INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDING BETWEEN
ORASCOMTMT INVESTMENTS S.A R.L.
Applicant
and
PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ALGERIA.
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/35

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
H.E. Judge Peter Tomka, President
Ms. Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member
Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Date of dispatch to the Parties: September 17, 2020

Representing the Applicant Representing the Respondent

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker Dr. Yas Banifatemi
Mr. Brody K. Greenwald Mr. Benjamin Siino
Ms. Kristen M. Young Mr. Pierre Viguier
Ms. Noor Davies Ms. Teresa Vega
Ms. Rocio Digon Mr. Peter Petrov

Ms. Hadia Hakim

Shearman & Sterling LLP
White & Case LLP Paris, France
Washington, D.C.

Mr. Oussama Daniel Nassif
Group Legal Counsel

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES..
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
Il. THE AWARD 13

1.GENERAL PRESENTATION OF THE AWARD........cscceseeeseeeseceseceseeeseesnecateseaeenteeeerseeensensees
2. PARTS OF THE AWARD THE ANNULMENT OF WHICH IS REQUESTED.
A. Preclusive effect of OTH’s Notice of Dispute.....
(a) Comparison of the different Notices of Dispute ..
(b) Legal rule
(c) Analysis of OTMTI’s alleged losses.
(d) Relevance of the settlement agreement between FNI, OTH and VimpelCom.....24

(e) Relevance of OTMTI’s sale of its controlling shareholding in OTH to

 

   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VimpelCom 25
B. Abuse of Rights 26
C. Conclusive Remarks by the Tribunal... ccc ceceeeseeeeeescceeseseeeseeeeeeeeneeeneaeee 27
IV. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARDS FOR ANNULMENT...........0ceseeeeeees 28
1.GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ANNULMENT........cscceseessseesecseceseceseesnecnseseaeenseeeeeseeenseeaees 28
A. Applicant’s Position 28
B. Respondent’s Position 28
C. Committee’s Analysis 29
(a) Function of Annulment under the ICSID Convention. ........0..:cceceeeeeneteeseees 29
(b) Discretion to Annul 31
(c) Principles Governing Annulment..........cccceeceeeseseeeeseneseeseesseeeeesseseeetseneeeeeenes 32
(d) The Present Case 33
2. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE ........:cseccereeeeteeeeeenee 33
A. Applicant’s Position 33
B. Respondent’s Position 34
C. Committee’s Analysis 36
(a) Fundamental Rule. 36
(b) Serious Departure 37
(c) The Right to Be Heard 38
3. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWER 40
A. Applicant’s Position 40
B. Respondent’s Position 4l
C. Committee’s Analysis 42
4. FAILURE TO STATE REASON‘ 43
A. Applicant’s Position 43
B. Respondent’s Position 44
C. Committee’s Analysis 45
V.TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS THE ANNULMENT OF WHICH IS SOUGHT BY THE
APPLICANT 48
1. THE ACCEPTANCE OF RESPONDENT’S “EXTINGUISHMENT OF RIGHTS” AND ABUSE OF
RIGHTS OBJECTION: 49
A. Applicant’s Position 49

 

(a) Admissibility of the Respondent’s “Extinguishment of Rights” and Abuse of
Rights Objections 50

(b) The Claimant’s Right to Be Heard and the Treatment of Parties... 51
(c) Alleged Waiver of the Applicant’s Right to Raise an Article 52(1)(d) Ground .. 52
B. Respondent’s Position 53
(a) Admissibility of the Respondent’s Lack of Standing (“Défaut d'Intérét pour
Agir”) and Abuse of Rights Objections.

 

 

(b) The Claimant’s Right to be Heard and the Treatment of the Parties... 55
(c) Alleged Waiver of the Applicant’s Right to Raise an Article 52(1)(d) Ground... 57
C. Committee’s Analysis 58

(a) Alleged Waiver of OTMTI’s right to raise an Article 52(1)(e) ground complaining
of the conduct of the proceeding........... 58
(b) Alleged Untimeliness of Algeria’s admissi 61

     

ity objections

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) OTMTI’s rights to be heard and to equal treatment 62
2.THE OTH NOTICE OF DISPUTE AND THE CLAIMANT’S RIGHT TO BRING THIS
ARBITRATION 69
A. Applicant’s Position 69
(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law..........c.ccceseeeeeseseeeseeseeeeeesseteeetseeeeesenes 69
(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons 70
B. Respondent’s Position 72
(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law..........c.ccceceeseesesseeseeseeeeeesseteeeeseeeeesenes 72
(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons 74
C. Committee’s Analysis 75
3. THE OTH ARBITRATION SETTLEMENT AND THE INADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIMANT'S,
CLAIMS 84
A. Applicant’s Position 84
B. Respondent’s Position 86
C. Committee’s Analysis 87
4. THE CLAIMANT’S PURSUIT OF ITS CLAIMS AS AN ABUSEOF RIGHTS........:c0cceseeesteeeeeenee 90
A. Applicant’s Position 90
(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law..........cccceeceeesesseeseeseeeeeeseeeetseeeeesenes 90
(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons 91

 

B. Respondent’s Position

(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law..

(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons

C. Committee’s Analysis

VI. THE EFFECT OF THE DECISION 00.0... ccceececceceeeeeceeceeeeeeseesceeceseesseeeeeeeseeeeeeees

VIL COSTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. APPLICANT’S COST SUBMISSION: 102
2. RESPONDENT’S COST SUBMISSIONS..........:cecccecesceseeseeseseceecaceseesetseeececsetseeeeseeseeeeeates 103
3.COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS 104
VIII. LANGUAGES OF THE PROCEEDING AND OF THE DECISION..............::008 106

Ix. DECISION. 106

ii

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

Award

Award rendered in Orascom TMT
Investments S.a r.l. v. People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/35) on May 31, 2017.

 

Annulment Hearing

Hearing on Annulment held on May
27-28, 2019 in Paris

 

Applicant/Claimant/Orascom

Orascom TMT Investments S.a r.1.
(formerly Weather Investments II S.a r.1.)

 

Application

Application for Partial Annulment dated
September 28, 2017

 

A. PHB1

Applicant’s Post-Hearing Brief dated
July 3, 2019

 

A. PHB2

Applicant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief dated
July 17,2019

 

BIT or the Treaty

Agreement between the Belgo-Luxembourg
Economic Union and the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of
Investments signed April 24, 1991 (entered
into force October 17,2002)

 

CLA-[#]

Applicant’s Legal Authority

 

Committee

Ad hoc Committee composed of Judge Peter
Tomka (President), Ms. Bertha Cooper-
Rousseau, and Professor Klaus Sachs,
constituted on October 26, 2017

 

Counter-Memorial

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
Annulment dated June 15,2018

 

 

 

 

ENTV Entreprise Nationale de Télévision

FNI Fonds National d’ Investissement algérien
Hearing on Preliminary Objections that took

Hearing place in the World Bank Offices in Paris
from May 26 to 30, 2015

ICJ International Court of Justice

 

 

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

 

 

 

ICSID Convention or Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

ILC

International Law Commission

 

Institution Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution
of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings

 

Investment Agreement

Investment Agreement entered into between
OTH, Oratel (on behalf of OTA) and
Algeria on August 5, 2001

 

The majority of the members of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

Majority Tribunal

Memorial Applicant’s Memorial on Partial Annulment
of the Award dated March 15, 2018

MTN Mobile Telephone Networks Holdings
(Proprietary) Limited

Oratel Oratel International Inc.

Os OS Holding

OTA Orascom Telecom Algérie S.P.A.

OTH Orascom Telecom Holding S.A.E. (now

Global Telecom Holding S.A.E (GTH))

 

OTH Arbitration

PCA Arbitration Case No. 2012-20
Orascom Telecom Holding S.A.E. v.
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria

 

OTMTI (Claimant; formerly Weather
Investment II S.a.r.1.)

Orascom TMT Investment S.a.r.1.

 

 

 

 

 

 

OTSE Orascom Telecom Services Europe

PCA Permanent Court of Arbitration

R-[#] Respondent’s Exhibit

Rejoinder Respondent’s Rejoinder on Annulment
dated February 15, 2018

Reply Applicant’s Reply on Partial Annulment of

 

the Award dated October 12, 2018

 

 

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief dated

 

 

R. PHBI July 3, 2019

Respondent’s Second Post-Hearing Brief
R, PHB2 dated July 17, 2019
RL-[#] Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

Request for Arbitration

Request for Arbitration filed on
October 24, 2012

 

The People’s Democratic Republic of

 

Respondent/Algeria Algeria
Share Purchase Agreement entered into
between VimpelCom, OTH (which had by
SPA then changed its name to Global Telecom

Holding S.A.E., “GTH”) and the Algerian
Fonds National d’ Investissement (the
“FNI”) on April 18, 2014

 

Tr. Day [#] [language] page:line

Transcript of hearings

 

Arbitral Tribunal which rendered the award
of May 31, 2017 consisting of

 

 

 

 

 

Tribunal Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
(President), Professor Albert Jan van den
Berg and Professor Brigitte Stern

VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

VimpelCom VimpelCom Limited

WAHF Wind Acquisition Holdings Finance S.p.A.

WCSP1 Weather Capital Special Purpose | S.A.

Weather Capital Weather Capital S.ar.l.

 

Weather Capital Finance

Weather Capital Finance S.A.

 

Weather I

Weather Investments S.A.

 

Weather II [the Claimant, i.e. OTMTI,

under its previous denomination]

Weather Investments II S.a r.l.

 

Weather Investments

Weather Investments S.p.A. (originally
called Weather Investments S.r.1.;
subsequently changed name into Wind
Telecom S.p.A)

 

Wind

Wind Telecomunicazioni S.p.A.

 

 

Wind Acquisition or WAF

 

Wind Acquisition Finance S.p.A.

 

vi

 

Il.

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

This case concerns the outcome of a dispute submitted to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the
Agreement between the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Unionand the People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments (the
“BLEU-Algeria BIT”, the “BIT” or the “Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into

force on October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention” or the “Convention”).

The Claimant in the arbitration proceeding and the Applicant in the annulment proceeding
is Orascom TMT Investments S.a rl. (COTMTIY” — formerly “Weather IT” or the

“Applicant”), a company incorporated in Luxembourg.

The Respondent is the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (“Algeria” or the
“Respondent”).

The Applicantand the Respondentare collectively referred to as the “Parties”. The Parties’

representatives are listed above on page (i).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On May 31, 2017, a tribunal composed of Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss
national (President); Professor Albert Jan van der Bern, a Dutch national; and Professor
Brigitte Stern, a French national (the “Tribunal’), rendered the Award whereby it decided

and ordered as follows (the “Award”):
a. The claims raised in this arbitration are inadmissible and the Tribunal is
precluded from exercising jurisdiction over this dispute;

b. The Claimant shall reimburse to the Respondent the amounts which the
Respondent has deposited with ICSID for the costs of the arbitration;

c. The Claimant shall pay US$ 2,842,811.01 plus €58,382.16 to the
Respondent, as a contribution to the legal fees and other expenses which the
Respondent incurred in connection with the arbitration;

1

d. All other requests for relief are dismissed.!

On September 28, 2017, OTMTI filed an Application for Partial Annulment of the Award
(the “Application”) pursuant to Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention and requested the
stay of enforcement of the Award pursuant to Article 52(5) thereof. The Application was

made within the time-period provided in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention.

On October 2, 2017, the ICSID Secretary-General registered the Application and notified
the Parties that the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed, pursuant to Rule
54(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID
Arbitration Rules”).

On October 12, 2017, the Applicant requested the Centre to use certain criteria for the

appointment of the members of the ad hoc Committee.

On October 16, 2017, the Respondent presented its observations on the Applicant’s letter
of October 12, 2017.

On October 16, 2017, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that, in accordance with
Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention, she intended to recommend to the Chairman of the
Administrative Council the appointment of Judge Peter Tomka, a Slovak national,
Ms. Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, a Bahamian national, and Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs, a
German national, to the ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) and invited the Parties to

provide any comments by October 20, 2017.

On October 20, 2017, the Respondent informed the Centre that it had no observations

regarding the proposed candidates.

On October 21, 2017, the Applicant indicated that it had no observations regarding the

proposed candidates.

On October 26, 2017, the Secretary-General, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
Rule 6(1), notified the Parties that all three Committee Members had accepted their

' Award, para. 587.

appointments and that the Committee was therefore deemed to have been constituted on
that date. Ms. Aurélia Antonietti, Senior Legal Adviser, was designated to serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

On October 27, 2017, the Committee informed the Parties of its availability to hold a first
session on December 12 or 13, 2017, in Paris, or on December 13, 2017 in Washington,
D.C., noting their preference for a hearing in Paris, without prejudice to the agreement of
the Parties or the decision of the Committee on the place of the proceeding or the place of

future hearings.

On October 31, 2017, the Respondent confirmed its availability for a first session on
December 12, 2017 in Paris, while the Applicant confirmed its availability for a hearing in
Washington, D.C on December 13, 2017, and noted that it was not available for a hearing

in Paris on December 12 or 13.

On November 1, 2017, the Centre transmitted a draft Agenda and a draft Procedural Order
No. | to the Parties in view of the first session, and invited them to submit a joint proposal
by November 17, 2017, advising the Committee of their points of agreement and/or their
respective positions where they did notreach an agreement. The Committee further invited
the Respondent to indicate whether it would be available for an in-person meeting in
Washington, D.C. orby video conference on December 13,2017, and invited the Applicant
to confirm by November 6, 2017, whether it wished to maintain its request fora stay of

enforcement of the Award.

On November 4, 2017, the Respondent informed the Centre of its availability fora first

session on December 13, 2017, in Paris.

On November 6, 2017, the Applicant confirmed that it wished to maintain its request for
the stay of enforcement of the Award, and informed the Centre that the Parties had agreed
on a timetable of written submissions on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the

Award.

On November 7, 2017, the Committee confirmed the provisional stay of enforcement of

the Award, and that the first session and hearing on the request for the stay of enforcement

3

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

of the Award would take place on December 13, 2017. It also confirmed that the Applicant
could participate from the World Bank Offices in Washington, D.C. while the Members of
the Committee, the Respondent, and the ICSID Secretary would participate fromthe World
Bank Offices in Paris.

On November 7, 2017, the Applicant’s counsel objected to their participation to the hearing
by video conference from Washington, D.C. and objected to the Respondent’s participation

from Paris.

On November 9, 2017, the Respondent reiterated its request to hold the hearing in Paris,

and invited the Committee to decide on the place of the proceeding.

On November 10, 2017, as agreed between the Parties, the Applicant filed its Request for
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement, together with Legal Authorities CLA-1 through
CLA-23 (the “Request for Continuation of the Stay”).

On November 14, 2017, the Committee invited the Parties to indicate by November 17,

2017, whether they agreed to:

extending the time for the Committee to decide on the Request in view of
the fact that the Respondent’s Rejoinder according to the Parties’ agreed
schedule was due by December 8, 2017; and

the Committee deciding the Request on the basis of the Parties’ written
submissions without holding a hearing.

On November 16 and 17, 2017, the Applicant and the Respondent respectively confirmed
their agreement to extend the deadline provided for in Arbitration Rule 54(2). The
Respondent further requested that the Committee allow the Parties to discuss the stay of
enforcement during the hearing scheduled on December 13, 2017. The Applicant further
suggested that the date of the first session and hearing on the Request for Continuation of

the Stay be moved to a later date.

On November 17, 2017, the Parties asked that the Committee authorize them to submit
their joint proposal on the draft Agenda and draft Procedural Order No. 1 by December 1,
2017. The Tribunal granted the Parties’ request on November 18, 2017.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

On November 17, 2017, the Committee informed the Parties of its decision that the first
session and the hearing on the Request for Continuation of the Stay would take place in
Paris on December 18, 2017, specifying that the Parties remained free to amend their

agreement on the venue for any subsequent hearing.

On November 20, 2017, the Parties indicated that they were not available for a hearing in

person on December 18, 2017.

On November 22, 2017, the Respondent informed the Committee that they were available
for a hearing in the evening of December 12, 2017, while the Applicant indicated its

unavailability and proposed that the hearing be held ata later date.

On November 23, 2017, the Respondent asked that the hearing be held on December 13,
2017, as initially planned.

On November 24, 2017, the Respondent filed its Response to the Applicant’s Request for
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement, together with Exhibits R-1 through R-4, and
Legal Authorities RL-1 through RL-12.

On November 30, 2017, the Respondent informed the Centre that the Parties had agreed to
hold a first session and hearing on the Request for Continuation of the Stay on December
12, 2017, in Paris. On the same date, the Applicant confirmed its agreement. The Parties
further requested that the Committee grant them until December 6, 2017, to file their
comments on the draft Procedural Order. The Committee granted this extension on

December 1, 2017.

On December 1, 2017, the Applicant filed its Reply to Respondent’s Response, along with
Legal Authorities CLA-24 through CLA-31.

On December 7, 2017, the Applicant submitted the Parties’ joint comments on the draft
Procedural Order No. 1. That same date, the Respondent provided its separate comments

on the draft Procedural Order No. 1.

On December 8, 2017, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder to the Applicant’s Reply, along
with Exhibits R-5 through R-11 and Legal Authorities RL-8 and RL-13 through RL-16.
5

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

On December 12, 2017, a first session and hearing on the Request for Continuation of the
Stay was held in the World Bank’s Offices in Paris, France, with simultaneous
interpretation. In addition to the Members of the Committee and the Secretary, the
following persons participated in the first session and hearing on the Request for

Continuation of the Stay:

Representing the Applicant:

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm, White & Case LLP

Ms. Andrea J. Menaker, White & Case LLP (by video conference)
Mr. Brody K. Greenwald, White & Case LLP (by video conference)
Ms. Kristen M. Young, White & Case LLP

Ms. Hadia Hakim, White & Case LLP

Ms. Eliane Holmlund, White & Case LLP

Representing the Respondent:

Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard, Shearman & Sterling LLP
Dr. Yas Banifatemi, Shearman & Sterling LLP

Mr. Benjamin Siino, Shearman & Sterling LLP

Mr. Pierre Viguier, Shearman & Sterling LLP

Ms. Teresa Vega, Shearman & Sterling LLP

On December 14, 2017, the Committee circulated a revised draft Procedural Order No. 1.

On December 15, 2017, as instructed during the hearing on the Request for Continuation
of the Stay and the first session, the Applicant provided clarifications regarding its

statement on Mr. Sawiris’ share ownership in OTMTI.

On December 29, 2017, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 recording the
agreementof the Parties on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. | provides, inter alia,
that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from April 10, 2006, that the
procedural languages would be English and French, and that the place of proceeding would

be Paris, France.

On March 12, 2018, the Committee rendered its Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of

the Award whereby it unanimously decided as follows:

40.

4l.

42.

43.

For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides as
follows:

(1) the stay of enforcement of the Award shall continue until the Decision
of the Committee on the Annulment Application subject to the conditions
specified in paragraph 70? above;

(2) if the conditions set out above are not complied with, the stay of
enforcement shall be automatically terminated;

and

(3) the costs of this phase of the proceeding are reserved.3
On March 15, 2018, the Applicant filed its Memorial on Partial Annulment of the Award,
together with an Expert Report of Professor Jan Paulsson, the third Expert Report of

Professor Rudolf Dolzer, Exhibits C-1096 through C-1098 and Legal Authorities CLA-
334 through CLA-453 (the “Memorial”).

On March 22, 2018, the Applicant requested leave to submit into the record two publicly
available documents and a press release (Exhibits C-1096 through C-1098). Algeria was

invited to submit its comments by March 26, 2018.

On March 26, 2018, the Respondent indicated that it had no objections to the production
into the record of the Applicant’s Exhibits C-1096 through C-1098.

On March 27, 2018, the Committee, in accordance with Section 15.4 of Procedural Order
No.1, granted the Applicant’s request to admit into the record the Exhibits C-1096, C-1097
and C-1098, without prejudice to the Respondent’s right to present, in its Counter-

Memorial, its view on the relevance of the said documents for the annulment proceeding.

? Paragraph 70 reads as follows: “The Committee therefore decides that the provisional stay of enforcement of the

Award renderedon May 31,2017, in Orascom TMT Investments S.

 

1. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/35) shall continue until the date on which the Committee issues its Decision on the
Annulment Application submitted by the Applicant provided, however, that within sixty days from this Decision, the
Applicant must provide an unconditional and irrevocable letter of guarantee issued by an internationally respected
bank forthe amount of US$ 3,508,598. 13 and € 58,382.16, which may only bedrawnupon by Algeria by presentation
of a Decision on the adhoc Committee rejectingthe Annulment Application”.

> Decision on the Stay of Enforcementof the Award, para. 73.

7

44,

45.

46.

47.

On May 4, 2018, the Applicant wrote to the Committee informing that “[iJn spite of
OTMTI’s best efforts, the banks uniformly have refused to issue a bank guarantee in favour
of Algeria, in the terms and within the time limit [...] imposed by the Committee”. A
statement of OTMTI’s Chief Financial Officer, describing OTMTI’s efforts to obtain the
guarantee, was attached to the letter. The Applicant informed the Committee about its
efforts to identify alternative solutions. The Applicant proposed two alternatives in order

to comply with the Committee’s decision:

(ji an undertaking in the form of a corporate guarantee from OTMTI that it would pay
the amounts due under the Award, if the Award is upheld, or

(ii) an escrow arrangement with the Permanent Court of Arbitration (the “PCA”),
which would hold the amounts due under the Award in escrow pending the outcome
of the annulment proceeding.

In the event the second option was selected, the Applicant requested an extension of

30 days to finalize an escrow agreement and deposit the funds with the PCA.

On May 5, 2018, the Committee invited the Respondent to submit its comments on the

Applicant’s letter by May 8, 2018.

On May 8, 2018, the Respondent submitted its observations on the Applicant’s letter of
May 4, 2018.

On May 9, 2018, the Committee issued a Decision Modifying the Conditions for the
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, whereby it decided to modify the
operative clause (paragraph 73) of its Decision of March 12,2018 as follows:

(1) The stay of enforcement of the Award shall continue until the Decision

of the Committee on the Application for Partial Annulment subject to the
conditions specified in paragraph 14[4] above of the present Decision;

4 Paragraph 1 4readsas follows: “Accordingly, the Committee decides that the provisional stay of enforcement of the

Award renderedon May 31,2017, in Orascom TMT Investments S.

 

r.l.v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria

(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/35) shall continue until the date on which the Committee issues its Decision on the
Annulment Application submitted by the Applicant provided, however, that the Applicant deposits, by June 15,2018,
at the latest, the amount of US$ 3,508,598.13 and € 58,382.16 due under the Award to an escrow account administered
by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague and the above-mentioned amounts may only be drawn upon by
Algeria by presentation of a Decision of the ad hoc Committee rejectingthe Annulment Application”.

8

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

(2) If the conditions set out above are not complied with, the stay of
enforcement shall be automatically terminated; and

(3) The costs of this phase of the proceeding are reserved.*

On June 13, 2018, the Applicant informed the Committee, that in accordance with the
Committee’s Decision Modifying the Conditions for the Continuation of the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, the Applicant had reached an agreement with the PCA on the
terms of a draft escrow agreement and requested that the Committee extend the deadline
for it to deposit the funds into the escrow until June 29, 2018, to which the Respondent did

not object.

On June 15, 2018, the Committee agreed to insert into Article 5, paragraph | (ii), an
additional condition for the release of the funds from the escrow account, namely the
Committee’s written instruction to the PCA. The Committee further indicated that it did
not consider necessary for the Respondent to be a party to the escrow agreement, but it
should rather be a beneficiary if the conditions therein are met. Finally, it extended the time
limit for establishing the escrow agreement and depositing the amounts due under the

Award until June 29, 2018.

On June 15,2018, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment, together with
Annex I, Legal Authorities RL-282 through RL-342 (the “Counter-Memorial”).

On June 28, 2018, the PCA acknowledged receipt of funds in the amount of
US$ 3,508,598.13 and € 58,382.16 deposited by the Applicant pursuant to the Escrow
Agreement concluded on June 27, 2018.

On July 30, 2018, following further exchanges with the Parties, the Committee confirmed

that the hearing on annulment would take place on May 27-28, 2019 in Paris.

On August 14, 2018, the Applicant informed the Committee that the Parties had agreed to
revise the procedural calendar for their remaining written submissions, which the

Committee agreed to on August 20, 2018.

* Decision Modifying the Conditions for the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, para. 15.

9

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

On October 12, 2018, the Applicant filed its Reply on Partial Annulment of the Award
together with the Supplemental Expert Opinion of Professor Jan Paulsson, the fourth
Expert Opinion of Professor Rudolf Dolzer and Legal Authorities CLA-454 through CLA-
493 (the “Reply”).

On February 15, 2019, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Annulment along with Legal
Authorities RL-343 through RL-376 (the “Rejoinder”).

On March 21, 2019, the Secretary of the Committee invited the Parties to (i) confer and
revert to the Committee regarding the organization of the hearing, and (ii) indicate whether

they considered that a pre-hearing call with the President would be needed.

On April 19, 2019, the Respondent informed the Committee that a pre-hearing conference
call was necessary to resolve the Parties’ disagreements. On April 20, 2019, the Applicant

confirmed its agreement.

On April 22, 2019, the Committee circulated the draft agenda for the pre-hearing

organizational meeting and invited the Parties to provide their comments by April 29, 2019.

On May 2, 2019, the Committee held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the Parties

by telephone conference.

On May 2, 2019, the Committee asked the Parties whether they would agree to the
attendance of Mr. Weiler, an associate currently working at CMS Hasche Sigle in Munich
with Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs, at the hearing on annulment. The Parties respectively
agreed to his attendance on May 2 and 3, 2019, andthe Secretariat transmitted Mr. Weiler’s

confidentiality declaration to the Parties on May 6, 2019.

On May 4, 2019, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the organization

of the hearing on annulment.

On May 14, 2019, the Respondent requested a leave to submit into the record as a legal
authority a decision on the application for annulment rendered on March 18, 2019 by the
ad hoc Committee in Churchill Mining PLC and Planet Mining Pty Ltd. v. Republic of
Indonesia (ICSID Case Nos. ARB/12/14 and ARB/12/40).

10

63.

64.

65.

66.

In its letter of May 20, 2019, the Applicant did not object, in principle, to the introduction
of that annulment decision into the record. However, it also requested a leave to submit
into the record an article written by Mr. A. Escobar: “The Relative Merits of Oral
Argument and Post-Hearing Briefs”, published in 2010, arguing that the article discusses
some of the same issues addressed by the ad hoc Committee in Churchill Mining v.

Indonesia.

In its letter of May 22, 2019, the Respondent did not object to the above-mentioned

Applicant’s request.

On May 22, 2019, the Secretary of the Committee informed the Parties that the Committee

had decided to grant the request of the Respondent and the request of the Applicant.

A hearing on annulment was held at the ICC Conference Centre in Paris on May 27-28,

2019 (the “Annulment Hearing”). The following persons were present:

Committee:

HLE. Judge Peter Tomka President
Ms. Bertha Cooper-Rousseau Member
Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs Member

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti Secretary of the Committee

For the Applicant:

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm White & Case LLP
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker White & Case LLP
Ms. Kristen M. Young White & Case LLP
Mr. Brody K. Greenwald White & Case LLP

Ms. Noor Davies White & Case LLP
Ms. Rocio Digon White & Case LLP
Mr. Samy Markaboui White & Case LLP
Ms. Hadia Hakim White & Case LLP
Mr. Julien Huet White & Case LLP
Mr. Jacob Bachmaier White & Case LLP
Mr. Jeffrey Stellhorn White & Case LLP
Mr. Achille Tenkiang White & Case LLP

Mr.

Oussama D. Nassif

Orascom Group

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

For the Respondent:

Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard Shearman & Sterling LLP
Dr. Yas Banifatemi Shearman & Sterling LLP
Mr. Benjamin Siino Shearman & Sterling LLP
Mr. Pierre Viguier Shearman & Sterling LLP
Ms. Teresa Vega Shearman & Sterling LLP
Mr. Peter Petrov Shearman & Sterling LLP
Ms. Barbara Blanchard Shearman & Sterling LLP

Court Reporters:
Ms. Christine Rouxel-Merchet (French)

Ms. Isabelle Questel (French)
Mr. Trevor McGowan (English) The Court Reporter Ltd.

Interpreters:

Ms. Sarah Rossi
Ms. Gabrielle Baudry
Mr. Manuel Malherbe

On June 7, 2019, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 3 concerning procedural

matters.
On July 3, 2019, the Parties filed Post-Hearing Briefs (“A. PHB1” and “R. PHB1”).

On July 17, 2019, the Parties filed Post-Hearing Reply Briefs (“A. PHB2” and
“R. PHB2”).

The Parties filed their Submissions on Costs on August 6, 2019, and their Replies on Costs
on August 20, 2019.

The proceeding was closed on June 15,2020.

The Committee deliberated in Paris on May 29, 2019 and on December 9, 2019; it further

exchanged views by various means of communication.

IHN. THE AWARD

73.

74.

75.

76.

1. GENERAL PRESENTATION OF THE AWARD

The 158-page Award (in English; 172-page in French) was rendered on May 31, 2017 by
the Tribunal consisting of Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler (presiding), Professor
Albert Jan van den Berg and Professor Brigitte Stern. The Tribunal rejected the
Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction but decided that “the claims raised in this
arbitration [were] inadmissible and the Tribunal [was] precluded from exercising

jurisdiction over this dispute”.®

The Award is divided into eight chapters. Chapter I introduces the Parties and provides a
brief overview of the dispute which arose from “the Claimant’s alleged investmentto build

a mobile telephone system in Algeria”.”

Chapter II records the procedural history of the arbitration proceedings. Chapter III,
entitled “Preliminary Matters”, makes it clear that the Award addresses only preliminary
objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the admissibility of the Claimant’s claims. It
further specifies the law applicable to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. According to the
Tribunal, its jurisdiction is governed by the ICSID Convention and the BIT. 8 No law is,
however, identified in this chapter as governing the issue of admissibility of the Claimant’s

claims.

Chapter IV describes facts which the Tribunal considered relevant to jurisdiction and
admissibility, namely the structure of the Weather Group, the origin of the Claimant’s
alleged investment in OTA and the acquisition of Wind Telecommunicazioni S.p.A. In the
view of the Tribunal, these facts were relevant in particular to the Respondent’s objection

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae and the Respondent’s objections to

© Award, para. 587.
7 Award, para. 5.
* Award, para. 134.

jurisdiction and admissibility “in relation to the Claimant’s status of indirect shareholder,

the OTH Arbitration and settlement, and the sale of the Claimant’s investment”.?

77. The longest chapter of the Award, Chapter V, provides a summary of the Parties’
arguments on the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to the
admissibility of the claims, the Tribunal’s detailed analysis of these objections and its

conclusions.

78. The Respondentraised an objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae arguing
that the BIT requires the investor to have its “real seat” (“siége réel”) in one of the
Contracting States. The Respondent contended that the Claimant’s real seat is not in
Luxembourg, but in Egypt. After a detailed analysis '° of the relevant provisions of the
ICSID Convention and of the BIT, the Tribunal concluded, by majority, that “‘siége social
in the definition of the BIT means ‘registered office’ or ‘siége statutaire’, in the sense of
the ‘seat’ appearing in a corporation’s constitutive documents”. '! Since the Claimant was
constituted in accordance with Luxembourg law and has its registered office in
Luxembourg, the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the Claimant is an investor within
the meaning of Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT !? and that it is also a national of a Contracting

Party under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. 3

79. The Tribunal considered next the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae.
The Respondent argued that the Claimant made no investment within the meaning of the
BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal, after having considered the
Parties’ arguments, concluded that “the Claimant made a number of successive investments

within the meaning of the ICSID Convention and the BIT” '* and that “the Claimant’s

° Award, para. 141.
1 Award, paras. 257-324.
" Award, para. 314.

!? Ibid. Arbitrator Stern disa greed with the Tribunal’s analysis and succinctly expressed her view that “siége social”
as referred to in the BIT can only mean “siége réel”. See Award, fn. 356.

'S Award, para. 315.
' Award, para. 380.

80.

81.

indirect shareholding in OTA constituted an investment pursuant to Article 1(2)(b) of the

BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention”. !5

The Tribunal subsequently dealt in the Award with the Respondent’s several objections in
relation to the Claimant’s (former) status as an indirect investor and the parallel arbitral
proceedings initiated by OTH. The Tribunal noted that “[t]he characterization of these
objections in terms of jurisdiction or admissibility has somewhat changed in the course of
the proceedings”. !° The Tribunal divided the Respondent’s assertions that the Tribunal has

no jurisdiction or that the claims are inadmissible into three groups:

(a) The Claimant is or was a “‘very indirect’ shareholder which is ‘too far removed”
from the investment affected by the Respondent’s measures;

(b) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction or the claims are inadmissible as a result of the
concurrent proceedings launched by OTH which resulted in a settlement between
the parties to those proceedings; and

(c) The Claimant sold its investment before filing the Request for Arbitration and has
thus lost or waived its right to bring arbitration proceedings against Algeria, which
either deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction or entails the inadmissibility of the
claims. !7

After having set outrather in detail the Parties’ arguments on all these issues, !* the Tribunal

provided its analyses in paragraphs 485-548. It started with establishing the timeline of the

main events, which it considered relevant to the objections under consideration. '? It then
examined the notices of dispute sent by OTH, Weather Investments, and the Claimant to

Algeria. The Tribunal noted that while the companies givingnotice and investmenttreaties

invoked were different, the three notices concerned the same measures or events. 2° The

Tribunal highlighted, in a table, what it considered to be the main passages from the three

notices of dispute.2! The Tribunal expressed its view that “while the parties to the dispute

'S Award, para. 385.

'6 Award, para. 386.

" Award, para. 386.

'8 Award, paras. 387-484.

' Award, para. 485.

29 Award, paras. 486 and 488.

2! Award, para. 487 atpp. 121-128.

82.

83.

and the legal bases for the claims (the BITs) are different, the dispute being notified in the
three notices is effectively one and the same”. 2? It further stressed that the three notices
were all sent by Mr. Sawiris and that he was the controlling shareholder of these

companies. ?3

The Tribunal believed that these companies constituted the vertically integrated chain and
“several entities could in theory, at least, bring arbitration proceedings against the
Respondent”. 4 It expressed, however, the view that “the existence of several legal
foundations for arbitration does not necessarily mean that the various entities in the
shareholder chain could make use of the existing arbitration clauses to assail the same
measures and to recover the same economic loss under any circumstances”.?5 And it
continued by noting that, “[i]ndeed, the purpose of investment treaty arbitration is to grant
full reparation for the injuries that a qualifying investor may have suffered as a result of a
host State’s wrongful measures”.”6 In its view, “[i]f the harm incurred by one entity in the
chain is fully repaired in one arbitration, the claims brought by other members of the
vertical chain in other arbitral proceedings may become inadmissible depending on the

circumstances”.?7

The Tribunal found that “[i]n the circumstances of the present dispute [...] the claims
[we]re inadmissible on several counts”. 28 It assigned “a decisive importance” to OTH’s
Notice of Dispute, noting that “the Claimant and its controlling shareholder, Mr. Sawiris,
caused the corporate organs of OTH to crystallize the dispute at the level of OTA’s direct

investor”. 7?

» Award, para. 488. Emphasis added.
3 Award, para. 490.
* Award, para. 495.
°5 Award, para. 495.

°6 Ibid.

27 Ibid. Emphasis added.
°8 Award, para. 496.

» Ibid.

16

84.

85.

86.

The Tribunal observed that on November 2, 2010 (the date of the OTH Notice of Dispute),
“the legal protection that was available at the various levels of the corporate chain was
activated at the OTH level”. *° In the view of the Tribunal, “[b]y exercising its right to
arbitrate against Algeria, OTH placed itself in the position of being made whole for the
alleged harm”. 3! The Tribunal continued by stating that “[t]o the extent OTH would have
restored its company value through arbitration proceedings under the BIT, all of the
companies higher up in the corporate chain, including the Claimant, would have been made
whole as well”. 3? In its view, “[i]f the value of OTH is restored, then the shareholders of
OTH suffer no loss, unless they incurred a loss of their own which is independent of the

value of OTH”. 3

The Tribunal subsequently proceeded to the review of the losses that the Claimant alleged
to have suffered as a result of Algeria’s measures, with a view to examining whether the
Claimant requested a relief for losses that only itself suffered irrespective of the valuation
of OTH. * It found that “the claims before the Tribunal in reality seek reparation for losses
covered by the requests for relief raised in the OTH Arbitration or for losses that the
Claimant[...] must or should have factored into the sale of its investment to

VimpelCom”.*5 In light of the above, it concluded “that the claims are inadmissible” .*°

The Tribunal then considered the relevance of the settlement agreement between National
Investment Fund of Algeria, OTH and VimpelCom. It opined that “the Claimant cannot
bring claims in this arbitration that OTH decided to settle, as the settlement clearly resolved
the dispute that the Claimant has brought before this Tribunal”.37 According to the

Tribunal, “[i]n the absence of harm which it incurred itself to the exclusion of OTH, the

°° Award, para. 497.

5! Ibid.

» Award, para. 498.

° Ibid.

* Award, paras. 499-517.
*5 Award, para. 518.

* Ibid.

>? Award, para. 524.

87.

88.

89.

%* Ibid.

Claimant cannottake over the dispute that OTH has settled”. 38 The Tribunal was convinced
that “the settlement agreement[...] confirms that the Claimant’s claims are

inadmissible”. *?

The Tribunal also considered the relevance of the sale of the Claimant’s investment to
VimpelCom three years before the settlement.“ It did notacceptthe Claimant’s arguments
on this point. In the Tribunal’s view, the fact that the Claimant sold its investment does not
change the Tribunal’s conclusions that the claims are inadmissible. According to the

Tribunal, it even “reinforces them [i.e., these conclusions]”.*!

Moreover, the Tribunal found that “the Claimant’s pursuit of its claims constitute[d] [...]
an abuse of rights under the circumstances”. In the Tribunal’s view, this “constitute[d] a
further ground forthe inadmissibility ofthe Claimant’s claims and preclude[d] the Tribunal

from exercising its jurisdiction over the dispute”.+3

The Tribunal emphasized that its analysis concerned the admissibility of the claims, not of

their merits in terms of liability or quantum. It pointed out that its conclusions on the

inadmissibility of the claims “are the result of the peculiar facts of the case”, in which:

(ji The group of companies of which the Claimant was part was organized asa vertical
chain;

(ii) The entities in the chain were under the control of the same shareholder;

(iii) | The measures complained of by the various entities in the chain were the same and
thus the dispute notified to Algeria by those entities was in essence identical; and

(iv) The damage claimed by the various entities was, in its economic essence, the
same. “4

** Award, para. 526.

4° Award, paras. 527-538.

41 Award, para. 527.

# Award, para. 539. The reasons are provided in paras. 540-545.
4 Award, para. 545.

# Award, para. 546.

90.

91.

92.

93.

The Tribunal finally noted that “in the past [tribunals] have adopted different approaches
in relation to constellations that may show some similarities with the present case”. 45 It
specifically referred to the tribunals in CME v. Czech Republic and Lauder v. Czech
Republic, noting that the tribunals “then reached contradicting outcomes” which, in its
view, “was one of the reasons for which these decisions attracted wide criticism”. 46 The
Tribunal, however, observed that in the past fifteen years “the investment treaty
jurisprudence ha[d] evolved, including on the principle of abuse of rights (or abuse of

process)”. 47

In view of its conclusion that the claims of Orascom TMT Investments are inadmissible,
the Tribunal did not consider it necessary to deal with the remaining objections to
jurisdiction, namely that the acts of ENTV (Entreprise Nationale de Télévision) are not
attributable to Algeria 48 and that it does not have jurisdiction over the contract claims based
on the Investment Agreement.‘ For the same reason, the Tribunal also considered that it
was not necessary for it to deal with an additional objection to the admissibility of

Claimant’s umbrella clause claims. *°

The short Chapter VI of the Award deals with the costs. The Tribunal decided that the
Claimant shall bear the entirety of the costs of the proceedings, i.e., the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the ICSID costs. It also decided that the Claimant shall reimburse 50%

of the Respondent’s fees and expenses incurred in connection with the arbitration. *!

Although the Award was rendered both in English and French, the Tribunal specified in

Chapter VII that in case of any discrepancy between the two versions, the English version

45 Award, para. 547.
46 Award, para. 547.
47 Award, para. 547.
48 Award, para. 556.
# Award, para. 566.
*° Award, para. 576.
*! Award, para. 585.

94.

95.

96.

must be deemed to reflect the meaning intended by the Tribunal. 5? The final chapter,

Chapter VIII, contains the Tribunal’s decision.

2. PARTS OF THE AWARD THE ANNULMENT OF WHICH IS REQUESTED

The Applicant seeks the partial annulment of the Award. While it is satisfied and does not
take any issue with the treatment of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections and their
rejection by the Tribunal, *3 the Applicant challenges the part of the Award dealing with
the issue of the admissibility of its claims and the conclusion of the Tribunal that the claims
are inadmissible. Therefore, it seeks to annul the portions of the Award relating to

admissibility and costs, *4 specifically paragraphs 485-585 and 587 of the Award.55

The Tribunal declared OTMTI’s claims inadmissible on two grounds, namely the
preclusive effect of the OTH’s Notice of Dispute and the abuse of rights. In this section,
the Committee will summarize the relevant parts of the Tribunal’s reasons for its

conclusions that OTMTI seeks to annul.

A. Preclusive effect of OTH’s Notice of Dispute
(a) Comparison of the different Notices of Dispute

The Tribunal began its analysis by comparing the three Notices of Dispute sent by OTH,
Weather Investments and OTMTI. After a textual analysis of the different notices, it found
that they “concern the same measures or events” *¢ and that both Weather Investments and

OTMTI themselves “considered the dispute to be one and the same”. 57

* Award, para. 586.

*} The Tribunal, having considered them, rejected the objections to its jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione
materiae. In light of its conclusion that the Claimant's claims are inadmissible, the Tribunal did not consider it

necessary to deal with Respondent’s remaining obj:

  

ions to jurisdiction, namely whether the acts of ENTV are

attributable to the Respondent and whether it has jurisdiction over the contract claims based on the Investment
Agreement.

* Application, para. 7.
*5 A. PHB1,para.1.
*6 Award, para. 486.
57 Award, para. 489.

20

97. On the facts, the Tribunal also stressed that:

There is no controversy that at the time when the OTH and Weather
Investments Notices of Dispute were sent, Mr. Sawiris and his family were
the ultimate beneficial owners and Mr. Sawiris was the controlling
shareholder of these companies. There is equally no dispute that the
Weather Group constituted a vertically integrated chain of companies, in
which the companies higher up in the chain controlled and directed the
companies further down. **

 

(b) — Legalrule

98. The starting point of the Tribunal’s legal analysis was the consideration that in a corporate

chain, several entities could in theory initiate arbitration proceeding:

In the vertically integrated chain that constituted the Weather Group,
several entities could in theory at least bring arbitration proceedings against
the Respondent. OTA could rely on the ICSID clause in the Investment
Agreement. OTH as direct foreign shareholders could invoke the arbitration
clause in the Algeria~-Egypt BIT. Weather Investments as indirect foreign
shareholder could claim on the basis of the arbitration provision in the
Algeria-Italy BIT. And the Claimant, another indirect foreign investor,
could start arbitration based on the Algeria-BLEU BIT. °°

99. The Tribunal then described a legal rule that a claim of one entity ofa corporate chain may
become inadmissible if the harm was fully repaired in another arbitration involving other

members of the vertical chain:

In the Tribunal’s view, the existence of several legal foundations for
arbitration does not necessarily mean that the various entities in the
shareholder chaincould makeuse of the existing arbitration clauses to assail
the same measures and to recover the same economic loss under any
circumstances. Indeed, the purpose of investment treaty arbitration is to
grant full reparation for the injuries that a qualifying investor may have
sufferedas a result of a host state’s wrongful measures. If the harm incurred
by one entity in the chain is fully repaired in one arbitration, the claims
brought by other members of the vertical chain in other arbitral proceedings

may become inadmissible depending on the circumstances. ©

58 Award, para. 490. Footnote omitted.
* Award, para. 495. Footnote omitted.
© Award, para. 495, Emphasis added.

21

100. The Tribunal then went on to find OTMTI’s claims inadmissible as the dispute had been
activated by OTMTIat the level of OTH:

OTH’s Notice of Dispute assumes a decisive importance, in itself and in
combination with the subsequent events. On 2 November 2010, the
Claimant and its controlling shareholder, Mr. Sawiris, caused the corporate
organs of OTH to crystallize the dispute at the level of OTA’s direct
investor. [...] Thus, on 2 November 2010, the legal protection that_was
available at the various levels of the corporate chain was activated at the
OTH level. By exercising its right to arbitrate against Algeria, OTH placed
itself in the position of being made whole for the alleged harm. *!

 

(c) Analysis of OTMTI’s alleged losses

101. In the nextstep of its analysis, the Tribunal inquired whether OTMTI’s claims were for

losses that had not been incurred by OTH:

The Tribunal will thus review the losses that the Claimant alleges to have
sufferedas a result of Algeria’s measures, with a view to examining whether
the Claimant requests relief for losses that only itself suffered irrespective
of the valuation of OTH. In this respect, OTMTI contends that “atleast part”
of the losses for which it seeks compensation in this arbitration were not
sustained by OTH.

102. The Tribunal distinguished between five different heads of damages:

1. The Tribunal held that OTMTI’s “claim for damages ‘for the Claimant’s
realized losses on the sale of its investment’ concerns the same economic
harm as OTH’s claim for diminution in value of its interest in OTA, which
OTH raised in the OTH Arbitration”. %

2. Regarding OTMTI’s claim for its “share of the unlawfully blocked OTA
dividends”, the Tribunal first held that “[w]ithin a vertical chain of
corporations, each entity may pay out dividends to its shareholder(s),
namely to the company or companies at the immediate higher echelon in
the chain” before concluding that OTMTI’s “claims for damages in

°! Award, paras. 496-497. Emphasis added.
@ Award, para.499,

Award, para. 505. Emphasis added.

“ Award, paras. 506-507. Emphasis added.

22

relation to the dividends are identical to, and necessarily contained in,
OTH’s claims in the OTH Arbitration”. ©

3. Regarding OTMTI’s claims for “damages due to incremental payments that
Claimant was obligated to pay to certain private equity investors [...]

because of the decrease in the value of Weather Investments, of which
Claimant was the majority owner”, © the Tribunal considered these claims
inadmissible “because these alleged losses derive primarily from the
presence of put options in an agreement freely entered into by the

Claimant”. 7

4. OTMTI’s claim for consequential damages, which (according to OTMTI’s
expert) arose as a result of OTMTI’s refinancing of its capital structure and
measures to “prevent a collapse of the Weather Group”, ®’ was found
inadmissible on two grounds: first, the Tribunal held that OTMTI did not
establish that OTMTI, as opposed to other entities of the Weather Group,
had incurred these losses; second, any losses to preventa collapse of the
Weather Group “must or should have been factored into the price when the
Claimant sold Weather Investments”.

5. The Tribunal rejected OTMTI’s claim for moral damages for alleged
reputational harm as inadmissible because these losses “if any, [were]
incurred either by OTH or by Mr. Sawiris and not by itself”.7°

103. The Tribunal noted that its analysis of the different heads of damages was informed by:

[T]he Claimant’s full memorial on the merits, the three expert reports
presented by the Claimant’s expert on valuation and damages analysis (two
of which were filed specifically in the bifurcated phase dealing with the
Respondent’s preliminary objections), the extensive discussion on these
issues at the Hearing, including the cross-examination of the Claimant’s
expert, as well as the record of the OTH Arbitration which has been
produced in this arbitration. 7!

104. After assessing OTMTI’s different heads of damages, the Tribunal concluded that:

[T]he claims before the Tribunal in reality seek reparation for losses covered
by the requests for relief raised in the OTH Arbitration or for losses that the

° Award, para. 508.
°° Award, para. 509. Emphasis added.
“7 Award, para. 510.
8 Award, para. 511.
© Award, para. 516.
™ Award, para. 517. Footnote omitted.
7 Award, para. 499.

23

105.

106.

107.

Claimant (owned and managed by an experienced businessman like Mr.
Sawiris) must or should have factored into the sale of its investment to
VimpelCom. Under the circumstances, the Tribunal cannot but conclude
that the claims are inadmissible. 7

(d) Relevance of the settlement agreement between FNI, OTH and
VimpelCom

Regarding the settlementagreement of April 18,2014 between FNI, OTH and VimpelCom,
the Tribunal concluded that it “confirm[ed] that the Claimant’s claims [we]re

inadmissible”. 73

On the facts, the Tribunal noted that:

After the closing of the share purchase (which occurred on 30 January
2015), OTA, OTH and Algeria finally put an end to the domestic courts and
arbitral proceedings, waiving all their claims. [...] On the same day, OTH
and Algeria addressed the “Renunciation Letter” informing the PCA
tribunal in the OTH Arbitration that they had “finally settled their dispute
referred to arbitration” in that proceeding. On 12 March 2015, the PCA
tribunal issued a consent award recording the above agreement between the
parties, which put an end to the OTH Arbitration. 4

The Tribunal found that OTH, as direct shareholder of OTA, was the most obvious party

to conclude a settlement agreement:

[I]t comes as no surprise that [the settlement agreement] was entered into,
inter alia, by OTH who also undertook a number of obligations on behalf of
OTA. As already mentioned, OTH was the “historical” controlling
shareholder of OTA, to which the GSM License was granted in 2001 (in the
name and on behalf of OTA) and which negotiated and concluded the
Investment Agreement in 2001 (in the name and on behalf of OTA).
Furthermore, it was OTH which in 2009-2010 objected to the measures
taken vis-a-vis OTA and which sent the first Notice of Dispute on 2
November 2010. At all times, OTH was and remained the direct and
controlling shareholder of OTA. For all of those reasons, it was thus entirely

” Award, para. 518.
® Award, para. 526.
™ Award, para. 522. Footnotes omitted.

24

logical for Algeria to negotiate with that foreign investor in the vertically
integrated chain of companies. >

108. The Tribunal then went on to find thatthe settlementagreementis tantamountto an arbitral
award in the OTH Arbitration and that it is irrelevant whether the content of the settlement

is beneficial to OTH/OTA:

In these circumstances, the Claimant cannot bring claims in this arbitration
that OTH decided to settle, as the settlement clearly resolved the dispute
that the Claimant has brought before this Tribunal as is shown by the
comparison of the notices of disputes above. The existence of a settlement
agreement does not change the Tribunal’s conclusions in relation to the
OTH Arbitration, as the settlement stands in lieu of the investment treaty
tribunal’s award which would have been forthcoming in that arbitration.
The settlement agreement puts an end to the dispute arising from Algeria’s
measures in the same manner as the award would have ended the dispute.
In the absence of harm which it incurred itself to the exclusion of OTH, the
Claimant cannot take over the dispute that OTH has settled. In this respect,
the content of the settlement, whether beneficial or detrimental to
OTH/OTA, is irrelevant. What matters is that the claims arising from
Algeria’s measures have ceased to exist due to the settlement agreement.”

(e) — Relevance of OTMTI’s sale of its controlling shareholding in OTH
to VimpelCom

109. Furthermore, the Tribunal held that the fact that OTMTI had sold its indirect controlling
shareholding in OTH to VimpelCom does not change its previous conclusion on the

inadmissibility of OTMTI’s claims:

The fact that the Claimant sold its investment does not change the
conclusions reached above. If anything, it reinforces them. [...] In the
absence of harm it has suffered itself as opposed to OTH, any separate
claims brought by the Claimant based on the same measures would have
been inadmissible if it had remained in control of its investment. This being
so, the sale of the investment cannot bestow on the seller more rights than
it would have had if it had remained as a shareholder. [...] [W]hen selling
its investment, the Claimant could have carved out from the scope of the
sale and reserved for itself the benefit of OTH’s claim against Algeria.
Absent such a carve out, the claim exercised by a subsidiary will benefit the
buyer of the shares. In this case, by selling the shares in a company granting

7 Award, para. 523, Foomotes omitted.
76 Award, para. 524.

25

control over OTH (Weather Investments), the Claimant sold the claim that
was attached to the shares in OTH. 7”

110. The Tribunal supported its analysis of the sales’ impact by examining Mr. Sawiris’
testimony at the Hearing on Preliminary Objections from May 26 to 30, 2015 (the
“Hearing”) who, when asked by Algeria’s Counsel, accepted that OTH’s or OTA’s claim
was sold with the shares and “recognized that the price paid by the buyer must have
included the claim to seek redress for Algeria’s measures in relation to which OTH had
already notified Algeria of a dispute”. 78 Furthermore, the Tribunal briefly scrutinized the
Risk Sharing Agreementand was “unable to find anything[...] that would supportthe view

that the Claimant reserved its claim in relation to past measures”.7°

B. Abuse of Rights
111. With regard to the doctrine of abuse of rights, the Tribunal found that:

[A]n investor who controls several entities in a vertical chain of companies
may commit an abuse [of rights] if it seeks to impugn the same host state
measures and claims for the same harm at various levels of the chain in
reliance on several investment treaties concluded by the host state. [...] In
the Tribunal’s opinion, this conclusion derives from the purpose of
investment treaties, which is to promote the economic development of the
host state and to protect the investments made by foreigners that are
expected to contribute to such development. If the protection is sought at
one level of the vertical chain, and in particular at the first level of foreign
shareholding, that purpose is fulfilled. 8°

112. On the facts, the Tribunal quoted Mr. Sawiris’ statement at the Hearing:

[MR. SAWIRIS:] So when I was defending the interests of Orascom
Telecom [Holding] [OTH] only, we would use the Egyptian treaty, because
that’s the instance now that is corresponding, and it’s the direct. [...] Then
when things start to go worse, you say, “Listen, guys, it’s not go[ing] to end
up there. There is an Italian treaty, so the mother company can go”. Then

7” Award, paras. 527-529.

78 Award, para. 531.

” Award, para. 534, Emphasis omitted.
® Award, paras. 542-543.

26

when I sell under the gun — and again I come to the different nature of my
claim [...] I used the Luxembourg treaty. *!

113. The Tribunal then analyzed this statement concluding that:

[A]s explained by Mr. Sawiris, the Claimant first caused one of its
subsidiaries, OTH, to bring claims against Algeria. Then, it caused a
different subsidiary in the chain, Weather Investments, to threaten to bring
a different arbitration in relation to the same dispute. Finally — after selling
the investment — it pursued yet another investment treaty proceeding in its
own name for the same investment (its past shareholding in OTA) in
relation to the same host state measures and the same harm. **

114. This led the Tribunal to find an abuse of rights “which constitutes a further ground for the

inadmissibility of the Claimant’s claims”. *3

Cc. Conclusive Remarks by the Tribunal
115. Inits conclusive remarks, the Tribunal emphasized that:

[Its] conclusions on the inadmissibility of the claims are the result of the
peculiar facts of the case, in which (i) the group of companies of which the
Claimant was part was organized as a vertical chain; (ii) the entities in the
chain were under the control of the same shareholder; (iii) the measures
complained of by the various entities in the chain were the same and thus
the dispute notified to Algeria by those entities was in essence identical; and
(iv) the damage claimed by the various entities was, in its economic essence,
the same. *4

8 HearingTr, Day 2 (May27,2015) [E], 189:21-190:13.
© Award, para. 545.
3 Award, para. 545.
“ Award, para. 546.

27

Iv.

116.

117.

118.

119.

THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARDS FOR ANNULMENT
1. GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ANNULMENT
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant points out that the annulment mechanism under Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention was designed to balance, on the one hand, the finality of awards and, on the
other hand, the need to ensure the fundamental fairness and integrity of arbitration

proceeding. 5 As such, ICSID awards are not entitled to any presumption of validity. 8

An award should undergo greater scrutiny where the annulment challenge relates to
conclusions on jurisdiction or admissibility.87 4d hoc committees do not have “full
discretion” not to annul the award in these circumstances because any failure to exercise

jurisdiction, where jurisdiction exists, is a manifest excess of power. 88

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that one of the fundamental objectives of the ICSID Convention is
to ensure the finality of arbitral awards, and the procedure of annulment is an exception
made to this objective in order to protect the integrity and legitimacy of the proceeding and
resulting award. °° The purpose of annulment proceedings excludes any de novo review of

the merits and any substantive review of the award.

Moreover, the ad hoc committee’s analysis must be based on the record that was before
the Tribunal. °! Even where it considers that a ground for annulment under Article 52(1) is
materialized, ad hoc committees retain a discretion to annul the award. The Respondent

cites with approval the view of the ad hoc Committee in Tulip v. Turkey that “[u]nder the

‘5 Reply, para. 32.

*6 Reply, para. 34.
*’ Reply, para. 34, referring to two expert opinions of Professor Paulsson.

*$ Reply, para. 35.
8° Counter-Memorial, paras. 209-2 10; Rejoinder, para. 206.

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 213; Rejoinder, para. 208.

°! Counter-Memorial, para. 215; Rejoinder, para. 209.

28

ordinary meaning of this provision, an ad hoc committee has some discretion and is not
under an obligation to annul even if it finds that there is a ground for annulment listed in

Article 52(1)”.

Cc. Committee’s Analysis
(a) Function of Annulment under the ICSID Convention

120. The annulment under Article 52 of the Convention represents an exception to the principle
of finality of the awards. That principle is embodied in Article 53(1) of the Convention
according to which “[t]he award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention”. The only
remedies, envisaged in Section 5 of Chapter IV of the Convention, are interpretation,
revision and annulment of the awards. The annulment process is not an appeal, it differs
from it. It is not concerned with the substantive correctness of the award but with the

integrity of the decision-making and the process which has led to the decision.
121. As the ad hoc Committee in Tulip v. Turkey explained that:

In any review process, two potentially conflicting principles are at work:
the principle of finality and the principle of correctness. Finality serves the
purpose of efficiency in terms of an expeditious and economical settlement
of disputes. Correctness is an elusive goal that takes time and effort, and
may involve several layers of control, a phenomenon that is familiar from
proceedings in domestic courts. In arbitration, the principle of finality
typically takes precedence over the principle of correctness. 4

122. The main goal of the ICSID Convention is to assure the finality of the ICSID awards.°>

Therefore, the drafters of the ICSID Convention opted for the model of a limited review.

* Counter-Memorial, para. 216, citing Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V. v. Republic of Turkey
(ICSID CaseNo. ARB/11/28), Decision on Annulment, December 30,2015, para. 45 (“Tulip v. Turkey”).

° See e.g., MCI Power Group, L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6),
Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 24 (“MCI v. Ecuador’), Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/1), Decision on Annulment, February 1,2016, para. 179 (“Totalv. Argentina’).

4 Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, December 30,2015, para. 40.

°S Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5,2016, para. 71.

29

It is useful to recall what the ad hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles said about this review

process:

This mechanism protecting against errors that threaten the fundamental
fairness of the arbitral process (but not against incorrect decisions) arises
from the ICSID Convention’s drafters’ desire that Awards be final and
binding, which is an expression of “customary law based on the concepts of
pacta sunt servanda and res judicata,” and is in keeping with the object and
purpose of the Convention. Parties use ICSID arbitration (at least in part)
because they wish a more efficient way of resolving disputes than is
possible ina national court system with its various levels of trialand appeal,
or even in non-ICSID Convention arbitrations (which may be subject to
national courts’ review under local laws and whose enforcement may also
be subject to defenses available under, for example, the New York
Convention). Procedural protections are, however, all the more necessary
in order to ensure that the resulting award is truly an “award,” i.e., a result
arrived at fairly, under due process and with transparency, and hence in the
basic justice of which parties will have faith. °°

123. Annulment differs from appeal also in its possible outcome. The successful request for
annulment may lead to the setting aside of the award, to its invalidation. The annulment
committee has the power either to confirm the award or to annul it in whole or in part. It
cannot substitute its decision for the decision under review that it has found to be
deficient.°’ An appeal, if successful, leads to the modification of the decision. An appellate

organ may substitute its decision for the decision which was subject of an appeal.

124. The distinction between annulment and appeal has been emphasized by many ad hoc
committees. They have stated consistently that their functions are limited and that they do

not have the powers of a court of appeal. °8 A decision to annul can be based on one or

°6 CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005,
para.36(“CDC v. Seychelles’). Footnotes omitted.

7” See e.g., MTD EquitySdn. Bhd. and MTD ChileS.A. v. Republic of Chile, Decision on Annulment, March 21,2007,
para.54 (“MTD v. Chile”); Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Vieira v. Republic of Chile ((CSID Case No. ARB/04/7),
Decision on Annulment, December 10,2010, para. 235 (“Vieira v. Chile’).

°8 See e.g., Klckner Industrie-Ank. GmbH. hers v. United Republic of C 1 Société Ce

des Engrais (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 3, 83, 118, 128, 177
(“Kléckner v. Cameroon’); Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1),
Decision on Annulment, May 16, 1 986, paras. 43 and 110(“Amco1v. Indonesia”); Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989,
paras. 5.08, 6.55 (“MINE v. Guinea”), Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4),
Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 18 (“Wena v. Egypt”), Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija, SA. &

 

30

several of the five grounds listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.% It is not the
tole of ad hoc committees to review tribunals’ findings on facts or to control their

interpretation of the applicable law. !

(b) Discretion to Annul

125. Another importantaspectto keep in mind is thatad hoc committees retain a certain measure
of discretion in exercising their power to annul an award. Under Article 52(3) of the ICSID
Convention: “[t]he Committee shall have the authority to annul the award”. Under the
ordinary meaning of this provision, an ad hoc committee has some discretion and is not
under an obligation to annul even if it finds that there is a ground for annulment listed in
Article 52(1).!°! As the ad hoc Committee in EDF v. Argentina stated “[t]o say that a
committee ‘shall have the authority to annul the award’ is very different from saying that

a committee ‘shall annul the award””. !°2 Decisions on applications for annulment confim

Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3,
2002, para. 62 (“Vivendiv. Argentina (I)”), CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June29, 2005, paras. 35 and
36; Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/10), Decision on Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 38 ; MTDv. Chile, Decision on Annulment, March 21,
2007, para. 52; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision on
Annulment, September 25, 2007, paras. 43-44 (“CMS v. Argentina”), Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab
Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 20 and 24 (“Soufraki v. UAE’),
Mr. Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6), Decision on Annulment, February 12, 2015,
para. 156.

°° Kléckner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, para. 3; Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment,
February 5, 2002, para. 17; Vivendiv. Argentina (I), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 62.

1 Kléckner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 61 and 128; Amco Iv. Indonesia, Decision
on Annulment, May 16, 1986, para. 23; CDCv. Seychelles Decision on Annulment, June29, 2005, para. 45; CMS v.
Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007, paras. 85 and 136; Tulipv. Turkey, Decisionon Annulment,
December 30, 2015, para. 44.

‘0! For the discussion of this principle in early ICSID cases see: Kléckner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment,
May 3, 1985, paras. 151 and 179; Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, Decision on
Annulment, December 3, 1992, para. 1.20 (“Amco II v. Indonesia’), MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment,
December 22, 1989, paras. 4.09-4.10; for more recent discussion seee.g., Total v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment,
February 1,2016, para. 167.

\2 EDF International S.A., Saur International S.A. and Le6n Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID CaseNo. ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment, February 5,2016, para. 73 (“EDF v. Argentina”).

31

126.

127.

128.

that even if a ground listed in Article 52(1) exists, annulment will ensue only if the flaw

has had a serious adverse impact on one of the parties. !%3

The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt stressed that a ground for annulment must have
had an effect on the outcome of the award and must have led to a substantially different
result in order to actually lead to annulment.'4 The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v.
Argentina (I) cautioned that it “must guard against the annulment of awards for trivial
cause”. !5 It stressed the discretion of committees and the practical significance of any

error, 106

If one of the grounds listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention is established, an ad
hoc committee still has to consider whether that ground had a material impact on the party

seeking annulment.

(c) _ Principles Governing Annulment

The principles governing annulment under the Convention, as elaborated by several dozens
of annulment committees, have usefully been summarized in the updated Background
Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID. '!" The ad hoc committees

have affirmed the following six broad principles:

1. The grounds listed in Article 52(1) are the only grounds on which an award may be
annulled;

2. Annulment is an exceptional and narrowly circumscribed remedy and the role of
an ad hoc committee is limited;

3. Ad hoc committees are not courts of appeal, annulment is not a remedy against an
incorrect decision, and an ad hoc committee cannot substitute the Tribunal’s
determination on the merits for its own;

4. Ad hoc committees should exercise their discretion not to defeat the object and
purpose of the remedy or erode the binding force and finality of awards;

1° Tylip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015, para. 45.
1 See Wena v. Egypt, Decisionon Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 58 and 105.

'°5 Vivendiv. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment, July 3,2002, para. 63.

106 Thid. at para. 66. In the same sense: Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 24 and 27;
CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June29, 2005, para. 37.

‘7 Updated Background Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, p. 32, para. 74.

32

129.

130.

131.

5. Article 52 should be interpreted in accordance with its object and purpose, neither
narrowly nor broadly; and

6. An ad hoc committee’s authority to annul is circumscribed by the Article 52
grounds specified in the application for annulment, but an ad hoc committee has
discretion with respect to the extent of an annulment, i.c., either partial or full.

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention contains an exhaustive list of the following five

grounds on which an award may be annulled:

(a) That the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) That the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) That there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) That there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; and

(e) That the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.
(d) The Present Case

In this proceeding, the Applicant seeks the partial annulment of the Award invoking three
grounds. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental
tule of procedure, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the
reasons on which the Award is based. !°* The Parties in the case at hand differ in their
interpretation of the three grounds raised by the Applicant under Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention. The Committee will follow in its analysis the sequence of the grounds for

annulment as invoked by the Applicant.

2. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROMA FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicantrecalls that Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention provides that an award
may be annulled when the tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure, and notes that one of such fundamental rules is the right to be heard.'°° As

Professor Schreuer explains, “the principle that both sides must be heard on all issues

108 Application, Section III — Grounds for Annulment, pp. 13-27, paras. 28-60.

1 Application, para. 28.

33

132.

133.

134.

affecting their legal position is one of the most basic concepts of fairness in adversarial
proceedings”. !!° In Wena v. Egypt, the ad hoc Committee stated that the right to be heard
“includes the right to state its claim or its defense and to produce all arguments and

evidence in support of it”. !"!

The full opportunity of presenting one’s case includes the right of rebuttal. !!2 Notallowing
one party a full opportunity to address late-raised issues, submits the Applicant, warrants
annulment of the resulting award. !'3 In addition, “[w]hile ad hoc committees have thus
annulled awards where the tribunal denied both parties an opportunity to be heard, the same
fundamental principles apply with even greater force wherea tribunal materially prejudices

only one party by denying it an opportunity to be heard”. !!4

The Applicant posits the scope of annulment fora serious departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure must not be “artificially restrict[ed]”, and in particular that the Applicant
is not required to prove that there would have been a different outcome so as to annul the
award. !!5 According to the Applicant, the Committee does not need to decide that
Arbitration Rule 41(1) is itself a fundamental rule in order to find an annullable error.!'° It
asserts that numerous tribunals have dismissed untimely objections on the basis of

Rule 41(1).!!7

B. Respondent’s Position

In the Respondent’s view, the Applicant does not contest that the test fora serious departure

from a fundamental rule of procedure is two-fold: (1) the departure from the rule by the

10 Application, pata. 28, referring to C. H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2009), p. 987,
para.305.

'! Application, para. 29; Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 57.

"2 Memorial, paras. 71-72; Reply, para. 71.
"3 Memorial, paras. 73-78.

"4 Memorial, para. 79. Emphases omitted.
"5 Reply, paras. 71-72.

"6 Reply, para. 73.

"7 Reply, para. 74.

34

135.

136.

tribunal must be serious; and (2) the procedural rule in question must be fundamental.!!8
On the first part, ad hoc committees have identified quantitative and qualitative criteria to
assess the departure from a rule, confirming this departure must be substantial. '!? On the
second part, the fundamental rules of procedure envisaged by Article 52(1)(d) are only

those which fall under principles of natural law. !2°

According to the Respondent, the Applicant is wrong in asserting that a violation of
Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules constitutes ipso facto a serious departure from
a fundamental rule of procedure. !2! On the contrary, while no ad hoc committee has yet
tuled on the question of whether the requirement of Article 41(1) amounts to a fundamental
tule of procedure, it is clear from the jurisprudence that this requirement is applied flexibly
by tribunals and committees. !”? In addition, ad hoc committees must also verify, in the
light of the circumstances of each case, whether the adversarial principle has in fact been

respected by tribunals. !23

The Respondent stresses that the respect of the adversarial principle must be assessed in
the light of the function and powers of arbitral tribunals and, in particular, that: tribunals
are under no obligation to draw the attention of a party to the fact that it has not fully
exercised its right to be heard; !”4 tribunals can adopta legal reasoning other than that of
the parties so longas this reasoning falls into the “legal framework” constituted by them;!25
and tribunals cannot base their decisions on evidence or legal concepts that one or both
parties have never had the opportunity to debate and which did not fall within the legal
framework established by the parties and therefore could not have been anticipated by

them. !26

"8 Counter-Memorial, para. 224; Rejoinder, para. 231.
"° Counter-Memorial, para. 225; Rejoinder, para. 232.

2 Counter-Memorial, paras. 226-228; Rejoinder, para. 233.

"2! Counter-Memorial, para. 229; Rejoinder, paras. 235-236.
2 Counter-Memorial, para. 229; Rejoinder, para. 236.

"3 Counter-Memorial, paras. 230-232.
4 Rejoinder, para. 242.

25 Rejoinder, para. 243.
26 Rejoinder, paras. 244-246.

35

137.

138.

139.

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

The respect for the fundamental rules of procedure is an important guarantee for the
integrity and legitimacy of the arbitration procedure. Article 52(1)(d) recognizes this by
providing that a party may request annulment of the award on the ground that “there has
been a serious departure from the fundamental rule of procedure”. This provision thus sets
two requirements for this ground for annulment. First, the rule concerned must be

fundamental and, second, the departure must be serious.

(a) Fundamental Rule

Not every departure from a rule of procedure will warrant an annulment. The rule in
question needs to qualify as “fundamental”. It appears from the travaux préparatoires of
the Convention that what the drafters had in mind are some basic principles — which may
be called principles of natural justice — such as the parties’ right to be heard, equal
opportunity of each party to present its case and the opportunity to present its evidence and
arguments and to respond to evidence and arguments of the other party. !2” As some ad hoc
committees have emphasized, fundamental rules of procedure are principles that are

essential to a fair hearing. !78

It is to be recalled that the drafters of the Convention when proposing this ground for
annulment were inspired by Article 35(c) of the Model Rules on Arbitral Procedure,
prepared by the United Nations International Law Commission. '?? In the Commentary on
the Draft Convention on Arbitral Procedure, this provision was described as “the principle
that the tribunal must function in the manner of a judicial body and with respect for the

fundamental rules governing the proceedings of any judicial body”. !3° According to this

"7 History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. 11, p.480.

8 See e.g., Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision on
Annulment, May 22, 2013, para.85 (“Libananco v. Turkey”); Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment,
December 30,2015, para. 71.

"2° Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1958, Vol. 11, p.86.

8° Commentary on the Draft Convention on Arbitral Procedure adopted by the International Law Commission at its
Fifth Session (A/CN.4/92), p. 109. (United Nations publications, Sales No.: 1955.V.1).

36

140.

141.

142.

Commentary, “[t]he right to be heard, including due opportunity to present proofs and

arguments” !3! is one of such fundamental rules of procedure.

The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt expressed the view that Article 52(1)(d) “refers
to a set of minimal standards of procedure to be respected under international law”. !32 It
further elaborated that each party shall have “the right to state its claim or its defense and
to produce all arguments and evidence in support of it”. '*3 And it continued: “[t]his
fundamental right has to be ensured on an equal level, in a way that allows each party to

respond adequately to the arguments and evidence presented by the other”. !34

(b) Serious Departure

The second requirement set forth in Article 52(1)(d) is that a departure from the
fundamental rule of procedure must be “serious” in order to provide a basis for annulling
an award. That view was already expressed by the International Law Commission
according to which the rule concerns “serious departure from fundamental rules of
procedure rather than minor departures”. !35 Various ad hoc committees held that not every
departure from a rule of procedure justifies annulment. Thus, according to the ad hoc
Committee in MINE v. Guinea “the departure mustbe substantial and be such as to deprive

a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide”. !36

Although some ad hoc committees examined whether the departure had a material impact
on the outcome of the proceedings, '3” this Committee believes that it is more appropriate
to adopt, as did some other ad hoc committees, a more flexible approach and to consider

whether the award might have been substantially different, in other words to examine a

81 Jhid.atp. 110.
'2 Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 57.

13 Ibid.
4 Ibid.

'85 Commentary on the Draft Conventionon Arbitral Procedure adopted by the International La w Commission at its
Fifth Session (A/CN.4/92), p. 109. (United Nations publications, Sales No.: 1955.V.1).

186 MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, para. 5.05.

157 See e.g., El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15), Decision on
Annulment, September 22, 2014, para. 269 (“E/ Paso v. Argentina”).

37

potential effect of the departure from the fundamental rule of procedure on the award. !38
This approach was also followed with approval by the ad hoc Committee in Tulip v. Turkey
when it stated that “[t]o require an applicant to prove that the award would actually have
been different, had the rule of procedure been observed, may impose an unrealistically high
burden of proof”. !39 And it continued: “[w]here a complex decision depends on a number
of factors, it is almost impossible to prove with certainty whether the change of one
parameter would have altered the outcome. Therefore, an applicant must demonstrate that
the observance of the rule had the potential of causing the tribunal to render an award
substantially different from what it actually decided”. !4° It further added that “in order to
be serious, the departure must be more than minimal. It must be substantial. It must have

deprived the affected party of the benefit of the rule in question”. '4!

143. A similar approach was taken by the ad hoc Committee in TECO v. Guatemala. It

expressed the view that:

Requiring an applicant to show that it would have won the case or that the
result of the case would have been different if the rule of procedure had
been respected is a highly speculative exercise. An annulment committee
cannot determine with any degree of certainty whether any of these results
would have occurred without placing itself in the shoes of a tribunal,
something which is not within its powers to do. What a committee can
determine, however, is whether the tribunal’s compliance with a rule of
procedure could potentially have affected the award. '4?

(c) — The Right to Be Heard

144. The Parties do not dispute that the right to be heard belongs to the category of the

fundamental rules of procedure. In accordance with the right to be heard, the parties shall

88 See e.g., Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, pam. 61; Victor Pey Casado and President
Allende Foundation v. Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, para. 78;
Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12), Decision on Annulment,
February 21,2014, para. 99 (“Caratube v. Kazakhstan”).

'° Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015, para. 78.

'40 Ibid. Emphasis in the original.

‘4! Ibid.

' TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/1 0/23), Decisionon Annulment,
April 5,2016, para. 85 (“TECOv. Guatemala”).

38

be given the opportunity to present all the arguments and all the evidence that they deem
relevant and to respond to arguments and evidence submitted by their opponent. In
particular, each party must be given the opportunity to address every formal motion before
the tribunal and every legal issue raised by the other party. The purpose of various

provisions of the ICSID Arbitration Rules is to provide for and guarantee this right. !43

145. The implications of this right are, however, sometimes disputed. For instance, ad hoc
committees have had to deal with the question of whether there wasa violation of a party’s
right to be heard if the tribunal had based its decision on a theory that the parties had not

fully discussed. '44
146. The ad hoc Committee in Caratube v. Kazakhstan stated that:

[T]ribunals do not violate the parties’ right to be heard if they ground their
decision on the legal reasoning not specifically advanced by the parties,
provided that the Tribunal’s arguments can be fitted within the legal
framework argued during the procedure and therefore concern aspects on
which the parties could reasonably be expected to comment, if they wished
their views to be taken into account by the tribunal. !45

147. That Committee also observed that “surprise [as faras the legal solution is concerned] does
notgive rise to a ground forannulment”. !6 In support of its view, it relied on the statement

of the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina (I) that:

It may be true that the particular approach adopted by the Tribunal in
attempting to reconcile the various conflicting elements of the case before
it came as a surprise to the parties, or at least to some of them. But even if
true, this would by no means be unprecedented in judicial decision-making,
either international or domestic, and it has nothing to do with the ground for
annulment contemplated by Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. '47

'3 See especially ICSID Arbitration Rules 20-21, 3 1-32, 37, 39-42, 44, 49-50, 54.

'4 K1éckner v. Cameroon (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 89-91; Wena v.
Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 66-70; Vivendi v. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment,
July 3, 2002, paras. 82-85; Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, paras. 90-96; El
Paso v. Argentina, Decisionon Annulment, September 22, 2014, paras. 278-286.

"5 Caratubev. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21,2014, para. 94.

146 Ibid. at para. 96.

'7 Vivendiv. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment, July 3,2002, para. 84.

  

39

148. This Committee considers this approach reasonable and well-grounded in international

judicial practice. 148

3. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS
A. Applicant’s Position

149. The Applicant sets forth that a tribunal manifestly exceeds its powers, inter alia, if it fails
to exercise jurisdiction where it exists or to apply the proper law. !49 An excess of powers
is manifest when it can be discerned with little effort.!5° When applying the law, the

Tribunal may not invent it or replace it with its own personal policy preferences. !5!

150. On the relevant standard under Article 52(1)(b), the Applicant makes the following
observations: an excess of power can be manifest if it can “readily be discerned”, although
this may occasionally require an ad hoc annulment committee to undertake an “elaborate
analysis”; '52 an ad hoc annulment committee is entitled to examine the “factual and legal
premises” upon which the tribunal’s decision is based; !53 and a tribunal commits an excess

of powers by the “manifest and consequential non-exercise of [its] full powers”. 5+

151. Furthermore, the Applicant contends that: a tribunal cannot assume but must prove the

legal rules it applies; !55an “egregious”, “gross” or “extreme” misapplication of the proper
law amounts to a failure to apply the proper law; '*° even if a tribunal’s reasoning is “of a

legal nature”, its award may be annulled when the decision did not “remain[] within the

'48 See e.g., Northern Cameroons (Cameroon v. United Kingdom), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1963, p. 15; Nuclear
Tests (Australiav. France), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1974, p.253; Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v. France), Judgment,
L.C.J. Reports 1974, p.457; Maritime Dispute (Peruv. Chile), Judgment, L.C.J. Reports 2014, p.3.

'4 Application, paras. 34-36; Memorial, para. 58.

'S° Memorial, para. 59.

'S' Memorial, paras. 62-64; Reply, para. 54; A. PHB1, para. 12.

'S Reply, para. 39. Annulment Hearing Tr. Day 1 (May 27,2019) [E]21:13-19.

'S Reply, paras. 40-41.

'S Reply, paras. 42-43. Annulment Hearing Tr. Day | (May 27,2019) [E]22:15-21.

'S5 Reply, paras. 44-46.

186 Reply, paras. 47-49.

40

152.

153.

general limits of positive law or has substantially departed from it”; !5” and a tribunal has
the authority to fill gaps in the applicable law, but not to create or invent new legal rules to

adjudicate the dispute. !5*

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that only a manifest excess of power which is “obvious, evident,
clear” warrants the annulment of the award. !59 If a certain degree of analysis may be
necessary to understand “what the tribunal has decided”, an excess of power cannot be
characterized as manifest when it is not “sufficiently clear and grave” or when it cannot

“readily be discerned”. 16°

With respectto the failure to exercise jurisdiction, the Respondent points out that the ICSID
Convention does not permit a de novo review of the tribunal’s jurisdictional ruling !°! No
ad hoc committee has ruled yet on whether an erroneous decision on admissibility may
amount to an excess of power.'© Yet, the Applicant fails to distinguish between situations
where the subject-matter of the application for annulment is not the jurisdiction of the
tribunal (and thus concerns the existence and scope of its powers), and the admissibility of
the parties’ claims (and thus concerns the exercise of its jurisdictional power). '® In any
case, an ad hoc committee cannot review the factual premises on which the tribunal based
its decision; and an ad hoc committee cannotannul an award if the tribunal’s disposition

of a question of law is “tenable”. !°

'57 Reply, paras. 50-52. Annulment Hearing Tr. Day | (May 27,2019) [E]24:6-7.
'§ Reply, paras. 53-55.

‘8° Counter-Memorial, paras. 330-332, 334.

1 Rejoinder, para. 38 1. Footnotes omitted.

'! Counter-Memorial, paras. 338-340.

1© Rejoinder, para. 390.

'6 Rejoinder, paras. 386-390; R. RHBI, para. 31.
14 Rejoinder, paras. 392-395.

165 Rejoinder, para. 396.

4l

154.

155.

With respectto the failure to apply the proper law, the Respondent sets forth that an arbitral
tribunal cannot be criticized for having applied the law agreed to by the parties, !6
especially when their agreement concerns a body of rules without setting a hierarchy
between them. '!6? Once the ad hoc committee has identified the law applicable to the
question in debate, it must ascertain whether the tribunal has endeavoured to apply that law
to the circumstances of the case '®* or whether it consciously ignored the applicable law.'°
The Respondent argues that the Applicant conflates, on the one hand, the control of the
tribunal’s endeavour to apply the proper law, and, on the other hand, the control of the
tribunal’s finding on the content of the applicable law. '” The latter is impermissible in that

it would constitute an appeal.!7!

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

Under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, a party may request annulment of the
award on the ground “that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers”. The travaux
préparatoires demonstrate that the intention of the drafters of the Convention was to cover
the situation where the Tribunal’s decision went beyond the terms of the parties’ arbitration
agreement. '? This ground covers a situation when a tribunal decides the dispute although
under the terms of the arbitration agreement it lacks jurisdiction over the claims submitted
to it by a claimant. It may also cover a situation when a tribunal fails to exercise its
jurisdiction. The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina (I), in a frequently quoted

passage, observed:

It is settled [...] that an ICSID Tribunal commits an excess of powers not
only if it exercises jurisdiction which it does not have under the relevant
agreementor treaty and the ICSID Convention, butalso if it fails to exercise
a jurisdiction which it possesses under those instruments. One might qualify
this by saying that it is only where the failure to exercise a jurisdiction is

‘66 Counter-Memorial, para. 347.

167

Counter-Memorial, paras. 348-349.

‘8 Counter-Memorial, para. 350.

1 Rejoinder, para. 430.

™ Rejoinder, para. 409.

'! Rejoinder, paras. 423-434.

'™ See History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. 11,p.517.

42

156.

157.

158.

capable of making a difference to the result that it can be considered a
manifest excess of power. Subject to that qualification, however, the failure
bya tribunal to exercise a jurisdiction given it by the ICSID Convention and
a BIT in circumstances where the outcome of the inquiry is affected asa
result, amounts in the Committee’s view to a manifest excess of powers
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b).!%

Unless there is a legally relevantreason fora tribunal to refrain from exercising jurisdiction

it possesses, a tribunal declining to exercise it exceeds its powers.

In the present case, while the Tribunal rejected the Respondent’s objections to its
jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae in the reasoning part of the Award, !74
it decided that “[t]he claims raised in this arbitration are inadmissible and the Tribunal is

precluded from exercising jurisdiction over this dispute”. !75

The Committee will have to review whether there were indeed legal reasons for the
Tribunal to refrain from the exercise of its jurisdiction in order to determine whether it has

manifestly exceeded its powers as contended by the Applicant.

4, FAILURE TO STATE REASONS
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant notes that Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention provides that an award
may be annulled if it fails to state the reasons on which it is based. It refers to the ad hoc

Committee in MINE v. Guinea which noted that the award must enable “one to follow how

"3 Vivendi v. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 86. See also Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on
Annulment, June 5, 2007, para. 43; Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly Empresas
Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Peru, S.A.)v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment,
September 5, 2007, para. 99 (“Lucchetti v. Peru”); FraportAG Frankfurt Services Worldwide v. Philippines (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 36-37 (“Fraport v. The Philippines’).

4 Award, paras. 314-315, 324,385. As noted above (para. 91), the Tribunal in view of its conclusion that thechims
are inadmissible did not consider it necessary to deal with the remaining jurisdictional objections that the acts of the
State-owned television provider are nota ttributable to the Respondent and the“ purely contractual claims” rela ting to
the Investment Agreement donot fall within its jurisdiction.

"5 Award, Chapter VIII entitled Decision, para.587(a). This formulation implicitly confirms that the Tribunal
possessed jurisdiction over thedispute.

43

the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion”. !76 The
requirementto state reasons —“one of the central dutiesof arbitral tribunals” !7” — extends
to the tribunal’s duty to consider and to respond to the arguments presented by the parties,

especially those highly relevant to their case. !78

159. Referring to Vivendi v. Argentina (1), the Applicant submits that annulment for failure to
state reasons should occur if the following two conditions are present: “first, the failure to
state reasons must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s

decision”. !79

160. The Applicant emphasizes four points regarding the reasons requirement: missing reasons
can be inferred or reconstructed, but only when there is a reasonable basis to do so in the
specific terms of the award; !8° inadequate, frivolous, unintelligible, or contradictory
reasons justify annulment; '®! arguments and evidence with “the potential to be relevant
to the final outcome of the case” must be considered and addressed by the tribunal; !8? and
a tribunal is not presumed to have considered the parties’ arguments and evidence when

they are accurately summarized in the award. !83

B. Respondent’s Position

161. The Respondentstates that there is no cause for annulmentunder Article 52(1)(e) when the

terms of the award allow the parties to understand the tribunal’s reasoning. '*4 In addition,

176 Application, para. 52; Memorial, para. 65; MINE v. Republic of Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22,
1989, para. 5.09. Annulment Hearing Tr. Day 1 (May 27,2019) [E],93: 7-9.

"” Application, para. 65, citing Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, CA. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5), Decision on Annulment, December 27,2016, para. 163.

8 Application, para. 53.

™ Memorial, para. 69, citing Vivendi v. Argentina (I), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 65. Emphasis
omitted.

18 Reply, para. 58.

's! Memorial, para. 66; Reply, paras. 61-66.

' Reply, paras. 67-69, citing TECO v. Guatemala, Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, paras. 135 and 138.
Emphasis in the original.

'S Reply, para. 70; A. PHB1, para. 13.

'S Counter-Memorial, paras. 429-431.

44

the reasons in the award are assessed in the light of the parties’ arguments and evidence
and can derive implicitly from the terms used in the award. !85 The tribunal is not obliged
to address all arguments and documents submitted by the parties, in particular when these
do not affect the decision or when the reasons provided by a tribunal directly contradict
them. !86 Lastly, to be annullable, genuinely contradictory reasons must be incapable of

standing together on any reasonable reading of the decision. !8”

162. The Respondent also makes the following three observations: Article 52(1)(e) does not
empower ad hoc committees to sanction the allegedly “inadequate or defective”
(“inapproprié ou défectueux”) nature of the reasoning of an award;'8§ the tribunal’s
reasoning can be implicit from a reading of the award as a whole; '®° and the failure of the
award to deal with every question submitted to the tribunal is not a ground for annulment

under Article 52(1)(e). 19°

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

163. A tribunal has an obligation under Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention to state the
reasons upon which its award is based. !9! Failure to comply with this obligation is a ground

for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

164. The purpose of this provision is to guarantee that a tribunal gives reasons for its award. It
has to explain to the reader, in particular to the parties, how and why the tribunal reached
its decision. However, Article 48(3) does not require discussion of arguments which have

no impact on the award. !9%

'85 Counter-Memorial, paras. 429-431.

'86 Counter-Memorial, paras. 434-435.

'§7 Counter-Memorial, paras. 440-441.

'8§ Rejoinder, paras. 507-512.

'8 Rejoinder, paras. 513-517.

1 Rejoinder, paras. 518-523.

1! This requirement is restated in [CSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(i).

' Standard Chartered Bankv. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/12), Award, November 2,
2012, paras. 273-275.

45

165. It is, however, to be observed that it is one thing to state the reasons in the award and to
explain to the parties the basis for the tribunal’s decision, and why and how it was reached,
and quite another whether the reasons given would convince the parties, in particular the
party which has not prevailed, about the correctness of the decision and the reasons given
in its support. The correctness of the reasoning is not relevant for the purpose of annulment
and the ad hoc committees are not expected to review this aspect of the reasoning.
Otherwise they would act as an appellate body. The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v.

Argentina (II) stated that:

[T]he issue before this Committee is not to assess the accuracy or quality of
the reasons given by the Tribunal butrather to review whether these reasons
enable the reader to understand why the Tribunal reached the conclusions
that were determinative for its decision(s).'%

A number of ad hoc committees have expressed a similar view. !°4

166. The classic formula for the requirements of reasons, which the Parties in the present
annulment proceeding also referred to was provided by the ad hoc Committee in MINE v.

Guinea:

The Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to
be motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning
of the Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The
adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under
paragraph (1)(e), because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc Committee
into an examination of the substance of the tribunal’s decision, in disregard
of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by Article 53 of the Convention.
A Committee might be tempted to annul an award because that examination
disclosed a manifestly incorrect application of the law, which, however, is
nota ground for annulment.

13 Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentina (ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/19), Decision on Annulment, May 5, 2017, para. 154 (“Vivendi v. Argentina (Il)”).

14 See e.g., MCI v. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 82; Vieira v. Chile, Decision on
Annulment, December 10, 2010, pata. 355; Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18),
Decision on Annulment, July 8, 2013, para.278; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/17), Decision on Annulment, January 24, 2014, para. 180 (“Jmpregilo v. Argentina”); Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Annulment, November 2, 2015, para. 66; Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v.
Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20), Decision on Annulment, February 26, 2016, para. 135; TECOv. Guatemala,
Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, para. 124.

 

  

46

In the Committee’s view, the requirementto state reasons is satisfied as long
as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point
A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of
fact or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by
either contradictory or frivolous reasons. '9°

167. Relying on these statements, the ad hoc Committee in Tulip v. Turkey explained that “the
standard merely requires that the reader can understand what motivated the tribunal. As
long as an ad hoc committee can follow the reasons, it is irrelevant what it thinks of their

quality”. !9°

168. The view to the same effect was expressed by several ad hoc Committees. Thus the ad hoc

Committee in Wena v. Egypt wrote:

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of
the challenged Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee to reconsider
whether the reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate
or not, convincing or not. As stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE, this
ground for annulment refers to a “minimum requirement” only. This
requirementis based on the Tribunal’s duty to identify, and to letthe parties
know, the factual and legal premises leading the Tribunal to its decision. If
such sequence of reasons has been given by the Tribunal, there is no room
left for a request for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).'”

169. The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina (I) said:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52 (1\e)
concernsa failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award,
not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons. It bears reiterating that
an ad hoc committee is nota court of appeal. Provided that the reasons given
by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the
tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e).
Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be
allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their
reasoning, !98

15 MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, paras. 5.08, 5.09.

16 Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015, para. 101.

'7 Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 79.

'8 Vivendi v. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 64. Emphasis in the origina |. Footnote omitted.

47

170. Subsequent ad hoc committees have since adopted this standard. !% It follows that the role
of this Committee under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Conventionis notto inquire whether
the reasons provided by the Tribunal in its Award are correct as a matter of law or whether
they are convincing but to satisfy itself that the reasons given enable the reader to

understand how and why the Tribunal arrived at its decision.

Vv. TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS THE ANNULMENT OF WHICH IS
SOUGHT BY THE APPLICANT

171. The Applicant invokes the following three grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention:

(ji That the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b));

(ii) That there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
(Article 52(1)(d)); and

(iii) | That the Award failed to state the reasons upon which it is based (Article 52(1)(e)).

172. These three grounds are invoked by the Applicant, in a twin combination, with respect to

several findings of the Tribunal. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal:

1. By holding that OTMTI’s right to arbitrate had been extinguished by OTH’s filing
of a notice of dispute manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons for
this conclusion;2

' CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, paras. 66-75; Mr. Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic
Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on Annulment, November 1 ,2006, para. 21; MTDv.
Chile, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, para. 92; Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007,
para. 134; Lucchetti v. Peru, Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007, paras. 127-128; Azurix Corp. v. The
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras. 53-56, 178;
MCI. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19,2009, paras. 82 and 86; Fraport v. The Philippines, Decision
on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 272 and 277; Continental Casualty Company v. The Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Decision on Annulment, September 16,2011, para. 100; Libananco v. Turkey, Decision
on Annulment, May 22, 2013, paras. 90-94; Impregilo v. Argentina, Decisionon Annulment, January 24, 2014, paras.
180-181; Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21,2014, paras. 101-102; Alapli Elektrik BV.
v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13), Decision on Annulment, July 10,2014, paras. 197-199; El Paso
v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 22, 2014, paras. 217 and 235; Kilig Ingaat ithalat th racat Sanayi ve
Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v. Turkmenistan (ICSID CaseNo. ARB/10/1), Decision on Annulment, July 14,2015, paras.
59-64.

2 Memorial, paras. 80-110; Reply, paras. 75-122.

48

2. By dismissing OTMTI’s claims on the basis of the abuse of rights manifestly
exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons for this conclusion;”°!

3. By finding that the settlement of the OTH Arbitration confirmed the inadmissibility
of OTMTI’s claims exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons for this
conclusion;? and

4. By accepting Algeria’s “untimely” objections of extinguishment of rights and abuse
of rights seriously departed froma fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state
reasons for admitting these objections. 2%

173. In its Post-Hearing Briefs, which were authorized by the Committee upon the Applicant’s
request, the Applicantaddressed, as the first ground for its request for the partial annulment
of the Award, the alleged serious departure from the fundamental rule of procedure.2™ The
Committee considers it useful to begin by addressing this issue, as it relates to the
Appellant’s complaint that the objections to the admissibility of its claims, which the

Tribunal upheld, were raised belatedly and should not have been admitted.

1. THE ACCEPTANCE OF RESPONDENT’S “EXTINGUISHMENT OF RIGHTS” AND
ABUSE OF RIGHTS OBJECTIONS

A. Applicant’s Position

174. The Applicant submits that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure and failed to state reasons when it accepted the Respondent’s objections of
“extinguishment of OTMTI’s rights” and abuse of rights, 2°> and thus the corresponding

part of the Award should be annulled.

20! Memorial, paras. 1 1 1-169; Reply, paras. 123-150.
2 Memorial, paras. 170-187; Reply, paras. 151-168.
23 Memorial, paras. 1 88-213; Reply, paras. 169-225.
24 A. PHBI, paras. 14-36; A. PHB2, paras. 1-10.

2°5 Memorial, paras. 188-189; Reply, paras. 169, 223. The Committee notes that the expression “extinguishment of
OTMTI’s rights” has been used by the Applicant; it is not the term used by the Tribunal in the Award. The Respondent
used, in French, the expressions “/e défaut d ‘intérét pour agir” and “le défaut de droit d'agir”, Hearing Tr. Day 5
(May 30,2015) [E] 162:22-23, R. PHB1, para. 19.

49

175.

176.

177.

(a) Admissibility of the Ri dent’s “Extinguish of Rights” and
Abuse of Rights Objections

 

The Applicant complains that the Respondent unveiled the two preliminary objections for
the very first time in its Closing Statement at the Hearing: first, the filing of OTH’s Notice
of Dispute under the Egypt-Algeria BIT “extinguished” the Claimant’s claims under the
BLEU-Algeria BIT; and, second, the Claimant had abused its rights to initiate arbitration
proceeding under the latter BIT.2% At the Hearing, the Claimant stated that the
Respondent’s objections could not be taken seriously given how late in the proceeding

they had been raised. 7°”

The Tribunal, the Applicant contends, ignored its own prior instructions that the
Respondent’s preliminary objections should be stated at the latest in its Counter-
Memorial.?°8 The Tribunal admitted and accepted the Respondent’s objections without
acknowledging the Claimant’s objection as to their timeliness. 2° The Respondent’s two
objections do not reflect an “evolution” or “refinement” of previously raised arguments
(as the record shows), ?!° and they could have been elaborated prior to the close of the
Hearing (since the Respondent was at all times fully aware of the nature and extent of the

control that the Sawiris Family exercised over every entity in the Weather Group). ?!!

According to the Applicant, the Respondent does not dispute that the Tribunal failed to
state reasons for admitting its two preliminary objections.!? In addition, “even if [the
Claimant] had not raised repeated objections to Algeria’s untimely new defenses, the

Tribunal still should have stated the reasons why it chose to admit the defenses well outside

296 Application, para. 31; Memorial, pam. 194; A. PHB1, para. 15.

2°7 Memorial, para. 194, citing Hearing Tr. Day 5 (May 30, 2015) [E] 196:22-197:16.
208 Memorial, para. 195, citing Procedural Order No. 2 of April 10,2014, para. 32.
2 Memorial, para. 195.

21 Reply, para. 170.

21! Reply, para. 182.

2? Reply, para. 224.

50

178.

179.

180.

of the time limits under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) and in contravention of its own

orders”. 2!3

Therefore, the Tribunal’s decision to permit the Respondentto introduce new preliminary
objections at such a late stage constitutes a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(d)
of the ICSID Convention.?!4 In addition, the Tribunal’s failure to consider the Claimant’s
objections to the admissibility of the Respondent’s objections, or to state reasons for its
decision to reject those objections, constitutes a ground for annulment under Article

52(1)(e) of the Convention.?!5

(b) The Claimant’s Right to Be Heard and the Treatment of Parties

The Applicant complains that the post-hearing procedure did not afford it with an equal or
adequate opportunity to address what ultimately were the dispositive issues in the
Award.?!6 The Claimant was “unfairly and improperly limited” to respond in the
“materially abbreviated manner and timeframe” permitted by post-hearing submissions,
and thus was not able to adduce factual evidence, testimony, or legal authorities (other than
publicly available cases).?!7 Moreover, the Tribunal failed to give the Claimantan adequate
opportunity to address the Respondent’s preliminary objections, as well as the opportunity
to discuss the two authorities not in the record but cited in the Award, which it contends,

had a particular significance to the outcome of the case.?!8

The Applicant further submits that the Claimant agreed to the post-hearing submissions
before the Respondent made its new preliminary objections, and its first true opportunity
to respond to the Respondent’s objections came only in the post-hearing reply; 7! that the

Tribunal’s “expressly imposed significant constraints” on the post-hearing briefs precluded

213 Reply, para. 225. Emphasis omitted.

214 Reply, paras. 175-183.

215 Memorial, para. 199.

216 Application, para. 33; A. PHB1, para. 21.

2'7 Application, para. 33; Memorial, paras. 200-204.
218 Memorial, paras. 200-213.

2! Reply, paras. 185-188.

51

181.

182.

183.

184.

the Claimant from adequately rebutting the very objections to which the Tribunal later

accorded dispositive weight; 220 that the Tribunal’s “expressed specific interest in other
issues” and its proposed opportunities to address those underscore the inadequacy of the
procedure with respect to the Respondent’s new and untimely objections; ?2! and that a
tribunal’s discretion based on the principle of jura novit curia to rely on authorities not in

the record is subject to important limits. 2?

Against this backdrop, the Tribunal’s decision to dismiss the Claimant’s claims based on
the Respondent’s untimely objections violated the Claimant’s right to be heard and
seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure, and therefore this part of the

Award is annullable. ??3

(c) Alleged Waiver of the Applicant’s Right to Raise an Article 52(1)(d)
Ground

The Applicantasserts it did not waive the right to object to the Tribunal’s serious departures

from a fundamental rule of procedure, relying on two bases. 77+

First, the Tribunal’s serious departures were not fully known or knowable until the issuance
of the Award: “[t]he weight that the Tribunal assigned to Algeria’s late extinguishment of
rights and abuse of rights objections—and the true nature and impact of the impairment of
OTMTI’s right to be heard on those issues—could not have been known until after the
Award was issued”. 225 Accordingly, there has been no waiver under Rule 27 of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules of the right to seek annulment.??6

Second, the Claimant repeatedly objected to the Respondent’s defenses. The Claimant

raised a Rule 41(1) objection to the admissibility of the Respondent’s defenses in the

0 Reply, paras. 189-191.

21 Reply, paras. 192-198. Emphasis omitted.
>? Reply, paras. 199-201.

23 Memorial, para. 200.

4 Reply, paras. 202-204.

5 Reply, para. 207.

26 Reply, para. 208.

52

185.

186.

arbitration. 227 In any event, the Respondent acknowledges, “[t]here is no requirement as to
form [for objections] set out in Arbitration Rule 27”. 228 Further, the Claimant repeatedly
and consistently highlighted the fundamentally improper nature of the Respondent’s late
objections, including in the Hearing on preliminary objections, Post-Hearing Briefs, post-

hearing correspondence, and submissions on costs.?29

In consequence, the Applicant preserved its right to challenge the Tribunal’s late admission

of those defenses and related violations of its right to be heard. 3°

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the adversarial principle and the equal treatment of the
Parties were respected at each stage of the arbitration procedure, including at the Hearing
and in the post-hearing phase, and thus the Tribunal did not seriously depart from a
fundamental rule of procedure.?3! The Applicant’s claims based on Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention should therefore fail.

27 Application, para. 32; Memorial, paras. 194 and 217, citing Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration,
para. 169; Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, paras. 9 1-92; Letter from OTMTI to the Tribunal
dated November 28, 2015, atp. 2; Claimant’s Submission on Costs in the arbitration, para. 12.

28 Reply, para. 211; citing Counter-Memorial, para. 287, fn. 287 (quoting Thomas H. Webster, Handbook of
Investment Arbitration, Sweet & Maxwell, 2012, p. 462, para. C-27-1 1).

»° Reply, paras. 212-222. See also footnote 227 above.

2 Reply, paras. 203-204.

23! Counter-Memorial, paras. 220-223.

53

187.

188.

189.

(a) Admissibility of the Respondent’s Lack of Standing (“Défaut
d’Intérét pour Agir”) and Abuse of Rights Objections

According to the Respondent, its preliminary objections to jurisdiction and admissibility
were timely. 232 The Respondent’s objections were made at the beginning of the procedure
and then refined and fully developed in the course of the proceeding to take into account

new evidence added to the record.?53

In particular, the Respondent raised its concerns to the Tribunal regarding the situation of
double recovery (“situation de double emploi”) from multiple claims and the complete
opacity of the Claimant regarding the vertical chain of ownership from the early stages of
the arbitration proceeding up to the decision on bifurcation.?34 Notably, at the Hearing on
Bifurcation, the Respondent answered the request of a Tribunal member by confirming it
intended to bring forward an objection based on the abuse of rights depending on the
evidence it would gather in the arbitration proceeding.5 In response, the Claimant
acknowledged that an abuse of procedure would need to be assessed in light of the specific

facts of the case.?36

Furthermore, the Respondent stresses that new evidence adduced throughout the arbitration
proceeding and in particular that which emerged from the examination of Mr. Sawiris at
the Hearing, uncovered the abuse of rights. 37 This evidence brought to light the situation
of double recovery (“situation de double emploi”) stemming from the submission to
arbitration of the same dispute by the Mr. Sawiris at different levels of the vertically
integrated corporate chain.?38 Mr. Sawiris acknowledged that when he sold the shares of

OTH to VimpelCom, he also gave up the right of action of OTH against the Respondent

2? Rejoinder, para. 284.

?33 Counter-Memorial, paras. 239-240; R. PHB1, para. 17.

2 Counter-Memorial, paras. 241-243.

5 Rejoinder, paras. 259-262, referring to Bifurcation Hearing Tr. (March 26, 2014) [F] pp. 20:15-22:32. In the
transcriptof the interpretation into English, the passage appears at 50:18-55:21.

36 Rejoinder, para. 263, referring to Bifurcation Hearing Tr. (March 26, 20 14) [E] 58:21-60:2.

37 Counter-Memorial, paras. 245-247.

28 Rejoinder, para. 285.

54

because the price included the evaluation of OTH’s claim initiated by the Notice of Dispute

dated November 2, 2010.239

190. Asa result, from the Respondent’s view, the Applicant cannot reasonably argue that the
objections to admissibility upheld by the Tribunal were untimely and warrant partial

annulment of the Award under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.2“°

(b) The Claimant's Right to be Heard and the Treatment of the Parties

191. The Respondent takes issue with the Applicant’s characterization of the Hearing and the
Post-Hearing Briefs, asserting that the Applicant had full knowledge of the objections to
admissibility and had an adequate opportunity to rebut them.?4! At the Hearing, the
Claimant did not object when its witnesses and experts were questioned on, among others,
the existence of its own harm, the effect of the OTH settlement agreement, and the abuse
of rights principle. ?*? In its Closing Statement, the Claimant specifically addressed the
abuse of rights principle, stating this argument was not “serious” in the present case.*43 At
the end of the Hearing, the Tribunal and the Parties agreed on the submission of two post-
hearing briefs and jointly determined the terms of these briefs, without complaint from the

Claimant on any aspect of the arbitral procedure. 74+

192. Moreover, the Claimant had an adequate opportunity to address the objections in the Post
Hearing Briefs. The Respondent recalls that the ad hoc Committee in Fraport noted that
“{a] full opportunity to present one’s case does not preclude a tribunal from setting
reasonable limits on the timing and scale of both parties’ submissions, provided that, in so
doing, it affords the parties equality of treatment”.?4> In its Post-Hearing Briefs, the

Claimant stated the OTH Arbitration was “irrelevant” and addressed the situation of double

2 Rejoinder, para. 278, referring to Hearing Tr. Day 2 (May 27,2015) [E] 170:3-14.and 173: 16-19.

© Counter-Memorial, para. 249; Rejoinder, para. 287.

41 Counter-Memorial, para. 250; Rejoinder, paras. 228 and 288.

>” Counter-Memorial, para. 254.

> Rejoinder, para. 293, referring to Hearing Tr. Day 5 (May 30, 2015) [E] 196:22— 197:16.

4 Counter-Memorial, paras. 256-257; Rejoinder, para. 297.

5 Counter-Memorial, para. 260; Rejoinder, para. 299, citing Fraport v. The Philippines, Decision on Annulment,
December 23,2010, para. 265. Emphasis omitted.

55

193.

recovery (“situation de double emploi’’), even submitting sources of law in support of its
contentions.“6 The Tribunal did not completely forbid the submission of factual evidence
and legal authorities, as the Applicant incorrectly asserts, but only required that those be

authorized by it beforehand.24”

The Respondent also states that the Tribunal did ensure that the adversarial principle was
respected at every stage of the arbitration proceeding, including at the Hearing and in the
Post-Hearing Briefs. 248 Contrary to the Applicant’s affirmation, the Tribunal did not have
to warn the Parties that it was inclined to uphold two preliminary objections and to grant
the Claimant an additional opportunity to present its arguments on these objections. 4?
Moreover, the Respondent argues, in the many procedural incidents initiated by the
Claimant in the arbitration proceeding, where the Claimant initially refused to comply with
the Tribunal’s instructions and subsequently alleged a violation of the adversarial principle,
the Tribunal allowed both Parties to formulate their arguments under the same
conditions. 25° As the Tribunal accepted the Claimant’s argument that “the Tribunal may
apply the maxim jura no[v/it curia (or jura novit arbiter) and rely on any applicable legal
authorities it deems relevant to its analysis”, 25! the Applicant cannot now reasonably
criticize the Tribunal for having granted the Respondent’s abuse of rights objection while
referring, inter alia, to extracts from two scholarly publications which were not debated.?52
Consequently, in upholding the Respondent’s objections, the Tribunal treated the Parties

equally and respected the Claimant’s right to be heard.

46 Rejoinder, paras. 313-314.

47 Rejoinder, paras. 316-317.

48 Counter-Memorial, paras. 263-264, 275; Rejoinder, para. 320.
> Counter-Memorial, para. 267.

250 Rejoinder, para. 326.

5! Award, para. 140.

2° Rejoinder, para. 327.

56

194,

195.

196.

197.

(c) Alleged Waiver of the Applicant’s Right to Raise an Article 52(1)(d)
Ground

In the Respondent’s view, the Applicant failed to raise in due course its objections to the
alleged procedural irregularities it now mentions in support of its request to partially annul
the Award. 55 More precisely, the Applicant forfeited its rights to invoke these alleged
irregularities pursuant to Rules 27 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.254

The Respondent submits that in the absence of a procedural objection raised during the
arbitration proceeding alleging a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, where
the party either requested the tribunal to remedy the situation or formulated a reservation,
an applicant is deprived of its right to invoke this departure in support of its annulment

application based onan Article 52(1)(d) ground. ?55

According to the Respondent, the Applicant mischaracterizes the record by affirming it
formulated in the arbitration proceeding a request under Rule 41(1) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules to reject the Respondent’s objections.”°° On the contrary, the Claimant
limited itself to arguing that the Respondent’s objections upheld by the Tribunal had been
raised for the first time at the Hearing and then tried to show that these objections were
unfounded, without any criticism of their admissibility. 57 Accordingly, the Applicant
cannot fault the Tribunal for not having considered (or rejected without justification) a

procedural objection that it never submitted to the Tribunal.258

The Applicant attempts to artificially qualify the extent of its knowledge of alleged
violations, stating they “[w]ere [nJot [fJully [k]nown [o]r [k]nowable” during the
arbitration proceeding, and only “became evident” when the Award was issued.?°?

However, a party needs not to wait until the award is issued to realize that there was a

?53 Counter-Memorial, para. 283.
254 Rejoinder, paras. 336-337.
255 Rejoinder, para. 343.

256 Counter-Memorial, para. 297.
°57 Rejoinder, para. 351.

258 Rejoinder, para. 352.

2° Rejoinder, para. 362. Emphasis omitted.

57

198.

199.

200.

procedural violation in the conduct of the arbitration process and must promptly submit its
objections (or, at least, before the rendering of the award).? Yet, the Claimant did not
raise any objection during the various stages of the procedure which followed, nor

expressed any reservation in this regard. 7°!

The Respondent submits that, pursuant to Rules 27 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
the Applicant is deprived of the right to invoke the alleged procedural irregularities in an
attempt to characterize a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. For the
above reasons, the Applicant’s partial annulment request based on Article 52(1)(d) can

only be dismissed. 7°

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

In the view of the Committee, three distinct issues arise in relation to the alleged serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure:

(a) The issue of whether OTMTI is barred from invoking the alleged procedural
irregularities by failing to promptly object to the conduct of the proceeding;

(b) The issue of whether Algeria’s admissibility objections as to the lack of OTMTI’s
standing (“défaut d’intérét pour agir’”) and the abuse of rights were untimely; and

(c) The issue of whether OTMTI was given sufficient opportunity to defend itself
against these objections and whether its right to be heard was respected.

(a) Alleged Waiver of OTMTI’s right to raise an Article 52(1)(e) ground

complaining of the conduct of the proceeding
The Respondent argues that OTMTI shall be deemed to have waived its right to invoke the
alleged irregularities in the conduct of the proceeding as a ground for annulment under

Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention since it did not promptly state its objection to

2 Rejoinder, paras. 366-369.

261 Rejoinder, para. 370.

2 Rejoinder, para. 374.

58

201.

the alleged non-compliance with the Arbitration Rules, as requiredby Rule 27 of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules. 7

The Committee is not convinced that OTMTI waived its right to seek annulment under
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention in relation to the treatment by the Tribunal of
the two objections raised by the Respondent with regard to the admissibility of the claims.
First, counsel for the Claimant noted in her Closing Statement that “[w]e heard a couple of
new arguments this morning: in part, that there are too many people that might be able to
claim [...] We also heard for the very first time today about the alleged abuse of rights”.26
When asked before the closure of the Hearing whether she had any complaints, counsel
simply replied: “I am trying to remember all the procedural orders!”265 Second, in its
Post-Hearing Briefs, OTMTI emphasized again that the Respondent argued for the very
first time at the Hearing that the commencement of the OTH Arbitration deprives the
Tribunal of jurisdiction. 26 Although OTMTI did not refer specifically in this context to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1), it, however, expressly invoked that Rule when it addressed
Respondent’s argument, advanced according to the OTMTI “for the very first time” at the
Hearing, that, because the “Claimant’s investment at issue [was] 0.05 percent indirect
shareholding in OTA [...] on the date it submitted its claim to arbitration”, 67 the Tribunal
lacked jurisdiction. OTMTI considered this to be the “Respondent’s newfound objection
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the whole of Claimant’s investment [which was] both

untimely and legally baseless”.2°8’ OTMTI, quoting ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1),

26 Counter-Memorial, para. 283. [CSID Arbitration Rule 27 provides that “[a] party which knows or should have
known thata provision ofthe Administrative and Financial Regulations, of these Rules, of any other rules or agreement
applicable to the proceeding, or of an order of the Tribunal has not been complied with and which fails to state
promptly its objections thereto, shall be deemed—subject to Article 45 of the Convention—to have waived its right
to object”.

2 Hearing Tr. Day 5 (May 30,2015) [E] 196:22-197:8.

265 Hearing Tr. Day 5 (May 30, 2015) [E] 250:22-23. Counsel spoke in English. The transcript of the interpretation
differs a little bit: “J’essaie de me souvenir de toutesles ordonnances deprocédure pour voir si. .. Mais non!” Hearing
Tr. Day 5 (May 30,2015) [F] 94:18-19.

266 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, para. 169.

267

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, para. 154. Emphasis added.

268 Ibid. Emphasis added.

59

202.

203.

204.

expressed the view that the objection was untimely and therefore “should [...] be rejected

by the Tribunal on this ground”. 26?

There can, therefore, be no doubt that the Tribunal was fully aware of the Claimant’s

position thatthe objections, which the Claimant considered “untimely”, shouldbe rejected.

Moreover, in a letter to the Tribunal, in which the Claimant reacted to the Respondent’s
requestto exclude Claimant’s resubmitted legal authority CLA-226 or provide Respondent
a further opportunity to submit responsive legal authorities and argument, the Claimant
emphasized that it relied in its Reply Post-Hearing Brief on the additional paragraphs of
Mr. Wehland’s monograph?” (which was already referred to in its Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility) “to respond to a jurisdictional objection that Respondent
raised for the very first time in passing during its Closing Argument” .?” The Claimant
argued that the additional pages from Mr. Wehland’s monograph were produced “to show
that there is no merit whatsoever to Respondent’s new and untimely objection”.272 The
Claimant stressed that “this new jurisdictional objection should be rejected not only
because it is meritless, but also it is untimely and was raised in clear violation of the

procedure set out in the ICSID Arbitration Rules”. 273

The Applicant argues that the Tribunal seriously breached a fundamental rule of procedure
“as its decision to admit and accept Algeria’s new and untimely objections violated
OTMTI’s right to be heard”. 274 As noted above, OTMTI expressed the view several times
in the arbitration proceeding that the “extinguishment of rights” and abuse of rights

objections were untimely and therefore should have been rejected (also) on that ground. It

?® Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, para. 155. See also Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 83
where reference is made to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) in relation to another objection which the Claimant
considered “untimely and devoid ofany merit”.

27 H. Wehland, The Coordination of Multiple Proceedingsin Investment Treaty Arbitration, Oxford University Press

2013.

27 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal, dated November 28,2015, p.2. Emphasis in the original.
2? Ibid. Emphasis added.

273 Ibid. Emphasis added.

24 Memorial, para. 200.

205.

206.

cannot be said that it waived its right to seek the partial annulment of the Award under

Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

(b) Alleged Untimeliness of Algeria’s admissibility objections

Pursuant to Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, any objection that the dispute or
any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not
within the competence of the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A party shall file
the objection with the Secretary-General no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed
for the filing of the counter-memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for
the filing of the rejoinder — unless the facts on which the objection is based are unknown

to the party at that time.

Reviewing the procedural history of the arbitration, it appears that the issues of parallel
proceedings, the preclusion of claims and abuse of rights have been mentioned from the

very beginning of the arbitration. They were addressed and discussed at different stages of

the proceeding:

a) At the First Session, Algeria pointed to the parallel proceedings initiated by
OTH. 275

b) In its Bifurcation Request, Algeria announced it would raise an admissibility
objection based on the remote indirect investment of OTMTI. 276

c) During the Hearing on Bifurcation, Algeria mentioned a possible abuse of
procedure2”7 which was expressly acknowledged by the Tribunal?’ and
OTMTI.?”

d) In its Memorial on Preliminary Objections, Algeria argued that OTMTI’s claims
are inadmissible as OTMTI lacked standing following the sale of its participation

275 First Session in the arbitration Tr. (May 16,2013) [E]36:11,38:3.

276 Respondent’s Bifurcation Request dated January 24,2014, p. 15.

27” Bifurcation Hearing Tr. (March 26, 2014) [E] 12:6, 15:10, 18:21-22, 19:14, 55: 18-21.
?*8 Bifurcation Hearing Tr. (March 26, 2014) [E] 50: 18-20.

2” Bifurcation Hearing Tr. (March 26, 2014) [E] 59: 1-3, 62:7.

61

in OTH to VimpelCom and a legal interest following the settlement agreement 28°
OTMTI addressed this objection in its Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder.?8!

207. Although the above-mentioned issues have been pending throughout the arbitration, they

have been discussed in relation to different points in time, i.e. whether the sale of Weather
Investments to VimpelCom and/or the settlement agreement (but not OTH’s filing of a
notice of dispute and its exercise of the rightto start arbitration against Algeria) would have
preclusive effects. The preclusive effect of OTH’s Notice of Dispute and any associated
abuse of rights have indeed been first raised in Algeria’s Closing Statement at the

Hearing. 782

208. However, the Committee does not consider that these were “new” preliminary objections

in a technical sense as the admissibility of OTMTI’s claims had been contested from the
very outset of the proceeding. Whereas the factual circumstances as well as the specific
legal theories relied upon evolved throughout the proceeding, the broad legal nature of the
objections remained unchanged. Against this background, Algeria’s argument that the
objections were further developed and refined in the course of the proceeding?*} appears
to be correct. 284 Nevertheless, Algeria’s reliance on different factual circumstances in its
Closing Statement raises the question whether the Claimant had the opportunity to defend

itself (see below).

() | OTMTI’s rights to be heard and to equal treatment

209. OTMTI submits that its rights to be heard and to receive equal treatment were violated as

a result of four alleged failures by the Tribunal:

28° Memorial on Preliminary Objections, paras. 286and288.

281

Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, paras. 113-115; Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,

paras. 274-299,

*® Hrg. Tr., Day 5 (May 30,2015) [E] 143:16-21, 153:10-25, 154:1-4, 162:1-15, 163:17-22, 168:14-15.

?83 Counter-Memorial, para. 240.

28 OTMTI’s Counsel, in her first reaction to the Respondent’s closing statement, referred to “a couple of new
arguments [heard] this morning”, not to “new objections”. See para. 201 above and fn. 264.

62

210.

211.

212.

213.

(ji OTMTI was unable to adequately address Algeria’s new arguments in its
Post-Hearing Briefs due to “the materially abbreviated manner and timeframe
permitted by post-Hearing submissions” ;78>

(ii) OTMTI was unable to adduce new factual evidence, expert or witness testimony
and severely limited in its ability to submit new legal authorities;

(iii) | OTMTI did not have an opportunity to comment on two of the legal authorities
eventually relied upon by the Tribunal in its Award; and

(iv) | The Tribunal gave OTMTI no indication as to the significance it would ultimately
attach to Algeria’s new admissibility arguments.

The Committee shall address these four allegations in turn.

(i) OTMTI’s alleged inability to adequately address Algeria's new
arguments in the Post-Hearing Briefs

OTMTI argues that the modalities of the Post-Hearing Briefs (such as the page and time

limits) had been agreed upon before Algeria revealed its new arguments in its Closing

Statement. 286

Yet the Parties agreed on a four-month deadline and a limit of 100 pages for the first Post-
Hearing Brief. The Reply Post-Hearing Briefs were due another six weeks later and limited

to 50 pages (later raised to 55 pages). 787

The Committee is not convinced that these directions impaired OTMTI’s ability to defend
itself against Algeria’s new arguments raised in the Closing Statement. During her own
Closing Statement, Counsel forthe Claimant observed that “it can’treally bea very serious
contention”.?88 And she added “[s]o we rejectitas clearly wrong”, noting that “this is really
our preliminary or initial look at some of the issues that have been raised, certainly, and we
will rely fora fuller explication on our post-hearing submissions”.**? This shows that

OTMTI was well aware of the Respondent’s new arguments regarding the preclusive effect

285 Memorial, para. 203.

286 Memorial, para. 203.

287 Procedural Order No. 10 of June 4, 2015, SectionsIV.5 and IV. 6. The Order was issued five days after the closure
of the Hearing on jurisdiction anda dmissibility.

28 Hrg. Tr., Day 5 (May 30,2015) [E] 197:7-16.

2 Hrg. Tr. Day 5 (May 30,2015) [E] 171:7-10. Emphasis added.

63

214.

215.

216.

of OTH’s Notice of Dispute and OTMTI’s abuse of rights. Nevertheless, OTMTI
commented only briefly on Algeria’s new arguments in its further submissions, dedicating
4 pages out of its 94 in its first Post-Hearing Brief?” and 4 pages out of 59 in its Reply
Post-Hearing Brief to these objections, 7°! considering them “baseless in fact and in law”,
or “meritless”. 2°? Nothing prevented the Claimant from devoting more attention to these
arguments. It could have done so with some additional six pages without any need to

request the Tribunal to expand the page limit for the Post-Hearing Brief.

Moreover, OTMTI did not seek leave from the Tribunal to raise the page limit to address
Algeria’s new arguments (despite the fact that the page limit regarding the Reply Post-
Hearing Briefs was raised by the Tribunal due to the BIT’s travaux préparatoires

meanwhile received from the Kingdom of Belgium).

(ii) OTMTI’s alleged inability to adduce new evidence

OTMTI argues that it “did not have the opportunity to adduce any witness or expert
testimony in response to Algeria’s untimely objections” and to “submit factual evidence of

any kind or legal authorities, other than publicly-available awards and decisions”. 2%

The Committee notes that Procedural Order No. 10 granted the Parties the opportunity to
submit two rounds of further legal authorities prior to the Post-Hearing Briefs. 294 Prima
facie, this did not seem to be limited to any specific issues. As part of this process, the
Claimant submitted the new legal authorities CLA-270 up to CLA-299. In addition to that,

the Parties were allowed to submit further additional international decisions and awards as

2 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, pp. 80-84.

°°! Claimant's Reply Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, pp. 46-50. By email of October 20, 2015 the Tribunal
informed the Parties that they were allowed five additional pa ges in their Reply Post-Hearing Briefs to address the
travaux préparatoires received from the Kingdom of Belgium. It is unclear why OTMTI nevertheless submitted 59
pages instead of 55 pages (Algeria’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief consisted of 55 pages).

2° Claimant’s Post-Hearing Briefin the arbitration, p. 8 1, paras. 169 and 178. See also Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing
Brief in the arbitration, p.47, para. 91 andp. 48, para. 94.

°°} Memorial, para. 203.
2° Procedural Order No. 10 of June4, 2015, Section III.

64

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

new legal authorities with the first Post-Hearing Brief to the extent that they addressed

issues related to questions raised by the Tribunal.?°>

In its response to Algeria’s new arguments on the preclusive effect of OTH’s Notice of
Dispute and OTMTI’s abuse of rights, the Claimant, however, did not rely on any new
legal authorities. Only in its Reply Post-Hearing Brief did the Claimant submit new

excerpts from Mr. Wehland’s monograph.?%°

While it is true that the Parties could only submit further additional international decisions
and awards as new legal authorities with the first Post-Hearing Brief insofar as they related
to the specific questions raised by the Tribunal, ?%” it has not been shown whether this

actually hindered the Claimant in its defence:

First, Algeria’s new arguments were spelt out in sufficient detail by Algeria’s Counsel in
his Closing Statement so the Claimant did not have to wait for Algeria’s first Post-Hearing

Brief to understand the nature and scope of the new arguments.

Second, the Tribunal’s limitations on the submission of new legal authorities with the Post-
Hearing Briefs did not prevent the Claimant from submitting new excerpts from
Mr. Wehland’s monograph. Arguably, if it had intended to submit further legal authorities,

it could and would have done so.

After Algeria’s objection to the submission of additional excerpts from Mr. Wehland’s

monograph, the Claimant argued in its letter to the Tribunal that:

[I]f the Tribunal is to consider Respondent’s new jurisdictional objection
rather than reject it as untimely under the ICSID Arbitration Rules, it would
be extremely prejudicial to Claimant to exclude from the record portions of
a legal authority thatalready was in the record, as this would deny Claimant
the right to be heard and would result in a fundamentally unfair proceeding
and unequal treatment of the Parties. Likewise, it would be unjustified and
prejudicial to Claimant to permit Respondentat this late stage to seek to
introduce new legal authorities to support a jurisdictional objection that

?°5 Procedural Order No. 10 of June4, 2015, Section IV.8.

26 Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, para. 96. H. Wehland, The Coordination of Multiple
Proceedings in Investment Treaty Arbitration, Ox ford University Press 2013 ,(CLA-226(Amended)).

?°7 Procedural Order No. 10 of June4, 2015, Section IV.8.

65

Respondent failed to raise until its Closing Argument and did not elaborate
until its Post-Hearing Brief. 2°
222. While the Claimantasserted thatthe exclusion of Mr. Wehland’s monograph would violate
its right to be heard, it did not state that it was in any other way hindered in its defence
against Algeria’s new arguments. To the contrary, it argued that the submission of new
legal authorities by Algeria at this late stage of the proceeding would be “unjustified and
prejudicial”. Itappears that the Claimant did nottake issue with the post-hearing procedure

prior to the Award.

223. Finally, as the ad hoc Committee in Churchill Mining v. Indonesia has stated, a party
cannot object belatedly after having submitted some evidence on the ground that it now

wishes it would have submitted more evidence.?

(iii) Claimant's inability to commenton some of the legal authorities
relied upon by the Tribunal

224. The Tribunal cited two legal authorities that were not on the record: First, it quoted a book
chapter by Professor Kolb stating that the prohibition of abuse of rights is a “general
principle applicable in international law as well as in municipal law”. 3° Second, it cited

Sir Hersch Lauterpacht’s statement that “there is no legal right, however well established,

28 OTMTI’s Letter to the Tribunal dated November 28, 2015, p.2. The Tribunal rejected the Respondent's objection.
See Award, para. 139.

2” Churchill Mining Ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and
ARB/12/40), Decision on Annulment, March 1 8, 2019, para. 186. Footnote omitted. (“The Applicants further contend
that the Parties did not file evidence, which they contend was critical, on the due diligence practice of investors in the
Indonesian mining sector in 2006-2010. They admit that they nonetheless did present arguments on duediligence, but
allege that these were made for different purposes than addressing the Minnotte factors, including in support of ther
claim for estoppel based on the State’s alleged recognition of the validity of the disputed licenses. However, the
Applicants cannot object belatedly to the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence they presented on the basis that they
now wish they might havesubmitted more. The fact that Churchill and Planet did submit evidence and arguments on
due care reflects the factthat they evidently had the opportunity to do so”).

5 Award, fn. 833, citingR. Kolb, Part Three Statute of the International Court of Justice, Ch. Competence of the
Court, General Principles of Procedural Law, in: Zimmermannet al. (eds), The Statute of the International Courtof
Justice: A Commentary (Oxford University Press, 2™ ed. 2012), p.904.

66

225.

226.

227.

228.

which could not, in some circumstances, be refused recognition on the ground that it has

been abused”. 3°!

As is apparent, the two quotations from legal authorities that were not on the record only
serve to establish and define the general doctrine of abuse of rights under international law.
This, however, was undisputed between the Parties during the arbitration. In its two Post-
Hearing Briefs in the arbitration, the Claimant had merely argued that the present scenario
does not constitute an abuse of rights without contesting the existence of the doctrine under

international law. 3?

In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal was thus under no obligation to invite the Parties to
comment on these legal authorities that did not concern a legal issue in dispute between

them.

(iv) No indication by the Tribunal as to the significance of Algeria’s
new arguments

The Applicant argues that:

[O]n several occasions at the end of the proceeding, the Tribunal expressed
specific interest in other issues that it was weighing, and provided additional
opportunities for the Parties to address them” and that “[t]he significant
further opportunities to be heard that the Tribunal offered with respect to
objections that it later dismissed underscorethe inadequacy of the procedure
with respect to the new and untimely objections on the basis of which the
Tribunal dismissed OTMTI’s claims. 3%

At the Hearing, the Tribunal identified the effects of the sale of OTH and the settlement
agreement on OTMTI’s claims in the arbitration and how they should be analyzed by the

Tribunal, whether as a question of admissibility, standing or quantum, as the issues on

*' Award, fn. 834, citing H. Lauterpacht, The Development of International Law by the Intemational Court (1958),

p. 164.

5” See Claimant’s Post-Hearing Briefin the arbitration, para. 178 (“Inthese circumstances, thereis no basis to argue,
as Respondent does, that Claimant’s exercise of its right under the BIT to initiate arbitration proceedings a gainst
Respondent constitutes an abuse of rights”.); Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief in the arbitration, para. 94 (‘In
these circumstances, there is no basis for Respondent to argue that Claimant’s exercise of its right under the BIT to
initia te arbitration proceedings a gainst Respondent constitutes an abuse of process”.).

°° Reply, para. 192.

229.

230.

231.

232.

which the Parties may focus a little bit more in the Post-Hearing Briefs. 3°4 While the
Tribunal did not single out OTH’s Notice of Dispute as a particular point of interest, the

Tribunal’s remarks were made before Algeria’s Closing Statement.

In its letter of February 12, 2016 (almost nine months after the Hearing), the Tribunal
invited the Parties to comment on the requirement of siége social in the Tenaris v.
Venezuela Award, issued two weeks earlier on January 29, 2016 and on the meaning of
Article 1(1)(b) of the Dutch and Arabic versions of the BIT. It did, however, not invite the

Parties to further comment on the preclusive effect of OTH’s Notice of Dispute.

As the deliberations of a tribunal might advance *% and take an unexpected turn evenat a
late stage, a tribunal cannotbe expected to provide acomprehensive list of key issues when

it invites the parties to comment on certain aspects at the hearing.

Moreover, as the Applicant admits, 3° there is no procedural rule requiring a tribunal to
signal a likely basis for its decision or outcome to the parties. Neither does the Committee
consider that a tribunal is required to seek additional comments of the parties ona relevant
issue that one party has only briefly touched upon in its submissions as long as the tribunal
considers itself sufficiently informed by the parties’ submissions. The situation might be
different if a party is completely unaware of, and therefore fails to address, one of its
opponent’s key arguments (which is clearly notthe case here as OTMTI made submissions

on the two admissibility issues).

Against this background, the Committee cannot find a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure in this regard. Although the Tribunal’s admissibility
decision might have come as a surprise to OTMTI, both Parties had briefed the Tribunal
on these issues in two written submissions. Furthermore, OTMTI’s legal expert, Professor

Dolzer, was extensively examined on the issue of abuse of rights during the Hearing. 397

°° Hearing Tr. Day 4 (May 29,2015) [E] 197:22-199:18.
*% The Tribunal expressly stated in its letter that it was “making progress”.

5° Reply, para. 173.
*"” See e.g. Hearing Tr. Day 4 (May 29,2015) [E] pp. 117-118.

68

233.

234.

235.

2. THE OTH NOTICE OF DISPUTE AND THE CLAIMANT’S RIGHT TO BRING THIS
ARBITRATION

A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state
reasons in holding that the Claimant’s right to arbitrate under the BIT had been
“extinguished” by OTH’s filing of a notice of dispute, thus rendering Claimant’s claims

inadmissible.

(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law

The Applicant contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in holding that
the Claimant’s right to act under the BIT had been “extinguished” by OTH’s filing of a
notice of dispute against the Respondent under the Egypt-Algeria BIT. 3° In inventing a
“putative rule of law” depriving the Claimant of standing and in finding the claims
inadmissible, the Tribunal relied on no legal authorities and found no support in the
language of the ICSID Convention or the BIT. 3° The Applicant further contends that,
neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT contains a rule of forfeiture, waiver, or other
legal limitations preventingso-called “parallel proceedings”.*!° The Applicant submits that
the Tribunal invented new law based upon on its own “purported policy ‘views’” when it

refused to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it.3!!

According to the Applicant, four points should also be considered in the present case when
examining the Tribunal’s non-application of the proper law: (1) the Tribunal did not
identify “principles of international law” as the law applicable to the Respondent’s
admissibility objections, nor was there any agreement between the Parties that “principles
of international law” applied to those objections; !2 (2) the specific terms of the Award

provide no basis to ground the Tribunal’s putative rule in the notion of “droit d’agir” or

+8 Application, paras. 38-40; Memorial, para. 80.

5 Memorial, paras. 84-85, 87; Reply, paras. 75-77.
5! Memorial, paras. 88-97.

5! Memorial, para. 98; A. PHB 1, para. 37.

5 Reply, para. 85; A. PHB1, para. 41.

236.

237.

“intérét pour agir’;3'3 (3) even if it relied on this notion, the Tribunal failed to establish
that such a “notion” is a principle of international law, or that it applies to issues of legal
standing or ius standiin an ICSID arbitration under the BIT;+'4 and (4) the fact that the
Applicant’s legal experts understand why the Tribunal found the Claimant’s claims
inadmissible as a result of OTH’s Notice of Dispute does not mean that the Tribunal
identified or applied the proper law under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention or
Article 9(4) of the BIT. 3!5

The Applicant maintains that, while the ad hoc Committee cannot reopen debates on
questions of fact, it can review the factual and legal premises underlying the Tribunal’s
Award.3!6 In the Applicant’s view, the Tribunal invented and imposed new “law” based
upon nothing more than its own policy views and refused to exercise the jurisdiction
validly conferred upon it under the BIT and the ICSID Convention, thus manifestly

exceeding its powers. 3!7

(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons

According to the Applicant, the Tribunal failed to state reasons in holding that OTH’s
Notice of Dispute under the Egypt-Algeria BIT rendered the Claimant’s claims
inadmissible, as this part of the Award relies on insufficient, contradictory, and internally
inconsistentreasons.?!8 According to the purported rule of law, announcedby the Tribunal,
“{i}f the harm incurred by one entity in the chain is fully repaired in one arbitration, the
claims brought by other members of the vertical chain in other arbitral proceedings may
become inadmissible depending on the circumstances”.*!9 Yet, itis impossible to discem

from the Tribunal’s Award the rule “actually applied” because no claim of any entity in

5 Reply, paras. 86-90; A. PHB1, para. 42.
5!4 Reply, paras. 91-93.
55 Reply, para. 94.

5! Reply, paras. 95-97.

5!7 Reply, para. 95; A. PHB1, para. 37.

518 Application, para. 54; Memorial, para. 82; A. PHB1, pam. 44.
5! Award, para.495.

70

238.

239.

the Claimant’s group has been repaired in November 2010.32 Moreover, the Tribunal’s
reasoning that the inadmissibility rule depends upon claims being “fully repaired” ina prior
arbitration, while at the same time finding that the economics of the OTH Arbitration

settlement was “irrelevant”, is contradictory and internally inconsistent. 32!

In addition, the Applicant submits that the Tribunal’s purported statement of reasons on
the consequence of OTH’s Notice of Dispute further requires partial annulment. The
Tribunal failed to offer any legal analysis of how one entity’s filing of a notice of dispute
could “extinguish” independent treaty claims held by a separate entity. 22 The Applicant
considers the Tribunal’s explanations that the Claimant first caused one subsidiary to bring
claims against Algeria and then it caused a different subsidiary in the chain to threaten to
bring a different arbitration to the same dispute as contradictory and inconsistent.*?>
Finally, the Tribunal’s ruling on the Notice of Dispute does not account for the

Claimant’s highly relevant arguments to its case. 324

On OTH’s Notice of Dispute, the Applicant also makes the following observations: first,
the specific terms of the Award provide no basis to import the “notion” of “droit d’agir”
or “intérét pour agir” into the Tribunal’s reasoning; 325 second, a tribunal cannot be deemed
to have considered the parties’ arguments by simply summarizing them in the award and
in this case the Tribunal’s decision ignored the Claimant’s legal argument; 32° and, third,
the Tribunal did not ground its putative rule on the mere assertion of a claim for relief, but

rather on the harm incurred being “fully repaired”, which the Tribunal did not determine.*?”

52° Memorial, para. 100. Emphasis omitted.

>! Memorial, paras. 101-103; A. PHB1, para. 48.

> Memorial, para. 104; A. PHB1, para. 46.

>°3 Memorial, para. 107.

54 Memorial, paras. 108-109; A. PHB1, paras. 44 and50.
°5 Reply, para. 104.

°° Reply, para. 112; A. PHB1, para. 51.

7 Reply, paras. 117-122.

71

240.

241.

242.

243.

In this context, according to the Applicant, the findings of the Tribunal on the OTH’s
Notice of Dispute should be annulled pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) and Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention.

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal ruled within the limits of its powers and stated
its reasons for finding the Claimant’s claims inadmissible on the basis of its absence of a

right to act (“défautde droit d’agir”) and thus this part of the Award should not be annulled.

(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law

In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal applied the applicable law in declaring the
Claimant’s claims inadmissible. 328 In accordance with Article 9(4) of the BIT, the Tribunal
correctly found that international law is applicable to the question of the admissibility of
the claims in the arbitration proceeding. *”° The Tribunal then upheld the objection to the
admissibility based on the Claimant’s absence ofa right to act (“défaut de droit d’agir’”) as

aresult of OTH’s prior exercise of its right to arbitrate. *°

The Respondent makes several arguments in this respect. First, the Tribunal adopted the
Respondent’s reasoning that the Claimant lost its interest to act (“perte d’intérét pour
agir”). The Tribunal followed the same factual premises, noting the vertically integrated
corporate chain of companies chaired by Mr. Sawiris and the notices of dispute signed by
him concerning the same measures and defining the dispute by reference to the previous
notice(s). 33! The Tribunal then considered that by sending the Notice of Dispute in the
name and on behalf of OTH, Mr. Sawiris had made the choice to crystallize “the one and
the same” dispute at the level of OTH. 3? In addition, the Tribunal noted that the existence

of this claim in OTH’s patrimony meant other companies in the corporate chain were

°°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 373.

>? Counter-Memorial, paras. 374-383; Rejoinder, para. 437.
5% Rejoinder, para. 442.

5! Counter-Memorial, paras. 390-391.

5% Counter-Memorial, paras. 393-394, citing Award, paras. 414, 496-497; Rejoinder, par. 446.

72

244,

245.

“satisfied” (“remplies de leurs droits”), except if they suffered an independent loss.333
After a detailed analysis of heads of damage invoked by the Claimant, the Tribunal held
thatall alleged heads of damage were in fact “caused to ... OTH” orwere, for otherreasons,

inadmissible. 354

Second, the Respondent notes that a comparison of the terms used by the Tribunal in the
Award to summarize the objections based onthe Claimant’s loss of its interest to act (“perte
d’intérét pour agir’”) (Award, paras. 411-416) with those used by the Tribunal in its
analysis (Award, paras. 495-498) confirms, if need be, that the Tribunal has accepted the
Respondent’s objection.*35 Moreover, the Applicant cannot seriously argue the Tribunal’s
reasoning is “[not] grounded in any way” on the notion of “droit d’agir” or “intérét pour
agir”. For one, the Applicant admits that, in declaring the Claimant’s claims inadmissible,
the Tribunal upheld the Respondent’s objections based on this notion. 33° The Applicant
also used, both during the arbitration proceeding and in this annulment proceeding, the

term “standing” to refer to its alleged interest to act. 337

Furthermore, the Respondent takes issue with the new arguments raised by the Applicant
in its Reply, criticizing the Tribunal for allegedly failing to establish the existence and
scope of the notion of “droit d'agir” and “intérét pour agir”.**8 It notes that the Claimant
never contested during the arbitration proceeding that a claimant must prove it has an
interest to act. 339 The Tribunal also established the scope of the rule which it subsequently
applied: if a claimant cannotactuallyclaim any material loss, the conditions for the exercise
of its right to act are not met. 4° The Applicant’s further contention that the Tribunal’s
application of this rule to circumstances in which ithad neverbeen applied before warrants

a partial annulment of the Award is similarly to no avail, as ad hoc committees are not

58 Counter-Memorial, para. 396.

54 Counter-Memorial, para. 397, citing Award, paras. 499-5 18.

535 Rejoinder, para. 447.
5% Rejoinder, para. 449.

57 Rejoinder, para. 451.
538 Rejoinder, para. 455.
> Rejoinder, paras. 456-459.
+ Rejoinder, paras. 46 1-465.

73

246.

247.

248.

entitled to scrutinize tribunals’ interpretation of the applicable law or ascertainment of the

facts. 4!

(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal fully justified its decision that the Claimant lost
standing to bring the arbitration.342 The Parties perfectly understand the Tribunal’s
reasoning, which the Applicant itself unwraps.*3 The Tribunal sought to determine
whether the conditions for the Claimant’s right to act (“droit d’agir”) were met and, in
particular, whether the Claimant had standing to bring these arbitration proceedings
(“intérét pour agir’’).>4 Based on the specific facts of the case, the Tribunal determined

that the Claimant did not have standing, and thus that its claims were inadmissible. *4

According to the Respondent, by claiming that the Tribunal did not refer to the Claimant’s
arguments and evidence alleging a notice of dispute has no effect, the Applicant is actually
questioning the Tribunal’s reasoning on the merits on this point. *4° In the arbitration, the
Claimant itself did not refer to any relevant legal sources for its proposition that “OTH’s
Notice of Dispute [...] has no legal significance other than to fulfill the procedural
requirements under the Algeria-Egypt bilateral investment treaty”. *47 In finding that the
Notice of Dispute sentby Mr. Sawiris on behalf of OTH activated “the legal protection that
was available atthe various levels of the corporate chain”, the Tribunal necessarily rejected

the Claimant’s argument that the notice had no effect. *48

The Respondent submits that the reasons in the Award are not contradictory.349 The

pronouncement “[i]f the harm [...] is fully repaired in one arbitration” (and not “[i]f the

1 Rejoinder, para. 467.
+” Counter-Memorial, para. 445.

+ Counter-Memorial, para. 446, citing Memorial, para. 486;R.PHB1, para. 64.
4 Rejoinder, paras. 530-532.

*45 Counter-Memorial, paras. 450-453.

6 Rejoinder, para. 539.

7 Rejoinder, para. 541.

8 Rejoinder, para. 541.

+ Counter-Memorial, para. 459; Rejoinder, para. 544.

74

249,

250.

251.

harm [has been] fully repaired”, as the Applicant suggests) does not refer to compensation
already obtained in past arbitration proceedings, but rather to a party being in a position to
fully assert its rights. 35° Since OTH had already exercised its right to act, the Tribunal could
conclude that “OTH placed itself in the position of being made whole for the alleged
harm”. 35! The Tribunal thus did not have to make any ruling on the content of the OTH
settlement agreement.*** In any event, the Respondent argues that, when several
interpretations of the reasons are possible, ad hoc committees must choose the

interpretation which confirms the coherence of the Tribunal’s reasoning. 353

In view of the above, the Applicant’s arguments alleging the part of the Award concerning
the Claimant’s absence of a right to act (“défaut de droit d’agir”) should be annulled
pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) and Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention are plainly

incorrect and should thus be rejected.

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

The Committee first turns to the issue whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
when it held that “the claims before the Tribunal in reality seek reparation for losses
covered by the requests for relief raised in the OTH Arbitration or for losses that the
Claimant (owned and managed by an experienced businessman like Mr. Sawiris) must or
should have been factored into the sale of its investments to VimpelCom” and,

consequently, “the Tribunal cannot but conclude that the claims are inadmissible” 35+

The Applicant complains that the Tribunal did not identify the law it applied to the issue
of admissibility of OTMTI’s claims, and that its conclusion has no basis in the specific

terms of the BIT or the ICSID Convention or in any applicable law.355

55° Rejoinder, para. 545; R. PHB 1, para. 65.
55! Rejoinder, para. 547.

5% Counter-Memorial, para. 447.

553 Rejoinder, para. 550.

554 Award, para. 518.

555 Application, paras. 50-51; Reply, par. 76.

75

252. As already noted above, 3° the Tribunal explicitly determined only the law applicable to
the issue of jurisdiction, noting that there was no dispute that its “jurisdiction is governed
by the ICSID Convention and the BIT”. 35’ The relevant provision in the BIT on the law to

be applied by the Tribunal provides as follows:

The arbitration court shall rule on the basis of the national law of the
contracting party that is a party to the dispute on whose territory the
investment is located, including rules concerning conflicts of laws, the
provisions of the present Agreement, the terms of the specific agreement
that may have been made in relation to the investment, as well as the
principles of international law.358
253. The Tribunal did notexpressly indicate what law it would apply to the issue of admissibility
of Claimant’s claims. There are no specific provisions on admissibility of claims in the BIT
and in the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal was, however, authorized by Article 9(4) of

the BIT to apply “the principles of international law”.

254. The Committee notes that the concept of admissibility of claims, or that of admissibility of
an application, is recognized in international law; it has been accepted and applied by
international courts and tribunals as will be shown below. It is distinct from the concept of
jurisdiction although sometimes the same facts and arguments are presented by a party as

relevant to jurisdiction and/or admissibility .*5?

255. It is not unusual in international litigation practice that the same preliminary objection is
presented as an objection to jurisdiction and, at the same time, an objection to the

admissibility of the claim. This happened, for instance, in Application of the Convention

*6 Para.75.

557 Award, para. 134.

558 Article 9(4) of the BIT (in English translation). In the authentic French text, the provision reads as follows: “Le
tribunal arbitral statuera sur la base du droit national de la Partie contractante partie au litige sur le territoire de
laquelle | investissement est situé, y compris les régles relatives aux conflits de lois, des dispositions du présent
Accord, des termes de | accord particulier qui seraitintervenu au sujet de | ‘investissement, ainsi que des principes de

       

droit international”.

> The Tribunal noted that “[t]he Respondenthas raised a number of objections in rela tion to the Claimant’s (former)
status as indirect investor and the parallel arbitral proceedings by OTH. The characterization of these objections in
terms of jurisdiction or admissibility has somewhat changed in the course of the proceedings”. Award, para. 386.

76

on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide case before the International

Court of Justice. In this context, the Court explained:

A distinction between these two kinds of objections is well recognized in
the practice of the Court. In either case, the effect of a preliminary objection
to a particular claim is that, if upheld, it brings the proceedings in respect of
that claim to an end; so that the Court will not go on to consider the merits
of the claim. If the objection is a jurisdictional objection, then since the
jurisdiction of the Court derives from the consent of the parties, this will
most usually be because it has been shown that no such consent has been
given by the objecting State to the settlement by the Court of the particular
dispute. A preliminary objection to admissibility covers a more disparate
range of possibilities. 3°

It then referred to its earlier pronouncement:

Objections to admissibility normally take the form of an assertion that, even
if the Court has jurisdiction and the facts stated by the applicant State are
assumed to be correct, nonetheless there are reasons why the Court should
not proceed to an examination of the merits.3°!

The Court then added:

Essentially such an objection consists in the contention that there exists a
legal reason, even when there is jurisdiction, why the Court should decline
to hear the case, or more usually, a specific claim therein. Such a reason is
often of such a nature that the matter should be resolved in limine litis, for
example where without examination of the merits it may be seen that there
has beena failure to comply with the rules as to nationality of claims; failure
to exhaust local remedies; the agreement of the parties to use another
method of pacific settlement; or mootness of the claim.3%

256. The concept of admissibility thus allows, in certain circumstances, an international court
or tribunal to decline to exercise jurisdiction which has been conferred upon it. Jurisdiction
of international courts and tribunals, including investment tribunals, is based on consent
Even when the consent has been granted, there may be situations in which it would be

inappropriate for an international court or tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction. In the absence

5 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 456, para. 120.

36! Qil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2003, p. 177,
para. 29.

5® Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 456, para. 120.

17

257.

258.

of specific provisions on admissibility in the applicable legal instruments, international
courts and tribunals have derived the rules on admissibility from general international law,
in particular from its principles. For instance, the International Court of Justice found that
while it had jurisdiction conferred upon it by the common agreement of France, the United
Kingdom, the United States of America and Italy, it could not exercise this jurisdiction to
adjudicate on the claim submitted by Italy without the consent of a third State (Albania),
since ruling on Italy’s claim would have required the Court to determine whether that third

State committed any international wrong against Italy. As the Court said:

To adjudicate upon the international responsibility of Albania without her
consent would run counter to a well-established principle of international
law embodied in the Court's Statute, namely, that the Court can only
exercise jurisdiction over a State with its consent. 3°
Similarly, the Court concluded that it was not able to exercise its jurisdiction in the East
Timor case because, as a prerequisite for considering the claims, it would have had to rule

on the lawfulness of conduct of the third State (Indonesia) in the absence of that State’s

consent. 64

Another basis for international courts and tribunals to refrain from exercising their
jurisdiction may be found in their inherent powers. They may be precluded fromexercising
jurisdiction when exercising it would undermine a judicial function or serve no purpose.

The International Court of Justice in the Northern Cameroons case stated:

[E]ven if the Court, when seised, finds that it has jurisdiction, the Court is
not compelled in every case to exercise that jurisdiction. There are inherent
limitations on the exercise of the judicial function which the Court, as a
court of justice, can never ignore. 365

This seems to be, in the context of investment arbitration, the approach adopted by the

Tribunal in Phoenix Action Ltd. vy. Czech Republic. Although there is nothing explicitly

58 Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943 (Italy v. France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem
Ireland and United States of America), Preliminary Question, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1954, p.32, see also pp. 33

and 34,

36 East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1995,p. 105, para. 35 andp. 106, para. 38.
36 Northern Cameroons (Cameroon v. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1963,
p. 29. Emphasis added.

78

stated to this effect in the ICSID Convention and the Czech Republic-Israel BIT, the

Tribunal expressed the view that

States cannot be deemed to offer access to the ICSID dispute settlement
mechanism to investments not made in good faith. The protection of
international investment arbitration cannot be granted if such protection
would run contrary to the general principles of international law, among
which the principle of good faith is of utmost importance.36

259. Algeria accepted that it agreed to protect “genuine Belgian/Luxembourgish investors”
under the BIT. It also agreed, through a different treaty, to protect Italian investors and
through yet another treaty Egyptian investors. But it also argued that it “never agreed to be

tried three times for one thing”. 3°

260. The Tribunal, therefore, examined the three notices of dispute by OTH, Weather
Investments and the Claimant to Algeria to conclude that they “concern the same measures

or events”. 368 This conclusion is well documented in the Award.>°?

261. In the view of the Committee, the Tribunal explicitly relied on the purpose of investment
treaty arbitration when it formulated a rule on possible inadmissibility of claims brought

before it. The relevant passage in the Award reads as follows:

[T]he existence of several legal foundations for arbitration does not
necessarily mean that the various entities in the shareholder chain could
make use of the existing arbitration clauses to assail the same measures and
to recover the same economic loss under any circumstances. Indeed, the
purpose of investment treaty arbitration is to grant full reparation for the
injuries that a qualifying investor may have suffered as a result of a host
state’s wrongful measures. If the harm incurred by one entity in the chain is
fully repaired in one arbitration, the claims broughtby othermembers of the

56 Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Award, April 15,2009, para. 106.

367 Hearing Tr. Day 5 (May 30, 2015) [E] 164: 12-20/ [F] 66: 15-16: “n'a jamais accepté de se voir poursuivre trois
fois pour laméme chose”. Algeria also argued that it “never agree[d] to protect three levels in one given chain of
control under a vertical integration in which the organs are accountable to the top of the chain, as Mr. Nasr recognized”
(“n'a jamais consentia protéger trois niveaux dela méme chaine de contréle opérée suivant le principed ‘intégration
verticale dans laquelle les organes répondent au sommetde lachaine, comme I assume complétement M. Nasr”), ibid.

56 Award, para. 486.

5® Award, paras. 487-490 at pp. 121-129.

 

79

262.

263.

264.

vertical chain in other arbitral proceedings may become inadmissible
depending on the circumstances. *”°
The Committee sees nothing wrong in presenting the issue of admissibility of claims this
way. If the harm was fully repaired in one arbitration, then there is nothing to be repaired
in another arbitration. Deriving the rule on admissibility from the purpose of investment

treaty arbitration was a legitimate exercise by the Tribunal of its function.

The Tribunal endeavored to apply this rule to the circumstances of the case. It formed the
view that “the legal protection that was available at the various levels of the corporate chain
was activated [on November 2, 2010] at the OTH level”. 37! That protection was activated
by OTH’s Notice of Dispute, which according to the Tribunal assumed “a decisive
importance” because “[OTMTI] and its controlling shareholder, Mr. Sawiris, caused the
corporate organs of OTH to crystallize the dispute at the level of OTA’s direct investor”.>”
The Tribunal stated that:

By exercising its right to arbitrate against Algeria, OTH placed itself in the
position of being made whole for the alleged harm. Indeed, if it succeeded
on the merits, the harm caused by the litigious measures would be
remedied. 373

The Claimant criticizes the Tribunal for assigning this role to OTH’s Notice of Dispute,
and emphasizes that “a notice of dispute under a treaty does not initiate arbitration
proceedings, nor does it have any legal effect other than to trigger the cooling off-period
under the relevant treaty”.374 It is certainly correct to state that arbitration proceedings are
instituted by sending of a notice of arbitration, not by sending of a notice of dispute.
However, a notice of dispute plays an important role in the settlement of investment
disputes. It makes a State aware of the investor’s claims. Investor protests against the
measures adopted by a State (or in some situations, of a failure to take measures, for

instance of protecting the investment) as being contrary to the legal obligations of a host

57 Award, para.495.
57! Award, para.497.
5” Award, para.496.
573 Award, para.497.
54 AnnulmentHearing Tr. Day 1 (May27,2019)[E]76.

80

265.

266.

267.

State. When a notice of dispute is required in the BIT’s article on settlement of disputes, it
is a pre-requisite, a condition for instituting arbitration proceedings by sending a notice of

arbitration if a dispute has not been settled by agreement.

Whether the Tribunal’s view of the role of OTH’s Notice of Dispute as “crystalliz[ing] the
dispute at the level of OTA’s director investor” is accurate and what this entails legally in
the Tribunal’s view is another matter. Critical to the Tribunal’s finding was ultimately the

question whether the harm caused by the measures complained of was remedied.

The Tribunal, in its analysis, was looking into the question whether the harm caused by the

measures complained of was remedied. It stated that:

To the extent OTH would have restored its company value through
arbitration proceedings under the BIT, all of the companies higher up in the
corporate chain, including the Claimant, would have been made whole as
well. Indeed, their loss depends on the diminution in value of their shares in
OTH, which depends on the value of OTH (which in turn is a function of
OTA’s value). If the value of OTH is restored, then the shareholders of OTH
suffer no loss, unless they incurred a loss of their own which is independent
of the value of OTH. *7>

The Tribunal thus considered that the harm caused to OTH was to be remedied in the
arbitration instituted by OTH. That Arbitration led to a consent award >” recording the
settlement agreement reached on April 18, 2014. Therefore, the Tribunal focused its
attention on reviewing the losses that OTMTI alleged to have suffered as a result of
Algeria’s measures to determine whether OTMTI requested relief for losses that only it
suffered, irrespective of the valuation of OTH. It concluded that that was not the case.

Rather, in the view of the Tribunal, the claims before it:

[I]n reality [sought] reparation for losses covered by the requests for relief
raised in the OTH Arbitration or for losses that the Claimant (owned and
managed by an experienced businessman like Mr. Sawiris) must or should
have factored into the sale of its investment to VimpelCom. >”

575 Award, para.498.
5% Orascom Telecom Holding S.A.E. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, PCA Case No. 2012-20, Award on
Agreed Terms, March 12,2015.

577 Award, para. 518.

81

268.

269.

270.

271.

That was the reason for the conclusion that the OTMTI’s claims were inadmissible. The
Tribunal did not need to postpone its examination of OTMTI’s claims to the merits stage
of the proceeding. It stressed in the Award that “[iJn carrying out its analysis, the Tribunal
ha[d] the benefit of the Claimant’s full memorial on the merits, the three expert reports
presented by the Claimant’s expert on valuation and damages analysis (two of which were
filed, specifically in the bifurcated phase, dealing with the Respondent’s preliminary
objections), the extensive discussion on these issues at the Hearing, including the
cross-examination of the Claimant’s expert, as well as the record of the OTH
Arbitration”. 378 No purpose would have been served by continuing the litigation which the

Tribunal knew was “bound to be fruitless”.”

It may be recalled that the Tribunal in Occidental Exploration v. Ecuador also adopted the
approach thatan issue may already be dealt with at the admissibility stage of the proceeding

when it is evident that a certain claim is unfounded. *°°

In view of the above, the Committee cannot uphold the request that it annul this part of the
Award on the inadmissibility of OTMTI’s claims for manifest excess of the Tribunal’s

powers.

The Committee now briefly turns to the allegation that the Tribunal failed to state reasons

when it found thatthe claims were inadmissible in view of the above-stated considerations.

The Committee recalls that pursuant to Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention a tribunal
has an obligation to state reasons upon which the award is based. The statement of reasons
is required in order to allow parties to understand how a tribunal has come to its
conclusions. As the ad hoc Committee in Tulip v. Turkey stated “[a]s long as an ad hoc

Committee can follow the reasons, it is irrelevant what it thinks of their quality”. 3°! The

578 Award, para.499.

5° See Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1974, p.271, para. 58; Northern Cameroons
(Cameroonv. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1963, p.38.

>* The Tribunal stated: “A claim of expropriation should normally be considered in the context of the merits of case.
However, it is so evident that there is no expropriation in this case that the Tribunal will deal with this chim as a
question ofadmissibility”. Occidental Exploration and Protection Company v. Republic of Ecuador, LCLA Case No
UN 3467, Final Award, July 1,2004, para. 80.

*! Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, December 30,2015, para. 101.

82

272.

273.

ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina (II) adopted a relatively strict approach on this
matter, holding that “the issue before [it] is not to assess the accuracy or quality of the
reasons given by the Tribunal but rather to review whether the reasons enable the reader to
understand why the Tribunal reached the conclusions that were determinative for its

decision(s)” 382.

The Committee notes that the Tribunal, before it reached its conclusion on the
inadmissibility of the Claimant’s claims, set out the main elements which it considered
“relevant to the objections”.3%3 It then examined the three notices of dispute sent to Algeria
by OTH on November 2, 2010, Weather Investments on November 8, 2010 and by the
Claimant on April 16, 2012. It highlighted their main passages in a seven-page chart. 38+
Having compared the three notices of dispute, the Tribunal formed the view that “the three
companies complain[ed] ofthe same measures takenby Algeria” and that “while the parties
to the dispute and the legal bases for the claims (the BITs) are different, the dispute being
notified in the three notices is effectively one and the same”. 385 The Tribunal provided
additional reasons why it considered the dispute notified in the three notices “to be one and
the same”. 386 The Tribunal then looked at the role of Mr. Sawiris in the three companies
(parts of the vertically integrated chain of the Weather Group) in which he was the

controlling shareholder.387

Although the Tribunal does not refer to any legal authority or precedent, it derives the rule
according to which “[i]f the harm incurred by one entity in the chain is fully repaired in
one arbitration, the claims brought by other members of the vertical chain in other arbitral
proceedings may become inadmissible depending on the circumstances” from the purpose
of investment treaty arbitration which, in the Tribunal’s view “is to grant full reparation

for the injuries that a qualifying investor may have suffered asa result of a host State’s

*® Vivendiv. Argentina (1), Decision on Annulment, May 5, 2017, para. 154.
58 Award, para. 485.

584 Award, para. 487 (pp. 122-128).

585 Award, para. 488.

58° Award, para. 489.

587 Award, paras. 490-494.

83

274.

275.

276.

wrongful measures”.388 The Tribunal thus took the view that whether the claims are
inadmissible depends on the circumstances. To areader of the Award, itis sufficiently clear
on what factual circumstances the Tribunal basesits decision and itis notdifficultto follow
the reasoning of the Tribunal.389 Whether the reasons provided by the Tribunal are

convincing is another matter with which the annulment proceeding is not concerned. 3

The Committee thus cannot accept the Applicant’s submission that the Tribunal failed to
state reasons for its finding that OTH’s Notice of Dispute was of decisive importance in
itself and in combination with the subsequent events in rendering the claims

inadmissible. *°!

3. THE OTH ARBITRATION SETTLEMENT AND THE INADMISSIBILITY OF THE
CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS

A. Applicant’s Position

Assuming arguendo the Tribunal’s findings with respect to the OTH Arbitration
settlement were an independent ground for finding the Claimant’s claims inadmissible
under the BIT, the Applicant complains that, in any case, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers and failed to state reasons in finding that this settlement confirmed the
inadmissibility of the Claimant’s claims. Thus, this part of the Award should also be

annulled. 3°?

The Claimant was not, and could nothave been, bound by the terms of the OTH Arbitration
settlement or the Share Purchase Agreement (SPA) because it was not a party or a privy to
them. 3% Yet, “the Tribunal failed to address and instead ignored all of [the Claimant]’s

submissions and legal authorities demonstrating thata settlement agreementis binding only

588 Award, para. 495, Emphasis added.

5 Award, paras. 496-518.

5 See e.g., Fraport v. The Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, para. 277, Tulip v. Turkey,
Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015, paras. 99 and 104, EDF v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, February
5, 2016, para. 328.

°°" Award, para.496.

> Application, paras. 45-46, 60; Memorial, paras. 171-172; Reply, paras. 151-152.

>°3 Memorial, paras. 172-174.

84

277.

278.

on the parties and privies thereto”. 4 Even assuming that the economic harm and measures
were the same, the Tribunal’s determination was wrongly premised on the Claimant’s
claims under the BIT being the same as OTH’s claims under the Egypt-Algeria BIT, but
these claims were distinct. 39 Finally, the Applicant contends that the Tribunal ignored the
Claimant’s numerous submissions that the SPA was a deal between two self-interested
parties who conspired to share the spoils of the significant losses thatthe Claimant suffered

as a result of the Respondent’s measures.3%

The Applicant also submits that: (1) the Tribunal did not endeavor to apply, and did not
apply, a principle of international law in determining the relevance of the settlement of the
OTH Arbitration to OTMTI’s claims; 3% (2) the Tribunal failed in its analysis to address
any of the Claimant’s arguments and legal authorities regarding the legal effect of a
settlement agreement on non-parties and non-privies thereto;3%8 and (3) the Respondent’s
contention that the Claimant’s allegation of collusion was raised only in passing at the
Hearing, and that the Claimant failed to draw any “legal consequences” from this

allegation, are baseless. 3°?

For the Applicant, there thus was not only a clear allegation of collusion between OTH,
VimpelCom, and Algeria, but also significant evidence of such collusion, which the
Tribunal entirely failed to address in its Award. This failure constitutes a further failure to
state reasons requiring partial annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention.4°

>°4 Memorial, para. 174.

>°5 Memorial, paras. 175-182.
5° Memorial, paras. 183-186.

*7 Reply, para. 154.

°° Reply, paras. 159-160.
> Reply, paras. 161-167.
4 Memorial, para. 187.

85

279.

280.

281.

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent stresses that the part of the Award addressing the effect of the OTH
settlementagreementis fully reasoned and the Tribunal applied the proper law. *°! Itargues
that the Applicant’s assertion that the Tribunal ignored two of its arguments in ruling on
the effect of the OTH settlement agreement on the Claimant’s right to act (“intérét pour

agir”) is manifestly unfounded. 40

First, the Tribunal considered at length whether the sale of the investment could affect its
previous conclusions regarding the absence of the right to act and the effect of the OTH
settlement agreement, notably in an entire part of the Award devoted to “[t]he relevance of
the sale of the Claimant’s investment’. 4°3 While it did not expressly address the case law
cited by the Claimant, the Tribunal rejected its argument and fully justified this decision,
concluding that the “Claimant’s sale of its investment does not affect the Tribunal’s

conclusion on the inadmissibility of the Claimant’s claims”.4*

Second, the Applicant’s contention that the Tribunal ignored an alleged “collusion”
between the Respondent and OTH is, according to the Respondent, also manifestly
unfounded. *°> The Applicant complains that the Tribunal did not rule on an insinuation of
conspiracy that it made on only one occasion at the Hearing, without any supporting
evidence, and without drawing any legal conclusion from it.4°° In any event, this
insinuation was contradicted by the evidence filed in the arbitration proceeding related to
the OTH settlement agreement, 4” and the Tribunal expressly stated that it considered that
the criticisms formulated by the Claimant in this regard were “irrelevant”. 4°8 Therefore,

the Tribunal’s decision on the OTH settlement agreement is fully reasoned.

4°! Counter-Memorial, paras. 461-469.

4 Rejoinder, para. 553.

#°3 Counter-Memorial, para. 462, citing Award, paras. 527-538.
4 Rejoinder, paras. 557-558, citing Award, para. 538.

4°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 465.

496 Rejoinder, paras. 561-563.

4°7 Rejoinder, para. 561.

4°8 Rejoinder, para. 565.

86

282.

283.

284.

Furthermore, the Tribunal ruled within the limits of its powers in considering that the OTH
settlement agreement “confirms and reinforces” the inadmissibility of the Claimant’s
claims. 4 Notably, the Tribunal found that this settlement “clearly resolved the dispute
that the Claimant has brought before this Tribunal as is shown by the comparison of the
notices of disputes above’! and “puts an end to the dispute arising from Algeria’s
measures in the same manneras the award would have ended the dispute”. *!! Thus, the
Tribunal drew the consequences of the existence of “one and the same” dispute. +!2 The
Respondent submits that the Applicant’s partial annulment request under Article 52(1\e)

of the ICSID Convention can therefore only be rejected.

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal’s conclusion that “the settlement agreement entered
into between the Algerian FNI, OTH and VimpelCom confirms that the Claimant’s claims
are inadmissible” 4'3, merely constitutes a confirmatory statement and is not a separate
ground for the Tribunal’s finding that OTMTI’s claims are inadmissible. The Applicant
stated that the Committee “need not examine the Tribunal’s findings with respect to the
OTH settlement, which were not dispositive”. +!4 Yet, the Applicant also maintains that
“these findings also should be annulled for manifest excess of power and failure to state

reasons”. 4!5

The Committee is not convinced that the Tribunal exceeded its powers, and certainly not
manifestly, when it concluded that the settlement agreement confirmed its earlier findings
that the Claimant’s claims were inadmissible. When examining the relevance of the
settlementagreement, the Tribunal pursued the same logic of the investment law rule which

it derived from the purpose of investment treaty arbitrations. It defined that purpose as “to

4 Rejoinder, para.475.

410 Award, para. 524.

411 Award, para. 524.

4 Rejoinder, para. 477.

413 Award, para. 526. Emphasis added.

414 4. PHB, para. 52, referring to Memorial, para. 270.

415 Ibid.

87

285.

grant full reparation for injuries that a qualifying investor may have suffered as a result of
a hoststate’s wrongful measures” .4!6 The Tribunal described the rule in the following way:
“{ijf the harm incurred by one entity in the chain is fully repaired in one arbitration, the
claims brought by other members of the vertical chain in other arbitral proceedings may
become inadmissible depending on the circumstances”. *!7 In the context of the settlement
agreement, the rule applied by the Tribunal could be stated as follows: the claim of a
(former) indirect shareholder becomes inadmissible if and when a settlement agreement
concerning the same measures and the same economic harm is concluded between the
direct foreign shareholder and the host State. +8 According to this rule, the relevant point
in time for rendering further claims based on the same economic harm inadmissible is thus
the time when the settlement of a dispute is reached by way of an agreement. This is
because a settlement agreement compensates for the loss incurred by an investor. Once the
harm is compensated, an indirect investor higher up in the corporate chain can no longer
demand payment for its loss of share value by the direct investor. Any such claim would
fail at the merits stage; it may be said that absent any own loss,*!? the claim of the indirect
investor is manifestly unfounded and therefore inadmissible. 42° Consequently, to the extent
that the Tribunal relied on the settlement agreement to confirm and reinforce its prior
conclusions on the inadmissibility of OTMTI’s claims, it did not manifestly exceed its

powers.

The Tribunal devoted eight paragraphs *”! to its analysis of the settlement agreement of
April 18, 2014 between the Algerian FNI (acting on behalf of Algeria), OTH and

VimpelCom. The Tribunal was fully aware of Claimant’s arguments that the settlement of

416 Award, para. 495.

417 Ibid.

418 See Award, paras. 524-525.

419 The Tribunal stated that “if the value of OTHis restored, then the shareholders of OTH suffer no loss, unless they
incurred a loss of their own which is independent of the value of OTH”, Award, para. 498. The Tribunal then reviewed
“the losses that the Claimant alleges to have suffered as a result of Algeria’s measures, with a view to examining
whether the Claimant requestsrelief for losses that only itself suffered irrespective of the valuation of the OTH, Award,
para.499. The review is contained in paras. 499-517. However, it is not the role of an annulment Committee to
scrutinize whether that review is the correct one. This depends on the evidence and according to ICSID Arbitration
Rule 34 the Tribunal shall be the judge of the probative value of the evidence.

0 See para. 269 above and fn. 382.

#1 Award, paras. 519-526.

88

the OTH Arbitration was irrelevant to jurisdiction and admissibility as the Tribunal
summarized them rather extensively.42? Having already earlier concluded that it has
jurisdiction, the Tribunal considered whether the settlementhad any relevance for the issue
of the admissibility of Claimant’s claims. The Tribunal was not convinced that “the
settlement was made in suspicious circumstances (such as that it was forced by Algeria
upon OTH or was entered into by OTH’s board in collusion with Algeria” 4? contrary to
what was alleged by OTMTI in the original arbitration proceeding and is still maintained
by it in the present annulment proceeding. However, it is not for an annulment committee
to re-evaluate the evidence and arguments of the parties in the arbitration and to substitute
its own view for the one formed by an arbitration tribunal. According to Rule 34(1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules “[t]he Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any

evidence and of its probative value”.

286. Although the Tribunal did not address in writing each and every argument made by the
Parties, it has shown by summarizing them that it took them into account during its
deliberation. In the view of the Committee, the Tribunal provided sufficient reasons for its
conclusions that “the Claimant cannot bring claims in this arbitration that OTH decided to
settle” 44 and that “the settlement agreement entered into between the Algerian FNI, OTH
and VimpelCom confirms that the Claimant’s claims are inadmissible”.425 In the
Tribunal’s view, “the settlement clearly resolved the dispute that the Claimant has brought
before this Tribunal as is shown by the comparison of the notices of disputes above”.*?6
For the Tribunal, “the settlement stands in lieu of the investment treaty tribunal’s award”
and thus “puts an end to the dispute arising from Algeria’s measures in the same manner

as the award would have ended the dispute”. ‘7 In the view of the Tribunal, “[w]hat matters

#2 Award, paras. 452-463.

#3 Award, para. 523.

4 Award, para. 524.

#5 Award, para. 526.

6 Award, para. 524. The comparison of the three notices of dispute appears in para. 487 of the Award. The Committee
considers that the plural in the term “disputes” in para. 524 of the Award is rather an inadvertent mistake aspara. 487
refers to “three notifications of dispute” (in singular) and for the Tribunal “the dispute being notified in the three
notices is effectively one andthesame” (Award, para. 488.).

#7 Award, para. 524.

89

287.

288.

289.

290.

is that the claims arising from Algeria’s measures have ceased to exist due to the settlement

agreement”. 428

This is the key reasoning of the Tribunal for its conclusion on the relevance of the
settlement agreement which supports its conclusion that the claims are inadmissible. To
recall, the annulment proceeding is not concerned with the correctness of the reasons and

conclusions. In any case, they appear reasonable and certainly not frivolous or absurd.

Accordingly, the Committee cannot accept the Applicant’s request that this part of the
Award be annulled for manifest excess of powers and for failure to state reasons by the

Tribunal.

4. THE CLAIMANT’S PURSUIT OF ITS CLAIMS AS AN ABUSE OF RIGHTS
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state
reasons when it dismissed its claims on the basis of an abuse of rights. 42° The Tribunal’s
decision to admit and accept the Respondent’s untimely objections and, in so doing, to rely
upon legal authority not in the record, should be annulled under Article 52(1)(e) and
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. 43°

(a) — The Tribunal’s Application of the Law

According to the Applicant, the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law by disregarding
the BIT and ICSID Convention,**! assuming without demonstrating that the theory of
abuse of rights is a general principle of international law, “32 and supporting its views on

the purpose of investment treaties with no legal authority whatsoever.** Further

#8 Award, para. 524.
#° Application, paras. 41-44, 57.
4° Memorial, para. 189.

4! Memorial, paras. 116-120.

4? Memorial, paras. 121-123; Reply, paras. 123 and 133.
43 Memorial, paras. 124-130.

90

291.

292.

disregarding the applicable law, the Tribunal failed to define abuse of rights with reference
to clearly established and recognizable criteria, 434 to acknowledge the high standard of
proof that must be met in abuse of rights cases, 75 and to follow the decisions of other

tribunals finding that multiple proceedings do not give rise to an abuse of rights. 436

Moreover, the Applicant submits that the Tribunal did not identify “principles of
international law” as the law applicable to Algeria’s admissibility objections, nor was there
any agreement between the Parties to this effect;437 even if this was the case, the Tribunal
nonetheless was duty bound to prove, rather than assume, that abuse of right is a general
principle of international law and thus part of the applicable law that it was bound to
apply; 438 and that the Applicant is entitled to challenge the Tribunal’s decision on abuse of
tight because it did challenge this theory in the underlying arbitration, °° and the Applicant
can rely on new expert evidence in support of its partial annulment application since this

evidence is “specifically relevant”.44°

(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons

It is the Applicant’s view that the Tribunal failed to state reasons when it dismissed its
claims as an abuse of rights. For one, the Tribunal did not explain how filing multiple
notices of dispute, which invite negotiations with the State and preserve the right to bring
arbitration, but do not themselves commence arbitration, could ever be abusive.44! The

only action attributed to the Claimant is OTH’s filing a notice of dispute in November

44 Memorial, paras. 132-136; Reply, para. 124.

5 Memorial, paras. 137-140.

486 Memorial, paras. 141-150.

47 Reply, paras. 131-132.

48 Reply, paras. 133-141. di Appli it is not challenging the Tribunal’s application of the theory of
abuseof right to the facts ofthecase, bat rather the Tribunal’s failure to establish that the theory ofa buse of right that
it purported to apply is a principle ofinternational law, the Tribunal’s failure to identify the lega] requirements for the
application of the theory of abuse of right and the applicable standard, and the Tribunal’s failure to consider the
decisions of other courts and tribunals on these issues (/bid. at para. 140) .

4° Reply, para. 142.

#° Reply, para. 143.

 

#1 Memorial, para. 156.

91

293.

2010. 442 When OTH commenced the OTH Arbitration through a notice of arbitration dated
April 12, 2012, the Claimant had already sold Weather Investments to VimpelCom fora
year and had thus broken the vertical chain. “4 In addition, the Tribunal failed to state
reasons by failing to address the Claimant’s arguments regarding the standard of proof

applicable to abuse of rights objections. 444

The Applicant further advances that the Tribunal’s reasoning cannot be followed from its
own putative legal rule to the Tribunal’s conclusion, as the Applicant did not cause multiple
entities within a vertical chain of companies to bring parallel claims against the
Respondent, but rather only commenced the present arbitration against the Respondent.
The Applicant takes issue with four of the Respondent’s arguments on this point, and
replies that: (1) there is no basis in the specific terms of the Award to conclude that the
Tribunal considered and implicitly rejected the Claimant’s arguments regarding the legal
effect of a notice of dispute; 445 (2) the Tribunal’s reliance on “circumstances” alone,
without reference to legal rules of decision, is subject to annulment for both a manifest
excess of powers and a failure to state reasons; “4° (3) not only did the Tribunal fail to
address the Claimant’s arguments regarding the high standard of proof, but it also failed to
explain what, if any, standard it applied in assessing the evidence before it; 447 and (4) the
Applicant is not contesting the soundness of the Tribunal’s reasons, but rather the absence

of any reasons on the abuse of right. “48

+ Memorial, para. 159.

#8 Memorial, para. 159.
+4 Memorial, paras. 166-169.

#5 Reply, para. 146.
#6 Reply, paras. 147-148.
#7 Reply, paras. 149.

#8 Reply, para. 150. Emphasis in the original.

92

294.

295.

296.

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent sets forth that the Tribunal ruled within the limits of its powers and stated
its reasons when it ruled on the existence of an abuse of rights by the Claimant. The

Respondent submits that the Applicant’s contentions to the contrary are to no avail. #49

(a) The Tribunal’s Application of the Law

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal applied the applicable law and respected the
limits of its powers by declaring the Claimant’s claims inadmissible on the basis of the
abuse of rights. First of all, the Applicant does not dispute in its submissions in these
annulment proceeding that the Tribunal has endeavoured to apply the applicable law, which
is in itself sufficient to conclude that it did not commit an excess of power.**° The inquiry
of an excess of power is indeed limited to determining whether the tribunal has
endeavoured to apply the proper law to the circumstances of the case.*5! In this case, the
Tribunal rejected the Claimant’s claims on the basis of what it determined to be a “principle
of international law” (“principe de droit international’) under Article 9(4) of the BIT.*°?
By stating that the Tribunal “assumed, without demonstrating, that the theory of abuse of
right is a general principle of international law applicable in an ICSID arbitration under the
BIT”, 43 the Applicant admits that the Tribunal applied whatit determined to bea principle
of international law while criticizing it for not having sufficiently supported its decision on

this point. 454

Moreover, the Applicant raises new arguments at the annulment stage, which is not
permitted. The Claimant’s position on abuse of rights in the underlying arbitration—which
can be identified from the examination of its expert Professor Dolzer, its Closing Statement

at the Hearing, and its post-hearing briefs—was, among others, that this principle applied

© Counter-Memorial, paras. 412-424 and 470-478.
450 Rejoinder, para. 485.

451 Rejoinder, para. 486.
452 Counter-Memorial, para. 414.

453 Reply, para. 123.

454 Rejoinder, para. 488.

93

primarily to the treaty-shopping situation found in Phoenix Action, but there was no abuse
in the present case of an indirect shareholder asserting claims before the second forum.*9>
However, the Applicant now contests the existence of the abuse of rights principle and,
alternatively, that the “clearly established and recognizable criteria” and “legal
requirements” of abuse of rights have been examined by the Tribunal in this case. 45° Since
there was an agreement between the Parties that the abuse of rights principle forms part of
international law, the Tribunal cannot be criticized for applying this principle to the present

circumstances.457

297. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Applicant aims to question the soundness of the
Tribunal’s reasoning, which cannot constitutean excess of power. The criticisms addressed
by the Applicant seek to challenge the Tribunal’s assessment of the content of the
applicable law and the manner in which the Tribunal applied the abuse of rights principle
to the circumstances of the case. 458 For instance, the Applicant’s contention, according to
which “a consistent line of arbitral decisions finding that multiple proceedings do not give
rise to an abuse of rights”, seeks to criticize the Tribunal’s appraisal of the scope of the
abuse of rights principle. 45? However, as noted by the ad hoc Committee in Venezuela
Holdings, while refusing to second-guess the tribunal’s decision on abuse of rights, “it
seems to the Committee beyond doubt that it has no legitimate power to control the
Tribunal’s specific findings on either of the two elements in its jurisdictional findings, ie.
either the legal theory which the Tribunal applied in order to distinguish between legitimate
corporate planning and abuse of right, or the application of that theory to the particular

circumstances of the case”. 40

455 Counter-Memorial, para. 416; Rejoinder, para. 492.
456 Counter-Memorial, para. 417.

457 Counter-Memorial, para. 419.

458 Counter-Memorial, para. 420; Rejoinder, para. 496.
4° Counter-Memorial, para. 420. Emphasis omitted.

46 Rejoinder, para. 498, citing Venezuela Holdings, B.V., et al (case formerly known as Mobil Corporation, Venezuela
Holdings, B.V., et al.) v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/27, Decision on Annulment,
March 9, 2017, para. 114. Emphasis omitted.

94

298.

299.

300.

In light of the foregoing, the Respondent concludes that the Applicant’s arguments based
on Article 52(1)(b) that the Tribunal allegedly committed a manifest excess of power must

be rejected. 4°!

(b) The Tribunal’s Reasons

The Respondent asserts that the Tribunal fully justified its decision to find an abuse of
rights in this case. For one, both the legal basis and the factual premises of the Tribunal’s
reasoning can be understood from the language used in the Award.*®? The Tribunal stated
its reasons as follows: first, it established the legal basis of the general principle of abuse
of rights (which the Applicant recognizes in its briefs exists in international law);46
second, the Tribunal identified the special circumstances that may constitute an abuse of
rights, noting it may be applied beyond the context of opportunistic investment
restructuring and extend to situations where “an investor who controls several entities in a
vertical chain of companies [...] seeks to impugn the same host state measures and claims
for the same harm at various levels of the chain in reliance on several investment treaties
concluded by the host state”;4* third, the Tribunal applied the abuse of rights principle to
the facts at hand in finding, among others, that the Claimant’s actions were inconsistent
with the objective of the investment treaty system (which has already been achieved when

the investment protection was activated at OTH level). 465

Furthermore, the Respondent takes issue with the Applicant’s assertion that the Tribunal
ignored its arguments on abuse of rights. 4° On the contrary, the Tribunal summarized the
Claimant’s arguments and implicitly rejected them, as it is entitled to do given the
discretion ICSID tribunals possess in stating their reasons. 467 The Tribunal also held the

abuse of rights principle was not limited to opportunistic investment restructuring and

461 Rejoinder, para. 501.
42 Counter-Memorial, paras. 475-477; R. PHB1, paras. 69-71.
463 Rejoinder, para. 573, citing Award, paras. 540-541.

46 Rejoinder, para. 573, citing Award, paras. 541-543.
465 Rejoinder, para. 573, citing Award, paras. 544-545.
466 Counter-Memorial, paras. 475-477; R. PHB1, para. 76.

467

Rejoinder, para. 575.

95

detailed the “extraordinary circumstances” where it could apply. 4% Finally, the Tribunal
emphasized in its concluding observations that the application of the abuse of rights

principle was based on “the peculiar facts of the case”.4

301. For the above reasons, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal fully stated its reasons for
finding an abuse of rights in this case, and the Applicant’s application on the basis of

Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention can only be dismissed.4”°

Cc. Committee’s Analysis

302. After briefly summarizing the arguments of the Parties*”! on the alleged abuse of rights by
Mr. Sawiris’ conduct who “sought to maximize his chances of success by introducing
several arbitrations against the Respondent at different levels of the chain of
companies”, ‘7? the Tribunal devoted seven paragraphs to the consideration of the question

whether the initiation of the proceedings by OTMTI also constituted an abuse of rights.473

303. The Committee notes thatthe Tribunal referred to the application of the “doctrine” of abuse
of rights in investment jurisprudence mainly in situations where an investment was
restructured to attract BIT protection ata time when a dispute with the host State had arisen
or was foreseeable.*” Relying on two academic writings, 4” the Tribunal noted, however,

that the prohibition of abuse of rights as a general principle applicable in international law

468 Rejoinder, paras. 577-578.

4® Rejoinder, para. 579.

4 Counter-Memorial, para. 478; Rejoinder, para. 580.

47! Award, paras. 417-419 (Respondent) and 449-450 (Claimant).

4 Award, para. 417.

43 Award, paras. 539-545.

44 Award, para. 540. In footnote 832 three decisions (all part of the record) of arbitral tribunals are referred to: Mobil
Corporation, Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holdings, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos Holdings,
Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., and Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/27) (“Mobil v. Venezuela”), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, paras. 1 69ff; Renée
Rose Levy and Gremcitel S.A. v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/ 11/17), Award, January 9, 2015, paras. 180ff
(with further references to cases) and Lao Holdings N.V. v. Lao People’s Democratic Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/12/6), Decision on Jurisdiction, February 21,2014.

45 R. Kolb, “General Principles of Procedural Law” in A. Zimmermann, K. Oellers-Frahm, Ch. Tomuschat,
Ch. Tams(eds.), The Statute of the International Court of Justice: A Commentary, (2 ed. 2012), p.904 and
H. Lauterpacht, The Developmentof International Law by the International Court(1958),p. 164. They were not part
of the record.

96

304.

305.

as well as in municipal law “may equally apply in context other than [an opportunistic

restructuring of investment]”.476

The Applicant criticizes that this statement by the Tribunal as just an assertion without
reference to any authority.47”7 The Committee notes, however, that although there is no
case-law referred to immediately after this statement, the Tribunal nevertheless, when
referring to the monograph by Sir Hersch Lauterpacht “The Development of International
Law by the International Court” in support of its view, adds that the same quote is cited by
the Tribunal in Mobil v. Venezuela.*78 As noted above, that Decision was one of the
decisions on which the Tribunal relied to confirm that “the doctrine [of abuse of rights] has
found application in investment jurisprudence mainly in situations where an investment

was [opportunistically] restructured”.479

The Tribunal in Mobil v. Venezuela considered the law applicable to abuse ofright in much
more detail. 48° It observed that “in all systems of law, whether domestic or international,
there are concepts framed in order to avoid misuse of the law. Reference may be made in
this respect to “good faith” (“bonne foi”), “detournement de pouvoir” (misuse of power) or
“abus de droit” (abuse of right)”. 48! It referred to two judgments of the Permanent Court
of International Justice in support of the existence of the concept of abuse of right in
international law. 48? It also recalled that “ICSID tribunals had a number of occasions to
consider whether or not the conduct of an investor does constitute ‘an abuse of the
convention purposes’, ‘an abuse of legal personality’, an ‘abuse of corporate form’ or an

‘abuse of the system of international investment protection’”.4*3 It concluded that “[uJnder

46 Award, para. 541. Emphasis added.

477 Memorial, para. 125.

48 Award, fn. 834.

4 Award, para. 540. Emphasis added.

489 Mobil v. Venezuela, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10,2010, paras. 169-185.

481 Ibid.

482 Ibid. at paras. 173-174, referring to Polish Upper Silesia, P.C.1.J., Series A, Judgment No. 7,p.30 and Free Zones
of Upper Savoy and District of Gex, P.C.L.J., Series A/B No. 46, Judgment of June 7, 1932, [p. 167].

483 Ibid.,

para. 176. Footnotes omitted.

97

306.

307.

308.

general international law as well as under ICSID case law, abuse of right is to be

determined in each case, taking into account all circumstances of the case”.

The existence of the concepts of abuse of process and abuse of rights in international law
was recently confirmed by the International Court of Justice in Immunities and Criminal
Proceedings case.‘84 The Court stated that “[iJn the case law of the Court and its
predecessor, a distinction has been drawn between abuse of rights and abuse of process.
Although the basic concepts of an abuse may be the same, the consequences of an abuse
of right or an abuse of process may be different’”.485 It expressed the view that “[a]n abuse
of process goes to the procedure before a court or tribunal and can be considered at the
preliminary phase of these proceedings”.4*° It also added that “[i]t is only in exceptional
circumstances that the Court should reject a claim based on a valid title of jurisdiction on
the ground of abuse of process”.487 Thus, circumstances of the case assume the critical
importance and it is for a court or tribunal to consider them. In relation to abuse of rights,
the Court noted that “abuse of rights cannotbe invoked as a ground of inadmissibility when

the establishment of the right in question is properly a matter for the merits”. 488

It is to be observed that the Tribunal gave its consideration to the issue of the use of the
right granted to the investor under Article 9 of the BIT by the Claimant, in particular
Mr. Sawiris who controlled the Claimant. 48° Article 9 of the BIT concerns the settlement
of investment disputes between a contracting party and a national of the other contracting

party.

Pursuant to Article 9(4) of the BIT, the Tribunal was authorized, when considering and
deciding the dispute, to apply also “the principles of international law”. Therefore, it cannot

be said that when taking its decision on the Respondent’s objection to the admissibility of

4! Immunities, and Criminal Proceedings (Equatorial Guinea v. France), Preliminary Objections, Judgment,
L.C.J. Reports 2018, p.292.
485 Ibid.atp.335, para. 146.
486 Ibid. atp.336, para. 150.

487 Ibid.

488 Ibid. atp.337, para. 151.
48° Award, paras. 544-545.

98

309.

310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

the claims based on the alleged abuse of rights, the Tribunal resorted to the law which was

not applicable. Whether it was applied correctly is another matter.

As noted above, according to the jurisprudence, the abuse of rights has to be determined in
each case in light of all circumstances of the case. That was also the approach adopted by

the Tribunal.

The Tribunal began its factual analysis by stating that “Mr. Sawiris himself recognized that
he used the protection granted by Algeria in the different treaties at the various layers of

the chain, for strategic reasons depending on the circumstances”.4%°

The Tribunal then went on to analyse Mr. Sawiris’ testimony at the Hearing concluding
that “as explained by Mr. Sawiris, the Claimant first caused one of its subsidiaries, OTH,
to bring claims against Algeria. Then, it caused a different subsidiary in the chain, Weather
Investments, to threaten to bring a different arbitration in relation to the same dispute.
Finally — after selling the investment — it pursued yet another investment treaty proceeding
in its own name for the same investment (its past shareholding in OTA) in relation to the

same host state measures and the same harm”.*?!

In its conclusive remarks, the Tribunal stressed that its findings are the result of the peculiar
facts of the case, i.e., (i) the vertical integration of the group of companiesof which OTMTI
was part, (ii) the control of the same shareholder, (iii) the same disputed measures and (iv)

the same economic harm.*9?

The Tribunal thus appears to have applied a predominantly objective standard. OTMTI’s
abuse appears to consist of first exerting its controlling influence in OTH and Weather

Investments to make them threaten or bring claims and then later bringing its own claim.

In light of the above, and absent any further factual findings, OTMTI’s abuse appears to

be confined to bringing a claim in full knowledge of the fact that a previously controlled

4 Award, para. 544.
4°! Award, para. 545.
4 Award, para. 546.

99

315.

316.

317.

318.

entity had already brought a claim in respect of the same measures but was subsequently
sold to a new owner. This means that whenever the previous owner of a claim (e.g. an
assignor) knowingly brings this (then meritless) claim in his or her own name, s/he already
commits an abuse of rights. In other words, claimants who are aware of their lack of

standing act abusively.

The Committee, without expressing an opinion on the application of the doctrine of abuse
of rights by the Tribunal, is not convinced that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
and failed to state reasons when it found the claims inadmissible because it considered “the
Claimant’s pursuit of these claims [...] an abuse of rights under the circumstances”.4%3
The Tribunal viewed the conduct of the Claimant who availed itself of various treaties at
different levels of a vertical corporate chain, as abusive since it was “using its rights to
treaty arbitration and substantive protection in a manner that conflicts with the purposes of

such rights and of investment treaties”.494

The Tribunal relied on an established legal concept under international law and it did not
invent any new legal concept in this regard. A finding of abuse of rights always involved a

high margin of appreciation of the facts of the case which were of decisive importance.

It is not the role of the annulment Committee to review the Tribunal’s specific findings on
the relevant facts of the case to which the Tribunal applied the concept of abuse of rights.
Neither is it the role of the annulment Committee to assess whether the evidence gathered
by the Tribunal justify a finding of abuse of rights. This would transform the Committee

into an appellate body.

In the view of the Committee, the Tribunal’s reasons are comprehensible and allow the
reader to understand on what basis and how the Tribunal reached its conclusion. The
conclusions are based on the Tribunal’s evaluation of the factual circumstances of the case
which the Tribunal qualified as “peculiar”.495 The Tribunal stressed that its analysis

“concern[ed] the admissibility of the claim for which relief [was] sought in this arbitration,

#3 Award, para. 539.
44 Award, para. 545.
#5 Award, para. 546.

100

319.

320.

VI.

321.

as opposed to the merits of the claims in terms of liability or quantum” .4% The “peculiar”

facts of the case were described as follows:

(i) the group of companies of which the Claimant was part was organized
as a vertical chain; (ii) the entities in the chain were under the control of the
same shareholder; (iii) the measures complained of by the various entities
in the chain were the same and thus the dispute notified to Algeria by those
entities was in essence identical; and (iv) the damage claimed by the various
entities was, in its economic essence, the same. 497

The Tribunal summarized the arguments of the Parties. It was thus aware of these
arguments and considered them in its deliberations, even if it subsequently did not address
them all in its legal analysis. There is no obligation for a tribunal to address every legal
argument submitted by a party if it considers it irrelevant in view of its conclusions based

on other arguments and facts.

The Committee concludes that it cannot uphold the request of the Applicant to annul part
of the Award concerning the abuse of rights on the grounds invoked under Article 52(1)(b)
and (e) of the ICSID Convention.

THE EFFECT OF THE DECISION

The Committee, upon request of the Applicant, issued on March 12,2018 the Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award. According to that Decision “[t]he stay of
enforcement of the Award shall continue until the Decision of the Committee on the
Application for Partial Annulment subject to the conditions specified in paragraphs 70 [of
the Decision on the Stay of Enforcement]”.498 On May 9, 2018, the Committee issued a
Decision Modifying the Conditions for the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the

Award. 499

46 Ibid. Emphasis in the original.

47 Ibid.

48 See para. 39 above.

4° See para.47 above.

101

322. In accordance with the modified conditions the Applicant deposited the amount of US$
3,508,598.13 and € 58,382.16 due under the Award to an escrow account administered by
the PCA in The Hague (NL). These amounts may only be drawn upon by Algeria by
presentation of the Decisionof the ad hoc Committee rejecting the Annulment Application.
As the Committee has now decided to reject the Application for the Partial Annulment, the
stay of enforcement lapses and consequently Algeria is entitled to draw the amounts due
by OTMTI under the Award and which were deposited to the escrow account administered

by the PCA.

VII. COSTS
1. APPLICANT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

323. In its submissions on costs dated August 6 and 20, 2019, the Applicant argues that the
Respondent should bear all costs incurred by the Applicant in connection with annulment
proceedings, including fees of its counsel, its expert witnesses, translation, travel and other

costs, 5 as well as the ICSID costs, totaling US$ 6,982,740.37, broken downas follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Category Total Costs (USD)
White & Case LLP Fees 4,890,851.30
White & Case LLP Expenses 263,907.71
Total Legal Fees & Expenses 5,154,759.01
Expert Fees and Costs 239,200.81
ICSID Costs 625,000.00"
OTMTI Arbitration Costs 963,780.55

Total Incurred Costs 6,982,740.37

 

324. The Applicant believes that “an award of costs is warranted in the circumstances, because

Algeria caused this annulment proceeding through its own significant procedural

5® Applicant’s Submission on Costs, paras. 2 and 1 1; Applicant’s Reply Submission on Costs, para. 33.
**! The Committee notes that the Applicant further paid another US$ 130,000, thus totaling the ICSID costs to
US$ 755,000, including the lodging fee paid forthe Application.

102

325.

misconduct in the arbitration, which is the very subject of this annulment proceeding”.5°
In the Applicant’s view, Algeria “continuously — and inappropriately— expanded the
scope of the Arbitration, asserting for the very first time in its Closing Argument at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction new admissibility objections and urging that the Tribunal create
new law without any basis in the BIT or the ICSID Convention’”.5° The Applicant submits
that “[h]ad Algeria raised its admissibility objections earlier, [...] [the Claimant] would
have had the opportunity to present its evidence and law to defeat those objections as
without any basis in law or fact and this annulment proceeding never would have been
necessary”.5°4 The Applicant concludes that “[o]n this basis alone, an award of costs is
warranted, irrespective of whether [it] prevails in its application for partial annulment”.5°
The Applicant, however, believes that it “should prevail in this proceedings and therefore

should be awarded its costs and legal fees insofar as they are reasonable”.5%

2. RESPONDENT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

In its submissions on costs, the Respondent submits that the Applicant should bear all the
costs and expenses of these proceedings, including the Respondent’s legal fees and
expenses totaling US$ 4,627,031 .21 (which also includes taxes).5°’ The Respondent argues
that the more recent practice of annulment committees has been to decide that the
unsuccessful applicant for annulment shall bear all ICSID costs, including the fees and
expenses of the Members of the ad hoc committee.5°8 The Respondent further submits that
its legal fees and expenses shall be fully reimbursed by the Applicant in view of the fact

that the application for annulment is “manifestly unfounded” (“manifestement infondé’)

5 Applicant’s Submission on Costs, pam. 4.

*% Applicant’s Submission on Costs, pam. 4.

5° Applicant’s Submission on Costs, pam. 4.
*°5 Applicant’s Submission on Costs, pam. 4.

5° Applicant’s Submission on Costs, para. 10.

*°7 Respondent's Reply Submission on Costs, paras. 33 and 34.

508 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, paras. 8 and 9, with references to a number of annulment decisions rendered
between 2007 and2017.

103

326.

327.

328.

329.

330.

and that the Applicant acted in “bad faith” (“mauvaise foi”) and engaged in procedural

“misconduct” (“comportement déloyal’”).5

3. COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

It is useful to recall the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID
Arbitration Rules on the costs of the proceedings. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention,

which is contained in its Chapter VI titled “Cost of Proceedings”, provides:

[T]he Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the Award.
Rule 47(1)(j) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules implementing that provision states that “[t]he
award shall be in writing and shall contain [...] any decision of the Tribunal regarding the

cost of the proceeding”.

In accordance with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Article 61(2), being part of
Chapter VI, “shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee”. Rule 53
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules specifies that these Rules “shall apply mutatis mutandis to
any procedure relating to the [...] annulment of an award and to the decision of the [...]

Committee”.

Both Parties recognize that under the above-mentioned provisions the Committee enjoys

discretion in allocating the costs. 5!°

In accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e), the Applicant made the advance payments
requested by ICSID to cover the costs of the annulment proceeding (costs and expenses of

the Centre and fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee; “ICSID costs”).

ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e) provides that:

5 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, para. 13.
5! Applicant’s Submission on Costs, para.3 and Applicant’s Reply Submission on Costs, para. 2; Respondent's
Submission on Costs, para. 6 and Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, para. 6.

104

331.

332.

[I]Jn the event that an application for annulment of an award is
registered [...] the applicant shall be solely responsible for making the
advance payments requested by the Secretary-General to cover expenses
following the constitution of the Committee, and without prejudice to the
right of the Committee in accordance with Article 52(4) of the Convention
to decide how and by whom expenses incurred in connection with the
annulment proceedings shall be paid.
As the ad hoc Committee in MCI v. Ecuador stated, the “consequence of this rule [...]
should normally be that the applicant, when annulment is refused, remains responsible for
these costs”.5'!! The Applicant was not successful with its Application for Partial
Annulment which the Committee decided to reject. As a consequence, the Committee
decides that the ICSID costs (including the fees and expenses of the Committee Members)

shall be borne by the Applicant.

Although the Application was not successful, the Committee does not share the
Respondent’s view that the grounds which it invoked were “manifestly without merit”
(“manifestement infondés”).>'2 The Application was certainly not frivolous. It raised a
number of important points in relation to two rather novel issues in the field of investment
arbitration, namely the preclusive effect of the notice of dispute in the context when several
notices of dispute were sent by the companies organized in the vertical chain, all being
under the control of the same shareholder, and the abuse of rights which the Tribunal found
in the circumstances of the case. The Committee further notes that counsel for the
Applicant, while vigorously defending the interests of its client, acted in a professional and

courteous manner.

The Committee shares the view of the ad hoc Committee in EDF v. Argentina that “[t]here
is no general rule in ICSID proceedings that the losing party should pay the successful

party’s costs, nor is there even a presumption in favour of such an outcome”.>!3

5!! MCI vy. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 88. See also Tulip v. Turkey, Decision on
Annulment, December 30, 2015, para. 230; Postova Banka, a.s.. and Istrokapital SE v. Hellenic Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/13/8), Decision on Annulment, September 29, 2016, para. 170.

5 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, para. 23. Emphasis added.

513 EDF vy. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, February 5,2016, para. 389. In footnote 445 the Committee contrasted
this to the position under Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules, under which the starting pointis a presumption that the

105

333.

VII.

334.

Ix.

335.

In view of the above factors, the Committee decides that each Party shall bear its own costs
for the legal representation and the expenses it incurred in connection with this annulment

proceeding.

LANGUAGES OF THE PROCEEDING AND OF THE DECISION

The proceeding has been conducted in English and French. The Applicant made its
submissions in English, and the Respondent in French. The Decision of the ad hoc
Committee is issued in both languages, English and French, which are, in accordance with
Rule 22(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules equally authentic. The Decision was originally
drafted in English and subsequently translated into French. In case of any discrepancy
between the two versions, the English version shall be deemed to reflect the meaning

intended by the Committee.

DECISION
For the reasons given above, the Committee unanimously decides:

qd) OTMTI’s Application for Partial Annulment is rejected.

(2) In accordance with the terms of paragraph 73(1) of the Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award that Decision will cease to have effect on the date of
issue of the present Decision and accordingly Algeria is entitled to draw the
amounts due by OTMTI under the Award which were deposited to the escrow
account administered by the Permanent Court of Arbitration.

(3) OTMTI shall bear all ICSID costs incurred in connection with this annulment
proceeding.

(4) Each Party shall bear the costs for its legal representation and its expenses in the

annulment proceeding.

unsuccessful party must bear the whole costs of the Tribunal. It should be noted that the UNCITRAL Rules were
origina lly dra fted for commercial arbitration.

106

[signed] [signed]

 

Ms. Bertha Cooper-Rousseau Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs
Member Member
Date: September 12, 2020 Date: September 10, 2020
[signed]

HE. Judge Peter Tomka
President

Date: September 11, 2020

107

