INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Orazul International Espafia Holdings S.L.

Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/19/25)

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Inka Hanefeld, President of the Tribunal
Mr. David R. Haigh QC, Arbitrator
Prof. Alain Pellet, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Anna Toubiana

Assistant to the Tribunal
Mr. Aaron de Jong

7 January 2021

Table of Contents

A. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ......cccsssssssssssnssssnssesnssscnssscnssncnssscnsscasscassncneenensenenes 1

B. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON BIFURCATION

 

 

 

C. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION ON BIFURCATION .....cccsssssssessessessessessesseeseeneesnees 4
D. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON BIFURCATION ......ccssssssssessssssssesscesessesseeneeneees 6
I. The Applicable Legal Fr | 7
Il. The Tribunal’s Analysis 8

 

1. The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant’s claim is belated and contrary to general

principles of law. 8

2. The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant failed to first comply with Article 10 of
the BIT 10

3. The Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and the Claimant has

engaged in an abuse Of ProceSs.........csseceseseeseeseseesesseeseeseseesesecetsesseseeatseeeseeaeeeeets 10

4. The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant consented to the measures and has waived

its right to bring its claims ll

Til. Conclusi 12

E. THE TRIBUNAL’S ORDERS. 13

Procedural Background

On 24 August 2020, following the First Session held on 7 August 2020 and further
communications with the Parties thereafter, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order
No. 1 (PO1) and the Procedural Timetable as Annex A thereto.

In line with the Parties’ joint proposal, the Procedural Timetable contemplates that the
Respondent may first submit a Memorial on Preliminary Objections together with a
Request for Bifurcation in lieu of a Counter-Memorial on the Merits. In such case, the
Parties and the Tribunal are to adhere to a pre-agreed schedule identified as Scenario 2

in the Procedural Timetable to first resolve the issue of the Request for Bifurcation.

On 16 November 2020, the Respondent submitted a Memorial on Preliminary

Objections together with a Request for Bifurcation, both in Spanish language.

On 21 November 2020, in light of the short time frame to render a decision on the
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation under Scenario 2, the Tribunal invited the
Respondent to submit the English translation of its Memorial on Preliminary Objections
and Request for Bifurcation as early as possible. The Tribunal at the same time invited
the Claimant to submit its Observations on the Request for Bifurcation and an English

translation thereof together on 14 December 2020.

On 30 November 2020, the Respondent submitted an English translation of its Memorial

on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation.

On 14 December 2020, the Claimant submitted its Observations on the Respondent’s
Request for Bifurcation in English language.

After careful consideration of the Parties’ respective positions (Parts B. and C.), the
Tribunal herewith issues its Decision on Bifurcation (Part D.) and its corresponding
orders (Part E.).

The Respondent’s Position on Bifurcation

The Respondent requests that the Tribunal orders the arbitration to be bifurcated into
two phases: one phase to determine the Respondent’s preliminary objections, and the

other phase to resolve any issues of the merits of the Claimant’s claims.!

Underlining its Request for Bifurcation, the Respondent asserts in its Memorial on

Preliminary Objections that the Tribunal should dismiss the Claimant’s claims in the

' Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, paras. 298 ef seq.

arbitration for the following reasons, which the Tribunal summarises briefly as follows

(Preliminary Objections):

10. First, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant’s claim is inadmissible as it is
unreasonably belated and contrary to general principles of law. According to the
Respondent, such principles preclude the admissibility of claims not made within a
reasonable time after the allegedly wrongful act occurred. In this case, while the
Claimant grounds its claim in regulatory measures adopted between 2003 and 2013, the
Respondent asserts that the Claimant unreasonably and unduly delayed its initiation of

these proceedings when it filed its Request for Arbitration only in August 2019.7

11. Second, the Respondent asserts that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction in these proceedings
as the Claimant failed to fulfil the conditions in Article 10 of the BIT and first submit
the dispute to Argentine national courts. According to the Respondent, such prior
submission forms part of the essential terms under which the Respondent offered its
consent to submit disputes to arbitration under the BIT. It says that the Claimant cannot
now resort to a broadened interpretation of the MFN Clause in order to evade that
obligation by importing norms from other investment treaties. Rather, the Respondent
says that Spain and Argentina’s conduct subsequent to their entry into the BIT evidences
that the dispute resolution mechanisms therein were not meant to be modified by
application of the MFN Clause.?

12. Third, the Respondent asserts that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the present
dispute, as the Claimant has not established itself as a protected investor under the BIT,
nor one that made any investment in Argentina. Rather, the Respondent says that it was
US-based Duke Energy — not the Claimant — that owned the allegedly impaired
participations in Argentina when the Respondent first enacted the challenged measures
in 2003. It says further that the measures were then all adopted by the time Duke Energy
sold its Argentinian interests to the investment fund I Squared Capital in December 2016
without itself ever having commenced proceedings under the BIT. The Respondent
otherwise argues that the claimant entity, Orazul International Espaiia Holdings S.L.,
has at all times operated as nothing more than a Spanish-incorporated shell company
with no actual activity in Spain; one used by Duke Energy as an intermediary to seek
access to the protections under the Argentina-Spain BIT. According to the Respondent,

od

the Claimant has in this regard effected a “clear abuse of process”* and that, in view of

principles of good faith, the Tribunal should consider its claims inadmissible.°

2 Id., Section ILA.
3 Id., Section ILB.
“Id., para. 146.

5 Id., Section ILC.

13. Finally, the Respondent says that the Claimant has already consented to and accepted
the measures it now seeks to challenge. In particular, the Respondent asserts that the
Claimant’s entry into various agreements with the State starting in 2004,° together with
its adhesion to the regime provided for in Resolution SE No. 95/2013, has had the
consequence that the Parties have accepted all challenged measures and waived all
rights to bring claims based on those measures. Further, the Respondent specifically
accepted that the remuneration regime under ES Resolution No. 95/2013 prohibits it
from bringing any claims based on a different remuneration mechanism. The Parties
also agreed to the payment of certain receivables corresponding to the specific
measures, as well as further complementary regulations, meaning that the Parties have
also waived their rights to lodge claims in that regard too. According to the Respondent,
the Claimant has thus waived any claims over the challenged measures, and thus

rendered its claims in these proceedings inadmissible.”

14. As to bifurcation itself, the Respondent submits that whether a matter should be
bifurcated is a question of procedural efficiency, and in particular, whether the
determination of preliminary objections will render addressing the merits of the dispute
unnecessary.* To this end, citing Emmis v. Hungary,’ the Respondent asserts that
tribunals may consider the following factors when addressing a request to bifurcate
proceedings: whether the request is substantial or frivolous, whether there would be a
substantial reduction in subsequent stages were the request to be granted and an
objection upheld, and whether the issues to be considered in the jurisdictional phase are

too interrelated with the merits. !°

15. In the present case, according to the Respondent, bifurcation will facilitate the efficient
conduct of the arbitration proceedings.'! It says further that more than justified reasons

exist for the Tribunal to accept its Preliminary Objections above, '? and that resolution

° According to the Respondent, these include inter alia the Final Agreement for the Management and Operation

of the Projects to Readjust the Wholesale Electric Market executed in 2005 (known as the “Final Agreement”),

the Agreement for the Management and Operation of Projects, Increase of Availability of Thermal Power
ion and Adj of the ion for the G ion 2008-2011 executed in 2010, and the 2019

Agreement for the Regularization and Payment of Receivables with the Wholesale Electric Market: Memorial on

Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, para. 13.

7 Id., Section ILD.

8 Id., para. 299.

° Emmis International Holding, B.V., Emmis Radio Operating, B.V. and MEM Magyar Electronic Media

Kereskedelmi és Szolgdltaté Kft. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2, Decision on Application for Bifurcation,

13 June 2013, para. 37(2) (AL RA 114). [hereinafter Emmis v. Hungary]

'© Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, para. 305.

"' Id., para. 309.

2 Id., para. 299.

 

Cc.

Bid.

of the same will render unnecessary the need for the Tribunal to address some issues on
the merits. '°

The Claimant’s Position on Bifurcation

The Claimant opposes the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation.

According to the Claimant, when deciding whether to bifurcate proceedings, tribunals
should consider whether the preliminary objection will not likely succeed, whether
bifurcation would materially reduce time and costs, and whether jurisdiction and the
merits are so intertwined as to make bifurcation impractical.'* The Claimant says further
that the Respondent bears the burden to prove that bifurcation is warranted, in that it
will contribute to the efficiency of the proceedings and is not impractical, but that in the

present case it has failed to meet that burden. !°

As regards the Respondent’s assertion that the Claimant’s claim is belated, the Claimant
submits that the Respondent’s position is factually incorrect and therefore meritless. To
this end, it says that the challenged measures in fact continued after 2013 and endure
even today.!° In any case, the BIT does not contain a limitation period for claims,!’
while any delay in commencing proceedings only occurred as a result of the
Respondent’s assurances to the Claimant that it would restore the electricity
framework.'* The Claimant says further that bifurcating the Respondent’s objections is
otherwise impractical as they are inextricably intertwined with the merits. According to
the Claimant, if the Tribunal is to decide any delay argument, it will also need to decide
on the merits of the Claimant’s claims regarding the Respondent’s assurances and
violations thereof, in particular as regards the temporary nature of the measures and
Claimant’s entry into the FONINVEMEM programs. '?

The Claimant says that the Respondent’s assertion that it failed to first fulfil the
conditions in Article 10 of the BIT is also groundless and cannot justify bifurcation.
According to the Claimant, it is entitled to invoke the MFN Clause to import a more
favourable dispute resolution clause from another BIT, resulting in it no longer needing

to comply with the 18-month waiting period. In any case, such waiting periods are not

para. 304.

‘4 Claimant’s Observations on Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, paras. 121, 128.

Sid.
‘id.
"Id.,
'8id.,
id.

paras. 9-10.
para. 44,
paras. 20, 51.
para. 45.
paras. 17, 46.

20.

21.

0 Id.,
1 d.,
2 Id.,
3 d.,
4 Id.,
3 Id.,
6 Id.,
"Id.,
8 Id.,

“essential” policies of either Argentina or Spain, while the Claimant’s compliance with
Article 10 would in any case be futile and unduly expensive.° Further, Claimant says
the objection cannot easily be disentangled from the merits of the case. To this end, it
argues that local litigation conditions exist to offer States an opportunity to address
matters before turning to arbitration.*! Therefore, to ascertain whether the Respondent
had a prior opportunity to resolve the Claimant’s grievances, the Tribunal would have
to determine the nature of the measures, the scope of the local submissions, and whether
the Claimant’s administrative petitions against the measures gave the Respondent an

opportunity to revert them and compensate the Claimant.”

The Claimant further argues that the Respondent’s objections challenging its status as a
protected investor under the BIT are devoid of any merit. It says first that Duke Energy
and the Claimant are the same entity; the Claimant simply changed from its Duke
Energy designation (Duke Energy International Espafia Holdings S.L.U.) to its current
name (Orazul International Espafia Holdings S.L.) in 2017.7 Thus, Claimant has
remained the same Spanish-seated entity that has indirectly owned an interest in Cerros
Colorados at all relevant times, and is therefore a protected investor under the BIT.**
The Claimant was thus also not incorporated simply to obtain protection under the
BIT.*> Finally, the Claimant says the Respondent fails to allege any facts supporting its
allegation that the Claimant’s investments are not protected investments under the broad
definition in the BIT.”° Relatedly, the Claimant argues that any question over whether
its investments qualify for protection under the BIT is otherwise intertwined with the

merits.””

Finally, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s assertion that the Claimant has
waived its rights to bring claims is without merit.?* First, the Claimant says Cerros
Colorados is party to the relevant agreements and waivers, and otherwise subject to the
government resolutions — not the Claimant. Even then, the Respondent forced Cerros
Colorados to enter into the agreements or abide by the resolutions, while the agreements
are in any case unlawful under Argentine law and otherwise constitute breaches of the

BIT in and of themselves. The Claimant says further that the waivers in any case do not

paras. 67-72.
para. 75.

paras. 26-27, 76.
paras. 31, 82.
paras. 32-33, 82.
para. 84.

para. 34.

para. 35.

para. 103.

22.

D.

23.

24.

25.

26.

cover its treaty claims.”° The Claimant otherwise asserts that the Tribunal would need
to inquire into the merits of the case to determine whether the agreements containing
the alleged waivers were, as the Claimant argues, forced upon Cerros Colorados, and
whether the Respondent observed its commitments under the said agreements, which

the Claimant disputes.*°

The Claimant finally says that the Respondent has failed to show how bifurcation would

in any case materially reduce the time and cost of the proceedings.*!

The Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation

The Respondent requests that the Tribunal bifurcate these proceedings so that it resolves
the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections prior to undertaking an assessment of the

merits of the Claimant’s claims.

In determining the Respondent’s request, the Tribunal is mindful that a decision on
whether or not to bifurcate these proceedings will direct the Parties down one or the
other jointly proposed pathways: on the one hand, if the Tribunal grants the
Respondent’s request, the Parties’ so-called Scenario 2.1 of the Procedural Timetable
comes into operation. This scenario foresees the Parties filing further discrete
submissions on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, with a hearing on the same
scheduled for September 2021. If necessary, a hearing on the merits would take place
thereafter in the third quarter of 2022.

On the other hand, if the Tribunal denies the Respondent’s request, the proceedings are,
pursuant to the Parties’ joint proposal, scheduled to pursue Scenario 2.2 of the
Procedural Timetable. This scenario anticipates the Parties making submissions on the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections and the merits of the Claimant’s claims together,

with a hearing on those combined issues to take place in January 2022.

In view of the above, the Tribunal acknowledges that its decision on the Respondent’s
request will influence the likely timing of the final resolution of the Parties’ dispute

going forward. It takes this decision in full appreciation of that consequence.

2 Id., paras. 38, 104.
30 Jd., para. 39.
31 Jd., para. 125.

27.

28.

29.

30.

I.

The Applicable Legal Framework

With the above in mind, the Tribunal now specifically turns to the Respondent’s request
to bifurcate the proceedings. In doing so, the Tribunal first considers the legal
framework governing the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation. For this purpose, the
Tribunal recalls Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention, which provides as follows:

Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the
competence of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which
shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join

it to the merits of the dispute.
Similarly, ICSID Arbitration Rule 41 relevantly provides that:

(2) The Tribunal may on its own initiative consider, at any stage of the
proceeding, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is within

the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence. [...].

(4) The Tribunal [...] may deal with the objection [that a dispute or any
ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other
reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal] as a preliminary

question or join it to the merits of the dispute.

From the above provisions, the Tribunal acknowledges its express power under the
ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules to both determine the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections, but also, as a first step, to resolve its request for bifurcation. At
the same time, the Tribunal observes that neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID
Arbitration Rules identify any particular guiding principles that might assist it to decide
whether a particular proceeding should or should not be bifurcated. It is equally apparent
that neither provision establishes an express presumption on a request one way or the

other.

Accordingly, the Tribunal looks to the established case law on bifurcation in ICSID
proceedings. At the outset, the Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Churchill Mining v.
Indonesia, which held that the “[b]ifurcation of preliminary issues is within the

discretionary power of an ICSID tribunal.”>*

It further agrees with the Parties that in
resolving the question of whether to grant the Respondent’s request, the overarching
factor to consider is one of procedural efficiency; in other words, whether bifurcating is

more likely to increase or decrease the time and costs associated with the arbitration or

°2 Churchill Mining Ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd y. Republic of Indonesia, (CSID Case Nos. ARB/12/14 and
12/40, Procedural Order No. 15, 12 January 2015, para. 26 (AL RA 116).

31.

32.

33.

could significantly contribute to clarifying and simplifying the dispute before the
Tribunal.*? Further, while there is no formal burden of proof, the Tribunal must

nevertheless be persuaded that, on balance, bifurcation will facilitate that objective.

In line with this understanding, the case law — including that cited by the Parties —
demonstrates that tribunals generally consider the following three cumulative factors

when deciding whether to grant a request for bifurcation:**

a. Whether the preliminary objection is prima facie serious and substantial (in
other words: does the objection have a reasonable chance of success and is not

otherwise frivolous, vexatious or clearly without merit);*>

b. Whether the jurisdictional objection is too intertwined with the merits, insofar
as the Tribunal would have to already “delve into the substance of the alleged

236

breaches’””® or that a duplication of evidence would result, meaning any savings

in time or cost from a bifurcation would be unlikely; and

c. Whether the objection, if granted, will ultimately result in a material reduction
of the merits phase of the proceedings, or even dispose of all or substantially all

of the claims.

I. The Tribunal’s Analysis

After carefully analysing the Parties’ respective submissions of 30 November 2020 and
14 December 2020, in the interests of procedural economy and efficiency, the Tribunal
decides not to bifurcate the hearing of the Respondent’s four Preliminary Objections

from the merits for the reasons outlined below.

1. The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant’s claim is belated and contrary

to general principles of law

Bearing in mind its intention not to conflate the “merits of the objection” with the prior
question of the merits of a bifurcation, the Tribunal does not accept that the
Respondent’s objection based on the Claimant’s allegedly unreasonable delay in
commencing these proceedings is frivolous or vexatious. The dispute underlying these

proceedings has continued for nearly two decades. While, as the Claimant identifies, the

33.C, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd Edition, p. 537.

+4 See, e.g., Emmis v. Hungary, para. 37(2) (AL RA 114).

35 Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada, PCA Case No. 2016-13, Procedural Order No. 4
(Decision on Bifurcation), 18 November 2016, para. 4.4.

36 See Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/16/41, Procedural Order No. 2, 28
June 2018, para. 52 (CL-206).

34.

35.

BIT contains no express limitation period, in a case that has persisted as long as this,
the Tribunal is not convinced that the Respondent’s objection regarding the
commencement of these proceedings is entirely unreasonable. To this end, the
Respondent has pointed the Tribunal to, in the Tribunal’s preliminary view, defensible

legal doctrine supporting its position.*’

At the same time, however, the Tribunal is not convinced that bifurcation based on the
Respondent’s timeliness argument would necessarily facilitate the efficient conduct of
these proceedings. To this end, the Tribunal considers that any decision on the
Respondent’s objection would likely entail the Tribunal prematurely delving into the
substance of the merits of the Claimant’s claims and having to decide on issues
encompassed therein. This includes, in particular, the likelihood that the Tribunal would
have to consider the timing of the challenged measures and whether they amounted to
a continuous breach of the BIT. It will also likely entail the Tribunal’s consideration of
the Respondent’s alleged promises to the Claimant over the years that the measures
would only be “temporary” in nature (including, in particular, the Respondent’s
commitments allegedly made in relation to the FONINVEMEM programs). As the
Claimant argues, such comprise representations it relied on in deciding not to commence
proceedings earlier. However, in the Tribunal’s view, such also go to the heart of the
Claimant’s claims in these proceedings for violations by the Respondent of the BIT. To
this end, the Tribunal refers to the evidence of the Claimant’s witness Mr. McGee, who

explains that:°*

the Government continued adopting harmful measures affecting Cerros
Colorados, while constantly “moving the goal post” to achieve the
promised normalization of the market and reinstate the rules in force prior

to the 2003 measures.

The Tribunal is thus not convinced that significant issues relevant to both the
Respondent’s objection and the merits do not overlap, nor that meaningful efficiency
savings would result from bifurcation in the event the Tribunal ultimately does not

uphold the Respondent’s objection.

57 See, e.g., the Respondent's references to Professor Bin Cheng: Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request
for Bifurcation, paras. 34-36.

38 Witness Statement of Richard McGee (CWS-1), para. 30.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

2. | The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant failed to first comply with Article
10 of the BIT

With respect to the Respondent’s objection regarding the Claimant’s failure to first
adhere to the 18-month national courts condition in Article 10 of the BIT, the Tribunal
also finds that, on balance, it is not in the interest of efficiency to bifurcate the

proceedings.

The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s objection is not vexatious or without any
merit. While the Parties do not dispute that the Claimant did not comply with Article 10
of the BIT before commencing these arbitration proceedings, they disagree on the
mandatory nature of such provisions and whether the Claimant may invoke the MFN
Clause to effectively remove and replace the obligation in substance. To this end, the
Tribunal is cognisant that whether particular aspects of a BIT may be transposed to
another treaty through application of a most favoured nation clause remains
controversial. It thus considers that the issue warrants further elaboration by the Parties

in these proceedings.

Notwithstanding this, while the question of whether the Claimant was obligated to
comply with Article 10 remains largely a legal one, the Tribunal considers that it will
still likely entail a review of matters inextricably intertwined with the merits. In view of
the Parties’ submissions to date, the Tribunal in particular foresees having to evaluate
whether, in light of the surrounding circumstances, the Claimant’s compliance with
Article 10 would have engendered a reasonable prospect of resolving the Parties’
dispute before Argentine national courts within the applicable timeframes. In the
Tribunal’s view, such will necessarily involve a consideration of matters relevant to the

Claimant’s substantive claims.

3. The Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and the Claimant

has engaged in an abuse of process

In its third preliminary objection, the Respondent raises challenges against the
Claimant’s status as a protected investor under the BIT, and regarding whether its

participations constitute protected investments under the same.

The Respondent’s objections in this regard are representative of the typical issues that
arise in investor-state disputes. Outside of the validity of the Respondent’s challenges,
in the Tribunal’s view, the objections the State raises are of a sort that are generally
intertwined with the merits of a case, insofar as they render bifurcation an inefficient
procedural mechanism. In this case, and similar to the Respondent’s objection on

timeliness, the Tribunal considers that the perceived complexity and evolving nature of

10

Al.

42.

43.

44.

the ownership and corporate structure of the Claimant, its related entities and their
participations in Argentina over the past two decades will in all likelihood warrant a
detailed analysis by the Tribunal of facts and evidence relating thereto. Should the
Respondent’s objection fail, the same issues are then likely to arise again at a merits
stage of the proceeding, especially those concerning the ownership of relevant
participations over the duration of the Parties’ relations and the impact, if any, of the
Respondent’s alleged conduct on their value. Accordingly, in the Tribunal’s view, the

Respondent’s objection does not warrant bifurcation.

4. The Respondent’s claim that the Claimant consented to the measures and has

waived its right to bring its claims

The Parties are in dispute over the application and effect of the successive agreements
and governmental regulations issued by the Respondent over the course of the Parties’
dealings. These include, inter alia, the agreements concerning the contested
FONINVEMEM programs and Resolution No. 95/2013.

The Parties in particular disagree on whether the Claimant itself was party to the
agreements or subject to the regulations, whether such amounted to waivers over the
Claimant’s claims in these proceedings (or adequate compensation in lieu), and whether
the Respondent might have breached its commitments under the agreements and lost its
right to rely on the waivers. In the Tribunal’s view, these questions are complex and, in
view of the Parties’ submissions to date, deserve further elaboration and substantiation

in the course of these proceedings.

At the same time, the Tribunal considers that evaluating the above questions without
prematurely delving into the substance of the Claimant’s claims and the evidence in
support thereof is unrealistic. In particular, the Tribunal expects that resolving the
Respondent’s waiver objection will entail deciding on questions such as whether the
Respondent forced the Claimant or Cerros Colorados to enter into the above
agreements, their scope and content, and whether the Respondent breached its
commitments thereunder, including as regards the FONINVEMEM programs. In the
Tribunal’s understanding, these are issues that remain central to the Claimant’s claims
that the Respondent violated the BIT and will require an evaluation of evidence to that

end.

Should the Respondent fail on its objection, it is likely that the Tribunal would need to
consider the same evidence again, resulting in a probable duplication thereof. To this
end, the Tribunal points to the evidence of the Respondent’s witness, Mr. Cameron,
filed with its Memorial on Preliminary Objections, in which he already now discusses

matters that appear relevant to the Claimant’s claims on the merits, including, in

ll

4S.

46.

47.

48.

particular, the contested circumstances around the entry by power generators into the
FONINVEMEM program and its various agreements.*? As the Claimant’s witness Mr.

McGee also explains:*°

While the Government made it look as if participation in FONINVEMEM
was optional, in reality doing so was a condition for Cerros Colorados to
secure collection of the unpaid receivables from CAMMESA originated
between 2004 and 2006 that were not “invested” in FONINVEMEM.

Thus, in the Tribunal’s view again, considerations of efficiency do not advocate for

bifurcating the proceedings in light of the Respondent’s waiver obligation.

Til. Conclusion

In view of the above, the Tribunal is not convinced that bifurcation would assist to
facilitate the efficient conduct of this arbitration. Rather, given the likelihood that the
Tribunal would need to consider many of the same issues and supporting evidence
necessary to establish the merits of the Claimant’s claims, the Tribunal considers that
one collective procedure and final hearing is appropriate in this case. The Tribunal
nevertheless recalls that the present decision by no means prejudges its final decision
on the preliminary objections raised by the Respondent and, should it ultimately uphold
the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, it retains authority and discretion to

compensate it by way of orders as to costs.

In coming to its decision, the Tribunal is mindful that the Respondent, being the party
bringing this request to bifurcate the proceedings, has itself not sought to elaborate
further on how bifurcation might materially reduce or render entirely unnecessary the
remaining stages of the arbitration, were the Tribunal to uphold its objections.*! As to
the third factor tribunals consider when deciding such requests, the Tribunal has in this
regard not been convinced that, on balance, bifurcation would in fact reduce time and

costs in these proceedings.

In view of its decision, and as described above in Part A, the arbitration will henceforth
adhere to the jointly established procedure identified as Scenario 2.2 of the Procedural
Timetable. The Tribunal will therefore address the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections together with the merits.

>° Witness Statement of Daniel Cameron, paras. 15 ef seq.
4° Witness Statement of Richard McGee (CWS-1), para. 24.
41 See, in particular, Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, para. 309.

12

E. The Tribunal’s Orders

49. In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal:
a. dismisses the Respondent’s request to bifurcate the proceedings;

b. directs the Parties to follow the procedural calendar set out in Scenario 2.2 of
the Procedural Timetable annexed to the PO1.

50. The Tribunal reserves its decision on costs.

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,
[signed]
Dr. Inka Hanefeld, LL.M. (NYU)

President of the Tribunal
Date: 7 January 2021

