IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL
CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES (“ICSID”)

BROUGHT UNDER THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - CENTRAL AMERICA-
UNITED STATES FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (“CAFTA”) AND THE
INVESTMENT LAW OF EL SALVADOR

(ICSID CASE NO. ARB/09/12)
BETWEEN:

PAC RIM CAYMAN LLC

Claimant

THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR

Respondent

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S
JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS

 

THE TRIBUNAL:
Professor Dr Guido Santiago Tawil;
Professor Brigitte Stern; and
V.V.Veeder Esq (President)

ICSID Tribunal Secretary:
Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Date: June 1, 2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

Part 1: The Arbitration ....sccssecsessesvessesesesssssessessessesessesseenessesnsensensenneenes 1.01
A: The Parties 1.01
B: The Dispute 1.02
C: The Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010 cscs 1.04

D: The Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections . 1.04

 

E: Non-Disputing Party Written Submissions .. 1.07

 

 

 

 

 

F: Amicus Curiae 1.07
G: The Parties’ Claims for Relief as regards Jurisdiction ....c.ccccceecee 1.10
Hi: The Jurisdictional ISSUCS ..c.ceccccescscescscceceeete estes eeces ese eeeseeeseeeseeneseeies 1.14
Part 2: Issue A — “Abuse of Process ”...sssssssssssssssssssssvsssssssssssssssssesesssseees 2.01
Introduction. 2.01
The Burden and Standard Of Proof .....ccccccccccccccccesee cesses tenes neeeeeeeeees 2.01
The Respondent's Case 2.05
The Claimant's Cas 2.06
The CAFTA Member States ....sccccccccescscescsvssteveseevesseesseseseeseseeseseeseseesssieness 211
Amicus Curide SUBMISSION ccc ects ee tes ceteseesestessseeseseeseseeneseness 211
The Tribunal ’s ANdlysis ..cecccscccsescesescsssesessesesseteseesssseeseeasseeisseenseesseeants 2.12
The Relevant Measures Or Practices ...cescccescccesesveseevessevsstetesieesieesieesissess 2.16
Application to this CaS ....cccccccccee cscs eeseteneseeesesceeeceneteneneneeeaeeetenenees 2.23
The Respondent's Submissi 2.23

 

The Claimant's Submissi 2.24

 

 

One-Time Acts
Comy Act
C Act.

 

Legal Consequence.

Abuse of Process

 

Ratione Temporis

 

Decisions

 

Part 3: Issue B — “Ratione Temporis”
Introduction

The Respondent's Case

The Claimant's Case ...cececcecseeeececeees
The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions
Part 4: Issue C — “Denial of Benefits”.
Introduction

The Respondent's Case

(i) Sub. ial Busi Activities
(ii) Ownership/Control ......0.000000
(iii) — Timeliness

 

 

The Claimant's Case ...cececcecseeeececeees
(i) Sub. ial Busi Activities
(ii) Ownership/Control ......0.000000

(iii) Timeliness

 

Non-Di. ing Parties’

Amicus Curia

2.24

2.28

2.29

2.31

2.31

2.32

2.35

3.01

3.01

3.01

3.06

3.10

4.01

4.01

4.02

4.03
4.04
4.06

4.10

4.10
4.11
4.11

4.15

4.17

The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) Sub. ial Busii Activities. 4.18
(ii) Ownership/Control o...cccccccccceces cscs cece teseeeseeescecseeceeeeeneeeneaeieee 4.23
(iii) Timeliness 4.23
Part 5: Issue D — “Ti Law” 5.01
Introduction. 5.01
The Respondent's Case 5.01
The Claimant's Case...cescecceccecceccessecssssssssessesseseeseesesseesecsessssssissneenseneeness 5.05
The Tribunal’s Analysis And DeCiSionS ....c.cccseecses cesses esses eeteseeseseeeteeaees 5.08
Part 6: Issue E — “Legal and Arbitration Costs” ....c.sssssssssssssssessssesssseees 6.01
Introduction. 6.01
The Claimant's Claim ....c.cceccecceccecsecsessesseessesseseeseeseeseesessessessnssassneeneeneeneess 6.01
The Respondent’s Resp 6.10
The Respondent's Claim 6.12
The Claimant's Re. 6.24
The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions .....c.ccceccecvecveeeesees ess ieseeseeeteeeeseess 6.25

Part 7: The Operative Part.csccssssssssssssssessssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssesesesesees 7.01

Glossary of Defined Terms

“CAFTA” means the Dominican Republic - Central America-United States Free Trade
Agreement of 2004;

“DOREX” means Dorado Exploraciones, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable;

“Enterprises” means Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable (also
called “PRES”) and Dorado Exploraciones, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable (also
called “DOREX”);

“Governmental Ethics Law” means Ley de Etica Gubernamental (The Respondent’s
Governmental Ethics Law);

“ICSID Convention” means the International Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes of 1965;

“ICSID” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (also “the
Centre’);

“Investment Law” means Ley de Inversiones (The Respondent’s Investment Law);

“MARN” means Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (The Respondent’s
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources);

“MINEC” means Ministerio de Economia (The Respondent’s Ministry of Economy);

“Mining Law” means Ley de Mineria (The Respondent’s Mining Law of 1995, amended in
2001);

“ONI” means Oficina Nacional de Inversiones (The National Office of Investments, a
division of MINEC);

“Pacific Rim” means Pacific Rim Mining Corporation;
“PRC” means the Claimant (Pac Rim Cayman LLC);

“PRES” means Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad An6énima de Capital Variable

List of Selected Legal Materials

Treaties:

The Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement of 2004
(“CAFTA”)

The ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes of 1965 (“ICSID
Convention”)

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 (“Vienna Convention”)

Salvadoran Laws:
Investment Law, Legislative Decree No. 732, 14 October 1999

Mining Law, Legislative Decree No. 544, 14 December 1995, amended by Legislative
Decree No. 475, 11 July 2001

Regulations of the Mining Law and its Amendments, Legislative Decree No. 47, 20 June
2003

Decisions, Awards and Judgments:

Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Decision on
Claimants' Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification, 4 April 2002

Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), Preliminary Objection — Judgment, 22 July
1952, ICJ Reports 1952

Aegean Sea Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey), Judgment, 19 December 1978, ICJ Reports
1978

Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/00/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001

African Holding Company of America, Inc. and Société Africaine de Construction au Congo
S.A.R.L. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No ARB/05/21, Award, 29 July
2008

Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005

Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No
ARB/08/3, Decision on Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, 2 February 2009

Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas IT Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30 December
2010

Chevron Corporation (USA) and Texaco Petroleum Company (USA) v. Republic of Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 34877, Interim Award, 1 December 2008

Commerce Group Corp. and San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17, Award, 14 March 2011

Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CS1D Case
No. ARB/04/19, Award, 12 August 2008

Electricity Company of Sofia v. Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), 1939 P.C.I.J. (ser. A/B) No.
77 (Order of Apr. 4)

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada), Judgment, 4 December 1998, ICJ Reports 1998
Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003

Impregilo S.p.A v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSTD Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005

Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, 1CS1D Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2
August 2006

Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, ICSID Case ARB/05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 July
2007

Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria (Cameroon v. Nigeria),
Preliminary Objections, 11 June 1998, ICJ Reports 1988

Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine, SCC Case No. 080/2005 (ECT), Final Award,
26 March 2008

M.C.I. Power Group, L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, CSID Case No.
ARB/03/6, Award, 31 July 2007

vi

Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, IIC 166 (2002),
Partial Award, 7 August 2002

Mobil Corporation and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/27, Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010

Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2,
Award, 11 October 2002

Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic, SCC 126/2003, Award, 29 March 2005

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009
Phosphates in Morocco (Italy v. France), 1938 P.C.I.J. (ser. A/B) No. 74 (June 14)

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction under CAFTA Article 10.20.5, 17 November 2008

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Decision on Clarification Request of the Decision on Jurisdiction, 13 January 2009

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Second Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 18 May 2010

Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland), 1928 P.C.LJ. (ser. A) No. 15
(Apr. 26)

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, CSTD Case No.
ARB/02/6, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004

Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, LCIA Case No. UN7927, Award on Preliminary
Objections to Jurisdiction, 19 September 2008

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case
No ARB/84/3, Second Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988

Tokios Tokelés v.Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April
2004

Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CS1D Case No. ARB/07/25,
Decision on Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 12
May 2008

Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 24 December 1996

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award,
2 June 2000

Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v. The Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227,
Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November 2009

Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, CSTD Case No. ARB/00/1, Award, 24
January 2003

Miscellaneous Materials:

ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, with
commentaries, 2001, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2001, Vol II, Part Two

Kinnear (et al), Investment Disputes under NAFTA, An Annotated Guide to Chapter 11
(2006)

Leathley, /nternational Dispute Resolution in Latin America: An Institutional Overview
(2007)

Schreuer, et al. The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd ed. 2009)

Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1966, Vol. II

viii

PART 1: THE ARBITRATION

A: The Parties

The Claimant: The named Claimant is Pac Rim Cayman LLC (also called “Pac Rim
Cayman” or “PRC”), a legal person organised under the laws of Nevada, USA, with
its principal office at 3545 Airway Drive, Suite 105, Reno, Nevada 89511, USA.
The Claimant is wholly owned by Pacific Rim Mining Corporation (also called “Pa-
cific Rim”), a legal person organised under the laws of Canada. In these arbitration
proceedings, the Claimant advances several claims against the Respondent both on
its own behalf and on behalf of its subsidiary companies, collectively described as

the “Enterprises.”

The Enterprises: The Enterprises are legal persons organised under the laws of the
Respondent, namely: (i) Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad Anénima de Capital
Variable (also called “PRES”), with its principal office at 5 Avda. Norte, No. 16,
Barrio San Antonio, Sensuntepeque, Cabaiias, El Salvador; and (ii) Dorado Explora-
ciones, Sociedad An6énima de Capital Variable (also called “DOREX”), with its
principal office at the same address. PRES is the owner of certain rights in the min-
ing areas denominated as “El Dorado Norte,” “El Dorado Sur” and “Santa Rita”;
and DOREX< is the owner of certain rights in the mining areas denominated as
“Huacuco”, “Pueblos” and “Guaco.” These mining areas are located in Las Cabajfias

and San Vicente, in the northern part of El Salvador.

ICSID & CAFTA: The Claimant is and has been since 13 December 2007 a national
of a Contracting State to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(the “ICSID Convention”) and the Dominican Republic-Central America-United
States Free Trade Agreement (“DR-CAFTA” or “CAFTA”), in force for the USA as
from August 2005. Canada is not a Contracting State to CAFTA or the ICSID Con-
vention; and Pacific Rim, being a Canadian legal person, is not and never has been a

national of a Contracting State to CAFTA or the ICSID Convention.

Part 1—Page1

Prior to 2 March 2012, the Claimant had designated its legal representatives as
Messrs Arif H. Ali, Alexandre de Gramont, R. Timothy McCrum, and Theodore
Posner Esqs, all of Crowell & Moring LLP, 1001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Wash-
ington, DC 20004. By letter dated 2 March 2012, the Claimant advised the Secre-
tary of the Tribunal that Messrs Ali, de Gramont, and Posner had changed law firms,
and submitted a Power of Attorney providing that Claimant’s legal representatives
henceforth be designated as Arif H. Ali, Alexandre de Gramont, and Theodore Pos-
ner, Esqs. of Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP, 1300 Eye Street NW, Suite 900, Wash-
ington, DC 20005, and R. Timothy McCrum, Ian A. Laird, Kassi D. Tallent, and
Ashley R. Riveira of Crowell & Moring LLP, 1001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20004.

The Respondent: The Respondent is the Republic of El Salvador.

The Respondent is a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention. It is also a Con-

tracting State to CAFTA, in force for the Respondent as from 1 March 2006.

The Respondent’s legal representative is Lic. Romeo Benjamin Barahona, Fiscal
General de la Reptiblica, Final 48 Calle Oriente y 19 Avenida Sur, Residencial Pri-
mavera, Santa Tecla, La Libertad, EI Salvador. Prior to 10 May 2012, the Respon-
dent had also designated its legal representatives as Messrs Derek C. Smith, Luis Pa-
rada, Tomas Solis and Ms Erin Argueta, all of Dewey & LeBoeuf LLP, 1101 New
York Avenue NW, Suite 1100, Washington D.C. 20005, USA. By letter dated 10
May 2012, the Respondent submitted a Power of Attorney providing that Messrs
Smith, Parada and Solis, and Ms Argueta had moved to Foley Hoag LLP, 1875 K
Street NW, Suite 800, Washington, DC 20006, but continued to represent the Re-

spondent in this arbitration.

B: The Dispute

1.8.

The Claims: As asserted by the Claimant (but denied by the Respondent), the claims
pleaded by the Claimant (with the Enterprises) allege: (i) the Respondent’s arbitrary
and discriminatory conduct, lack of transparency, unfair and inequitable treatment

in failing to act upon the Enterprises' applications for a mining exploitation conces-

Part 1— Page 2

1.10.

1.11.

1.12.

1.13.

sion and environmental permits following the Claimant’s discovery of valuable deposits
of gold and silver under exploration licenses granted by MINEC for the Respondent;
(ii) the Respondent's failure to protect the Claimant's investments in accordance with
the provisions of its own law and (iii) the Respondent’s unlawful expropriation of the

investments of the Claimant (with the Enterprises) in El Salvador.

The details of these claims pleaded by the Claimant are set out in the Decision of 2

August 2010 issued by the Tribunal, to which further reference is made below.

CAFTA: In pursuance of these claims, it is alleged by the Claimant that the Respon-
dent breached its obligations under Section A of CAFTA, namely: (i) CAFTA Arti-
cle 10.3: “National Treatment”; (ii) CAFTA Article 10.4: “Most-Favoured Nation
Treatment”; (iii) CAFTA Article 10.5: “Minimum Standard of Treatment”; (iv)
CAFTA Article 10.7: “Expropriation and Compensation”; and (v) CAFTA Article

10.16.1(b)(i)(B): as to “investment authorizations.”

Investment Law: The Claimant also alleges that the Respondent has breached the
Salvadoran Investment Law, which prohibits expropriation without compensation, as
well as unjustified or discriminatory measures which may hinder the establishment,
administration, use, usufruct, extension, sale and liquidation of foreign investments
(Article 5 - Equal Protection, Article 6 - Non-Discrimination, and Article 8 - Expro-

priation).

Other Salvadoran Laws: The Claimant also alleges that the Respondent has
breached the Salvadoran Mining Law (Articles 8, 14, 19 and 23), Article 86 of the
Salvadoran Constitution, Article 1 of the Salvadoran Civil Code and Article 4(j) of

the Salvadoran Governmental Ethics Law.

During the Hearing (described below), the Claimant significantly clarified, inter alia,
the temporal limits to its CAFTA Claims, namely claims for damages only from the
period from March 2008 forwards and not for any earlier period. The Tribunal re-

turns to this late clarification of the Claimant’s pleaded case later in this Decision.

Part 1— Page 3

C: The Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010

1.14. | On 2 August 2010, the Tribunal issued its Decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 (for ease of reference, here
called “the Decision of 2 August 2010”).

1.15. In Part X of the Decision of 2 August 2010 (paragraph 266), the Tribunal decided

for the reasons therein set out:

(1) As to the Respondent’s Objections under CAFTA Article 10.20.4, these objec-
tions are not granted by the Tribunal;

(2) As to the Respondent’s Objection under CAFTA Article 10.20.5, this objec-
tion is not granted by the Tribunal;

(3) As to costs, the Tribunal here makes no order under CAFTA Article 10.20.6,
whilst reserving all its powers as to orders for costs at the final stage of these
arbitration proceedings; and

(4) As to all other matters, the Tribunal retains its full powers to decide any fur-
ther matters in these arbitration proceedings, whether by order, decision or

award.

1.16. | The Decision of 2 August 2010 (with its all recitations and reasons) should be read

with this Decision to avoid unnecessary repetition here.

D: The Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections

1.17. The Respondent submitted its Objections to Jurisdiction under ICSID Arbitration
Rule 41(1) on 3 August 2010, leading to the further procedure resulting in this Juris-
diction Decision. The Respondent’s Objections comprise four independent grounds
to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction: (i) Abuse of Process by the Claimant; (ii) Ratione
Temporis; (iii) the Respondent’s Denial of Benefits under CAFTA Article 10.12.2;

and (iv) the Investment Law.

Part 1— Page 4

1.18.

1.19.

1.20.

1.21.

1.22.

Procedural Orders: During this further procedure, the Tribunal made a number of
procedural orders, all of which were issued or recorded in writing. It is unnecessary

to set out their terms here.

Jurisdiction Memorials: Pursuant to the Tribunal’s procedural orders, the Respon-
dent submitted its Memorial on its Objections to Jurisdiction dated 15 October 2010
(here described as the Respondent’s “Jurisdiction Memorial”); the Claimant submit-
ted its Counter-Memorial on the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction on 31 De-
cember 2010 (here described as the Claimant’s “Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial”);
the Respondent submitted its Reply Memorial on the Claimant’s Jurisdiction
Counter-Memorial on 31 January 2011 (here described as the Respondent’s “Juris-
diction Reply”); and the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder Memorial on the Respon-
dent’s Jurisdiction Reply on 2 March 2011 (here described as the Claimant’s “Juris-

diction Rejoinder”).

Written Testimony: The Parties adduced the following written testimony in support
of their respective cases on jurisdiction: for the Respondent, the witness statement of
Mr Luis Alberto Parada dated 14 March 2011; and for the Claimant, the witness
statements of Ms Catherine McLeod Seltzer dated 31 December 2010, Mr Tom
Shrake dated 31 December 2010, Mr Steven K. Krause dated 31 December 2010 and
Mr Charles Pasfield dated 2 March 2011.

The Hearing: The Hearing on the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections took place
over three days, from 2 to 4 May 2011, at the World Bank, Washington DC, USA,
recorded by verbatim transcript (here referred to as “D1”, “D2” and “D3”). The
Hearing was attended by (inter alios) the following Parties and Non-Participating

Parties.

The Claimant: The Claimant was represented by Mr Tom Shrake and Ms Catherine
McLeod-Seltzer; and from Messrs Crowell & Moring LLP by Mr Arif H. Ali, Mr
Alexandre de Gramont, Mr R. Timothy McCrum, Mr Theodore Posner, Ms Ashley
R. Riveira, Ms Marguerite C. Walter, Ms Kassi Tallent, Mr Timothy Hughes, Ms
Maria Carolina Crespo, Ms Christina Ferraro, Mr Stephen Duncan and Ms Jessica

Ferrante.

Part 1—Page5

1.23.

1.24.

1.25.

1.26.

1.27.

1.28.

The Respondent: The Respondent was represented by Mr Benjamin Pleités (Secre-
tary General of the Attorney General’s Office), Mr Daniel Rios (Legal Adviser from
the Ministry of the Economy), Mr René Salazar (Director General of Commercial
Treaty Administration, Ministry of Economy), Mr Enilson Solano and Ms Claudia
Beltran (of the Respondent’s Embassy in Washington DC); and from Messrs Dewey
& LeBoeuf by Mr Derek Smith, Mr Aldo Badini, Mr Luis Parada, Mr Tomas Solis,
Ms Erin Argueta, Ms Mary Lewis, Mr Albert Coto and Ms Jamihlia Johnson.

Costa Rica: The Republic of Costa Rica, as a Non-Disputing Party, was represented
by Mr José Carlos Quirce (of the Ministerio de Comercio Exterior) and Ms Laura

Dachner (of Costa Rica’s Embassy in Washington DC).

USA: The USA, as a Non-Disputing Party, was represented by Mr Mark Feldman,
Ms Alicia Cate, Mr Patrick Pearsall, Ms Kimberley Claman, Mr David Bigge, Ms
Katharine Kelly, Ms Karen Kizer, Mr Lee Caplan, Mr Jeremy Sharpe (all from the
US Department of State), Mr Gary Sampliner (of the U.S. Department of Treasury),
Ms Kimberley Claman (of the United States Trade Representative) and Mr Chris

Herman (of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency).

The Hearing was also attended by, as interpreters: Ms Silvia Colla, Ms Judith Leten-
dre and Mr Daniel Giglio; and, as court reporters: Mr Rodolfo Rinaldi and Mr David
Kasdan.

The Parties made respective oral opening submissions at the Hearing: for the Re-
spondent: Mr Smith [D1.6], Mr Badini [D1.71] and Mr Parada [D1.106]; and for the
Claimant: Mr Ali [D1.131], Mr de Gramont [D1.152], Mr Posner [D1.212] and Mr
Walter [D1.264]. The Non-Disputing Parties present at the Hearing elected not to

make oral submissions to the Tribunal.

The Parties made respective closing oral submissions at the Hearing: for the Re-
spondent: Mr Smith [D3.576 & 756] and Mr Badini [D3.620 & 751]; and for the
Claimant: Mr Ali [D3.653 & 739], Mr de Gramont [D3.655] and Mr Posner
[D3.698].

Part 1— Page 6

1.29. Oral Testimony: The Parties adduced the following oral testimony at the Hearing:
for the Respondent: Mr Parada [D2.284x, D2.298xx, D2.400xxx and D2.515xxxx];
and for the Claimant: Mr Shrake [D2.420x, D2.432xx, D2.510xxx and D2.532xxxx].
(Here and below, “x” denotes direct examination, “xx” cross-examination, “xxx” re-

direct examination and “xxxx” re-cross-examination).

1.30. Post-Hearing Submissions: Pursuant to the Tribunal’s procedural orders regarding
post-hearing written submissions, on 10 June 2011, the Respondent and the Claim-
ant respectively submitted their final submissions (together with submissions on
costs); and, on 24 June 2011, the Respondent and the Claimant respectively submit-

ted their reply submissions on costs.

E: Non-Disputing Party Written Submissions

1.31. | Costa Rica: Under cover of a letter dated 13 May 2011 from the Ministry of Foreign
Trade (“Comex”), Costa Rica submitted a Non-Party Submission pursuant to
CAFTA Article 10.20.2 signed by Mr Federico Valerio de Ford, Ms Monica C.
Fernandez Fonseca and Mr Luis Adolfo Fernandez, relating to (i) denial of benefits
under CAFTA Article 10.12.2 and (ii) the definition in CAFTA of an “investor” and

a “national” (For ease of reference, here described as “the Costa Rica Submission”).

1.32. USA: By an email message dated 20 May 2011 from the US Department of State,
the United States of America submitted a Non-Party Submission pursuant to
CAFTA Article 10.20.2 signed by Mr Jeffrey D. Kovar, Ms Lisa J. Grosh, Mr Mark
E. Feldman and Ms Alicia Cate, relating to denial of benefits under CAFTA Article

10.12.2. (For ease of reference, here described as “the USA Submission”).

F: Amicus Curiae

1.33. Pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.3, Article 37(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
and the Tribunal’s Procedural Order dated 23 March 2011, eight member organiza-
tions of La Mesa Frente a la Minerfa Metdlica de El Salvador (The El Salvador Na-

tional Roundtable on Mining) submitted a written submission dated 20 May 2011

Part 1— Page 7

1.34.

1.35.

    

under cover of a letter also dated 20 May 2011 from the Centre for International En-
vironmental Law (“CIEL”), signed by Mr Marcos A. Orellana of CIEL, Mr Aaron
Marr Page of Forum Nobis PLLC and Mr Stuart G. Gross of Gross Law. (For ease

of reference, here described as “the Amicus Curiae Submission”).

The Tribunal received no application from any other person or body to make sub-
missions as an amicus curiae in these arbitration proceedings (whether timely or oth-
erwise), notwithstanding apparent public statements made by certain persons to the

contrary.

The Tribunal’s Procedural Order dated 23 March 2011 as regards submissions from
amici curiae was made available to all interested persons; and it provided (inter alia)

as follows:!

“In accordance with Article 10.20.3 of the Dominican Republic-Central Amerca
United States Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA-US) and ICSID Arbitration Rule
37(2), the Tribunal invites any person or entity that is not a Disputing Party in these
arbitration proceedings or a Contracting Party to DR-CAFTA-US to make a written
application to the Tribunal for permission to file submissions as an amicus curiae.

All such written applications should:
(1) be emailed to ICSID at icsidsecretariat@ worldbank.org
by Wednesday, 2 March 2011;

(2) in no case exceed 20 pages in all (including the appendix described
below);

(3) be made in one of the languages of these proceedings, i.e. English or
Spanish;

(4) be dated and signed by the person or by an authorized signatory for the
entity making the application verifying its contents, with address and
other contact details;

(5) describe the identity and background of the applicant, the nature of
any membership if it is an organization and the nature of any
relationships to the Disputing Parties and any Contracting Party;

(6) disclose whether the applicant has received, directly or indirectly, any
financial or other material support from any Disputing Party,
Contracting Party or from any person connected with the subject-
matter of these arbitration proceedings;

I text was and remains published on ICSID’s web-site at:
id. worldbank.org/ICSID/FrontServlet?requestT ype=Cas
‘rame&FromP 1

    

 

Part 1— Page 8

1.36.

1.37.

1.38.

(7) specify the nature of the applicant’s interest in these arbitration
proceedings prompting its application;

(8) include (as an appendix to the application) a copy of the applicant’s
written submissions to be filed in these arbitration proceedings,
assuming permission is granted by the Tribunal for such filing, such
submissions to address only matters within the scope of the subject-
matter of these arbitration proceedings; and

(9) explain, insofar as not already answered, the reason(s) why the
Tribunal should grant permission to the applicant to file its written
submissions in these arbitration proceedings as an amicus curiae ...”

The Amicus Curiae Submission received by this Tribunal addressed the following
matters: (i) the factual background to the dispute raised by the Claimant in these ar-
bitration proceedings, (ii) whether there exists any “legal dispute” under Article 25
of the ICSID Convention or any “measure” under CAFTA Article 10.1, as distinct
from the Claimant’s dissatisfaction with Salvadoran public policy in recent years
and the “independently-organized communities who have risen up against the
Claimant’s projects, i.e. [the] amici”; (iii) whether the Claimant’s claim amounts to
an abuse of process; and (iv) the Respondent’s denial of benefits under CAFTA Ar-
ticle 10.12.2.

The Amicus Curiae Submission concludes:

“The general political debate concerning sustainability, metals mining and democ-
racy in El Salvador is ongoing. Pac Rim has attempted to influence the political de-
bate, but has been disappointed in its lobbying efforts. Dissatisfied with the direction
of the democratic dialogue, Pac Rim has abused the arbitral process by changing its
nationality to attract jurisdiction. The Tribunal should not sanction this abuse and,
more important, has no jurisdiction to hear a complaint against the course of a po-
litical debate.”

The Tribunal notes that the Amicus Curiae Submission does not address the further
jurisdictional issues raised by the Respondent regarding “Ratione Temporis” and the
“Investment Law.” The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent, unlike the Amicus
Curiae Submission, has not impugned this Tribunal’s jurisdiction by reference to Ar-

ticle 25 of the ICSID Convention and CAFTA Article 10.1.

Part 1— Page 9

G: The Parties’ Claims for Relief as regards Jurisdiction

1.39.

1.40.

1.41.

1.42.

The Respondent: In its Jurisdiction Memorial (paragraph 476), the Respondent re-

quests the Tribunal to:

(i) _ Issue an award dismissing all claims in this arbitration for lack of jurisdiction
resulting from the Claimant’s abuse of process;

(ii) | Award the Respondent all arbitration costs and legal fees incurred in this arbi-

tration, plus interest.

In its Reply Costs Submissions, the Respondent rejected the Claimant’s request for

an order for costs.

The Claimant: In its Post-Hearing Submissions (paragraph 113), Costs Submission

(paragraph 35) and Reply Costs Submission (paragraph 3), the Claimant requests

this Tribunal:

(i) to deny all of the jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent with
prejudice;

(ii) to enter a procedural order for concluding the remainder of this case in a sin-
gle, expeditious phase;

(iii) to issue an order allocating to Respondent all the costs of these proceedings to
date; and

(iv) to decline the Respondent’s request for an award of costs.

The Tribunal’s Request to the Parties: By \etter dated 13 September 2011 (commu-
nicated to the Parties by the Tribunal’s Secretary), the Tribunal requested the Par-
ties’ assistance in clarifying the jurisdictional objections addressed by the Parties in

these arbitration proceedings, as follows:

“\ During its current deliberations (which are not complete), the Tribunal has
noted that the unnumbered first sub-paragraph of Paragraph 476 in the “Prayers
for Relief” of Part IX (page 152 ) of the Respondent's Memorial on its Objections to
Jurisdiction dated 15 October 2010 may not be wholly consistent with the full list of
jurisdictional objections pleaded both earlier in that same document (for example,
see Paragraph 457, at pages 145-146) and the Respondent's subsequent written and
oral submissions to the Tribunal, as also addressed by the Claimant.

Part 1— Page 10

1.43.

If there were in fact any inconsistency, the Tribunal requests the Parties to clarify
the full list of the jurisdictional objections addressed in these arbitration proceed-
ings.

Accordingly, the Tribunal requests the Respondent (as the Disputing Party raising
jurisdictional objections) briefly to clarify in writing the full list of its jurisdictional
objections as soon as possible but no later than 26 September 2011; and the Tribu-
nal requests the Claimant (as the Disputing Party responding to such objections) to
respond briefly in writing to such clarification, within two weeks of its receipt ...”

The Respondent responded to the Tribunal’s request by letter dated 26 September
2011, confirming (inter alia) the list of its objections as summarised in an attached

“outline”, as follows (with underlining and other emphasis here omitted):

“T: Primary Objection against all claims in this arbitration: Abuse of Process

If the Tribunal finds that Claimant’s actions constitute Abuse of Process, El Salva-
dor requests the Tribunal to dismiss the entire arbitration (Memorial, para. 71) by:

A: — Rejecting jurisdiction and dismissing all claims under CAFTA (Memorial, pa-
ras. 61-70); and

B: — Rejecting jurisdiction and dismissing all claims under the Investment Law of
El Salvador (Memorial, paras. 103-105).

II: Alternative Objections:

A: Alternative 1: If the Tribunal decides that there is no Abuse of Process:

(1) With regard to the CAFTA claims, El Salvador requests the Tribunal to dis-
miss all CAFTA claims for lack of jurisdiction based on any of the following
independent objections:

(i) Denial of benefits provisions of CAFTA (Memorial, para. 106; 253-254); or
(ii) Pac-Rim Cayman is not an Investor of a Party (Memorial, paras. 256-
259); or

(iti) There is no jurisdiction ratione temporis (Memorial, paras. 305-318); or
(iv) CAFTA’s three-year statute of limitations precludes consideration of
Claimant's main claims (Memorial, paras. 324-336);and

(2) With regard to the Investment Law claims, El Salvador requests the Tribunal
to dismiss all claims under the Investment Law of El Salvador for lack of ju-
risdiction based on any of the following independent objections:

a. Enforcing the CAFTA waiver (Memorial, paras. 428-454); or
b. Pac-Rim Cayman is not a “Foreign Investor” under the Investment Law

(Memorial, paras. 379-380); or

Part 1— Page 11

1.44.

c. Piercing the corporate veil (Memorial, paras. 381-413); or

d. Article 15 of the Investment Law does not constitute consent (Memorial,
paras. 337-379); or, in the alternative, the Investment Law claims are inad-
missible (Memorial, paras. 424-427); or

e. Indivisibility of the CAFTA claims and the Investment Law claims (Memo-
rial, para. 105).

B: Alternative 2: If the Tribunal finds that Claimant’s actions constituted Abuse
of Process, but that the Abuse of Process only affects the CAFTA claims and
only results in the rejection of jurisdiction under CAFTA,

(1) El Salvador requests the Tribunal to also dismiss all claims under the Invest-
ment Law for lack of jurisdiction based on any of the independent objections
listed in paragraph II.A.2 above, i.e.,

a. Enforcing the CAFTA waiver (Memorial, paras. 428-454); or

b. Pac-Rim Cayman is not a “Foreign Investor” under the Investment Law
(Memorial, paras. 379-380); or

c. Piercing the corporate veil (Memorial, paras. 381-423); or

d. Article 15 of the Investment Law does not constitute consent (Memorial,
paras. 337-379); or, in the alternative, the Investment Law claims are inad-
missible (Memorial, paras. 424-427); or

e. Indivisibility of the CAFTA claims and the Investment Law claims (Memo-
rial, para. 105).”

The Claimant responded by letter dated 10 October 2011 to the Tribunal’s request,

stating (inter alia) as follows:

“... Claimant wishes to observe that Respondent's recitation of its objections in the
September letter is not entirely consistent with its previous pleadings, and in some
instances is internally contradictory. The primary ambiguity arises from Respon-
dent’s seemingly interchangeable use of the terms, “dismiss for lack of jurisdiction”
and “reject jurisdiction.” For example, in their first paragraph of page 2 of the Sep-
tember letter, Respondent asserts that if the Tribunal finds an abuse of process, it
should dismiss all claims “for lack of jurisdiction.” In the following paragraph,
however it asserts that the consequence of a finding of abuse of process would be for
the Tribunal to “reject jurisdiction under CAFTA.”

A dismissal for lack of jurisdiction occurs where a claimant has failed to demon-
strate that the requirements for jurisdiction are satisfied. On the other hand, the no-
tion of “rejecting” jurisdiction indicates that the requirements for jurisdiction have
been proved — i.e., jurisdiction exists — but the tribunal, in the exercise of its discre-
tion, chooses not to accept jurisdiction. Here, this distinction is relevant because Re-
spondent has raised objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis (under
CAFTA) and ratione personae and voluntatis (under the Investment Law), while also
raising objections that, in Respondent’s own words, “are not strictly tied to the_re-
quirements for jurisdiction, like Abuse of Process and Denial of Benefits.”

Part 1 — Page 12

1.45.

Given the manner in which Respondent has articulated its objections (as opposed to
the relief which it may have requested in connection therewith, or the order in which
the objections may have been presented), Claimant does not understand the objec-
tion dubbed “Abuse of Process” to be an objection based on a “lack of jurisdic-
tion.” As Respondent has described it in its Objections, its abuse of process argu-
ment is derived from a judicial doctrine of a discretionary nature, whereby an inter-
national tribunal may decline to exercise its jurisdiction if it concludes, based on an
assessment of the “particular facts and circumstances of the case,” that to do so
would undermine the tribunal's integrity or otherwise constitute an abuse of the ar-
bitral procedure.

In Claimant's view, it is clear that abuse of process, as an equitable doctrine, is not
relevant to the question of whether or not the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the pre-
sent dispute. Indeed, as it has emphasized on past occasions, Claimant is not aware
of any investment arbitration tribunal having dismissed an entire case for lack of ju-
risdiction on the sole basis of abuse of process. In this regard, Claimant has repeat-
edly referred to the guidance provided by the Rompetrol tribunal, cautioning that
dismissal on the sole basis of abuse of process would require a tribunal to disregard
the jurisdiction that it is “bound to exercise” under the terms of the Washington
Convention; and that a tribunal certainly is not in a position, “at [a] very prelimi-
nary stage, before it has even had the benefit of the Claimant's case laid out in de-
tail in a Memorial, let alone the supporting evidence,” to assess a question of abuse
of process, including the attendant considerations of the Claimant’s motivation in
bringing its claims to arbitration.

In conclusion, Claimant submits that Respondent's abuse of process objections is a
request for an extraordinary remedy under which the Tribunal may decline to exer-
cise its jurisdiction even where all of the jurisdictional requirements have been met,
because it has concluded that the arbitral process has been so severely abused that
it would be improper to hear the merits of the dispute. In this case, there is more
than enough argument and evidence presently before the Tribunal to demonstrate
that such a remedy would be entirely unwarranted and inappropriate. Thus, not-
withstanding that the abuse of process objection does not and cannot per se affect
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, Claimant submits that the Tribunal should proceed to
evaluate and reject the objection and the associated relief requested ...”

By letter dated 18 October 2011 (communicated by the Tribunal’s Secretary), the
Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Parties’ two responses, having also noted their

respective contents for the purpose of this Decision.

Part 1 — Page 13

H: The Jurisdictional Issues

1.46.

1.47.

It is convenient for the purpose of this Decision to describe the Respondent’s juris-
dictional objections under four separate headings: (A) the “Abuse of Process” issue
regarding the Claimant’s claims under CAFTA; (B) the “Ratione Temporis” issue;
(C) the “Denial of Benefits” issue regarding the Claimant’s claims under CAFTA;
and (D) the “Investment Law” issue regarding the Claimant’s Non-CAFTA claims.
The Abuse of Process Issue does not apply to the Claimant’s Non-CAFTA claims, as
determined by the Tribunal. In addition, the Tribunal addresses the Parties’ respec-

tive claims for Legal and Arbitration Costs (E).

In addressing these Issues A to E, the Tribunal has considered all the written and
oral submissions made by the Parties. In order to explain the grounds for this Deci-
sion, it is necessary below to cite or summarise a certain number of these submis-
sions at some length, but not all of them. The fact that a submission is not cited or
summarised below does not signify that it was not considered by the Tribunal in ar-

riving at this Decision.

Part 1 — Page 14

(01)

ANNEX TO PART 1: THE RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

It is appropriate here, for later ease of reference, to set out the relevant legal texts
from (i) the Investment Law, (ii) CAFTA, (iii) the ICSID Convention, (iv) the ICSID
Arbitration Rules and (v) the International Law Commission’s Articles on State Re-

sponsibility.

The Investment Law

Article 15(a) of the Investment Law provides (as translated by the Claimant from the
original Spanish into English), in relevant part:

“In the case of disputes arising among foreign investors and the State, regarding
their investments in El Salvador, the investors may submit the controversy to: (a)
The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), in order to
settle the dispute by ... arbitration, in accordance with the Convention on Settlement
of Investment Disputes Between States and Investors of Other States (ICSID Con-
vention) ...””

The original Spanish text of Article 15 of the Investment Law provides, in full:

“En caso que surgieren controversias 6 diferencias entre los inversionistas naciona-
les o extranjeros y el Estado, referentes a inversiones de aquellos, efectuadas en El
Salvador, las partes podrdn acudir a los tribunales de justicia competentes, de
acuerdo a los procedimientos legales. En el caso de controversias surgidas entre in-
versionistas extranjeros y el Estado, referentes a inversiones de aquellos efectuadas
en EI Salvador, los inversionistas podrdn remitir la controversia: (a) Al Centro In-
ternacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones (CIADI), con el obje-
to de resolver la controversia mediante conciliacion y arbitraje, de conformidad con
el Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y
Nacionales de otros Estados (Convenio del CIADI); ...”.

  

Annex to Part 1— Page 1

(02) CAFTA

1.4. CAFTA Article 10.1: Scope and Coverage

“dL.

This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating
to:

(a) investors of another Party;
(b) covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Articles 10.9 and 10.11, all investments in the territory of
the Party.

A Party’s obligations under this Section shall apply to a state enterprise or
other person when it exercises any regulatory, administrative, or other
governmental authority delegated to it by that Party.

For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind any Party in relation to any
act or fact that took place or any situation that ceased to exist before the date
of entry into force of this Agreement.”

15. CAFTA Article 10.12: Denial of Benefits

“dL.

A Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of another Party
that is an enterprise of such other Party and to investments of that investor if
persons of a non-Party own or control the enterprise and the denying Party:

(a) does not maintain diplomatic relations with the non-Party; or

(b) adopts or maintains measures with respect to the non-Party or a person of
the non-Party that prohibit transactions with the enterprise or that would
be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Chapter were accorded
to the enterprise or to its investments.

Subject to Articles 18.3 (Notification and Provision of Information) and 20.4
(Consultations), a Party may deny the benefits of this Chapter to an investor of
another Party that is an enterprise of such other Party and to investments of
that investor if the enterprise has no substantial business activities in the
territory of any Party, other than the denying Party, and persons of a non-
Party, or of the denying Party, own or control the enterprise.”

Annex to Part 1 — Page 2

1.6. CAFTA Article 10.15: Consultation and Negotiation

“In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and the respondent should ini-
tially seek to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which may
include the use of non-binding, third-party procedures such as conciliation and me-

diation.””

1.7. CAFTA Article 10.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

“I. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot
be settled by consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this sec-
tion a claim

(i) _ that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A [of Chapter Ten]
(B) — an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement;

and

(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a ju-
ridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly,
may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim

(i) _ that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement;
and

(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of,
or arising out of, that breach.

Annex to Part 1 — Page 3

At least 90 days before submitting any claim to arbitration under this Section,
a claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written notice of its intention to
submit the claim to arbitration (“notice of intent”). The notice shall specify:

(a) the name and address of the claimant and, where a claim is submitted
on behalf of an enterprise, the name, address, and place of incorpora-
tion of the enterprise;

(b) for each claim, the provision of this Agreement, investment authoriza-
tion, or investment agreement alleged to have been breached and any
other relevant provisions;

(c) the legal and factual basis for each claim; and

(d) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.

Provided that six months have elapsed since the events giving rise to the claim,
a claimant may submit a claim referred to in paragraph 1:

(a) under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedures for
Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the respondent and the
Party of the claimant are parties to the ICSID Convention;

(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that either the
respondent or the Party of the claimant is a party to the ICSID Con-
vention; or

(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section
when the claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration (“notice of
arbitration”):

(a) referred to in paragraph I of Article 36 of the ICSID Convention is
received by the Secretary-General;

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules is received by the Secretary-General; or

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, together
with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, are received by the respondent.

A claim asserted for the first time after such notice of arbitration is submitted

shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section on the date of its
receipt under the applicable arbitral rules.

Annex to Part 1— Page 4

5. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 3, and in effect on the date
the claim or claims were submitted to arbitration under this Section, shall
govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Agreement.

J"
1.8. CAFTA Article 10.17: Consent of Each Party to Arbitration

“I. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this
Section in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent under paragraph I and the submission of a claim to arbitration
under this Section shall satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the
dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in writing;”
and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention for an “agreement.”

1.9. CAFTA Article 10.18: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party

I. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more than
three years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first acquired,
or should have first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under Article
10.16.1 and knowledge that the claimant (for claims brought under Article
10.16.1(a)) or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(b))
has incurred loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement; and

(b) _ the notice of arbitration is accompanied,

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(a), by
the claimant’s written waiver, and

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(b), by
the claimant’s and the enterprise's written waivers

of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative
tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any

Annex to Part 1— Page 5

measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article
10.16.

Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought under Arti-
cle 10.16.1(a)) and the claimant or the enterprise (for claims brought under
Article 10.16.1(b)) may initiate or continue an action that seeks interim injunc-
tive relief and does not involve the payment of monetary damages before a ju-
dicial or administrative tribunal of the respondent, provided that the action is
brought for the sole purpose of preserving the claimant’s or the enterprise's
rights and interests during the pendency of the arbitration.

No claim may be submitted to arbitration:

(a) for breach of an investment authorization under Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(B)
or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B), or

(b) for breach of an investment agreement under Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(C) or
Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(C).

if the claimant (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the claimant or the
enterprise (for claims brought under Article 10.61.1(b)) has previously submitted the
same alleged breach to an administrative tribunal or court of the respondent, or to any
other binding dispute settlement procedure, for adjudication or resolution."

1.10. CAFTA Article 10.20: Conduct of the Arbitration

“2. A non-disputing Party may make oral and written submissions to the tribunal

regarding the interpretation of this Agreement.”

The tribunal shall have the authority to accept and consider amicus curiae
submissions from a person or entity that is not a disputing party...

When it decides a respondent's objection under paragraph 4 or 5, the tribunal
may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party reasonable costs
and attorney's fees incurred in submitting or opposing the objection. In deter-
mining whether such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider
whether either the claimant's claim or the respondent’s objection was frivol-
ous, and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable opportunity to com-
ment...”

1.11. CAFTA Article 10.22: Governing Law

“dL.

Subject to paragraph 3, when a claim is submitted under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(A) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(A), the tribunal shall decide the issues
in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of
international law.

Annex to Part 1 — Page 6

1.12.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the other terms of this Section, when a claim is

submitted under Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(B) or (C), or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(b) or
(C), the tribunal shall apply:

(a) the rules of law specified in the pertinent investment agreement or in-
vestment authorization, or as the disputing parties may otherwise
agree; or

(b) if the rules of law have not been specified or otherwise agreed:

(i) the law of the respondent, including its rules on the conflict
of laws; and

(ii) such rules of international law as may be applicable.

3. A decision of the Commission declaring its interpretation of a provision of this
Agreement under Article 19.1.3(c) (The Free Trade Commission) shall be
binding on a tribunal established under this Section, and any decision or
award issued by the tribunal must be consistent with that decision.”

CAFTA Article 10.28: Definitions

‘enterprise’ means an enterprise as defined in Article 2.1 (Definitions of General
Application) and a branch of an enterprise; ...”

[Article 2.1 provides: “enterprise of a Party’ means an enterprise constituted or or-
ganised under the law of a Party, and a branch located in the territory of a Party
and carrying out business activities there”; ..."]

““national’ means a natural person who has the nationality of a Party according to
Annex 2.1 (Country-Specific Definitions); ...”

[Annex 2.1(g) provides: “with respect to the United States, ‘national of the United

States’ as defined in the existing provisions of the Immigration and Nationality
Act...)

Annex to Part 1— Page 7

(03)

1.13.

1.14.

(04)

1.15.

1.16.

The ICSID Convention

ICSID Article 25(1)

“1. The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to
submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may with-
draw its consent unilaterally.”

ICSID Article 27

“1. No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an
international claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its nationals and another
Contracting State shall have consented to submit or shall have submitted to
arbitration under this Convention, unless such other Contracting State shall have
failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such dispute.

2. Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of paragraph (1), shall not include
informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the
dispute.”

The ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Arbitration Rule 27

“A party which knows or should have known that a provision of the Administrative
and Financial Regulations, of these Rules, of any other rules or agreement
applicable to the proceeding, or of an order of the Tribunal has not been complied
with and which fails to state promptly its objections thereto, shall be deemed—
subject to Article 45 of the Convention—to have waived its right to object.”

ICSID Arbitration Rule 28

“(1) Without prejudice to the final decision on the payment of the cost
of the proceeding, the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, decide:

Annex to Part 1— Page 8

1.17.

1.18.

(a) at any stage of the proceeding, the portion which each party shall pay,
pursuant to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14, of the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facili-
ties of the Centre;

(b) with respect to any part of the proceeding, that the related costs(as de-
termined by the Secretary-General) shall be borne entirely or in a par-
ticular share by one of the parties...”

ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2)

“After consulting both parties, the Tribunal may allow a person or entity that is not
a party to the dispute (in this Rule called the “non-disputing party”) to file a written
submission with the Tribunal regarding a matter within the scope of the dispute. In
determining whether to allow such a filing, the Tribunal shall consider, among other
things, the extent to which:

(a) the non-disputing party submission would assist the Tribunal in the determina-
tion of a factual or legal issue related to the proceeding by bringing a perspec-
tive, particular knowledge or insight that is different from that of the disputing
parties;

(b) the non-disputing party submission would address a matter within the scope of
the dispute;

(c) the non-disputing party has a significant interest in the proceeding.

The Tribunal shall ensure that the non-disputing party submission does not disrupt
the proceeding or unduly burden or unfairly prejudice either party, and that both
parties are given an opportunity to present their observation on the non-disputing
party submission”

ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1)

“I. Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the

jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the
Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A party shall file the objection with the
Secretary-General no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of
the counter-memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing
of the rejoinder—unless the facts on which the objection is based are unknown to the
party at that time.”

Annex to Part 1— Page 9

(5)

1.19.

1.20.

ILC Articles on State Responsibility

Article 14 - Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation

“I. The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State not having a
continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its
effects continue.

2. The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State having a continuing
character extends over the entire period during which the act continues and remains
not in conformity with the international obligation.

3. The breach of an international obligation requiring a State to prevent a given
event occurs when the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which
the event continues and remains not in conformity with that obligation.”

Article 15 - Breach consisting of a Composite Act

“I. The breach of an international obligation by a State through a series of actions
or omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful occurs when the action or omission
occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions is sufficient to constitute the
wrongful act.

2. In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first of
the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or
omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the international
obligation.”

Annex to Part 1 — Page 10

(01)

2.1.

(02)

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

PART 2: ISSUE A - ABUSE OF PROCESS

Introduction

This first issue as to Abuse of Process, as alleged by the Respondent and denied by
the Claimant, was the principal issue raised in the Parties’ written and oral submis-
sions at the Hearing. Although, as later determined by the Tribunal in this Decision,
it is not the decisive issue as regards the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections to
the Claimant’s CAFTA claims, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to begin with it

as a matter of courtesy to the Parties.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

The Tribunal has first to establish its general approach to the question of proof for
the purpose of this issue, as with other jurisdictional issues. Two distinct factors are
relevant: (i) the burden of proof, i.e. on which party the obligation rests to prove its
case; and (ii) the standard of proof required to discharge that burden, i.e. whether it

is a “prima facie” standard (as submitted by the Claimant) or a different standard.

Standard of Proof: As far as the standard of proof is concerned, both in its Jurisdic-
tion Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to “ac-
cept pro tem the facts as alleged by [the Claimant] to be true and in that light to in-
terpret [the relevant provisions of the treaty] for jurisdictional purposes;”” and the
Claimant cited a number of decisions that have allegedly applied such an approach,

including (in its submission) the Phoenix award.

In contrast, the Respondent submitted that the Claimant’s factual allegations relevant
to the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction cannot enjoy any special status as assumed

facts. The Respondent contended that the Claimant must meet its full standard of

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 37.

Part 2—Page1

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

2.8.

proof or the Claimant’s allegations must be considered unproven, with necessarily

adverse consequences for the Claimant’s jurisdictional case.

At an early jurisdictional stage of an arbitration, as regards facts alleged by a claim-
ant in its pleadings but not admitted or even denied by a respondent, the Tribunal
acknowledges that it is often said that an arbitration tribunal is required to test the
factual basis of a claimant’s claim by reference only to a “prima facie” standard — as
regards the merits of such claim. That standard was most clearly expressed by Judge
Higgins in the well-known passage from her separate opinion in Oil Platforms; and
it has been applied, as a general practice, by many tribunals in addressing jurisdic-

tional objections made in many investor-state arbitrations.*

In this case, as regards the Respondent’s several jurisdictional objections, the Tribu-

nal is not minded to accept the Claimant’s submissions, for two reasons.

First, this Tribunal has already received from both Parties a substantial mass of writ-
ten and oral evidence, including the cross-examination of certain important wit-
nesses at the Hearing. Accordingly, having received such extensive evidential mate-
rials directed at factual issues, the Tribunal thinks it inappropriate to apply to those
issues a lesser standard of proof in favour of the Claimant, when the Tribunal can ar-
rive fairly at its decision on a sufficient evidential record to which both Parties have
had a full opportunity to contribute and, moreover, have also substantially contrib-

uted.

Second, but more importantly, the Tribunal considers that it is impermissible for the
Tribunal to found its jurisdiction on any of the Claimant’s CAFTA claims on the ba-
sis of an assumed fact (i.e. alleged by the Claimant in its pleadings as regards juris-
diction but disputed by the Respondent). The application of that “prima facie” or
other like standard is limited to testing the merits of a claimant’s case at a jurisdic-
tional stage; and it cannot apply to a factual issue upon which a tribunal’s jurisdic-

tion directly depends, such as the Abuse of Process, Ratione Temporis and Denial of

Jurisdiction Reply, § 12.
These materials are considered by Schreuer (et al), The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2" ed), pp.
540-542.

Part 2 — Page 2

2.9.

2.10.

Benefits issues in this case. In the context of factual issues which are common to
both jurisdictional issues and the merits, there could be, of course, no difficulty in
joining the same factual issues to the merits. That, however, is not the situation here,
where a factual issue relevant only to jurisdiction and not to the merits requires more

than a decision pro tempore by a tribunal.

The Phoenix award makes the point clearly, as follows:

“In the Tribunal’s view, it cannot take all the facts as alleged by the Claimant as
granted facts, as it should do according to the Claimant, but must look into the role
these facts play either at the jurisdictional level or at the merits level, as asserted by
the Respondent.

If the alleged facts are facts that, if proven, would constitute a violation of the rele-
vant BIT, they have indeed to be accepted as such at the jurisdictional stage, until
their existence is ascertained or not at the merits level. On the contrary, if jurisdic:
tion rests on the existence of certain facts, they have to be proven at the jurisdi
tional stage.”

 
 

 

Accordingly, this Tribunal is here required to determine finally whether it has juris-
diction over the Claimant’s CAFTA claims on the proven existence of certain facts
because all relevant facts supporting such jurisdiction must be established by the
Claimant at this jurisdictional stage and not merely assumed in the Claimant’s fa-

vour.

The Tribunal therefore decides, in regard to all disputed facts relevant to the jurisdic-
tional issues under CAFTA not to apply the lesser “prima facie” standard in favour
of the Claimant; but, rather, the higher standard of proof applicable to both Parties’
cases, whether it be described as the preponderance of the evidence or a standard
based on a balance of probabilities. In arriving at this decision, the Tribunal has
noted that the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on Abuse of Process by
the Claimant does not, in legal theory, operate as a bar to the existence of the Tribu-
nal’s jurisdiction; but, rather, as a bar to the exercise of that jurisdiction, necessarily
assuming jurisdiction to exist. For present purposes, the Tribunal considers this to be

a distinction without a difference.

Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, §§ 60-61.
[Phoenix v. Czech Republic]

Part 2 — Page 3

2.11.

2.12.

2.13.

2.14.

Burden of Proof: As far as the burden of proof is concerned, in the Tribunal’s view,
it cannot here be disputed that the party which alleges something positive has ordi-
narily to prove it to the satisfaction of the Tribunal. At this jurisdictional level, in
other words, the Claimant has to prove that the Tribunal has jurisdiction. Of course,
if there are positive objections to jurisdiction, the burden lies on the Party presenting

those objections, in other words, here the Respondent.

This sharing of the burden of proof has been stated in Chevron v. Ecuador in the fol-

lowing terms:

“As a general rule, the holder of a right raising a claim on the basis of that right in
legal proceedings bears the burden of proof for all elements required for the claim.
However, an exception to this rule occurs when a respondent raises a defense to the
effect that the claim is precluded despite the normal conditions being met. In that
case, the respondent must assume the burden of proof for the elements necessary for
the exception to be allowed. "6

The Tribunal agrees that the burden lies on a claimant who asserts a positive right
and on a respondent who asserts a positive answer to the claimant. The Tribunal
does not consider the latter to be an exception to the former, both being (in its view)
the application from a different perspective of the same general principle that the
party which asserts a positive case has to prove that case. In this case, the Claimant
is asserting that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Parties’ dispute; and, as re-
gards this first jurisdictional objection, the Respondent is asserting an abuse of proc-

ess by the Claimant.

This general approach was analysed by the Chevron tribunal in relation to a respon-
dent’s positive objection asserting abuse of process by a claimant, not dissimilar to

the present case:

“A claimant is not required to prove that its claim is asserted in a non-abusive man-
ner; it is for the respondent to raise and prove an abuse of process as a defense. 7

Chevron Corporation (USA) and Texaco Petroleum Company (USA) v. The Republic of Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 34877, Interim Award, 1 December 2008, § 138.
Ibid., § 139.

Part 2 — Page 4

2.15.

(03)

2.16.

2.17.

2.18.

8

In summary, it is the Tribunal’s opinion that it is not bound to accept the facts neces-
sary to support or deny jurisdiction as alleged by the Claimant and the Respondent
respectively; that the Claimant has the burden to prove facts necessary to establish
jurisdiction (as it positively asserts); and that the Respondent has the burden to prove
that its positive objections to jurisdiction are well-founded. Accordingly, for the
purpose of this Decision, the Tribunal adopts a general approach to the Parties’ dis-
puted factual allegations whereby all the elements of proof adduced by the Parties
are considered by the Tribunal for the purpose of assessing whether the Claimant
and the Respondent have discharged their respective burdens to prove their respec-

tive cases.

The Respondent’s Case

In summary, the Respondent’s presentation of its jurisdictional objection based on
Abuse of Process begins with a statement of facts, which are not contested by the

Claimant:

“Pacific Rim Mining Corp. is a Canadian company that applied for an environ-
mental permit and a mining exploitation concession in El Salvador through one of
its subsidiaries in 2004. The environmental permit and the concession were not
granted. Three years later, in December of 2007, Pacific Rim Mining Corp. changed
the nationality of another subsidiary, Pac Rim Cayman, from the Cayman Islands to
the United States..."*

The Respondent then makes its legal analysis on these facts, which (as will be seen
later in this Decision) is strongly contested by the Claimant. In the Respondent’s
submission, the Claimant has “abused the provisions of CAFTA and the interna-
tional arbitration process by changing Pac Rim Cayman's nationality to a CAFTA

Party to bring a pre-existing dispute before this Tribunal under CAFTA.”

This objection is the major part of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections. As
confirmed in its Jurisdiction Reply, “El Salvador's main jurisdictional objection is
Claimant's Abuse of Process.” This was re-confirmed in the Respondent’s letter

dated 26 September 2011 sent to the Tribunal (cited in Part 1 above).

Jurisdiction Memorial, § 1.

Part 2—Page5

2.19.

2.20.

(04)

2.21.

9
10
mn

In presenting this main objection, the Respondent does not object to prospective na-
tionality planning made in good faith before any investment. The Respondent ob-
jects to the Claimant’s change of nationality because of its timing at a much later

date, made in deliberate bad faith:

“What Claimant and its parent company did in the present case, however, is not pro-
spective nationality planning but a retrospective gaming of the system to gain juris-
diction for an existing dispute based on existing facts over which there would not
otherwise be {urisdiction. This is an abuse of the international arbitration system
and process.”

The Respondent’s position was summarised at the outset of its Post-Hearing Sub-

missions:

“Pacific Rim Mining Corp., a Canadian corporation, through its wholly-owned shell
subsidiary, Pac Rim Cayman, has abused the international arbitration process by
changing Pac Rim Cayman's nationality from the Cayman Islands to the United
States, and then using this nationality to initiate ICSID arbitration proceedings for a
pre-existing dispute and assert claims under CAFTA and the Investment Law of El
Salvador as a national of the United States. The consequence of this abuse can only
be the dismissal of this entire arbitration.”"°

The Claimant’s Case

In summary, the Claimant submits that its change of nationality was not an abuse of
process because it was part of an overall plan to restructure the Pac Rim group of

companies. According to the Claimant, “(ijn 2007, the Companies were looking for

oll

ways to save money;” and as a result, changes are alleged to have been envisioned,

as follows:

“This led to an examination of the overall corporate structure of the Companies.
There were administrative costs involved in maintaining Pac Rim Cayman as a
Cayman Islands entity. At the same time, the Companies were advised that there
would be no adverse tax consequences to domesticating Pac Rim Cayman to Nevada
— the jurisdiction from which it had been effectively managed by Mr. Shrake since
1997. In other words, the Companies believed that by domesticating Pac Rim Cay-
man to Nevada, they could eliminate the costs of maintaining Pac Rim Cayman in

Jurisdiction Memorial, § 18. Emphasis by the Respondent.
The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 2.
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 136.

Part 2 — Page 6

2.22.

2.23.

2.24.

2.25.

 

 

the Cayman Islands, without losing any tax benefits. It made no sense to manage a
Cayman Islands company from Nevada, if that company could be domesticated to
Nevada with cost savings and no adverse tax consequences.”

This was an incomplete explanation on the evidential materials adduced by the
Claimant itself, particularly from its principal factual witness, Mr Shrake. Even be-
fore the Hearing, Mr Shrake candidly acknowledged that the availability of interna-
tional arbitration (under CAFTA and ICSID) was one of the elements of its decision

to change the Claimant’s nationality:

“The ability of Pac Rim Cayman to bring claims under CAFTA, if a dispute with El
Salvador were to arise in the future, was one of the factors I considered, and which
— with others — weighed in favour of the reorganization. ”

The Claimant nonetheless submitted that the events giving rise to the Parties’ dispute
occurred after this change of nationality on 13 December 2007; and, given that tim-
ing, the change cannot be characterised as an abuse of process by the Claimant. It
was said that a change in nationality can be triggered by many reasons; and if na-
tionality planning for the purpose of international arbitration can be made in good
faith as one of several reasons before an investment is made (as the Respondent ac-
knowledges), then why not a change made in like good faith after an investment but

before any dispute has arisen?

In the present case, however, the timing is important. For the Respondent, CAFTA
came into force on | March 2006; the Claimant changed its nationality in 13 De-
cember 2007 whereupon, ostensibly, it acquired substantive and procedural rights
under CAFTA; President Saca’s speech was publicly reported on 11 March 2008;
and the Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitration on 30 April 2009.

From the Claimant’s Notice of Intent onwards, the Claimant has pleaded “unlawful
and politically motivated measures” taken by the Respondent before 13 December

2007, including (as alleged) the arbitrary imposition of unreasonable delays and un-

iction Counter-Memorial, § 138.

Mr Shrake’s Witness Statement, § 113. See also, to the same effect, the Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, §

“As part of this overall assessment of the Companies’ organizational structure, Mr. Shrake also

considered the Companies’ potential avenues of recourse if a dispute were ever to arise with El Salvador
in the future.”

Part 2— Page 7

2.26.

2.27.

2.28.

precedented regulatory obstacles designed and implemented with the aim of prevent-
ing PRES and DOREX from developing gold mining rights in which the Claimant,
through those Enterprises, had made substantial and long-term investments.'* As
pleaded by the Claimant, many of these events necessarily pre-dated the speech of
President Saca in March 2008, allegedly confirming the opposition of the Respon-

dent’s Government to granting mining permits. 1s

In the Notice of Arbitration, the following measures were also alleged by the Claim-

ant against the Respondent, as taking place before December 2007:

“As previously set out in the Notice of Intent and further summarized herein, PRC’s
claims arise out of unlawful and politically motivated measures taken by the Gov-
ernment of President Elias Antonio Saca Gonzalez, through the Ministerio de Medio
Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (“MARN”) and MINEC, against Claimant's invest-
ments.”

As regards the speech of President Saca, the Claimant alleges first: “in March 2008,
President Saca abruptly and without any justification announced that he opposed
granting any new mining permits.”!° The Claimant next alleges that the permit had
been earlier refused by MARN on the instructions of the Government: “it is now ap-
parent that MARN’s inaction had been directed from above, and specifically from
the offices of President Saca.”!’ These events cover a period which, at least in part,
pre-date December 2007. The Claimant alleges that President Saca’s speech re-
vealed that the permit refusals were made following an existing policy by the Gov-
ernment and were not mere bureaucratic incidents: “In 2008, it became clear that the
Government’s delay tactics with respect to the issuance of the Enterprises’ various
permits had been designed and implemented with the unlawful, discriminatory, and

politically motivated aim of preventing the Enterprises’ mining.”'*

In other words, as here alleged by the Claimant, President Saca’s speech (post-

December 2007) expressed a “newly announced ‘policy’ of opposing the issuance of

Notice of Intent, Introduction, pp. 1-2.
Notice of Intent, § 32.

Notice of Arbitration, § 9.

Notice of Arbitration, § 64.

Notice of Arbitration, § 74.

Part 2 — Page 8

2.29.

2.30.

2.31.

mining permits;””” and the earlier refusal of the Government (pre-December 2007)

to act upon the Enterprises’ applications for permits therefore constituted “a gross

abuse of administrative discretion.””°

In the Counter-Memorial, the Claimant again focused on the speech given by Presi-

dent Saca in March 2008:

“Even if Respondent contests the existence of a mining ban (despite the public
statements of President Saca and his successor, President Funes), its characteriza-
tion of the measure at issue as a single act or omission completed in December 2004
still is incorrect, because the failure of MARN to act in December 2004, together
with subsequent failures to act by MARN and its sister ministry, Ministerio de
Economia (“MINEC”), is a situation that continued to exist after the key jurisdic-
tional thresholds were crossed, thus causing it to come within the scope of CAFTA’s
Investment Chapter. vl

Another citation from the Claimant’s earlier pleadings to the same effect, amongst
many others, can be reproduced here, because it refers not only to “continuing” acts
or omissions alleged against the Respondent, but also to “composite” acts or omis-

sions:

“Even if the Tribunal were to accept Respondent's assertion that, despite the public
statements of two successive heads of State, the de facto mining ban does not exist,
the individual instances of Respondent's failure to grant Claimant’s mining-related
applications are continuing or composite acts or omissions that breach CAFTA ob-
ligations ...””°

In its Jurisdiction Rejoinder, the Claimant returned to the alleged significance of the

de facto ban:

“As explained in the Notice of Arbitration, it is the de facto mining ban confirmed by
President Saca — as opposed to any individual missed deadlines under the Minin,
Law or the Environmental Law — that rendered Claimant’s investments valueless.”

Notice of Arbitration, § 77.

Notice of Arbitration, § 81.
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 19.
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 163.
Jurisdiction Rejoinder, § 235.

Part 2 — Page 9

2.32.

2.33.

2.34.

In its Post-Hearing Submissions, as at the Hearing, the Claimant presented the rele-
vant measure as a “practice” covering both an earlier period of time when CAFTA
did not apply (either pre-December 2007 or even pre-March 2006) and a later period
of time when it did apply to the Claimant, namely, as a continuing course of conduct
by the Respondent that existed before and after the Claimant’s change of nationality

on 13 December 2007:

“The measure at issue as consistently identified in Claimant's pleadings is El Salva-
dor’s practice of withholding permits necessary for metallic mining: This measure is
a continuing course of conduct by Respondent which may have begun before CAFTA
became applicable to Claimant, but continued thereafter (indeed, to this very day)
and which Claimant became aware of at the earliest in March 2008, when El Salva-
dor’s President first confirmed the existence of a de facto mining ban."4

As regards the date when the Parties’ dispute arose, the Claimant alleges that it arose
only in March 2008 and not before, i.e. it came into existence as a continuing or

composite act after the change in the Claimant’s nationality in December 2007:

“The act supporting Pac Rim Cayman's claims of breach resulting in loss or damage
is Respondent's de facto ban on mining as announced by President Saca in March
2008. . . . As relevant to Respondent's abuse of process argument, since the act giv-
ing rise to the dispute did not occur until March 2008 or, alternatively, only became
recognizable as a continuing or composite act in breach of CAFTA obligations at
that time, Pac Rim Cayman's domestication to Nevada in December 2007 could not
have been “a retrospective gaming of the system to gain jurisdiction for an existing
dispute.”

The Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s pleaded case had developed significantly
from its early pleadings by the end of the Hearing, as not infrequently happens dur-
ing a complicated arbitration. This development has, however, created certain diffi-

culties for the Tribunal, to which it is necessary to return below.

The Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 3.
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 376. Emphasis by the Claimant. See also § 11 of the Respondent’s Post-
Hearing Submissions.

Part 2 — Page 10

(05)

2.35.

(06)

2.36.

2.37.

2.38.

2.39.

The CAFTA Member States

The USA Submission addresses Denial of Benefits and does not address the issue of
Abuse of Process. The Costa Rica Submission likewise does not address Abuse of

Process, concentrating mostly on Denial of Benefits.

Amicus Curiae Submission

The Amicus Curiae Submission does address the issue of Abuse of Process (in addi-

tion to other matters), first in general terms:

“The facts underlying Claimant's claim are deeply intertwined with the social and
political change that has occurred since the advent of representative democracy in
post-civil war El Salvador, and there is little doubt that the Tribunal’s decision to
accept or reject jurisdiction over a claim of this nature could impact the transition
toward democracy in El Salvador. The Tribunal’s decision could also impact the
communities amici represent - their lands, their livelihoods, and even their well-
being and fundamental rights.”

This Amicus Curiae next contends that the Claimant’s claims amount to an abuse of
process for two reasons, the first developed by the Respondent (as summarised

above) and the second that is specific to its own Amicus Curiae Submission:

“1. Pac Rim’s last minute re-organization to take advantage of CAFTA benefits af-
ter setting itself up to enjoy the benefits of Cayman Islands’ zero taxation is abusive
in nature.

2. Pac Rim’s attempt to take a dispute centered between it and the affected commu-
nities to a forum where the communities have only limited discretionary rights is
abusive in nature ...”

The Amicus Curiae Submission contends, that in relying only on the first of these
two reasons, “the Republic has, in fact, underestimated the extent of the abuse of
process” (p. 10), because this dispute is, in fact, not a dispute between an investor
and a host State but a dispute between an investor and the local communities of

which the State is only an intermediary.

The Amicus Curiae Submission alleges that this is a purely political dispute and

therefore that the Parties’ dispute is not a “legal dispute” under Article 25 of the IC-

Part 2 — Page 11

2.40.

(07)

2.41.

2.42.

26

SID Convention, nor relates to a “measure” under CAFTA Article 10.1. The Tribu-
nal will limit itself here to the Amicus’ arguments relating to the Abuse of Process

issue.

The Amicus Curiae Submission addresses the motivation for the Claimant’s change
of nationality, basing itself on Mr Shrake’s testimony. It considers that stating that
one of the motives for the change was to save a few thousand dollars in annual cor-
porate registration fees is fanciful; but even if it were one element of the decision-
making process, the Claimant’s access to international arbitration was another fac-
tor; and that factor is sufficient for the Tribunal to find here that there has been an

abuse of process by the Claimant. As alleged by the Amicus Curiae Submission:

“Moreover, regardless of whether the benefit of CAFTA dispute resolution was a
primary or secondary motivation, the fact that it is a motivation is all that the rele-
vant prong of the abuse of process inquiry requires.” (p. 10)

The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal finds as a relevant fact, based on the Claimant’s own evidential materi-
als, that one of the principal purposes of the change in the Claimant’s nationality
was the access thereby gained to the protection of investment rights under CAFTA
and its procedure for international arbitration available against the Respondent. Al-
though the Tribunal accepts that another purpose was to save unnecessary expenses
for the Pacific Rim group of companies, the Tribunal finds, as a fact, again based on
the Claimant’s own evidential materials, that such a purpose was not the dominant,
still less the only, motive for the change. As rightly emphasized by the Respondent,
“... Claimant presents no evidence that the costs of maintaining a limited liability
company in Nevada are significantly cheaper than being incorporated in the Cayman

Islands.””°

Accordingly, the factual situation here is materially similar to the facts found by the

tribunal in the Mobil v. Venezuela case, that “... the main, if not the sole purpose of

Jurisdiction Reply, § 87.

Part 2 — Page 12

2.43.

2.44.

2.45.

2.46.

the restructuring was to protect Mobil investments from adverse Venezuelan meas-

ures in getting access to ICSID arbitration through the Dutch-Venezuela BIT.””’

That, however, is not a sufficient answer to determine the issue of Abuse of Process
in this case. The Tribunal does not accept the arguments made to the contrary in the
Amicus Curiae Submission. As already described, there is an important issue of tim-
ing and other circumstances in this case, to which it is necessary to return below at

some length.

At the outset, the Tribunal subscribes to the general approach set out in the decision

made in Mobil v. Venezuela:

“The Tribunal first observes that in all systems of law, whether domestic or
international, there are concepts framed in order to avoid misuse of the law.
Reference may be made in this respect to “good faith” (“bonne foi”),
“détournement de pouvoir” (misuse of power) or “abus de droit” (abuse of
right).””

The Claimant’s restructuring consisted of its change of nationality on 13 December
2007. To adopt the tribunal’s approach in Mobil v. Venezuela, “(s)uch restructuring
could be ‘legitimate corporate planning’ as contended by the Claimant or an ‘abuse
of right’ as submitted by the Respondent. It depends upon the circumstances in
which it happened.””° As already summarised above, it is not contested between the
Parties that the circumstances of this case are decisive as to the time when the rele-
vant measure(s) occurred and the Parties’ dispute arose, whether before or after the

change in the Claimant’s nationality on 13 December 2007.

This important question of timing was also explained in the Phoenix award:

“International investors can of course structure upstream their investments, which
meet the requirement of participating in the economy of the host State, in a manner
that best fits their need for international protection, in choosing freely the vehicle
through which they perform their investment. ...

Mobil Corporation and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/27, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010, § 190. [Mobil v. Venezuela]

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, § 169.

Ibid, § 191.

Part 2 — Page 13

2.47.

2.48.

2.49.

But on the other side, an international investor cannot modify downstream the
protection granted to its investment by the host State, once the acts which the
investor considers are causing damages to its investment have already been
committed.”

The Tribunal does not dispute (nor did the Respondent) that if a corporate restructur-
ing affecting a claimant’s nationality was made in good faith before the occurrence
of any event or measure giving rise to a later dispute, that restructuring should not be
considered as an abuse of process.*! That is not, however, the issue in the present

case, as the Tribunal explains below by reference to other reported cases.

The Tribunal notes first the approach adopted by the tribunal in Autopista v. Vene-
zuela,” where a Mexican company restructured its investment in a Venezuelan
company, Aucoven, by transferring 75 % of its shares to a US corporation. As in the
present case, the respondent alleged that this restructuring was an abuse in order to
gain access to ICSID jurisdiction. The tribunal noted that the US entity had been in-
corporated eight years before the parties had entered into their concession agree-

ment; and that it was not a mere shell corporation. Thus, the tribunal concluded that

the restructuring did not constitute “an abuse of the Convention purposes.”

In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,* the claimant was organised under Lithuanian law but
was owned and controlled as to 99 % by Ukrainian nationals. The tribunal noted that
this enterprise was formed many years before the BIT between Ukraine and Lithua-

nia entered into force; and it concluded:

“The Claimant manifestly did not create Tokios Tokelés for the purpose of gaining
access to ICSID arbitration under the BIT against Ukraine, as the enterprise was
founded six years before the BIT ... entered into force. Indeed, there is no evidence
in the record that the Claimant used its formal legal nationality for any improper

purpose.

Phoenix v. Czech Republic, supra, note 5, §§ 94-95. Emphasis in the original.
Certain decisions to this effect have been made subject to a dissenting opinion.

Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001.

Ibid., § 126.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, §§ 53 to
56. This case did not involve a restructuration by a change of nationality to get access to ICSID

 

jurisdiction, but an initial structuration permitting such access.

35

Ibid., § 56.

Part 2 — Page 14

2.50.

2.51.

39

The tribunal therefore concluded that there had been “no abuse of legal personal-

ity

In Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia,” a Bolivian company had entered into a water con-
cession contract with the Bolivian authorities. Bechtel, a US corporation, owned
55% of the shares in the Bolivian company, which were transferred to a Dutch com-
pany. The tribunal’s jurisdiction was ostensibly derived from the Dutch-Bolivian
BIT. Bolivia argued that the Dutch entity was a mere shell company created solely
for the purpose of gaining access to ICSID and that, therefore, the tribunal had no ju-
risdiction under the BIT. The tribunal considered that the Dutch claimant was “not
simply a corporation shell established to obtain ICSID jurisdiction over the case.”
The tribunal explained the dividing line between abuse of process and legitimate re-

structuring even after the making of an investment:

“\.. it is not uncommon in practice and — absent a particular limitation — not illegal
to locate one’s operation in a jurisdiction perceived to provide a beneficial regula-
tory and legal environment in terms, for example, of taxation or the substantive law
of the jurisdiction, including the availability of a BIT.”

A statement to the same effect can be found in the Mobil decision, where the tribunal
considered legitimate an “upstream” reorganization made in order to protect invest-
ments by gaining access to ICSID arbitration before any dispute, in contrast to an il-
legitimate “downstream” reorganization to the same effect with respect to a pre-

existing dispute:

“As stated by the Claimants, the aim of the restructuring of their investments in
Venezuela through a Dutch holding was to protect those investments against
breaches of their rights by the Venezuelan authorities by gaining access to ICSID
arbitration through the BIT. The Tribunal considers that this was a perfectly legiti-
mate goal as far as it concerned future disputes.

With respect to pre-existing disputes, the situation is different and the Tribunal con-
siders that to restructure investments only in order to gain jurisdiction under a BIT

Idem. The President, Prosper Weil, strongly dissented, stating: “The ICSID mechanism and remedy are not
meant for investments made in a State by its own citizens with domestic capital through the channel of a
foreign entity, whether pre-existent or created for that purpos Given the indisputable and undisputed
Ukrainian character of the investment the Tribunal does not, in my view, give effect to the letter and spirit,
as well as the object and purpose, of the ICSID institution.” /bid., Dissenting Opinion, § 19 and § 20.
Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21
October 2005.

Ibid., § 321.

Ibid., § 330 (d).

 

Part 2 — Page 15

2.52.

2.53.

2.54.

2.55.

40

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, §§ 204-205. Emphasi:

for such disputes would constitute, to take the words of the Phoenix Tribunal, ‘an
abusive manipulation of the system of international investment protection under the
ICSID Convention and the BITs’. The Claimants seem indeed to be conscious of this,
when they state that they “invoke ICSID jurisdiction on the basis of the consent ex-
pressed in the Treaty only for disputes arising under the Treaty for action that the
Respondent took or continued to take after the restructuring was completed. 0

 

The Tribunal concludes from these and other legal materials submitted by the Parties
that, in order to determine whether the Claimant’s change of nationality was or was
not an abuse of process, the Tribunal must first ascertain whether the relevant meas-
ure(s) or practice, which (as the Claimant allege) caused damage to its investments
from March 2008 onwards, took place before or after the change in nationality on 13
December 2007. This approach in turn requires the Tribunal to ascertain the legal

nature of the relevant measure(s) or practice alleged by the Claimant.

The Relevant Measure(s) or Practice: In order to identify these measures or prac-
tice, the Tribunal must necessarily analyse the Claimant’s own pleadings. It will be
recalled that the Tribunal decided, in its Decision of 2 August 2010, that the Notice
of Intent was incorporated by reference into the Notice of Arbitration, and also to
“treat the Notice of Arbitration as amended in the manner requested by the Claim-
ant.' Accordingly, the Claimant’s early pleadings include both the Notice of Intent

and the Notice of Arbitration.

The Notice of Intent pleads several alleged measures; and in the Notice of Arbitra-
tion, the same measures are pleaded. Starting with the Jurisdiction Counter-
Memorial, the emphasis is increasingly placed by the Claimant on the alleged de

facto ban publicly disclosed in President Saca’s speech.

At this early stage, the Claimant based its pleaded case on the allegation that the Re-
spondent had taken precise measures (in the plural) that improperly refused to grant
to PRES an exploitation concession and to deliver to DOREX environmental per-

mits. In its Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, the Claimant alleged that the measure (in

ded.
Decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5, 2
August 2009, § 35.

 

Part 2 — Page 16

2.56.

2.57.

2.58.

the singular) that had damaged its investments was the de facto ban announced by

President Saca in March 2008, inter alia, as follows:

“Respondent treats a December 2004 missed deadline by El Salvador’s Ministerio
de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (“MARN”) as if that were the sole or pri-
mary measure at issue. In fact, as is clear from Claimant's Notice of Arbitration, the
measure at issue is Respondent's de facto ban on mining operations, a practice
which then-President Saca announced in March 2008."*”

“The act supporting Pac Rim Cayman's claims of breach resulting in loss or
damage is Respondent's de facto ban on mining as announced by President Saca in
March 2008 ..."*”

At the Hearing, the Claimant’s Opening Statement described “the measure at issue”
(again in the singular) as follows: “The practice of the Government not to grant any

metallic mining application regardless of whether it satisfied all of the regulatory re-

quirements.”“4

At the end of the Hearing, the Claimant clarified its pleaded case in its Closing

Statement, as follows:

“... And it is true — and Respondent has really hit on this point over and over again
over the course of these proceedings — it is true that we've sometimes referred to the
individual acts and omissions that resulted in the denial of permits to PRES and
DOREX as measures. We sometime used term “measures” to describe those acts
and omissions. And they are, indeed, measures. That is an accurate way to describe
those acts and omissions, but they're not the measure at issue, and I think that's a
very important distinction to make. The measure at issue — and I really want to
emphasize that phrase — “the measure at issue” — that is, the measure that is the
basis for Claimant's articulation of breaches by Respondent of obligations on the
international law plane is the practice of withholding mining-related permits. It is
that measure that forms the basis of our claims ...""°

The Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s case was most clearly pleaded and ex-
plained during the Hearing. It therefore does not attach undue significance to its ear-
lier written pleadings which might well be understood differently. The Tribunal un-

derstands the Claimant from its later pleadings as alleging that the measures de-

 
 
  

iction Counter-Memorial, § 19.

sdiction Counter-Memorial, § 376. Cited in § 11 of the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions.
The Claimant’s Opening Statement, Hearing D1.160, with its Opening Power Point, Overview of Facts, p.

Hearing D3.708-709.

Part 2 — Page 17

2.59.

2.60.

46

scribed in its early pleadings formed only a factual pattern which derived from a
then unstated practice of the Salvadoran Government, of which (as the Claimant al-
leges) the Claimant first became aware on 11 March 2008 with the report of Presi-
dent Saca’s speech. Accordingly, the Tribunal treats the Claimant’s pleaded case as
alleging a practice by the Respondent which came to the Claimant’s knowledge only
with President Saca’s reported speech in March 2008, which practice is alleged to
consist of either a continuing or composite act in breach of CAFTA and for which
the Claimant claims damages only from March 2008 onwards. The Tribunal accepts
that a governmental practice, by definition, has necessarily to comprise a multiplic-
ity of pre- or co-existing acts or omissions. It is necessary to ascertain the legal na-
ture and timing of such a practice where a claimant’s pleaded allegations are di-
rected both at the acts or omissions themselves and to the practice comprising such

acts or omissions, which practice only become known to a claimant at a later date.

What then is the role of President Saca’s speech as now alleged and explained by the
Claimant in its pleadings? According to the Claimant, it was not by itself a measure,

but it is what made public an alleged pre-existing governmental practice:

“This is why President Saca’s March 2008 public acknowledgment of the ban is so
important. Claimant does not contend that the President's statement is by itself the
measure at issue. But the President’s statement did provide critical information,
given the inherent difficulty in discerning the measure at issue, and as such may be
seen as the consummation point of the administration’s action and inaction
constituting the offending measure at issue in this arbitration. ve

From this and other explanations from the Claimant, it follows that, although the
President’s speech is not alleged to be a measure by itself, it is the point in time
when, according to the Claimant, its dispute with the Respondent arose. It would be
possible to use other language to describe the emergence of this dispute, as em-
ployed by both Parties in this case (e.g. “born”, “crystallised” etc); but all these
terms convey the same concept; and the Tribunal here prefers substance to seman-

tics.

Jurisdiction Rejoinder, § 238.

Part 2 — Page 18

2.61.

2.62.

2.63.

2.64.

y

However, in the Tribunal’s view, it is necessary as a matter of international law (be-
ing applicable to the Claimant’s CAFTA claims) to distinguish between President’s
Saca’s speech as the alleged culminating point of a pre-existing practice and the ef-
fective beginning of a practice causing injury to the Claimant and its Enterprises.
The Claimant’s pleaded case was ambiguous on this point; particularly as to whether
and (if so) when the alleged practice became a continuous act or a composite act by

the Respondent.

During the Hearing, the Tribunal understood the Claimant’s case to include three
alternative analyses of its alleged practice: (i) the speech of President Saca publicly
launched a new policy, that did not exist before; (ii) the speech of President Saca ac-
knowledged the existence of a practice analysed as a continuous act; and (iii) the
speech of President Saca acknowledged the existence of a practice analysed as a

composite act.

At the end of the Hearing, the Tribunal requested both the Claimant and the Respon-
dent to comment on whether and (if so) when the alleged practice constituted a con-
tinuing act or a composite act, as those two terms are used in Articles 14 and 15, re-
spectively, of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility of States (cited in the Annex
to Part 1 above); and in particular whether the Claimant’s pleaded claims were based
on alleged conduct by the Respondent that pre-dated the Claimant’s change of na-

tionality on 13 December 2007.

According to the Claimant’s answer, the Tribunal did not need to characterise the
relevant measure because the only important factor, according to the Claimant, was
the existence of an unlawful situation which was applicable to the Claimant in

March 2008, after 13 December 2007:

“As for whether the ban is better described as a continuing measure or a composite
measure, Claimant suggests that, like other tribunals confronted with similar fact
patterns, this Tribunal need not choose. If the Tribunal finds that the measure at
issue is conduct that did not cease to exist prior to CAFTA’s becoming applicable to
Claimant, there is no need to label the measure.”

The Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 23.

Part 2 — Page 19

2.65.

2.66.

2.67.

2.68.

The Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s response might be more appropriate for
the Ratione Temporis issue; but that it is clearly inappropriate to this Abuse of Proc-
ess issue. For this latter issue, it is important to ascertain whether the alleged meas-
ure began before and continued after the change in the Claimant’s nationality. It here

is necessary to apply first principles of international law.

The question of identifying precisely when an internationally wrongful act takes
place is often a difficult factual question; it has important consequences on the law
of international responsibility; and, as far as it concerns investment arbitration under

a treaty, it can directly affect (as here) the exercise of jurisdiction by a tribunal.

In any particular case, three different situations can arise: (i) a measure is a “one-
time act”, that is an act completed at a precise moment, such as, for example, a na-
tionalisation decree which is completed at the date of that decree; or (ii) it is a “con-
tinuous” act, which is the same act that continues as long as it is in violation of rules
in force, such as a national law in violation of an international obligation of the
State; or, (iii) it is a “composite” act, that is an act composed of other acts from
which it is legally different. These important and well-established distinctions under
customary international law are considered in the Commentaries of the ILC Articles

on State Responsibility.*

(i) One-Time Act: As far as a one-time act is concerned, the ILC Commentaries ex-
plain both its instant realisation, at a precise moment in time, and the fact that it can

have continuous effects:

“The critical distinction for the purpose of article 14 is between a breach which is
continuing and one which has already been completed. In accordance with para-
graph 1, a completed act occurs ‘at the moment when the act is performed’, even
though its effects or consequences may continue...”

“An act does not have a continuing character merely because its consequences ex-
tend in time.””

Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, with commentaries, 2001,
Yearbook of the International Law Commi:
ILC Commentaries, p. 59.
ILC Commentaries, p. 60.

 

ion, 2001, vol II, Part Two [“ILC Commentaries”].

Part 2 — Page 20

2.69.

2.70.

2.71.

ILC Commentaries

Based on such a definition, it is relatively easy to determine the moment when a

measure takes place as a one-time act.

(ii) Continuous Act: In contrast, a continuous act is the same act extending through-
out a period of time, as also explained in the ILC Commentaries:

“In accordance with paragraph 2, a continuing wrongful act, on the other hand,
occupies the entire period during which the act continues and remains not in

conformity with the international obligation, provided that the State is bound by the
international obligation during that period. “st

(iii) Composite Act: Finally, a composite act is not the same, single act extending
over a period of time, but is composed of a series of different acts that extend over
that period; or, in other words, a composite act results from an aggregation of other
acts and acquires a different legal characterisation from those other acts, as de-

scribed in the ILC Commentaries:

“Composite acts give rise to continuing breaches, which extend in time from the first
of the actions or omissions in the series of acts making up the wrongful conduct.

Composite acts covered by article 15 are limited to breaches of obligations which
concern some aggregate of conduct and not individual acts as such. In other words,
their focus is ‘a series of acts or omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful.’”” 2

“Only after a series of actions or omissions takes place will the composite act be
revealed, not merely as a succession of isolated acts, but as a composite act, i.e. an
act defined in aggregate as wrongful. s

The fact that a composite act is composed of acts that are legally different from the
composite act itself means that the composite act can comprise legal acts and still be
unlawful or that it can comprise unlawful acts violating certain norms which are dif-
ferent from the legal norm violated by the composite act. For example, several legal
acts (of which each by itself is not unlawful) can become unlawful as the composite

aggregation of those legal acts; or a series of unlawful acts interfering with an in-

 

 

ILC Commentaries, p. 63.

This type of composite act was referred to by the Claimant in its Post-Hearing Submi
composite measure is a series of acts and omissions which, in the aggregate, constitute a breach of relevant
obligations (even though individual acts or omissions on their own may not constitute such a breach). Such

ions, § 30: “A.

 

Part 2 — Page 21

2.72.

2.73.

2.74.

vestment (which by themselves are not expropriatory) can by their aggregation result

in an unlawful expropriation.

Was the relevant measure in the present case, as alleged by the Claimant, a continu-
ous act or a composite act? This is important, if the continuous or composite act ex-
tends over a critical date, here the Claimant’s change of nationality on 13 December

2007.

As regards a continuing act, the ILC Commentaries state the following:

“Thus, conduct which has commenced sometime in the past, and which constituted
(or, if the relevant primary rule had been in force for the State at the time, would
have constituted) a breach at that time, can continue and give rise to a continuing
wrongful act in the present. 755

In this situation, the unlawful act only starts when the rule which this act violates is

applicable.

As regards a composite act, the ILC Commentaries state the following:

“In cases where the relevant obligation did not exist at the beginning of the course
of conduct but came into being thereafter, the ‘first’ of the actions or omissions of
the series for the purposes of State responsibility will be the first occurring after the
obligation came into existence.”

Paragraph I of article 15 defines the time at which a composite act ‘occurs’ as the
time at which the last action or omission occurs ...”

In this situation, the unlawful composite act is composed of aggregated acts and
takes place at a time when the last of these acts occurs and violates (in aggregate) the

applicable rule.

 

an analysis was performed by the tribunal in Société Générale, which referred to the concept of composite
act and stated clearly that acts that are not illegal can become such by accumulation: “While normally acts
will take place at a given point in time independently of their continuing effects, and they might at that
point be wrongful or not, it is conceivable also that there might be situations in which each act considered
in isolation will not result in a breach of a treaty obligation, but if considered as a part of a series of acts
leading in the same direction they could result in a breach at the end of the process of aggregation ...”,
Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, LCIA Case No. UN7927, Award on Preliminary Objections to
Jurisdiction, 19 September 2008, § 91.

ILC Commentaries, p. 61.

ILC Commentaries, p. 64.

ILC Commentaries, pp. 63-64.

Part 2 — Page 22

2.75.

2.76.

2.77.

58
59

Application to this Case: Having here set out the relevant general principles of in-
ternational law, the Tribunal turns to the present case, as pleaded by the Claimant

and disputed by the Respondent.

The Respondent’s Submission: In summary, the Respondent submits that the rele-
vant acts alleged by the Claimant were completed before the change in the Claim-

ant’s nationality on 13 December 2007:

“In the present case, the measure at issue was exhausted when MARN did not
respond to Claimant within the 60-day time period prescribed in the law. The
presumed denial, denegacion presunta, of Claimant's application gave Claimant the
opportunity to challenge the denial of the environmental permit. On the date that the
60-day period expired, the measure and its effects were consummated. Therefore the
situation at the core of the present dispute, formed by all the acts and events
described above, ceased to exist before CAFTA entered into force. The fact that
Claimant's environmental permit was not granted is not the result of an omission
from an ongoing obligation to act by the Government arising from Claimant's 2004
application.

Indeed, Claimant could have resubmitted its application for an environmental
permit after CAFTA entered into force. This could have generated another measure
by MARN, either granting or denying the permit, which would be covered by the
Treaty. But once the Government did not respond within the time period prescribed
in the law concerning the 2004 application, and the presumed denial operated by
law, the measure of which Claimant here complains, took place for purposes of
CAFTA and the law of El Salvador. The fact that Claimant could resubmit its
application is evidence that the alleged omission by MARN to respond to Claimant's
application did not extend in time past the 60-day adjudication period, much less up
to the entry into force of the Treaty. 758

Accordingly, the Respondent contends that the relevant acts, measure, measures and
other essential facts giving rise to the Parties’ dispute all took place before 13 De-
cember 2007. The Respondent specifically alleges that: (i) with regard to the envi-
ronmental permit, MARN did not meet the time limit established under Salvadoran
law to either issue or deny the environmental permit by December 2004 (i.e. three
years before the Claimant’s change of nationality);° and (ii) with regard to the ex-
ploitation concession filed with the Bureau of Mines, once the Bureau of Mines sent
the two warning letters to the Claimant in October and December 2006 triggering

the provisions of Article 38 of the Mining Law, that application was effectively ter-

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 317-318.
Jurisdiction Memorial, § 287.

Part 2 — Page 23

2.78.

2.79.

2.80.

minated; nothing more could have been done by the Claimant after the expiration of
the 30-day extension to revive it; and, therefore, such application should be treated
as having been effectively terminated under the laws of the Respondent by January

2007 (i.e. one year before the Claimant’s change of nationality).

The Claimant’s Submission: In summary, the Claimant alleges that the relevant
measure was the de facto mining ban consisting of a practice®! of withholding min-
ing-related permits and concessions which only became public and known to the
Claimant in March 2008 (with President Saca’s speech); and which then wiped out
the value of its mining investments and nullified its legitimate expectations and other
protections under CAFTA, thereby giving rise to its present dispute with the Res-

pondent.

One-Time Acts: The Tribunal considers first whether the relevant measure or meas-
ures constitute one-time acts that were completed before the Claimant’s change of
nationality in December 2007. If this were the case, in the Tribunal’s view, it would
follow on the particular facts of this case, that the Claimant’s change of nationality
would be an abuse of process by the Claimant. However, if the relevant one-time
acts all took place after such change of nationality in or after March 2008, in the
Tribunal’s view, it would follow on the particular facts of this case, that such change
would not be an abuse of process. The Tribunal bears in mind that, in the case of
one-time completed acts, the mere fact that earlier conduct has gone un-remedied
when a treaty enters into force does not justify a tribunal applying the treaty retro-
spectively to that conduct. Any other approach would subvert both the inter-
temporal principle in the law of treaties and the basic distinction between breach and

reparation which underlies international law on State responsibility.

One factor supporting the Respondent’s analysis is the Claimant’s own early plead-
ing of its case in the Notice of Intent, where almost all the references to acts (of

which the Claimant there complains) take place before the Claimant’s change of na-

  

iction Reply, §§ 194-196; the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §§ 104-105.

Meaning: “a repeated or customary action; the usual way of doing something”: see the Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Submi:
Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11
October 2002, § 70 [Mondev v. USA].

 

ions, § 14,

Part 2 — Page 24

2.81.

tionality. For example, there are references to earlier events “in late 2005” (§ 18),
“()n March 2004 (§ 19), “in September 2004’ (§ 19), “on August 2004” (§ 20), “(in
December 2004 (§ 20), “(b)etween March 2004 and December 2006” (§ 22), “in
December 2006” (§ 22), “in December 2006” (§ 23), “(in September 2005” (§ 25),
“on November 9, 2006 (§ 27), “(s)ince the end of 2006 (§ 29), “in or about January
2007” (§ 29), “in 2007” (§ 30), “in 2007” (§ 33), and “other industries ... have re-
ceived environmental permits during the same time-frame that the Enterprises’ ap-
plications have been pending.” (§ 35). The factual narrative pleaded in the Claim-
ant’s Notice of Arbitration concerning the El Dorado concession™ also focuses pri-
marily on events before December 2007, whilst also expressing strong criticism of
President Saca’s speech in 2008. Although the Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s sub-
sequent explanation of these events as not being relevant measures, these remain al-

leged facts pre-dating the Claimant’s change of nationality.

Was the Claimant therefore aware from these facts of an actual or impending dispute
with the Respondent before its change of nationality on 13 December 2007, as the
Respondent contends? Again, it is necessary to turn to several passages in the

Claimant’s own pleading in the Notice of Intent:

“Since the end of 2006, when indications arose that MARN was intent on delaying
the Enterprises’ activities, it has become increasingly apparent that these delay tac-
tics were designed and implemented by the Government with the unlawful, discrimi-
natory, and politically motivated aim of preventing their operations altogether.

In addition to articulate the foregoing position, MARN also informed the Enterprises
in 2007 that, prior to the Ministry granting any environmental permits, MARN
would need to conduct a “country-wide strategic environmental study ... nod

. representatives of the companies participated in both public and private
meetings with various members of the Government throughout the year [this is a
reference to the year 2007], during which they objected to the Government's
newfound positions ..."°

“The Government’s nascent opposition to the Enterprises’ operations was first
manifested by MARN in late 2005, when it began delaying its responses to their ap-
plications for environmental permits without explanation. Soon thereafter, it began

A similar analysis can be made for the Exploration Licenses for Pueblos, Guaco, and Huacuco.
Notice of Intent, § 29.
Notice of Intent, § 31.

Part 2 — Page 25

2.82.

2.83.

2.84.

to arbitrarily change or add new requirements to the established legal process for
obtaining such permits. "6

From these early pleadings, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant was here alleg-
ing a known opposition to its interests by the Salvadoran Government by 2005; and
it had already objected to the conduct of the Salvadoran authorities as to the non-
granting of new mining permits by 2007, before its change of nationality one year
later. If the matter rested there, the Tribunal would be minded to accept the submis-
sions of the Respondent; but for the Claimant’s subsequent clarification of its

pleaded case.

The Tribunal has taken particular note of the Claimant’s belief that it received indi-
cations from the Salvadoran authorities, to the effect that the different permits and
authorisations could yet be granted to its Enterprises. According to the Claimant,
even if there were theoretical legal circumstances under which a government agen-
cy’s failure to meet a statutory deadline could give rise to a dispute between an in-
vestor and the Respondent, the conduct in this particular case of MARN, the Bureau
of Mines and other government officials led the Claimant reasonably to understand
that even though deadlines had been missed by these authorities, PRES’s applica-
tions for a permit and a concession remained under consideration by the Salvadoran
authorities.” Therefore, so the Claimant contends, having induced it to understand
that despite the missed deadlines in 2004 or 2007 there was no dispute between the
Parties, the Respondent is now effectively precluded, as a matter of law, from here
arguing that the missed deadlines triggered the present dispute between the Claimant

and the Respondent before December 2007.%

The Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s submissions. It also notes that, even after
March 2008, there were discussions between the Claimant and the Salvadoran au-
thorities. In the Notice of Intent, it was specifically pleaded that: “(i)n 2008, Presi-
dent Elias Antonio Saca was reported as having publicly stated that he opposed the
granting of any outstanding mining permits. In light of President Saca’s comments

and the Government’s actions and inactions, the Enterprises engaged in several

Notice of Intent, § 18.
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, ss 93-127.
Jurisdiction Rejoinder, §§ 268-276; Hearing Day 1.223-225.

Part 2 — Page 26

2.85.

meetings with the Government in 2008 seeking approval of the necessary permits.”

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the alleged omission to grant a permit and
concession was not completely finalised before 13 December 2007, because even at
that time there still seemed to be a reasonable possibility, as understood by the
Claimant, to receive such permit and concession notwithstanding the passage of

time.

In conclusion, taking stock of all the evidential materials adduced before the Tribu-
nal and the several submissions from both the Claimant and the Respondent, the Tri-
bunal concludes that: (i) before 13 December 2007, the Claimant was aware of diffi-
culties in obtaining the permit and concession; (ii) discussions with Salvadoran au-
thorities to resolve those difficulties extended at least until mid-2008, after President
Saca’s speech; (iii) exchanges between the Claimant and the Salvadoran authorities,
involving the latter’s request for further information after the legal date which (as
the Respondent alleges) constituted the legal termination of administrative proceed-
ings,” suggest that the door was not closed to the Claimant before 13 December
2007; and (iv) the fact that, differing from other similar requests,”! no formal deci-
sion was taken by the Respondent terminating such proceedings likewise suggests
that these proceedings were still live at the beginning of 2008.7" In addition, as al-
ready explained by this Tribunal, the Claimant has unequivocally pleaded later in
these proceedings (after the Notice of Arbitration but at least from its Counter-
Memorial onwards) that the relevant measure does not comprise one or more of the
individual acts taken by MARN and MINEC, but the alleged de facto ban or practice
by the Respondent that was not made public before the Claimant’s change of nation-

ality on 13 December 2007.

Notice of Intent, § 32.

See the letter from MINEC to PRES dated 4 December 2006, and the letter from MARN to PRES issued
exactly two years after (4 December 2008), evidencing in both cases that at the time of such letters the
proceedings were still not terminated.

See the Tribunal’s question at the Hearing (D3.559, lines 7/22 and 560, line 1) and the Respondent’s
answer (at D3.614, lines 13/22), referring to the fact that besides Pacific Rim Mining Corp there was only
one other Exploitation Concession Application (of another company whose name counsel at that time did
not know), which was filed in 2005 and rejected by the Ministry of Economy in 2006. See also the
references made in s§ 62 and 64 of the Commerce Group award indicating that in other cases MARN and
the Ministry of Economy terminated environmental permits and denied the extension of licenses
applications.

See Mr Shrake’s Witness Statement, gs 101, 118, 119 and 120. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent did
not produce any evidence (by means of witness statements or otherwise) expressly contradicting the
existence and content of the conversations and meetings adduced by the Claimant.

Part 2 — Page 27

2.86.

2.87.

2.88.

2.89.

Accordingly, treating the relevant measure pleaded by the Claimant as an alleged
practice constituting a one-off act under international law, the Tribunal could con-
sider that the Parties’ dispute arose in March 2008, at the earliest. On this analysis,
therefore, the Tribunal would not consider that the relevant measure alleged by the
Claimant comprised one or more one-time acts completed before the Claimant’s
change of nationality on 13 December 2007. However, it is impossible for the Tri-
bunal to characterise this alleged practice, necessarily comprising several acts and

omissions, as a one-off act; and the Tribunal here declines to do so.

Composite Act: As already described above, the Claimant pleaded its relevant meas-
ure as a composite act. The Tribunal considers that the existence of the de facto ban
or practice, as alleged by the Claimant, necessarily extends both before and after the
Claimant’s change of nationality in December 2007; and, therefore, the Tribunal is
next required to analyse whether the alleged ban could be a composite act under in-
ternational law. If the Tribunal were to determine that the ban was a composite act,
only the component acts which occurred after the Claimant’s change of nationality
on 13 December 2007 could be treated by the Tribunal as possibly engaging the re-
sponsibility of the Respondent under CAFTA.

As no relevant act was pleaded by the Claimant occurring after the change of nation-
ality that could be a component part of the alleged practice only publicly disclosed in
March 2008, it is impossible, in the Tribunal’s view, to characterise the ban as a dif-
ferent legal animal from the several acts that comprise it, i.e. as a composite act.
That ban was described by the Claimant as: “(t)he practice of the Government not to
grant any metallic mining application” derived from the facts that the Government
did not grant environmental permits to DOREX and did not grant a concession ex-
ploitation to PRES, which occurred before the Claimant’s change of nationality in
December 2007. These are similar acts the aggregation of which does not produce a
different composite act under international law. The Tribunal therefore rejects the de

facto ban, as pleaded by the Claimant, as a composite act.

Continuous Act: Can the alleged practice be characterised as a continuous act, as

also pleaded by the Claimant? If the Tribunal were to determine that there was a

Part 2 — Page 28

2.90.

2.91.

2.92.

B

continuous act in this case, only that portion of the continuous act taking place after
the change of nationality on 13 December 2007 could be considered by the Tribunal
for the purpose of engaging possible responsibility by the Respondent under
CAFTA.

As regards this question, the Claimant explained that:

“.. (while the ban may have come into existence at some earlier point in time, it
continued to exist after Pac Rim Cayman acquired its U.S. nationality in December
2007, which is when CAFTA became applicable to measures relating to Pac Rim
Cayman.”

The Tribunal also bears in mind that the Claimant pleads that the alleged unlawful
practice by the Respondent is a negative practice not to grant any mining applica-
tion, i.e. it allegedly comprises omissions to act and not positive acts; and that, con-
sequently, it is difficult to give a precise date for such omissions (compared to a spe-
cific positive act). Once an act takes place, it affects the parties’ legal position; but,
in contrast, an omission to act does not necessarily affect the parties as long as it is
not definitive; and an omission can remain non-definitive throughout a period during
which it could be cured by a positive act. As determined above by the Tribunal, al-
though there were deadlines fixed under Salvadoran law for the granting of the per-
mits and the concession, the Claimant understood that the Salvadoran authorities
themselves did not treat these deadlines as definitive deadlines after which permits

or concessions could no longer be granted to the Claimant at all.

In the Tribunal’s view, on the particular facts of this case as pleaded by the Claim-
ant, an omission that extends over a period of time and which, to the reasonable un-
derstanding of the relevant party, did not seem definitive should be considered as a
continuous act under international law. The legal nature of the omission did not
change over time: the permits and the concession remained non-granted. The con-
troversy began with a problem over the non-granting of the permits and concession;
and it remained a controversy over a practice of not granting the mining permits and

concession.

The Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 4.

Part 2 — Page 29

2.93.

2.94.

2.95.

The Tribunal notes that this same general approach was adopted for the omission to
pay a debt (which omission lasts as long as the debt remains unpaid) in SGS v. Phil-
ippines, where the tribunal decided that: “... the failure to pay sums due under a con-
tract is an example of a continuing breach.”” A similar analysis was made by the

tribunal in African Holding:

“The Tribunal concludes in this regard that the nature of the dispute concerned the
fact that the work had been performed under a contract and that their cost had not
been paid during a lengthy period of more than fifteen years. That the DRC officially
refused to pay or kept silent is unimportant for the nature of the dispute. The fact is
that the DRC defaulted in its obligations under the terms of the contract, to which is
therefore attached a situation of non-performance envisaged by Article 7.1.1 of the
UNIDROIT Principles. Under this same article, non-performance includes defective
or late performance. Moreover, the fact that the DRC offered to renegotiate the
debts and to pay only a fraction of their value cannot be considered the same as an
official refusal. Even if the DRC had agreed to pay, and did not in fact pay, the
nature of the dispute would still remain the same: before as well as after the critical
date, the amount for the work performed was not paid.”

Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that the alleged de facto ban should be consid-
ered as a continuing act under international law, which: (i) started at a certain mo-
ment of time after the Claimant’s request for environmental permits and an exploita-
tion concession but before the Claimant’s change of nationality in December 2007
and (ii) continued after December 2007, being publicly acknowledged by President’s
Saca speech in March 2008; or, in other words, that the alleged practice continued

after the Claimant’s change of nationality on 13 December 2007.

Legal Consequences: What then are the legal consequences of the existence of an

alleged continuous act overlapping the Claimant’s change of nationality? This ques-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, § 167.

African Holding Company of America, Inc. and Société Africaine de Construction au Congo S.A.R.L. v.
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No ARB/05/21, Sentence sur les déclinatoires de
compétence et la recevabilité, 29 July 2008. French original: “Le Tribunal conclut a cet égard que la nature
du différend concerne le fait que des travaux ont été exécutés sous contrat et que leur cofit n’a pas été réglé
pendant une longue période de plus de quinze ans. Que la RDC ait officiellement refusé de payer ou ait
gardé le silence, est sans importance pour la nature du différend. Le fait est que la RDC a manqué a ses
obligations aux termes du contrat, ce qui se rattache donc a une situation d’inexécution envisagée
Varticle 7.1.1 des Principes d’UNIDROIT. Aux termes de ce méme article, l’inexécution comprend
V’exécution défectueuse ou tardive. En outre, le fait que la RDC offrait de renégocier les créances et de ne
payer qu’une fraction de leur valeur ne peut pas étre assimilé & un refus officiel. Méme si la RDC avait
accepté de payer, et n’a en fait pas payé, la nature du différend serait toujours restée la méme: avant
comme aprés la date critique : le montant des travaux exécutés n’a pas été réglé.”

    

Part 2 — Page 30

2.96.

2.97.

2.98.

2.99.

n

tion touches not only upon the Abuse of Process issue, but also the Ratione Tempo-
ris issue; and it is here helpful to address these issues together to contrast their dif-

ferences.

Abuse of Process: The Tribunal first considers the point in time when a change of
nationality can become an abuse of process. Several different answers were sug-
gested by the Parties as the crucial dividing-line: (i) where facts at the root of a later
dispute have already taken place and that future dispute is foreseen or reasonably
foreseeable; (ii) where facts have taken place giving rise to an actual dispute; and
(iii) where facts have taken place giving rise to an actual dispute referable under the

parties’ relevant arbitration agreement.

The Tribunal starts with the last of these three suggested answers, as submitted by

the Claimant during the Hearing:

“\.. the temporal determination for abuse of process purposes must be made on the
basis of evaluating what concrete acts were taken by the Party asserting jurisdiction
to invoke the instrument on which it intends to base its consent and under which it
intends to assert its claims.”

The Respondent contested this dividing-line as far too late and also as an absurd
logical impossibility:

“As El Salvador indicated at the hearing, under this standard there could never be
abuse of process for change of nationality because the jurisdictional instrument
relied on by a claimant committing an abuse cannot be invoked until after the
putative claimant changes nationality. This guarantees that the moment of the

‘temporal determination’ would always be after the change of nationality and the
change could thus never be abusive.”

The Tribunal accepts the force of the Respondent’s submission; and it therefore re-
jects this third suggested answer. As far as the two other suggested answers are con-
cerned, the Tribunal considers that they can be examined together for the purpose of
this case. In the Tribunal’s view, the dividing-line occurs when the relevant party

can see an actual dispute or can foresee a specific future dispute as a very high prob-

Hearing D3.744.
The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 46.

Part 2 — Page 31

2.100.

2.101.

2.102.

The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Subm
The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submiss

ability and not merely as a possible controversy. In the Tribunal’s view, before that
dividing-line is reached, there will be ordinarily no abuse of process; but after that
dividing-line is passed, there ordinarily will be. The answer in each case will, how-
ever, depend upon its particular facts and circumstances, as in this case. As already
indicated above, the Tribunal is here more concerned with substance than semantics;
and it recognises that, as a matter of practical reality, this dividing-line will rarely be

a thin red line, but will include a significant grey area.

To this extent, the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s general submission that: “... it
is clearly an abuse for an investor to manipulate the nationality of a shell company
subsidiary to gain jurisdiction under an international treaty at a time when the inves-
tor is aware that events have occurred that negatively affect its investment and may
lead to arbitration.””* In particular, abuse of process must preclude unacceptable
manipulations by a claimant acting in bad faith and fully aware of an existing or fu-

ture dispute, as also submitted by the Respondent:

“.. In addition, the investor has substantial control over the stages of the
development of the dispute [as described in Maffezini]. Because it is the investor
who must express disagreement with a government action or omission and the
investor who must formulate legal claims, the investor may delay the development of
the dispute into these later stages until it has completed the manipulative change of
nationality. Relying on this test would permit an investor that is fully aware of a
dispute to create access to jurisdiction under a treaty to which it was not entitled at
the time of the actions affecting the investment, and at the same time provide no
protection to the State from this abusive behaviour. "9

Ratione Temporis: The Tribunal considers that this approach as regards the Abuse
of Process issue is materially different from the approach applicable to the Ratione
Temporis issue, where both Parties relied on the general principle of non-

retroactivity for the interpretation and application of international treaties.

The Claimant submitted as follows in its Post-Hearing Submissions: “Whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione temporis depends on whether the measure at issue is

an act or fact that took place or a situation that continued to exist after CAFTA be-

 

  

ns, § 49. Emphasis by the Respondent.
ions, § 50.

Part 2 — Page 32

2.103.

2.104.

came applicable to Claimant.”*° The Respondent shared this analysis, here cited (for
example) from its Jurisdiction Reply: “The relevant issue [for jurisdiction ratione
temporis] is the date on which the measure, act, or fact that constitutes the alleged
breach took place.”*! There is here no reference to a claimant’s knowledge or

awareness of an alleged breach or present or future dispute.

The general principle of non-retroactivity in the law of international treaties, unless
there is a specific indication to the contrary, is well established. This principle is
embodied in CAFTA’s Article 10.1 (cited in the Annex to Part 1 above). It is codi-
fied in Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which provides:
“Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, its
provisions do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or any
situation which ceased to exist before the date of the entry into force of the treaty
with respect to that party.” In its 1966 Commentaries to the Draft Articles of the
Law of Treaties, the International Law Commission stated: “There is nothing to pre-
vent the parties from giving a treaty, or some of its provisions, retroactive effect if
they think fit. It is essentially a question of their intention. The general rule however
is that a treaty is not to be treated as intended to have retroactive effects unless such
an intention is expressed in the treaty or was clearly to be implied from its terms.”*?
It would be possible to add to these legal materials; but it is unnecessary to do so

given that this general principle is not materially disputed by the Parties.

Where there is an alleged practice characterised as a continuous act (as determined
above by the Tribunal) which began before 13 December 2007 and continued there-
after, this Tribunal would have jurisdiction ratione temporis over that portion of the
continuous act that lasted after that date, regardless of events or knowledge by the
Claimant before 13 December 2007. The Tribunal concludes that this solution is dif-
ferent from that reached in its analysis of the Abuse of Process issue, as here ex-

plained.

The Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 8.
Jurisdiction Reply, § 191.
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1966, Vol. II, p. 211.

Part 2 — Page 33

2.105.

2.106.

2.107.

Having reached these several conclusions, the Tribunal turns to the question
whether, as regards the Ratione Temporis issue, all factual materials before 13 De-
cember 2007 are irrelevant to the Claimant’s pleaded case in regard to the alleged
practice as a continuous act causing injury from March 2008 only? The Tribunal
considers that such materials could still be received as evidence of the factual back-
ground to the Parties’ dispute, as was stated in Mondev (when discussing substantive
standards under NAFTA Chapter 11):

*.. events or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the respondent
State may be relevant in determining whether the State has subsequently committed

a breach of the obligation. But it must still be possible to point to conduct of the
State after that date which is itself a breach. 783

 

As in Mondev, the Tribunal determines that it could remain appropriate for the
Claimant to point to the conduct of the Respondent before 13 December 2007. This
same approach was adopted by the MCI tribunal, which did not dismiss acts and
omissions completed before the treaty’s entry into force as irrelevant. It decided that
such acts and omissions may be considered: “for purposes of understanding the
background, the causes, or scope of violations of the BIT that occurred after its entry

into force.”**

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that for jurisdiction to exist under CAFTA in the
present case ratione temporis, there must be a dispute between the Parties after the
application of CAFTA to the Claimant consequent upon its change of nationality on
13 December 2007, based on a continuous act or measure that existed after such

date.

In the Tribunal’s view, the relevant date for deciding upon the Abuse of Process is-
sue must necessarily be earlier in time than the date for deciding the Ratione Tempo-
ris issue. Where the alleged practice is a continuous act (as concluded above by the
Tribunal), this means that the practice started before the Claimant’s change of na-

tionality and continued after such change. This analysis would found the basis of the

Mondev v. USA, supra note 62, § 69.
M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6,

Award, 31 July 2007, § 62.

Part 2 — Page 34

Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis under CAFTA; but it would preclude the ex-
ercise of such jurisdiction on the basis of abuse of process if the Claimant had
changed its nationality during that continuous practice knowing of an actual or spe-
cific future dispute, thus manipulating the process under CAFTA and the ICSID

Convention in bad faith to gain unwarranted access to international arbitration.

2.108. At this point, it is necessary to return again to the Claimant’s pleading at the Hear-

ing, to the effect that it was only claiming compensation for the period from March

2008 onwards, in the words of its counsel:

“\.. let me be very clear: with respect to our claim for damages, we are only asking
for damages as a result of the breach that we became aware of and that we only
could have become aware of in — as of March 2008 at the earliest ...

... let me just emphasize in response to the Tribunal's question as to whether the
measure at issue is the same for the CAFTA claims and the Investment Law claims,
it is. In both cases the measure at issue is the de facto mining ban. Also, as I said
earlier, in both cases, Claimant is alleging damages only from the period from
March 2008 forward and not from any earlier period. 85

2.109. As unequivocally explained at the Hearing on several occasions, the Claimant’s al-

(08)

2.11

85

leged measure, the de facto ban forming the legal and factual basis pleaded for its
CAFTA claims, must be understood by the Tribunal as a continuous act relevant for
the Claimant’s claims for compensation from March 2008 onwards (not before);
that, as such, it became known to the Claimant only from the public report of Presi-
dent Saca’s speech on 11 March 2008; and that, also as such, it was not known to or
foreseen by the Claimant before 13 December 2007 as an actual or specific future

dispute with the Respondent under CAFTA.

Decisions

0. For these reasons, in the circumstances of the present case, taking into particular
consideration the Claimant’s claims as finally pleaded and explained to this Tribu-
nal, the Tribunal determines that the change in the Claimant’s nationality on 13 De-
cember 2007, on all the evidential materials adduced by the Parties in these proceed-

ings, is not proven to have been an abuse of process precluding the exercise of the

Hearing D3. 719 & 729 (see also D3.701).

Part 2 — Page 35

Tribunal’s jurisdiction to determine such claims under CAFTA and the ICSID Con-
vention; and the Tribunal therefore rejects the Respondent’s case on the Abuse of

Process issue.

2.111. This determination, together with the Tribunal’s determination of the Denial of
Benefits issue later in Part 4 of this Decision, renders it unnecessary for the Tribunal
to address other factors raised by the Parties in regard to the Abuse of Process issue.
It should not be assumed from its silence here that, if relevant, the Tribunal was
minded to decide any of these further factors one way or another. However, the Tri-
bunal considers that the Abuse of Process issue does not apply to the Claimant’s
claims under the Investment Law which are not made under CAFTA and made with

an independent right to invoke ICSID Arbitration.

Part 2 — Page 36

(01)

3.1.

3.2.

(02)

3.3.

3.4.

PART 3: ISSUE B - RATIONE TEMPORIS

Introduction

This Ratione Temporis issue under CAFTA formed a relatively limited part of the
jurisdictional debate between the Parties; it has already been addressed in material
part by the Tribunal in Part 2 above (in regard to the Abuse of Process issue); and, as
appears later in this Decision, it is not decisive of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in re-
gard to the Claimant’s CAFTA claims. In these circumstances, the Tribunal ad-

dresses this issue shortly, again as a matter of courtesy to the Parties.

It is nonetheless necessary to summarise the Parties’ respective submissions on this
issue, which, to a significant extent, mirrors certain of their submissions made on the
Abuse of Process issue. The summaries below therefore inevitably duplicate earlier

submissions in Part 2 of this Decision, which the Tribunal has there already decided.

The Respondent’s Case

As an alternative and subsidiary objection to its case on the Abuse of Process and
Denial of Benefits issues, the Respondent contended that this Tribunal lacks jurisdic-
tion ratione temporis due to the fact, principally, that the Claimant’s change of na-
tionality on 13 December 2007 occurred after the relevant measure or measures

leading to the Parties’ present dispute.*°

In summary, the Respondent submits that in order to be considered as an investor
under CAFTA Article 10.28, an enterprise has first to be a national or an enterprise
of a Party, and as such the enterprise has to attempt to make, be making or have
made an investment in the territory of another Party. As the Claimant became an en-
terprise of a Party only on 13 December 2007, all transactions in which it may have

been involved before that date were not made as an investor under CAFTA.*”

 

iction Memorial, § 8; Hearing D1.107; and the Respondent’s Post-Hearings Submissions, § 102.
Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 256-257; Hearing D1.107-111.

Part 3 - Page 1

3.5.

3.6.

3.7.

The Respondent also submits that the provisions of CAFTA Chapter 10, including
the dispute settlement provisions, can only apply after CAFTA entered into force for
the USA and the Respondent on 1 March 2006; and as the Claimant did not become
a national of the USA until 13 December 2007, CAFTA protections and benefits

could only have been available to the Claimant after 13 December 2007.88

As a result of these undisputed facts, the Respondent concludes that: (i) CAFTA
could only cover investments made by the Claimant as a covered investor after 13
December 2007; and that there were no such investments;*” (ii) the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over disputes based on any relevant measure that took place before 13
December 2007; and all relevant measures took place before 13 December 2007;
and, in any case, (iii) CAFTA imposes a three-year time limit to bring CAFTA
claims that should be counted from the time the Claimant knew or should have
known of the alleged breach and that damage had occurred caused by such breach;
and these CAFTA proceedings began after the expiry of that limitation period: the
Respondent submits that, taking 2004 as the commencement date (the expiration of
environmental permit statutorily mandated period) or 1 March 2006 (when CAFTA
entered into force), the Claimant did not file its Notice of Arbitration within three

years of either of those commencement dates.”!

The Respondent alleges that, when considering its jurisdiction ratione temporis the
Tribunal is not impeded from looking at factual events that took place before the
Claimant’s change of nationality, but its jurisdiction must depend upon the existence
of a relevant measure that took place after 13 December 2007 and which also consti-
tuted a breach of the Respondent’s obligations towards the Claimant under CAFTA.
According to the Respondent, if this breach date occurred prior to the acquisition of

CAFTA nationality by the Claimant, it necessarily follows that there can be no juris-

  

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 264-274 and 297-304, §185; Hearing D1.111-114; Respondent’s Post-Hearings
ions, § 102.
iction Memorial, §§ 260-263; Reply Memorial, § 186.

ction Memorial, §§ 275-279; Reply Memorial, § 187. Respondent’s Post-Hearings Submissions, §

   

109.
Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 324-336; Reply Memorial, § 188; Respondent’s Post-Hearings Submissions, §
112.

Part 3 - Page 2

3.8.

3.9.

3.10.

diction for the Tribunal to decide the merits of the Claimant’s claims under CAF-

TA”?

The Respondent submits that the relevant measure giving rise to the Parties’ dispute
took place before 13 December 2007. It alleges that: (i) with regard to the environ-
mental permit, MARN did not meet the time-limit established under Salvadoran law
to either issue or deny the environmental permit by December 2004,°% and (ii) with
regard to the application for the exploitation concession filed with the Bureau of
Mines, once the Bureau of Mines sent the two warning letters to PRES in October
and December 2006 triggering the provisions of Article 38 of the Mining Law, the
application was effectively terminated; and nothing more could have been done after
the expiration of the 30-day extension thereby granted to revive its application.
Therefore, according to the Respondent, the application should be treated as having

been effectively terminated by January 2007.4

With respect to the requirement to submit evidence of ownership or authorisation to
use the surface area of the concession, the Respondent contends that it did not have
any legal duty or obligation to change its laws in favour of the Claimant’s applica-
tion and, therefore, that there was no breach of CAFTA or any other legal obligation
towards the Claimant. In any case, all the attempts to change the law in order to ac-
commodate the Claimant’s interests took place in 2005 and 2006, followed by Clai-

mant’s attempt to procure a new law in 2007.°°

Concerning the Claimant’s allegation that the relevant measure is a de facto ban
occurring in March 2008 with President Saca’s speech or constitutes a continuing or
composite act that was only apparent to the Claimant from that speech in March
2008, the Respondent submits that press reports of President Saca’s statements does
not constitute a measure”® and that not issuing the environmental permit and not
granting the concession application are not the result of several omissions or a con-

tinued omission by the Respondent; nor can these constitute a composite act be-

Reply Memorial, § 191; Respondent’s Post-Hearings Submissions, § 103.
Jurisdiction Memorial, § 287.

Reply Memorial, §§ 194-196; Respondent’s Post-Hearings Submissions, §§ 104-105.
Reply Memorial, § 197.

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 321-323.

Part 3 - Page 3

3.11.

3.12.

3.13.

3.14.

cause there was only one application for an environmental permit and only one
omission to issue it (which occurred in December 2004) and only one application for

an exploitation concession that was effectively terminated by January 2007.”

In addition, the Respondent contends that such statements by the Respondent were
not new. Press reports in July 2006 and June 2007 contained similar concerns ex-
pressed by the Respondent’s Ministers of Environment Barrera and Guerrero with
respect to mining and possible changes to existing legislation for exploitation con-

cessions, respectively.”

Moreover, according to the Respondent, the Claimant has failed to identify the date
of the relevant measure at issue. Instead, it has identified only when it allegedly “be-
came aware” of the relevant measure; and this insufficient response cannot assist the
Claimant’s argument that there is a relevant measure covered by CAFTA that oc-
curred after the Claimant’s change of nationality, over which CAFTA could apply
and by which this Tribunal could assert jurisdiction over the Claimant’s CAFTA

claims. The Respondent concludes that there is no such relevant measure.”

The Respondent submits that the loss of value in Pac Rim’s stock was not caused by
the press reports regarding President Saca’s statement, but co-incided with the
worldwide decline in stock values in 2008 and mirrored the significant drop in the
values of other gold stocks.'° The reason why this Canadian parent company’s
stock price never recovered was because it suspended drilling activities and began to

make work-force reductions in El Salvador.'°!

The Respondent submits that the present case should be distinguished from other
cases, such as RDC v. Guatemala, because in that case there was an executive act af-
fecting the investment after CAFTA entered into force. The Respondent also con-
tends that although a “practice” could be considered a measure, the timing of that

measure must depend on the specific acts that are alleged to form part of that “prac-

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 305-319; Reply Memorial, § 201; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §

106.

Reply Memorial, §§ 205-206, citing R-120 and R-121.

Hearing, D3.709-719; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 105.
Reply Memorial, §§ 209-210; Hearing D1.115.

Hearing D1.116-117; and the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 20.

Part 3 - Page 4

3.15.

3.16.

3.17.

102
103
104

105

tice.” In the present case, according to the Respondent, such acts took place in 2004

and were in any event completed by January 2007.1

With respect to the Claimant’s allegation that exchanges before December 2007
between MARN and MINEC and the Claimant evidenced a “mere disagreement”
and not a dispute for the purpose of CAFTA, the Respondent submits that the defini-
tion of a dispute set forth by the Permanent Court of International Justice in Ma-
vrommatis Palestine Concessions (adopted by ICSID tribunals) defines a dispute as
a “disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests be-
tween two persons.” As such a disagreement existed between 2004 and 2006 before
the Respondent’s accession to CAFTA, the Claimant’s contrary case should be re-

jected by the Tribunal.'%

As regards CAFTA’s limitation period, CAFTA Article 10.18.1 limits consent to
submit a claim to arbitration to three years from the date when the claimant first ac-
quired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach of CAFTA
and that the claimant or the enterprise had thereby incurred loss or damage. The
Respondent submits that the evidential materials before this Tribunal demonstrate
that the Claimant knew in December 2004 that the environmental permit was not is-
sued within the time-limit fixed by Salvadoran law; and that, even on the argument
that the three-year term could only count from the date CAFTA entered into force
for the Respondent (on 1 March 2006), the Claimant did not file its Notice of Arbi-

tration until 30 April 2009, after CAFTA’s three-year time limit had expired.'°

Lastly, the Respondent relies on the award dated 14 March 2011 in Commerce
Group,'°* whereby, according to the Respondent, that tribunal considered the same

factual allegations advanced by the Claimant in this case and decided that the al-

Reply Memorial, §§ 213-216.

Reply Memorial, § 218.

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 324-336; Reply Memorial, §§ 220-223; Hearing D1.117-119; Respondent's
Post-Hearings Submis
Commerce Group Corp. and San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/17, Award, 14 March 2011 [Commerce v. El Salvador].

 

ions, § 112.

Part 3 - Page 5.

(03)

3.18.

3.19.

3.20.

106

107

108

leged de facto ban on mining was not a relevant measure for the purposes of CAF-

TA, 10
The Claimant’s Case

In summary, the Claimant submits that Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione temporis under CAFTA should fail on two principal grounds: (i)
that nothing in CAFTA requires an investor first to attain the status of “person of a
Party” and only afterwards make its investment in the territory of another Party; and
(ii) that the measure at issue is not MARN’‘s failure to grant an environmental permit
to PRES within the required time period in 2004, but the Respondent’s de facto min-
ing ban consisting of the practice of the Respondent to withhold permits and conces-
sions in furtherance of the exploitation of metallic mining investments, which was
only publicly disclosed in President Saca’s speech in March 2008, after the Clai-

mant’s change of nationality in December 2007.1”

As regards the first ground, the Claimant submits that CAFTA Article 10.28 clearly
establishes that the order of operations, whether investments were made before ac-
quiring the nationality of a Party or otherwise, is not determinative of whether a per-

son is a covered investor of a Party under CAFTA.'®

As regards the second ground with respect to the relevant date, the Claimant submits
that the Parties’ dispute arose only when the Claimant first became aware of the re-
levant measure that constituted a breach of the Respondent’s CAFTA obligations
towards the Claimant, causing damage to its investments in El Salvador. The Clai-
mant submits that it neither became nor could have become aware of the relevant
measure (in the form of the de facto ban on mining) before 13 March 2008 when
President Saca publicly disclosed the existence of this ban. In the Claimant’s own

words: “it is the ban, as first publicly confirmed by El Salvador’s chief executive in

Commerce v. El Salvador, supra note 105, § 112. See the Respondent's letter dated 17 March 2011; and

the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 38.

Jurisdiction Rejoinder, §§ 226-227; Hearing D1.134-138 and 215; Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §
20.

Jurisdiction Rejoinder, §§ 228-229.

Part 3 - Page 6

3.21.

3.22.

3.23.

3.24.

109

110
11

March 2008, that wiped out the prospect of Claimant being able to derive value from

its investments, thus rendering those investments worthless.”

In the Claimant’s submission, although the delays and irregularities by the Respon-
dent in the application of Salvadoran law provide valuable historical context for un-
derstanding the Respondent’s CAFTA breaches and constitute further evidence and
factual bases for the Claimant’s claims under CAFTA, they do not in themselves
constitute the relevant measure alleged by the Claimant to have breached the Res-

pondent’s CAFTA. obligations.'!°

For the Claimant, the acts and omissions of the Respondent occurring prior to 2008
are not the measures at issue in this arbitration. Rather, they were only individual in-
stances where MARN or MINEC failed to issue permits or concessions in a timely
manner which may have caused delay, but which did not, in contrast to the de facto
mining ban, wipe out the value of the Claimant’s mining investments nor nullify its

legitimate expectations under CAFTA, giving rise to the present dispute.

According to the Claimant, “prior to the ban’s coming to light, the frustration of
individual acts or omissions causing delay was dissipated by statements and acts of
Government officials consistent with steady (albeit slow) progress towards the goal
of being able to extract the minerals PRES and DOREX had discovered during the

exploration phase of the investment.”"!!

In the Claimant’s submission, there was in place in El Salvador a practice of with-
holding mining-related permits and concessions; and that such a practice — already in
existence for some indeterminate period of time while the Respondent was to decide
what the future of metallic mining in El Salvador was to be - was never revealed in
the laws, regulations and representations by the Government on which the Claimant

relied in making and expanding its investments in El Salvador. According to the

 

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, $195.
Jurisdiction Rejoinder, § 232.

Part 3 - Page 7

3.25.

3.26.

3.27.

112
113
114
115
116
17

 

Jurisdiction Rejoinder,
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §§ 29-31.

Jurisdiction Counter-Memoriall, § 224-244; Hearing D1.221-223.
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions § 21, citing Socié:
No. UN 7927, Award on Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction, 19 September 2008, § 87.

Claimant, it came to light only in March 2008 when President Saca publicly ac-

knowledged its existence.'!”

The Claimant contends that the de facto mining ban constitutes the breach of CAF-
TA pleaded by the Claimant; and, accordingly, the relevant date on which Claimant
first knew or should have known that the ban had been implemented by the Respon-
dent, causing loss to the Claimant, was March 2008.!'3 According to the Claimant,
the significance of President Saca’s revelation in March 2008 is illustrated by the
impact on the share price of the Claimant’s parent company (Pacific Rim), which
dropped precipitously upon the President’s announcement of the alleged de facto
mining ban and has never since recovered, a pattern materially different from other

gold stocks. 4

The Claimant contends that President Saca’s speech in March 2008 may have
marked either the actual imposition of the ban or confirmed a practice that pre-dated
his announcement. In any case, that ban, as it relates to the Claimant, is a measure
covered by CAFTA. In the first case, it would be a measure that took place both af-
ter CAFTA’s entry into force in March 2006 and the Claimant’s change of nationali-
ty in December 2007. In the second case, it would be a continuing practice that con-
tinued both after CAFTA’s entry into force and the Claimant’s change of nationality.
Moreover, in this last case, the Claimant submits that the de facto ban should be
considered as a continuing or composite measure,'! as distinct from a completed act

with continuing effects.!'®

According to the Claimant, acts and omissions that occurred before December 2007
should only be taken into account by this Tribunal “for purposes of understanding

the background, the causes or scope of the violations of CAFTA that occurred after

vll7

entry into force.

iction Rejoinder §

 

 

Générale v. Dominican Republic, LCIA Case

Part 3 - Page 8

3.28.

3.29.

3.30.

118

Ju

 

With respect to the difference between a dispute and a mere disagreement drawn by
the Respondent, the Claimant submits that, although every dispute involves a disa-
greement, it is not true that every disagreement constitutes a dispute. In the Clai-
mant’s submission, the Respondent’s case is not supported by the decision of the
Permanent Court of International Justice in the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions
case, nor is it the correct interpretation of CAFTA. According to the Claimant, for
there to be a dispute under CAFTA, there must be an allegation of a breach of an ob-
ligation under CAFTA and an allegation of loss or damage by reason of or arising

out of that breach.''*

Also according to the Claimant, even if there were some theoretical circumstances
under which a government agency’s failure to meet a statutory deadline might auto-
matically give rise to a treaty dispute between an investor and the government, the
conduct of MARN, the Bureau of Mines and other government officials led the
Claimant reasonably to understand that even though deadlines had been missed,
PRES’s applications for a permit and a concession remained under active considera-
tion by these agencies.'!? Therefore, having induced the Claimant to understand that
despite the missed deadlines in 2004 or 2007 there was no dispute, the Respondent is
now precluded, as a matter of law, from arguing that the missed deadlines triggered

the present dispute between the Claimant and the Respondent.'”°

With respect to the decision in Commerce Group, the Claimant submits that its cir-
cumstances differ significantly from this case. Whilst the Commerce Group case was
about the Respondent’s revocation of environmental permits previously granted, the
present case relates only to a de facto ban.'?! The claim in this other case was dis-
missed by the tribunal on the basis that the claimant had challenged the revocation
before the local courts and had failed to terminate such local court action, even after
it had submitted its claims to arbitration under CAFTA, in violation of its waiver ob-
ligation under CAFTA Article 10.18. That being that the principal factor for the tri-

bunal’s decision, the tribunal’s reference (in paragraph 112 of its award ) to a policy

iction Rejoinder, §§ 260-267.

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, §§ 93-127.
turisdiction Rejoinder, §§ 268-276; Hearing D1.223-225.
Hearing D1.228-234; and the Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §§ 13-15.

Part 3 - Page 9

(04)

3.31.

3.32.

3.33.

3.34.

122

that led to the revocation should be considered, according to the Claimant, as mere

obiter dicta.'””

The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions

issue

 

The Tribunal determines that the relevant questions to be addressed under this
are: (i) whether, in order to be an investor making an investment under CAFTA Ar-
ticle 10.28, an enterprise has already to be a national or an enterprise of a Party or if
such nationality can be acquired after the investment has been made; (ii) what is the
relevant measure and which date should be considered as the date of the measure for
the purpose of this issue; and (iii) the relevance to be given by the Tribunal, if any,
to the recent award in the Commerce Group arbitration. It will be noted that the
second question, in particular, has already been addressed and decided by the Tri-
bunal in Part 2 above; but it remains necessary to duplicate below the same overall

analysis.

The First Question: With regard to the first question, the Tribunal does not find in
the text, object or purpose of CAFTA any indication that, in order to qualify for pro-
tection under the treaty, CAFTA requires an investor to have a Party’s nationality

prior to making its investment.

Article 10.28 of CAFTA defines “investor of a Party” as: “... a Party or state enter-
prise thereof, or a national or an enterprise of a Party, that attempts to make, is mak-
ing, or has made an investment in the territory of another Party[.]...” In the Tribun-
al’s opinion, CAFTA Article 10.28 does not require any precise chronological order
in the fulfillment of its requirements to quality an “investor of a Party.” The Tribunal
notes the use of the past tense in regard to the making of an investment; and it also
notes that there is no linguistic impediment in an investor otherwise qualified for

protection under CAFTA having made its investment prior to such qualification.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, for the purpose of this Ratione Temporis issue, what

CAFTA requires is not that the investor should bear the nationality of one of the Par-

Hearing D1.228-234; and the Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 16.

Part 3 - Page 10

3.35.

3.36.

3.37.

3.38.

ties before its investment was made, but that such nationality should exist prior to
the alleged breach of CAFTA by the other Party. Therefore, as regards this issue in
the present case, the Tribunal is required to determine when the Parties’ dispute
arose in order to establish if the Claimant’s required nationality under CAFTA na-

tionality was present at the relevant time.

(ii) The Second Question: As already noted earlier in this decision, the Parties
strongly disagree as to what is the relevant dispute and the time when it arose.
Whilst the Respondent submits that the relevant measure giving rise to the dispute
was the failure to issue the environmental permit within the statutorily mandated ad-
judication period by December 2004 or the termination by negative silence of the
exploitation concession proceedings under Article 38 of the Mining Law in January
2007, the Claimant alleges that the relevant measure was the de facto mining ban re-
sulting from a practice of withholding mining-related permits and concessions which

only came to light, to the Claimant’s knowledge, in March 2008.'73

For the reasons given in Part 2 above, the Tribunal has determined that the relevant
dispute as regards the Claimant’s claims (as now pleaded and clarified in these pro-

ceedings) arose on 13 March 2008, at the earliest.

The Tribunal’s determination has several consequences for the Ratione Temporis
issue. First, as a matter of chronology, there is no doubt that at the time the dispute
arose in March 2008, the Claimant was a national of the USA, a CAFTA Party
(since 13 December 2007). Second, the relevant measure alleged by the Claimant
will necessarily focus on unlawful acts or omissions under CAFTA that allegedly

took place not earlier than March 2008.

Such being the Tribunal’s analysis, the debate between the Parties concerning: (i)
the measures that took place both before the Claimant changed its nationality on 13
December 2007 or before CAFTA entered into force on 1 March 2006; and (ii) the

three-year time limit under CAFTA as invoked by the Respondent become irrelevant

The Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 14.

Part 3 - Page 11

3.39.

3.40.

3.41.

124

126
127

for the purpose of deciding the Ratione Temporis issue; and it is not necessary for

the Tribunal to address their respective submissions any further here.

(iii) The Third Question: The Respondent has much relied upon the passage in the
award dated 14 March 2011 in the Commerce Group arbitration, where the tribunal
considered that: “even if the de facto mining ban policy and the revocation of the
permits could be teased apart, the Tribunal is of the view that the policy does not
constitute a ‘measure’ within the meaning of CAFTA.”'™ The ban was treated by
the tribunal as a policy of the Government, as opposed to a measure taken by it. In
contrast, the revocation of the environmental permits was treated as a measure taken
pursuant to that policy and, as noted, it was the revocation of those permits which

put an end to the claimants” mining and processing activities.

In the opinion of the Tribunal, this passage must be read in the context of that par-
ticular case, where there was at least one specific and identifiable governmental
measure that allegedly terminated the rights of the claimants.'*> That particular
measure was challenged by the claimants, both before the local courts and before the
CAFTA arbitration tribunal. The CAFTA claim was dismissed by the CAFTA tri-
bunal on the ground that the claimants should have discontinued the local proceed-
ings and, by not having done so, the claimants had infringed the waiver provision in
CAFTA Article 10.18.'7° Although the tribunal accepted that non-compliance with
this waiver provision did not formally dispose of the de facto ban claim (because
that particular of action had been not challenged before the local courts),'”” it did do

so in substance.

As it appears to the Tribunal from this award, the tribunal decided that it was not

confronted with separate and distinct claims pleaded by the claimants in that arbitra-

Commerce v. El Salvador, supra note 105, § 112.

Id., § 62, citing the Claimants’ request (“On September 13, 2006 MARN revoked the environmental
permits of the San Sebastian Gold Mine and the San Cristobal Plant and Mine, thereby effectively
terminating Claimants’ right to mine and process gold and silver”). In addition, “Commerce/Sanseb
applied to MARN for an environmental permit for the New San Sebastian Exploration Licence and the
Nueva Esparta exploration license, and then to Respondent’s Ministry of Economy for extension of the
exploration licenses. The requested environmental permits were not granted, and on 28 October 2008, El
Salvador’s Ministry of Economy denied Commerce/Sanseb’s application citing Commerce/Sanseb’s
failure to secure an environment permit”, (Id § 65).

Id. § 107.

Id. § 108.

Part 3 - Page 12

3.42.

3.43.

128
129

130

tion. Accordingly, the tribunal viewed: “the Claimants’ claim regarding the de facto
mining ban policy as part and parcel of their claim regarding the revocation of the
environmental permits.”!7* Therefore, having considered that the claim concerning
the revocation of the environmental permit was pleaded by the claimants before the
local Salvadoran courts and could not be re-pleaded under CAFTA, the tribunal
could only conclude that the same approach needed to be taken to preclude the

pleading under CAFTA of the de facto mining ban claim.

Given this Tribunal’s interpretation of the award in its context, the distinction appar-
ently drawn between the Respondent’s policies and measures in paragraph 112 of

the award can be seen as being limited to the particular claims pleaded by the clai-

mants in that particular case, as was indeed acknowledged by the tribunal.'?

In this Tribunal’s opinion, the present case differs significantly from the Commerce
Group arbitration. The relevant measure here at issue is not a specific and identifia-
ble governmental measure that effectively terminated the investor’s rights at a par-
ticular moment in time (i.e. the termination of a permit or license, denial of an appli-
cation, etc.), but, rather the alleged continuing practice of the Respondent to with-
hold permits and concessions in furtherance of the exploitation of metallic mining
investments.'*’ Moreover, no legal action against the Respondent has been filed be-
fore the local Salvadoran courts by the Claimant. Whilst it will remain for the Clai-
mant to prove its claims at the merits stage of these proceedings, the way the case

has been pleaded and clarified by the Claimant before this Tribunal indicates that the

Id. § 111.

Id. §§ 112 (“at least based on the Tribunal’s evaluation of this particular case”) and 68 (“...the Tribunal
will not address arguments that have not been raised by the Parties, as this Award is a decision only in the
dispute as pleaded between them”).

In answering the Tribunal’s question at the Hearing if “(A)s we stand today, going back in time to March
2008, has any foreign company been given an exploitation permit for underground mining, first of all as
regards any foreign company and, separately, as regards any local —that is, national- company. And if no
such and if none have been granted, either none to a foreign company or none to a local company or both,
what is the reason for that?” (page 559, lines 7/22 and 560, line 1), the Respondent answered “The truth of
the matter is that no foreign or national company received a mining exploitation concession in El Salvador
since Commerce Group was issued its last concession in August of 2003. The truth of the matter is that
since then there have only been two Exploitation Concession Applications. One was by Pacific Mining
Corp. of Canada. One was for another company whose name I do not know. That other one was filed in
2005 and was rejected by the Ministry of the Economy in 2006. Since 2005, with the exception of the
Pacific Rim Mining Corp. there simply have been no Mining Exploitation Concession Applications”.
Respondent’s answers at Hearing D3.614-615.

 

   

Part 3 - Page 13

3.44.

distinction made in the Commerce Group award, as invoked by the Respondent, is

inapplicable to this Ratione Temporis issue.

Decisions: In conclusion, as regards the Claimant’s CAFTA claims, the Tribunal
decides to reject the Respondent’s objections to its jurisdiction under this Ratione
Temporis issue. As already noted in regard to the Abuse of Process issue, however,
this is not the decisive issue in regard to the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections

to the Claimant’s CAFTA claims.

Part 3 - Page 14

(01)

Al.

4.2.

43.

PART 4: ISSUE C - DENIAL OF BENEFITS

Introduction

This third issue regarding denial of benefits arises under CAFTA Article 10.12.2,
which permits (but does not require) a CAFTA Party, subject to CAFTA Articles
18.3 and 20.4, to:

“.. deny the benefits of [Chapter 10 of CAFTA] to an investor of another Party that
is an enterprise of such other Party and to investments of that investor if the enter-
prise has no substantial business activities in the territory of any Party, other than
the denying Party and persons of a non-Party, or of the denying Party, own or con-
trol the enterprise.”

“Enterprise” is a broadly defined term under CAFTA Articles 10.28 and 2.1, mean-
ing “any entity constituted or organized under applicable law, whether or not for
profit, and whether privately-owned or governmentally-owned, including any corpo-
ration, trust, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, or other association” and
a branch of such enterprise. (The full texts of these CAFTA provisions are set out in

the Annex to Part | above).

The Tribunal was informed by the Parties that this case is the first time that an arbi-
tration tribunal has been required to address the issue of denial of benefits under

CAFTA Article 10.12.2.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal (as invited by the Parties) considered whether it
was desirable for the Tribunal to draw on past decisions by tribunals addressing pro-
visions on denial of benefits under other treaties, particularly the Energy Charter
Treaty. The Tribunal has chosen not to do so here given their different wording, con-
text and effect. (These decisions include Plama v. Bulgaria; LLC AMTO v. Ukraine
(under the Energy Charter Treaty) and Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic; Generation

Ukraine vy. Ukraine (under the USA-Ukraine BIT); and, as tangentially raised,

Part 4 - Page 1

44.

45.

(02)

4.6.

EMELEC vy. Ecuador (under the USA-Ecuador BIT) and CCL Oil v. Kazakhstan
(under the USA-Kazakhstan BIT)).

As expressly worded in CAFTA, it is significant that the “benefits” denied under
CAFTA Article 10.12.2 include all the benefits conferred upon the investor under
Chapter 10 of CAFTA, including both Section A on “Investment” and Section B on
“Investor-State Dispute Settlement.” Section B specifically includes CAFTA Article
10.16(3)(a) providing for ICSID arbitration, as here invoked by the Claimant for its
claims under CAFTA to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide those CAFTA
claims against the Respondent. This jurisdictional issue under CAFTA does not
therefore resemble the more limited issue under Article 17(1) of the Energy Charter
Treaty, although in this respect it resembles the position under Article 1113(1) of
NAFTA. The Tribunal is not aware of any decision as to denial of benefits under

NAFTA; and none was brought to its attention by the Parties.

For these reasons, the Tribunal determines that, in the present case, it must interpret
the relevant text of CAFTA by itself, in accordance with the relevant principles for
treaty interpretation under international law as codified in the Vienna Convention on

the Law of Treaties.

The Respondent’s Case

The Respondent contends that it has properly, fully and timeously denied all relevant
benefits to the Claimant under CAFTA Article 10.12.2 on 3 August 2010 (the day
after the Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010), whereby the Respondent (as a
CAFTA Party) may and did deny the benefits of CAFTA (including the provision on
dispute resolution here invoked by the Claimant) to an enterprise of another Party,
i.e. the Claimant, if “the enterprise has no substantial business activities in the terri-
tory of any Party, other than the denying Party, and persons of a non-Party, or of the

denying Party own or control the enterprise.”

Part 4 - Page 2

47.

4.8.

49.

131

This summary is
Hearing Submissions.

131
In summary,

the Respondent contends that the Claimant has never had “substan-
tial business activities” in the USA (as a CAFTA Party) and that it is and has been
owned and controlled always by persons of a non-CAFTA Party. Whereas the Re-
spondent submits that the ownership/control part of this test under CAFTA Article
10.12.2 is disjunctive, requiring either ownership or control by “persons of a non-
Party”, the Respondent asserts in this case that the Claimant is both owned and con-
trolled by Pacific Rim, a Canadian company and a legal person of a non-CAFTA
Party, which has at all relevant times wholly owned the Claimant. The Respondent
contends that these facts, effectively admitted by the Claimant during these arbitra-
tion proceedings, suffice to justify the Respondent’s denial of benefits under

CAFTA Article 10.12.2, validly made in a timely manner on 3 August 2010.

(i) Substantial Business Activities: The Respondent relies on Mr Shrake’s evidence
as factual confirmation that the Claimant had no relevant business activities in the
USA: it submits that Mr Shrake testified that the Claimant does nothing other than
hold shares; that it has no employees; that it leases no office space; that it has no
bank account [D2.445xx]; that it has no board of directors; that it pays no taxes in
the USA; that it owns no tangible property or makes anything in the USA; and that it
performs by itself no exploration activities from the USA [D2.493xxff]. The Re-
spondent submits that Mr Shrake also testified that all contributions towards the al-
leged investments in El Salvador were made not by the Claimant but by the Claim-
ant’s parent company and another company related to the Claimant’s parent com-
pany [D5.511xx]. The Respondent contends, again based on Mr Shrake’s evidence,
that the Claimant had and has no physical existence whatsoever other than its name
on certain documentation; and, thus, that it cannot possibly have (or have had) sub-

stantial business activities in the USA.

The Respondent contends that if the mere holding of shares by a claimant acting
only as a nominal holding company was a sufficient activity to defeat a denial of
benefits under CAFTA (as argued by the Claimant), then the entire purpose of
CAFTA Article 10.12.2 would be effectively eviscerated. According to the Respon-

dent, the Claimant’s case would ensure that all enterprises passively holding shares

   

  

jargely prepared from the Respondent’s oral submissions at the Hearing and its Post-

Part 4 - Page 3

4.10.

4.11.

4.12.

would qualify for treaty protections under CAFTA, thereby making CAFTA Article
10.12.2 redundant. The Respondent submits that this absurd result cannot be the cor-

rect interpretation of the relevant treaty language in CAFTA under international law.

In regard to the Claimant’s alleged investments made in El Salvador, the Respondent
refers to wire transfers coming not from the Claimant but from its Canadian parent
company (either Pacific Rim or its predecessor); Mr Shrake’s confirmation to such
effect in a press release of 3 July 2008, as also explained by Mr Shrake during his
oral testimony [D2.488xx]; and the Claimant's slender reliance upon a fragmentary
page from an unconsolidated and apparently unaudited balance sheet purporting to
show the Claimant carrying an investment in El Salvador as an “asset”. As to the lat-
ter, the Respondent submits that this entry proves nothing as to whether the Claimant
itself actually made that investment in the first place (as opposed to its Canadian
parent company); and that all it could show, at most, is that at some unidentified
time this asset was ostensibly placed on the Claimant’s books. In any event, the Re-
spondent submits that this “thinly documented indication” of apparent ownership of
an asset located in El Salvador cannot constitute substantial business activities by the

Claimant in the USA for the purposes of CAFTA Article 10.12.2.

(ii) Ownership/Control: The Respondent contends that the Claimant was both
owned and controlled by persons of a non-CAFTA Party. As to the twin contrary ar-
guments advanced by the Claimant, the Respondent contends that neither can suc-
ceed in defeating this straightforward conclusion under CAFTA, as a matter of treaty

interpretation and as a matter of undisputed or indisputable fact.

First, so the Respondent submits, the Claimant wrongly applies the plain language of
CAFTA to argue not the ownership of the Claimant, but the different ownership of
the Claimant's Canadian parent company (Pacific Rim); and second, the Claimant
wrongly asserts that because the majority of the shares in the Canadian parent are al-
legedly held by persons with postal addresses in the USA, then it must follow that
the Canadian parent company is owned by persons of a CAFTA Party (namely the
USA) and thus the Claimant, as the Canadian parent’s subsidiary, is indirectly also
owned by persons of that same CAFTA Party (the USA).

Part 4 - Page 4

4.13.

4.14.

4.15.

4.16.

As to the issue over CAFTA’s interpretation, the Respondent submits that it is le-
gally irrelevant that the Canadian company might have US-based shareholders be-
cause, regardless of who or what these shareholders might be or of their nationality,
the Claimant remains wholly owned by a person of a non-CAFTA Party for the pur-

pose of CAFTA Article 10.12.2, namely the Claimant’s Canadian parent.

As to the issue over indirect share ownership, the Respondent submits that the
Claimant has not established, as a fact, that the Canadian parent is owned by “na-
tionals” of the USA. Chapter 10 of CAFTA defines “national” as “a natural person
who has the nationality of a Party according to Annex 2.1 (Country-Specific Defini-
tions)”; CAFTA Annex 2.1 provides that, for the USA, “ ... 'a natural person who
has the nationality of a Party’ means ‘national of the United States' as defined in the
existing provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act”; and that the US statute
defines a “national of the United States” as either “(A) a citizen of the United States,
or (B) a person who, though not a citizen of the United States, owes permanent alle-
giance to the United States.” (8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(22)). CAFTA and the US statute,

so submits the Respondent, take no account of postal addresses in the USA.

The Respondent also contends that a postal address or even residence in the USA is
not the same as nationality or permanent allegiance under US law because there are
many natural and legal persons with addresses in the USA who are not nationals or

do not owe permanent allegiance to the USA.

The Respondent concludes that it would violate basic principles of treaty interpreta-
tion under international law to ignore such a carefully drafted definition in CAFTA
and instead to substitute what the Claimant acknowledges to be domestic “rules of
thumb” used by different U.S. governmental agencies for different purposes, not in-
volving a definition in a multilateral treaty subject to international law. Moreover,
even under these so-called proxies invoked by the Claimant, the Respondent con-
tends that, as an evidential matter, the Claimant has not identified these US-based
persons; and it therefore remains impossible for the Respondent (and the Tribunal)

even to test the Claimant’s unfounded factual assertions.

Part 4 - Page 5

4.17.

4.18.

4.19.

(iii) Timeliness: The Respondent contends that it denied timeously benefits under
CAFTA on 3 August 2010 as regards the Claimant; that its notification to the USA
on 1 March 2010 was also made timeously; that its invocation of CAFTA’s denial of
benefits provision was not required before the commencement of these ICSID arbi-
tration proceedings by the Claimant on 30 April 2009 (with its Notice of Arbitra-
tion); and that in any event such invocation could not have been made before 13 De-
cember 2007 when the Claimant became an enterprise of the USA (as a CAFTA
Party).

First, the Respondent submits that the plain language of CAFTA sets forth the re-
quirements for the invocation of denial of benefits; and that, notably, nowhere does
CAFTA impose any time-limit for such an invocation by a CAFTA Party by notice
to a claimant. The Respondent also cites Ms Kinnear’s NAFTA Guide and Thorn &
Doucleff’s “Disregarding the Corporate Veil and Denial of Benefits Clauses: Testing

Treaty Language and the Concept of ‘Investor’” (2010) to show that, in practice, the
question whether a State has the right to deny benefits to an investor is most unlikely
to arise before a dispute with that investor: “Before this, states do not necessarily
have either a reason or the opportunity to evaluate the nationality of the investors in-

volved in potentially countless foreign investments within their territory.”

Second, the Respondent submits that a CAFTA Party’s invocation of denial of bene-
fits remains appropriate after an ICSID arbitration has commenced; and that it does
not amount to the unilateral withdrawal of consent prohibited by Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention. According to the Respondent, the CAFTA Party is not there
withdrawing consent because the general consent expressed in CAFTA Article 10.17
to “the submission of a claim to arbitration under this Section in accordance with
this Agreement,” remains intact; but there was and remains no unconditional consent
to arbitrate disputes with an enterprise falling within CAFTA Article 10.12.2. The
Respondent submits that an investor of a non-CAFTA Party cannot enjoy the bene-
fits of CAFTA; and that CAFTA’s provision on denial of benefits simply protects
CAFTA Parties and their nationals from “free-riding” non-CAFTA Party investors

improperly invoking arbitration and other benefits under CAFTA.

Part 4 - Page 6

4.20.

4.21.

4.22.

4.23.

Accordingly, so the Respondent submits, the timing of the Respondent’s invocation
of denial of benefits was appropriate as a timely jurisdictional objection in these IC-
SID arbitration proceedings; and that this timing has permitted the Tribunal to con-
sider the denial of benefits issue efficiently under the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rules, along with other objections to jurisdiction made by the Respon-
dent. Conversely, the Respondent submits that an implied time-limit requiring that
the denial of benefits under CAFTA Article 10.12.2 must be invoked prior to an ar-
bitration’s commencement would lead to several practical difficulties for CAFTA

Parties.

The Respondent accepts, however, that a CAFTA Party may not wait until after an
adverse award to invoke denial of benefits under CAFTA for measures addressed in
that arbitration award. It submits, apart from considerations of good faith, that in an
ICSID arbitration, a “party which knows or should have known that a provision of ...
these [ICSID Arbitration] Rules or of any other rules or agreement applicable to the
proceeding . . . has not been complied with and which fails to state promptly its ob-
jections thereto, shall be deemed . . . to have waived its right to object” pursuant to

ICSID Arbitration Rule 27.

The Respondent further contends that the present case demonstrates the inappropri-
ateness of requiring a CAFTA Party to invoke denial of benefits prior to the com-
mencement of an arbitration. Here, the Respondent did not have any notice that the
Claimant changed its nationality in December 2007 (from the Cayman Islands to the
USA) until 16 June 2008; that such notice was not volunteered by the Claimant but
given in response to an unrelated query by the Respondent's National Investment Of-
fice; and that the Respondent would not even then have had any reason to under-
stand that the Claimant was to become a claimant under CAFTA or whether, in such
a dispute, the Respondent could invoke denial of benefits under CAFTA Article
10.12.2.

Nor, according to the Respondent, is there any requirement under CAFTA for the
invocation of denial of benefits in the short ninety-day period between a CAFTA
Party’s receipt of the Notice of Intent from a claimant and that claimant’s subse-

quent filing of a Notice of Arbitration under CAFTA. It would be unreasonable, so

Part 4 - Page 7

4.24.

4.25.

4.26.

4.27.

the Respondent submits, to require a CAFTA Party to engage professional legal ad-
visers, complete all necessary researches, vet the decision to deny benefits with ap-
propriate government agencies and then promptly invoke its right to deny benefits
all within ninety days of receiving each and every Notice of Intent, especially where

a Notice of Intent might not even be followed by any Notice of Arbitration at all.

Moreover, in the present case, the Respondent submits that the Claimant's Notice of
Intent was cursory and even misleading: it asserted (wrongly) that the Claimant was
an “American investor” which was “predominantly managed and directed from its

exploration headquarters in Reno, Nevada” (Introduction and paragraph 6).

The Respondent contends that by 1 March 2010 it had only partially completed its
investigations into the Claimant's ownership and business activities when it provided
to the U.S. Trade Representative a notification letter of the Respondent’s intent to
deny benefits to the Claimant under CAFTA Article 10.12.2; that the Respondent
necessarily continued its investigations thereafter until its invocation of denial of
benefits on 3 August 2010; and that there was therefore no delay, still less any undue

delay by the Respondent.

The Respondent contends further that, in any event, the Claimant has not suffered
any prejudice from the timing of the Respondent’s denial of benefits under CAFTA
Article 10.12.2. Indeed, so the Respondent submits, the Claimant was not itself enti-
tled to any notice from the Respondent under CAFTA, as distinct from notification

to the USA as the most directly affected CAFTA Party under CAFTA Article 18.3.

The Respondent particularly dismisses the Claimant's argument that the Claimant
has somehow been prejudiced because the timing of the notice of denial of benefits
prevented the USA from engaging in the consultation procedure under CAFTA Arti-
cle 20.4. The Respondent contends that such participation could not be an inappro-
priate grant of “diplomatic protection” in contravention of Article 27(1) of the IC-
SID Convention. The Respondent emphasises that if there were any merit to the
Claimant’s argument, it would be the USA (not the Claimant) which would have

standing to make such an objection in this case; but the USA not only does not raise

Part 4 - Page 8

the Claimant’s argument but clearly rejects that argument in its own Submission to

this Tribunal.

4.28. | Moreover, the Respondent formally made the following statement at the Hearing, as
recorded in the transcript: “[I]f the United States of America wishes to initiate such
consultations with El Salvador with respect to the invocation of the denial of bene-
fits, E] Salvador would not have any objection to those consultations on the basis
that they would amount to diplomatic protection for purposes of Article 27 of the
ICSID Convention, and El Salvador expressly waives any right it might have to ob-

ject to those consultations on that ground.” 132

4.29. Lastly, the Respondent contends that its case is supported by the USA’s state prac-
tice relevant to CAFTA Article 20.4 and ICSID Article 27. The Respondent refers
to the US Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual, Volume 7 — Consular Ser-
vices, Part 671, Assistance to Citizens Involved in Commercial, Investment and
Other Business Related Disputes Abroad (“FAM”), as showing that the USA’s offi-
cial policy on handling foreign investment disputes of U.S. nationals overseas
closely tracks the distinction made in ICSID Article 27(1) and Article 27(2) between
(i) diplomatic protection and espousal and (ii) informal communications meant to
facilitate dispute resolution; that FAM prohibits consular officers from taking a posi-
tion on the merits of a foreign investment dispute until the requirements for espousal
have been met, including the exhaustion of local and other remedies (which ex-
pressly include international arbitration under any applicable international treaty);
that, until that time, “the scope of appropriate USG [U.S. Government] assistance is
generally confined to consular services aimed at helping the United States citi-
zen/national navigate the host country legal system”; that the USA “may in its dis-
cretion decide to make diplomatic representations to the host government in order to
encourage expeditious resolution of the dispute”; but that there is a clear limit on
such representations, as follows: “In all such cases, however, posts [i.e., embassies
and consulates] should be clear both with the host government and with the investor
that such representations do not reflect a decision on the part of the USG that the
claim is valid, but rather reflect our interest in having the claim amicably and expe-

12 Hearing D4.649.

Part 4 - Page 9

4.30.

(03)

431.

4.32.

4.33.

4.34.

ditiously resolved” (paragraph 1). The Respondent submits, therefore, that there was
and can have been no practical difficulty in this case arising from ICSID Article

27(1).

In conclusion, for all these reasons, the Respondent contends that it has effectively
denied the Claimant and its investments any benefits under CAFTA; and that conse-
quently this Tribunal has no jurisdiction or competence to decide any of the Claim-

ant’s claims under CAFTA and the ICSID Convention.

The Claimant’s Case

The Claimant contends that the Respondent has failed to establish any of the condi-
tions for invoking its denial of benefits to the Claimant under CAFTA Article
10.12.2.

'S3 the Claimant contends that it has substantial business activities in the

In summary,
USA; that it is both owned and controlled by persons of the USA as a CAFTA Party;
and that the Respondent did not give timely notice of its invocation of CAFTA Arti-

cle 10.12.2.

(i) Substantial Business Activities: The Claimant contends that the Respondent has
failed to discharge its burden of proving its positive assertion that the Claimant lacks
“substantial business activities” in the USA; that, ignoring evidence to the contrary,
the Respondent’s argument is narrowly focused on a small check-list of activities
which must be present (but only according to the Respondent) in order to qualify as
substantial business activities; and that the Respondent’s mechanical approach is in-

consistent with the text, object and purpose of CAFTA.

Taking all the evidence as a whole, the Claimant submits that it has substantial busi-
ness activities in the USA, whether the Claimant is considered separately as a single
holding company (which, along with its holdings, has been continuously managed

since 1997 from Nevada, USA) or whether the Claimant is considered as part of a

This summary is largely prepared from the Claimant’s oral submissions at the Hearing and its Post-
Hearing Submissions.

Part 4 - Page 10

4.35.

4.36.

4.37.

4.38.

group of Nevada-based companies (which together contributed substantial financial
capital, intellectual property, personnel and oversight to the companies’ Salvadoran
operations). Accordingly, so the Claimant submits, its activities fall squarely within
the meaning of “substantial business activities” in the USA under CAFTA Article
10.12.2.

(ii) Ownership/Control: The Claimant contends that the Respondent has equally
failed to discharge its burden of rebutting the evidence that the Claimant ultimately
is owned and controlled by persons of the USA as a CAFTA Party; and that the Re-
spondent’s argument that the Claimant is owned and controlled directly by its Cana-
dian parent (Pacific Rim) ignores the fact that the ultimate owners and controllers of
the Claimant are those US persons who own a majority of the shares in the Canadian

parent.

As to control, the Claimant submits, taking all the evidence as a whole, that the
Claimant is controlled, in the sense of exercise of critical decision-making, by a US
national (Mr Shrake); that Mr Shrake serves as one of the managers of the Claimant
(the Claimant’s board of directors having been replaced by three managers conse-
quent upon the change of nationality from the Cayman Islands to the USA in De-
cember 2007); and therefore, as both a manager and de facto chief executive officer
of the Claimant, Mr Shrake has (and had) the power to direct and control the activi-

ties of the Claimant.

As to ownership, the Claimant also submits that the fact of majority ownership by
US nationals (shareholders in the Claimant’s parent company) and day-to-day man-
agement by a US national in the USA precludes the Respondent from denying
CAFTA’s benefits to the Claimant under CAFTA Article 10.12.2.

(iii) Timeliness: The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s attempt to deny
CAFTA benefits to the Claimant must also fail because the Respondent did not
comply with the procedural requirements of CAFTA Article 10.12.2 requiring the
Respondent to provide to the USA timely notice of its intent to deny benefits to the
Claimant and an opportunity to engage in State-to-State consultations; that the Re-

spondent deliberately waited until 1 March 2010 (fifteen months after the Claimant

Part 4 - Page 11

4.39.

4.40.

441.

provided the Respondent with its Notice of Intent) for the Respondent’s notice to the
USA, long after the time for any meaningful State-to-State consultation envisaged
by CAFTA Article 10.12.2; and that the denial of benefits could not be validly made
by the Respondent on 3 August 2010 long after the commencement of this ICSID

arbitration.

The Claimant submits that the Respondent could have notified the USA as early as
June 2008 (following the meeting between the Respondent’s President, the USA’s
Ambassador and Pacific Rim’s chief executive officer); and that the Respondent has
never offered any satisfactory explanation in these proceedings as to why it chose
deliberately to wait so long before providing the notice in March 2010 to the USA or

the later notice in August 2010 to the Claimant.

The Claimant contends that CAFTA requires that a Party provide timely notice of its
intention to deny benefits before the filing of a request for arbitration by a claimant;
that, in contrast to almost every one of the 44 other U.S. investment treaties and free
trade agreements concluded since NAFTA entered into force in 1994, CAFTA
makes the invocation of denial of benefits “subject to” compliance with two other
CAFTA articles: (i) the first on the provision of notice to other CAFTA Parties of
measures that may affect CAFTA rights under CAFTA Article 18.3; and (ii) the sec-
ond on formal State-to-State consultations under CAFTA Article 20.4; that, as denial
of an investor’s CAFTA benefits is made “subject to” these two obligations, compli-
ance with these obligations must precede an actual denial of benefits by a CAFTA
Party; and that compliance with these two obligations must necessarily occur before

any claims are submitted by a claimant to ICSID arbitration under CAFTA.

The Claimant denies that its interpretation of CAFTA imposes any undue or imprac-
tical burden on CAFTA Parties. In particular, in the present case as already indi-
cated, the Claimant contends that the Respondent could have provided the required
notice in June 2008 (see above) or at least in December 2008 (after receiving the
Claimant’s Notice of Intent and before the Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitra-
tion in April 2009); that, contrary to the Respondent’s argument, it was not neces-
sary for the Respondent to engage in lengthy investigations to determine whether all

the criteria for denial of benefits were definitively established before the Respondent

Part 4 - Page 12

4.42.

4.43.

could provide such notice to the USA; and that CAFTA’s notification and consulta-
tion procedures exist so that CAFTA Parties may consult with one another over the
merits of a proposed measure, such as a proposed (but not actual) denial of benefits

to an investor of another CAFTA Party.

The Claimant dismisses the Respondent’s subsidiary reliance upon the notice re-
quirement in CAFTA Article 18.3 applying only “[t]o the maximum extent possi-
ble.” The Claimant contends that this plain language means only what it says: i.e.,
that failure to provide notice will not result in a breach of CAFTA in circumstances
where it is actually impossible for the CAFTA Party to provide such notice, as op-
posed to mere inconvenience, impracticality or arbitration strategy; that the former
would include an emergency measure adopted by the CAFTA Party to deal urgently
with a natural disaster or a situation in which the CAFTA Party’s legislative branch
unexpectedly amended a law without warning the executive branch effectively re-
sponsible for providing notice to CAFTA Parties under CAFTA Article 18.3; and
that, in contrast, nothing in the circumstances of the Respondent’s dealings with the
Claimant in the present case limited the possibility of the Respondent in providing

timely notice to the USA of its proposed denial of benefits to the Claimant.

The Claimant also dismisses the Respondent’s subsidiary reliance upon CAFTA
Article 18.3 relating to “proposed or actual measures,” as if the Respondent could
notify the USA of its denial of benefits to the Claimant at the point only when such
denial was “proposed” or “actual.” The Claimant contends that, consistent with the
ordinary meaning of CAFTA Article 18.3, a CAFTA Party’s obligation requires no-
tice of any measure that might affect another CAFTA Party’s interests under
CAFTA (such as a denial of benefits to one of that Party’s investors), whether that
measure is proposed or actual; that State-to-State consultations would be of little
utility (if any) if, as appears to have been the case when the Respondent sent its no-
tice to the USA, the denying Party has already made up its mind and was already
firmly committed to its position; and that the Respondent’s limited interpretation of
its obligation under CAFTA Article 18.3 (with CAFTA Article 10.12.2) violates the

legal principle of “effet utile” under international law.

Part 4 - Page 13

4.44,

4.45.

4.46.

4.47.

134

The Claimant contends further that a denying CAFTA Party’s notice under CAFTA
Article 10.12.2 must be provided in a timely manner for State-to-State consultations
to occur before claims are submitted to ICSID arbitration by the Claimant because

otherwise ICSID Article 27(1) renders later consultations impermissible.

The Claimant stresses the fact that the Respondent deliberately waited five months
to deny benefits to the Claimant in August 2010 after its notice to the USA in March
2010; that the Respondent’s tendered explanation lacks any substance (namely: “ ...
because this really is the first denial of benefits that we’re aware of under CAFTA or
NAFTA. And because we take seriously the opportunity of the United States Gov-

84 that

ernment or any other affected Party to engage in State-to-State consultation”);
if the Respondent had truly wished to provide the USA with an opportunity to en-
gage in State-to-State consultations, the Respondent would not have waited until this
ICSID arbitration was well under way, at which point the USA was bound by its
treaty obligation under ICSID Article 27(1) not to give any diplomatic protection to
the Claimant; and that tactical ad hoc waivers made unilaterally by the Respondent

at the Hearing (significantly to the Claimant and not the USA) cannot amend the in-

terpretation of two multilateral treaties under international law.

The Claimant submits that arguments that the investor’s claim is valid are clearly
intended to be addressed by the State-to-State consultation procedure under CAFTA.
Article 20.4; that the very purpose of notice and consultation qualifying CAFTA Ar-
ticle 10.12.2 is to give the CAFTA Parties the opportunity to exchange views on
both facts and law relevant to the claim (including any proposed denial of benefits);
and that it is not credible that the USA would have agreed to a procedure in CAFTA
that would require precisely the kind of intervention into the merits of a dispute in a

pending arbitration contrary to ICSID Article 27(1).

The Claimant submits that, for this reason, if the Respondent’s interpretation were
adopted, then for tactical reasons a CAFTA Party could deliberately wait until after
an investor had submitted its claim to ICSID arbitration to invoke denial of benefits

under CAFTA (just as the Respondent did in the present case); and that by such de-

Hearing D3.647.

Part 4 - Page 14

4.48.

4.49.

4.50.

(04)

451.

liberate delay, the CAFTA Party could thwart any objection from the investor’s
CAFTA Party under CAFTA Articles 18.3 and 20.4, notwithstanding CAFTA Arti-
cle 10.12.2.

The Claimant submits that there is no legitimate reason based on the text or context
of CAFTA for the Respondent’s assertion that the proper time to provide notice to a
claimant can be delayed to the jurisdictional phase of an arbitration. Indeed, so the
Claimant contends, under the Respondent’s interpretation there is no reason why a
respondent could not wait to deny benefits until after an award has been made in fa-
vour of such claimant. The Claimant submits that this absurd result cannot be the

correct interpretation of CAFTA Article 10.12.2 under international law.

Lastly, the Claimant contends that ICSID Article 25(1) prevents the Respondent
from denying benefits to the Claimant after claims have been submitted to arbitra-
tion by the Claimant because once a Contracting State has consented to ICSID arbi-
tration with a claimant, that consent is irrevocable and may not be unilaterally with-
drawn; and that the Respondent’s mistaken interpretation of CAFTA Article 10.12.2
would allow a respondent CAFTA Party to withdraw its consent after claims had

been submitted by a claimant to arbitration, in violation of ICSID Article 25(1).

In conclusion, the Claimant contends that the Respondent has not satisfied any of the
conditions for denying benefits to the Claimant under CAFTA Article 10.12.2; and
that, accordingly, the Respondent’s attempt to deprive the Claimant of CAFTA
benefits should fail and should have no effect on this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to ad-

dress the Claimant’s CAFTA claims on their merits.

Non-Disputing Parties’ Submissions

Costa Rica: In its Submission, Costa Rica observes that no provision of CAFTA re-
quires the CAFTA Party to address any communications “to the individual con-
cerned” (paragraph 3), as distinct from addressing the other CAFTA Party under
CAFTA Articles 18.3 and 20.4. Costa Rica also observes that the consultation pro-
cedure between CAFTA Parties under CAFTA Article 20.4 does not amount to dip-

Part 4 - Page 15

4.52.

4.53.

4.54.

4.55.

lomatic protection within the meaning of ICSID Article 27(1), citing the Interna-

tional Law Commission’s Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection (paragraph 5).

As to timing, Costa Rica observes that CAFTA Article 10.12.2 is silent on when a
CAFTA Party may deny benefits; and it suggests that, consequently, “denial of
benefits may occur at any time, regardless even of the existence or not of an invest-
ment arbitration” (paragraph 6), particularly when a tribunal is examining its juris-
diction (paragraphs 8 & 9), although such a denial could not be legally effective af-

ter an award was made (paragraph 7).

Costa Rica analyses the object and purpose of CAFTA Article 10.12.2, as follows
(paragraphs 12 & 13 ):

“12... the denial of benefits clause of [CAFTA Article 10.12] aims to correct a situa-
tion where investors, who may formally be from a Party to the Treaty but are not
such in reality, attempt to benefit from the Treaty. In this regard it is a clause that
privileges substance over form ... An interpretation of [CAFTA Article 10.12] that
creates formal requirements, including as to the moment of invocation, that are not
present in the text of the treaty and that have the effect of denying the provision of
any practicality goes against the object and purpose of the Treaty.

13 A State Party to DR-CAFTA is not necessarily informed at all times of the share
make-up and corporate structure of all investors from other Parties to the Treaty in
its territory. What is more likely is that the State only becomes aware of who owns
or controls a company at the time when there is a dispute, which escalates into an
investment arbitration. Failing to allow the invocation of the denial of benefits
clause even when an investment arbitration has already commenced deprives this
provision of any effectiveness.”

As regards the nationality of a natural person under CAFTA Article 10.12.2, Costa
Rica observes that, with respect to the USA, CAFTA expressly provides that such
nationality is determined by the US Immigration and Nationality Act, to the exclu-

sion of other domestic law instruments (paragraph 16).

USA: In its Submission, the USA observes that CAFTA Article 10.12.2 “is consis-
tent with a long-standing U.S. policy to include a denial of benefits provision in in-
vestments to safeguard against the potential problem of “free-rider” investors, i.e.

third party entities that may only as a matter of formality be entitled to the benefits

Part 4 - Page 16

4.56.

4.57.

(05)

4.58.

4.59.

of a particular agreement”, citing NAFTA Article 1113 and also testimony before

the US House of Representatives by one of CAFTA’s US negotiators (paragraph 3).

The USA observes (in common with Costa Rica) that a CAFTA Party is not required
to invoke denial of benefits under CAFTA Article 10.12.2 before an arbitration
commences; and that it may do so as part of a jurisdictional defence after a claim has
been submitted to arbitration (paragraph 5). The USA likewise observes that this
CAFTA provision contains no time-limit for its invocation; and that a contrary inter-
pretation would place an untenable burden on a CAFTA Party, contrary to the pur-

pose of CAFTA Article 10.12.2:

“... It would require the respondent, in effect, to monitor the ever-changing business
activities of all enterprises in the territories of each of the other six CAFTA-DR Par-
ties that attempt to make, are making, or have made investments in the territory of
the respondent [citing Ms Kinnear’s NAFTA Commentary]. This would include con-
ducting, on a continuing basis, factual research, for all such enterprises, on their re-
spective corporate structures and the extent of their business activities in those
countries. To be effective, such monitoring would in many cases require foreign in-
vestors to provide business confidential and other types of non-public information
for review. Requiring CAFTA-DR Parties to conduct this kind of continuous over-
sight in order to be able to invoke the denial of benefits provision under Article
10.12.2 before a claim is submitted to arbitration would undermine the purpose of
the provision” (paragraph 6).

 

The USA also observes that neither CAFTA Article 10.12.2 nor CAFTA Article
18.3 require a CAFTA Party to give any notice to a claimant (such as the Claimant
in the present case); and the USA notes that CAFTA Article 20.4.1 is only discre-
tionary even as to CAFTA Parties: “Any Party may request in writing consultations

with any other Party ...” (emphasis supplied).

Amicus Curiae

The Amicus Curiae observes in its Submission that CAFTA Article 10.12.2 “pro-
vides an important safeguard to CAFTA Parties and their citizens” and “cannot be

emptied of practical effect” or rendered “a nullity” (page 13).

The Amicus Curiae also observes that an imposed time-limit for the invocation of

denial of benefits by a CAFTA Party “would necessarily be expensive” for that

Part 4 - Page 17

(06)

4.60.

461.

4.62.

4.63.

Party [i.e. as the host State] which may “be facing serious imperatives regarding
poverty alleviation and the attainment of the millennium development goals”. It also
observes that even if, theoretically, a CAFTA Party “could establish and maintain
the required system of pre-investment investigation and post-investment monitoring
of a foreign investor's ownership structure,” such a system would also be “intrusive
for the investor, creating more bureaucratic hurdles and as such likely reducing for-

eign investment, not increasing it.” (page 13).

The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions

Introductory Matters: The Tribunal approaches this issue as to denial of benefits on
the basis that it is primarily for the Respondent to establish, both as to law and fact,
its positive assertion that the Respondent has effectively denied all relevant benefits
under CAFTA to the Claimant pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.12.2 and that, con-
versely, it is not primarily for the Claimant here to establish the opposite as a nega-

tive.

The Tribunal determines that the meaning and application of CAFTA Article
10.12.2, interpreted in accordance with its object and purpose under international
law, require the Respondent to establish two conditions in the present case: (i) that
the Claimant has no substantial business activities in the territory of the USA (be-
yond mere form) and (ii) either (a) that the Claimant is owned by persons of a non-
CAFTA Party (here Canada) or (b) that the Claimant is controlled by persons of a
non-CAFTA Party (here also Canada, or at least persons not of the USA or the Re-
spondent as CAFTA Parties). In addition, the Tribunal considers below whether a
third condition is required as to the time by which the Respondent should have
elected to deny benefits under CAFTA Article 10.12.2 and, if so, whether that dead-

line was met by the Respondent in the present case.

It is convenient for the Tribunal to address in turn each of these three questions.

(i) Substantial Business Activities: It is clear to the Tribunal from the factual evi-

dence adduced in these arbitration proceedings that the group of companies of which

Part 4 - Page 18

4.64.

4.65.

4.66.

4.67.

135

the Claimant forms part has and has had since December 2007 substantial business

activities in the USA.

A useful description of such activities was given by Ms McLeod-Selzer, the Chair-
man of Pacific Rim, a Director of Pacific Rim Exploration Inc, the President and a
Director of Dayton Mining (U.S.) Inc. and also one of the Claimant’s managers.
Significantly, the Respondent chose not to cross-examine this witness at the Jurisdic-
tion Hearing. In the circumstances, for present purposes, the Tribunal accepts her

written testimony as regards such activities.

Ms McLeod-Selzer’s description in her written witness statement leaves no doubt as
to the existence of such activities in Nevada, USA by “the Companies”, defined by
this witness to mean collectively Pacific Rim and all its subsidiaries, including the

Claimant:

“.. the Companies have always had a substantial presence in Nevada, USA. Indeed,
Mr. Thomas C. Shrake, who has served as the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of
Pacific Rim Mining Corporation since 1997, has always maintained his offices
there, along with the Companies’ other senior geologists. Mr. Shrake has largely
managed the Companies, including [the Claimant] and its Salvadoran subsidiaries
[PRES and DOREX] from Nevada. Pacific Rim Mining has other subsidiaries in
Nevada, including Dayton Mining (U.S.) Inc, which provided a substantial portion
of the capital invested in El Salvador. [The Claimant] is a legitimate holding com-
pany, which for many years has held the Companies’ most important assets, namely
our Salvadoran subsidiaries ....”"”°

However, in the Tribunal’s view, this first condition under CAFTA Article 10.12.2
relates not to the collective activities of a group of companies, but to activities at-
tributable to the “enterprise” itself, here the Claimant. If that enterprise’s own activi-
ties do not reach the level stipulated by CAFTA Article 10.12.2, it cannot aggregate
to itself the separate activities of other natural or legal persons to increase the level
of its own activities: those would not be the enterprise’s activities for the purpose of

applying CAFTA Article 10.12.2.

Accordingly, the relevant question is whether the Claimant by itself had substantial

activities in the USA from 13 December 2007 onwards. The Tribunal accepts that

Ms McLeod-Selzer’s witness statement, §5.

Part 4 - Page 19

4.68.

4.69.

4.70.

136

there were and are certain activities by the Claimant in the USA; and there can be no
criticism of their legitimacy under the laws of the USA; but the question remains
whether such activities were “substantial” within the meaning of CAFTA Article
10.12.2. Here Ms McLeod-Selzer’s written testimony provides little assistance to the

Tribunal.

In the Tribunal’s view, the evidence adduced in these proceedings shows only that
the Claimant was a passive actor both in the USA and the Cayman Islands both be-
fore and after December 2007, with no material change consequent upon its change
of nationality. In addition to the written testimony of Ms McLeod-Selzer, Mr

Shrake’s oral testimony demonstrates the slender scale of the Claimant’s activities.

Mr Shrake testified orally as follows at the Hearing:

“Q. Now, how many employees did Pac Rim Cayman [the Claimant] have while it
was registered in the Cayman Islands? A. It's a holding company. It doesn't
have employees.
Q. Okay. Did it lease any office space? A. For no employees? No, it didn't lease
office space.
Did it own anything other than the Shares in the company [sic] it held on be-
half of Pacific Rim Mining? A. The verb [is] being held, it's a holding compa-
ny. Its purpose is to hold.
But it did nothing else. It held those shares. It didn't own any? A. That's what
a holding company does.
Okay. Did it have annual board meetings? A. Yes, I believe.
Were minutes kept of those board meetings? A. I don't know, actually, for sure.
Okay. Did it have a bank account? A. Oh, no, it did not have a bank--

So, pretty much it just existed on paper? A. No - well, no. It's a holding com-
pany. The purpose of the company is to hold assets.
Right. But what physical existence, what existence did it have other than on
the documents that exist perhaps in your office and registered with the corpo-
rate Registry in the Cayman Islands? A. None ...'*°

©

s seseo ©

Later during his oral evidence, Mr Shrake testified:

A: ... [The Claimant] is a holding company. It apparently has no Board of Directors
[Here the witness was seeking to correct his earlier evidence that the Claimant
did have a board of directors: see D2.430 & 491-492] ... It has two — appar-
ently only has two managers [sic]. But again, this is a company designed sole-
ly to hold assets. There is [sic] no exploration activities directly through that

Hearing D2.445-446xx.

Part 4 - Page 20

471.

4.72.

4.73.

137

138

holding company. This is, as the name suggests, strictly a company to hold as-
13°
sets.

Mr. Shrake also explained that the principal activities of the group of companies in
Nevada, USA were not the Claimant’s but those of Pacific Rim Exploration Inc. as
regards ‘mine-finding’ and ‘wealth creation’, with which company he identified
himself (i.e. not the Claimant): “We are the intellectual property of the company”
and “it contributed everything to El Salvador.”!** This explanation significantly ex-
cluded the Claimant from the scope of such activities (not being involved with such

intellectual property, in contrast to Pacific Rim Exploration Inc).

This Tribunal does not here decide that a traditional holding company could never
meet the first condition in CAFTA Article 10.12.2 as to “substantial business activi-
ties”. Generally, such holding companies are passive, owing all or substantially all
of the shares in one or more subsidiary companies which will employ personnel and
produce goods or services to third parties. The commercial purpose of a holding
company is to own shares in its group of companies, with attendant benefits as to
control, taxation and risk-management for the holding company’s group of compa-
nies. It will usually have a board of directors, board minutes, a continuous physical

presence and a bank account.

That is clearly not the case here with the Claimant, compounded by its change of
nationality. In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimant’s case fails the simple factual test
of distinguishing between its geographical activities before and after the change of
nationality in December 2007. It is not possible from the evidence of Ms McLeod-
Selzer and Mr Shrake (including contemporary documentary exhibits) for the Tribu-
nal to identify any material difference between the Claimant’s activities as a com-
pany established in the Cayman Islands and its later activities as a company estab-
lished in the USA: the location (or non-location) of the Claimant’s activities re-
mained essentially the same notwithstanding the change in nationality; and such ac-

tivities were equally insubstantial.

Hearing D2.492-493xx.
Hearing D2.511-512xx.

Part 4 - Page 21

4.74.

4.75.

4.76.

477.

139

It will be recalled that the first condition in CAFTA Article 10.20.2 addresses “sub-
stantial business activities in the territory” of the USA. In the Tribunal’s view, the
Claimant cannot here attribute geographical activities to the Claimant “in the terri-
tory” of the USA when those same activities (including their location) are not mate-
tially different from its earlier insubstantial activities as a company in the Cayman
Islands. Moreover, the Claimant’s activities, both in the Cayman Islands and the
USA, were principally to hold the shares of its subsidiaries in El Salvador. The posi-
tion might arguably be different if it was acting as a traditional holding company
owning shares in subsidiaries doing business in the USA; but that is not this case.
The Claimant’s activities as a holding company were not directed at its subsidiaries’

business activities in the USA, but in El Salvador.

In short, as regards business activities in the territory of the USA, the Tribunal con-
cludes that the Claimant was and is not a traditional holding company actively hold-
ing shares in subsidiaries but more akin to a shell company with no geographical lo-

cation for its nominal, passive, limited and insubstantial activities.

It is not necessary for the purpose of this first condition for the Tribunal to deal in
detail with the source of the capital expended in El] Salvador as regards the invest-
ments held by the Claimant and its subsidiaries or Enterprises. It is clear to the Tri-
bunal from the evidence adduced in these arbitration proceedings that these activities
did not originate as part of the Claimant’s own activities in the USA but were asso-
ciated with Pacific Rim (its Canadian parent), as Mr Shrake testified.!° Accord-

ingly, such capital expenditure does not assist the Claimant’s case under CAFTA.

In the Tribunal’s view, here as elsewhere, Mr Shrake was a candid and honest wit-
ness; his oral testimony is consistent with other evidence (including the written tes-
timony of Ms McLeod-Selzer); and the Tribunal unhesitatingly accepts his evidence

on all these points.

Hearing D2.488-489xx.

Part 4 - Page 22

4.78.

4.79.

4.80.

4.81.

4.82.

4.83.

It follows that the first condition is met by the Respondent under CAFTA Article
10.12.2: the Tribunal finds as a fact that the Claimant did not and does not have sub-

stantial activities in the USA after December 2007.

(ii) Ownership/Control: As to ownership, it is not disputed between the Parties that
the Claimant has been and remains wholly owned by its Canadian parent company,
Pacific Rim, a person of a non-CAFTA Party for the purpose of CAFTA Article
10.12.2.

However, a majority of the shareholders in this Canadian company, both natural and
legal persons, reside or at least have postal addresses in the USA. According to the
Claimant, as noted above, this factor is said to result in the Claimant being owned,

albeit indirectly, by persons of a CAFTA Party (namely the USA).

In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent is correct in applying CAFTA’s Annex 2.1
referring for natural persons as USA nationals to the US Immigration and National-
ity Act. That statute’s requirements for US citizenship or permanent allegiance to the
USA cannot be met by adducing mere US postal addresses for shareholders in the
Canadian parent company, even assuming them to be natural persons and however
convenient or even appropriate for other domestic purposes (as Mr Pasfield testi-
fied). The Tribunal does not here decide, were CAFTA’s definition materially dif-
ferent, the question whether or not indirect ownership of the Claimant could suffice

to establish the nationality of the Claimant’s ownership.

It follows that that the second condition is met by the Respondent under CAFTA Ar-
ticle 10.12.2: the Tribunal finds as a fact that the Claimant is owned by Pacific Rim
Corporation, a legal person of a non-CAFTA Party. In these circumstances, it is not
necessary for the Tribunal to decide the alternative part of this second question as to
“control” under CAFTA Article 10.12.2. It should not be assumed that the Respon-
dent’s case would have failed on this issue, if necessary to the Tribunal’s decisions

above.

(iii) Timeliness: There is no express time-limit in CAFTA for the election by a

CAFTA Party to deny benefits under CAFTA Article 10.12.2. In a different case un-

Part 4 - Page 23

4.84.

4.85.

4.86.

4.87.

der different arbitration rules, this third question might have caused this Tribunal
certain difficulties given the importance of investor-state arbitration generally and,
in particular, the potential unfairness of a State deciding, as a judge in its own inter-
est, to thwart such an arbitration after its commencement. In this case, however, no

such difficulties arise for three reasons.

First, the Tribunal accepts that, given that this was the first denial of benefits by any
CAFTA Party under CAFTA Article 10.12.2, denying benefits to the Claimant under
CAFTA was a decision requiring particular attention by the Respondent, to be exer-
cised upon sufficient and ascertainable grounds. Inevitably, such a decision requires
careful consideration and, inevitably, also time. It is not apparent to the Tribunal that
the Respondent thereby deliberately sought or indeed gained any advantage over the
Claimant, by waiting until 1 March 2010 (as regards notification to the USA) or 3

August 2010 (for its invocation of denial of benefits to the Claimant).

Second, this is an arbitration subject to the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbi-
tration Rules, as chosen by the Claimant under CAFTA Article 10.16(3)(a). Under
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41, any objection by a respondent that the dispute is not
within the jurisdiction of the Centre, or, for other reasons, is not within the compe-
tence of the tribunal “shall be made as early as possible” and “no later than the expi-
ration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial”. In the Tribu-
nal’s view, that is the time-limit in this case here incorporated by reference into
CAFTA Article 10.12.2. Any earlier time-limit could not be justified on the wording
of CAFTA Article 10.12.2; and further, it would create considerable practical diffi-
culties for CAFTA Parties inconsistent with this provision’s object and purpose, as
observed by Costa Rica and the USA from their different perspectives as host and
home States (as also by the Amicus Curiae more generally). In the Tribunal’s view,

the Respondent has respected the time-limit imposed by ICSID Arbitration Rule 41.

Third, the Tribunal does not accept the Claimant’s arguments based on ICSID Arti-
cles 25(1) and 27(1).

As regards ICSID Article 27(1) precluding diplomatic protection in respect of a dis-

pute subject to ICSID arbitration before an award is rendered in such dispute, the

Part 4 - Page 24

4.88.

4.89.

4.90.

Tribunal does not consider that the procedures envisaged by CAFTA Article 20.4
and still less CAFTA Article 18.3 amount to the exercise of diplomatic protection by
a CAFTA Party.

The Tribunal accepts the reasoning in Costa Rica’s Submission, based on Article 1
of the ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection (2006) describing diplomatic
protection as “the invocation by a State, through diplomatic action or other means of
peaceful settlement, of the responsibility of another State for an injury caused by an
internationally wrongful act of that State to a natural or legal person that is a national
of the former State with a view to the implementation of such responsibility”. Article
16 of the ILC Draft Articles distinguishes between such diplomatic protection and
other actions and procedures; namely: “The rights of States .... to resort under inter-
national law to actions or procedures other than diplomatic protection to secure re-
dress for injury suffered as a result of an internationally wrongful act.” The Tribunal
also notes a similar distinction between diplomatic protection under ICSID Article
27(1) and “informal diplomatic exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a set-

tlement of a dispute” under ICSID Article 27(2).

In the Tribunal’s view, the two CAFTA procedures envisaged by CAFTA Articles
18.3 and 20.4 fall short of diplomatic protection under international law (whatever
may be the consular practice of a CAFTA Party, including the USA). Accordingly,
the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s submission based on ICSID Article 27(1).

As regards ICSID Article 25(1), the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission
to the effect that the Respondent’s consent to ICSID Arbitration in CAFTA Article
10.16.3(a) is necessarily qualified from the outset by CAFTA Article 10.12.2. It is
not possible for the Tribunal to arrive at any different interpretation without distort-
ing the meaning of Article 10.12.2, contrary to the applicable rules for treaty inter-
pretation under international law. Accordingly, a CAFTA Party’s denial of benefits
invoked after the commencement of an ICSID arbitration cannot be treated as the
unilateral withdrawal of that Party’s consent to ICSID arbitration under ICSID Arti-
cle 25(1).

Part 4 - Page 25

4.91.

4.92.

It follows that this third condition is met by the Respondent under CAFTA Article
10.12.2.

Decisions: Accordingly, for these several reasons above, the Tribunal decides that as
from 3 August 2010 the Respondent has established under CAFTA to the required
standard and burden of proof, as a matter of fact and international law, that the
Claimant as an investor and its investments in El Salvador can receive no benefits
from Part 10 of CAFTA upon which the Claimant’s CAFTA claims necessarily de-
pend; and accordingly that the Centre (ICSID) and this Tribunal can have no juris-
diction or other competence in respect of any such CAFTA claims. This decision re-
garding the Denial of Benefits issue, however, does not affect the Claimant’s other
Non-CAFTA claims, as next explained by the Tribunal below, in Part 5 of this Deci-

sion.

Part 4 - Page 26

(01)

5.1.

5.2.

(02)

5.3.

5.4.

PART 5: ISSUE D - INVESTMENT LAW

Introduction

The Tribunal here addresses the Respondent’s independent and alternative jurisdic-
tional objection to the effect that this Tribunal lacks any jurisdiction under the In-
vestment Law of El Salvador to decide the Claimant’s pleaded Non-CAFTA claims.

The Claimant contests this jurisdictional objection in full.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the Parties’ debate under this separate issue can be deter-
mined largely as a matter of legal interpretation, where issues as to the standard of
proof play no material part. It is, however, ultimately for the Claimant to establish
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over its Non-CAFTA claims as a matter of such interpre-

tation.

The Respondent’s Case

140

In summary, the Respondent denies jurisdiction under this issue on four principal

grounds: (i) that Article 15 of the Investment Law does not constitute consent to IC-

141

SID jurisdiction; ~ (ii) even if the Investment Law did constitute such consent and

did apply to the Claimant, the Claimant’s claims are precluded for the Claimant’s

failure to initiate conciliation before ICSID arbitration; '””

(iii) the Claimant is not a
foreign investor under the Investment Law;'*? and (iv) the CAFTA waiver precludes

jurisdiction under the Investment Law. 4

As to the first ground, the Respondent alleges that Article 15 of the Investment Law

does not constitute consent to arbitration for the purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID

 
 
  

iction Memorial, § 9; Hearing Day1.119-129.
iction Memorial, §§ 337-378; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 225-250.

Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 424-427; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 253-254.
Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 379-380; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 255-261.
Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 428-454; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 262-264.

Part 5 - Page 1

5.5.

5.6.

5.7.

151

Convention." In the Respondent’s submission, Article 15 contains no consent by

the Respondent to arbitration.'“°

The Respondent disputes the Claimant’s submission that the passage in the Inceysa
award supports the Claimant’s case that Article 15 constitutes consent under Article
25 of the ICSID Convention: the Respondent contends that this issue was not before
the Jnceysa tribunal and that the short passage cited by the Claimant was mere obiter
dicta and should not replace this Tribunal’s own legal analysis of Article 15.'*” Fur-
ther, the Respondent submits that the focus in the Jnceysa case was on the illegality

of the investment by a foreign company; !*

therefore, the Jnceysa case is not relevant
to the issue of whether or not Article 15 of the Investment Law constitutes consent;
and it is not necessary for the Tribunal to consider that case in order to arrive at its

own decision in the present case.”

In the Respondent’s further submission, the Tribunal’s duty to interpret Article 15
cannot be substituted, as the Claimant suggests, by the unreasoned reference to Ar-
ticle 15 in the Inceysa award, or academic commentaries, or what the Claimant erro-
neously refers to as the “official position” of the Respondent with respect to Article

15 of its Investment Law.'?

The Respondent contends that Article 15 is a unilateral declaration by the Respon-
dent, as opposed to reciprocal or multilateral statements of consent in a BIT or
CAFTA; there is no clear statement of consent in its text; and it must be interpreted
restrictively.!*! Therefore, so the Respondent contends, by stating that Article 15
should not be interpreted restrictively or by seeking support for its argument in the
decisions in SSP v. Egypt and Mobil v. Venezuela, the Claimant’s arguments are

fundamentally mistaken.'°

Jurisdiction Memorial, § 337; Jurisdiction Reply, § 225.

Ju

 

iction Memorial, § 373.

iction Memorial, § 339; Jurisdiction Reply, § 238.

iction Memorial, § 339; Jurisdiction Reply, § 240; Hearing Day 1.127-129.
iction Reply, § 241.

iction Reply, §§ 227-246.

Jurisdiction Memorial, s§ 340-373; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 225-250; Respondent’s Post-Hearing
Submissions § 129.
Jurisdiction Reply, § 231; Hearing D1.127.

Part 5 - Page 2

5.8.

5.9.

5.10.

5.11.

153
154
155
156

Ju

 

In the Respondent’s submission, the tribunal in SPP v. Egypt did not actually apply
the principles of interpretation for a unilateral declaration; and its decision, there-
fore, does not stand for the proposition that unilateral declarations are not to be in-

terpreted restrictively.!*

With regard to the decision in Mobil v. Venezuela, the Res-
pondent contends that the tribunal there did not specifically reject a restrictive inter-
pretation for unilateral acts of the State, such as national legislation; and that it con-
cluded that the ambiguous arbitration provision in the applicable investment law, to-
gether with the lack of evidence of any intention to consent to arbitration, meant that
the investment law did not include a statement of unilateral consent to ICSID arbi-

tration.'**

As additional evidence that the Respondent did not intend unilaterally to consent to
ICSID arbitration by its Investment Law, the Respondent cites Article 146 of the
Salvadoran Constitution which only allows the Respondent to agree to arbitration in
treaties and contracts; Article 146 simply does not mention legislation (such as the
Investment Law); and the Respondent accordingly cites in support of its case the

general principle of legal interpretation: “expressio unius est exclusio alterius”.'*°

As to the second ground, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s claims are
precluded for the Claimant’s failure to initiate conciliation before ICSID arbitration.
According to the Respondent, the text of the Investment Law is clear: if a dispute is
to be referred to ICSID under Article 15, such dispute is to be settled “by means of
conciliation and arbitration.” The express linguistic use of the conjunction “and”
connects conciliation with arbitration, so that both methods of dispute resolution
must be used by a claimant. As the Claimant did not initiate any conciliation prior to
arbitration for its claims under the Investment Law, the Claimant’s request for IC-

SID arbitration was and remains impermissible.'*°

As to the third ground, the Respondent contends that there is no indication of any
investment made by the Claimant in El Salvador at any time. In the Respondent’s

submission, the Claimant qualifies as a foreign legal person; but it does not meet the

iction Reply, § 232.

Jurisdiction Memorial, § 361.
Jurisdiction Memorial, s§ 374-378; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 251-252; Hearing D1.127.
Jurisdiction Memorial, §§ 424-427; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 253-254.

Part 5 - Page 3

5.12.

5.13.

5.14.

5.15.

 
 
 
  

Jurisdiction Memorial, s§ 428-454; Jurisdiction Reply, §§ 262-264.
Jurisdiction Memorial, § 428; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submi
Jurisdiction Memorial, s 429; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submiss

further express requirement of having made an investment in El Salvador. Therefore,
the Claimant does not therefore meet the definition of a foreign investor under the

Investment Law.'*”

Further, the Respondent contends that, even if there were consent to arbitrate in the
Investment Law and the Claimant were a foreign investor within the meaning of that
law, the Tribunal should still decline jurisdiction in this case because the Claimant is
not an investor of a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention.'** In the Respon-
dent’s submission, it is appropriate to pierce the corporate veil to identify the real
investor — the Canadian parent company, Pacific Rim - which is not an investor of a
Contracting State of the ICSID Convention and, therefore, not entitled to claim ju-
risdiction under the Investment Law before this Tribunal under the ICSID Conven-

tion.'?

As to the fourth ground, the Respondent contends that the waiver provision in CAF-
TA precludes the Claimant from bringing claims under the Investment Law.'® The
Respondent reiterates its request, as in its Preliminary Objections, that the Tribunal
enforce the Claimant’s waiver to prevent the Claimant from bringing duplicative

claims in these ICSID proceedings.'*!

In this regard, the Respondent submits that since the Tribunal did not grant its Pre-
liminary Objection in its Decision of 2 August 2010, such impermissible duplication
of proceedings survives under this jurisdictional objection and should be addressed
here as a jurisdictional objection by the Respondent. The Respondent contends that
such duplication of proceedings violated and still violates the Claimant’s written

waiver under CAFTA.'®

The Respondent further contends that, as the Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010

is not res judicata, the Tribunal may revisit its determination in that Decision on the

sdiction Memorial, §$ 379-380; Jurisdiction Reply s§ 255-257; Respondent’s Post-Hearing

iction Memorial, §§ 381-423.
iction Reply, § 261; Hearing D1.129; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §§ 116 and 127.

 

ms, §§ 118-125.
ions, § 124.

 

Part 5 - Page 4

(03)

5.16.

5.17.

5.18.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submis:
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, ss 34 and 426-466; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, $s 281-306; Hearing D1.148;
Claimant’s Post-Hearings Submiss
Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, $s 440-450; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, § 289; Hearing D1.147-148; Claimant’s
Post-Hearing Submissions, § 98.

Jurisdiction Rejoinder, ss 290-299; Hearing D1.147-148; Claimant’s Post-Hearings Submissions, § 92.

indivisibility of the two arbitration proceedings initiated by the Claimant under
CAFTA and the Investment Law. In the Respondent’s submission, the most impor-
tant reason to revisit that determination and CAFTA’s waiver provision is that this
arbitration’s jurisdictional phase has clearly demonstrated that there are two pro-
ceedings based on the same measures; and that the Claimant is intending to detach
those two proceedings and go forward with one of these proceedings independently
from the other and under a different legal standard. In the Respondent’s submission,

such result is prohibited by the CAFTA waiver. '

The Claimant’s Case

The Claimant contends, under this issue, that the Respondent’s objection should be
rejected on the ground that the text of Article 15 of the Investment Law contains the

Respondent's clear and specific consent to ICSID jurisdiction. '*

The Claimant submits that the decisions made in the Cemex, Mobil and Inceysa arbi-
trations, as well as by acknowledged legal scholars cited by the Claimant, all agree
that the language of Article 15 is an instrument of consent and, as such, not subject
to any principle of restrictive interpretation.'® Indeed, according to the Claimant, all
these materials conclude that such language is so clear that under any interpretive
standards or principles, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that it contains the

Respondent’s unilateral consent to ICSID jurisdiction.'°°

Further, the Claimant submits that the legislative history of the Investment Law con-
firms such an interpretation; and it refers, as an example, to a Power Point presenta-
tion made before the Asamblea Legislativa at the time of debating the Investment
Law bill which expressly referred to “international arbitration administered by IC-
SID” in the case of foreign investment. In the Claimant’s submission, it is clear that

at the time when the Respondent promulgated the Investment Law, the Asamblea

  

siol

s, §§ 120 and 122.

 

 

ions, § 91.

Part 5 - Page 5

5.19.

5.20.

5.21.

167

168
169

170
im

Legislativa was fully aware that the wording of Article 15 provided consent by the

Respondent to ICSID jurisdiction.'*”

In this regard, the Claimant alleges that the Respondent has not only declined to ad-
dress the contents of this legislative presentation, but also has failed to provide any
evidence contradicting the Claimant’s case. Indeed, according to the Claimant, the
Respondent did not provide any evidence (i.e. witness statement, legislative history,
academic commentary, etc.) confirming its case that it was never the intention of the
Salvadoran legislature to provide for the Respondent’s unilateral consent to ICSID

arbitration in the Investment Law.'®*

With respect to the Respondent’s invocation of Article 146 of the Salvadoran Con-
stitution, the Claimant states that: (i) the Respondent provides no legal authority to
support its contention that the Salvadoran Supreme Court has ever applied the max-
im “expressio unius est exclusio alterius” to interpret the Respondent’s Constitution;
and since the Supreme Court has exclusive jurisdiction to interpret the Salvadoran
Constitution in El] Salvador, this Tribunal should not allow itself to be pressed into
doing what the Respondent’s Supreme Court would not itself do; and (ii) even if the
Tribunal were to decide that it could properly apply the maxim “expressio unius est
exclusio alterius”’, it should appreciate its limited value as a tool for legal interpreta-

tion in the present case!

With regard to the Respondent’s attempt to attribute significance to the fact that Ar-
ticle 15 does not contain the exact same language as used in some of the Respon-
dent’s BITs or in CAFTA,!” the Claimant submits that the facts, that the word “con-
sent” or references to “mandatory” arbitration were included in some BITs, is not
sufficient to conclude that the absence of such mandatory language or the use of the
word “consent” in the Investment Law established that the Respondent did not in-

tend to consent to ICSID jurisdiction in that legislative instrument.'7!

isdiction Counter-Memorial, § 458; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, § 301; Hearing D1.148; the Claimant’s Post-
issions, footnote 172.

iction Rejoinder, §§ 284 and 303; Hearing D1147; Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, § 96.
isdiction Counter-Memorial, s§ 463-466; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, ss 307-312; Hearing D1.147; the
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submi:
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submi: $94,

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial, § 462; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, sg 313-316.

   
   

  

Part 5 - Page 6

5.22.

5.23.

5.24.

5.25.

Im
173
174
175

Ju

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial,

 

The Claimant denies that it was required to initiate conciliation before ICSID arbi-
tration. In its view, the conjunction “and” in Article 15 of the Investment Law means
only that both dispute settlement mechanisms provided by the ICSID Convention are
available to the disputing parties. In the present case, the investor decided to initiate
arbitration and not conciliation under the ICSID Convention. Further, the Claimant
submits that in the event that the Tribunal considers that conciliation is a procedural
requirement under Article 15 of the Investment Law, the Claimant should be re-
leased from complying with this requirement because, in the circumstances of this

particular case, conciliation was and would remain completely futile.!”

With regard to the CAFTA waiver question raised by the Respondent, the Claimant
contends that the matter was definitively settled by the Tribunal when deciding on
the Preliminary Objection in its Decision of 2 August 2010; and it should therefore

not be revisited at this late stage by the Tribunal!”

Moreover, the Claimant submits that, it is the proceedings that are indivisible here,
not the Claimant’s claims. There is nothing in the Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August
2010 that should be revisited in evaluating whether to dismiss any of Claimant’s
claims under the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections. The Claimant submits that
the dismissal of its CAFTA claims on any of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objec-
tions cannot be applied to the Claimant’s Non-CAFTA claims under the Investment
Law simply because (as the Respondent argues) those latter claims are being ad-

dressed as part of the same ICSID arbitration proceedings.'™

With respect to the Respondent’s allegations that the Investment Law is not applica-
ble to the Claimant due to the lack of investments made by the Claimant in El Salva-
dor, the Claimant submits that although substantial portions of the financial and in-

tellectual capital invested in El Salvador are of U.S. origin,'”°

the nationality of a
particular foreign investor is irrelevant for purposes of qualifying as a “foreign in-

vestor” under the Investment Law. The Claimant’s investments in El Salvador were

iction Rejoinder, s§ 317-325.

 

472-474; Jurisdiction Rejoinder, ss 326-328.

 

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §§ 105-112.
Jurisdiction Rejoinder, §§ 330.

Part 5 - Page 7

5.26.

(04)

5.27.

5.28.

'

'

76
77

78

Jurisdiction Rejoinder §§ 332

Tis jiction Rejoinder, 8 352-. 355.

made before and after the Claimant changed its nationality on 13 December 2007;
and its change to US nationality cannot affect its access to ICSID arbitration under
the Investment Law. Before its change of nationality, the Claimant was a Cayman
Islands company; and as such it could have invoked Article 15 because the United
Kingdom’s ratification of the ICSID Convention extended to the Cayman Islands.!7°
Such being the case, the change in nationality of the Claimant cannot justify the

Respondent’s case under this issue.

Lastly, the Claimant contends that it is an enterprise organised under the laws of Ne-
vada, USA. Consequently, under the applicable rules of international law, the Clai-
mant is a national of the USA, which is a Party to the ICSID Convention.!”” Moreo-
ver, according to the Claimant, if the Claimant’s corporate veil were lifted (contrary
to the Claimant’s primary submission), and nationality were then to be assessed by
reference to control over the Claimant, the Claimant would have U.S. nationality be-

cause the Claimant is (indirectly) controlled by U.S. persons. '”*
The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions

Pursuant to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the Centre’s jurisdiction extends to:
“any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment between a Contracting State
and a national of another Contracting State which the parties to the dispute consent

in writing to submit to the Centre” (emphasis supplied).

Article 15 of the Investment Law, provides, in material part: “In the case of disputes
arising between foreign investors and the State, regarding their investment in El Sal-
vador, the investors may submit the dispute to: (a) the International Center for Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), in order to settle the dispute by means of
conciliation and arbitration, in accordance with the Convention on Settlement of In-
vestment Disputes Among States and Nationals of other States (ICSID Conven-
tion)”. The full texts of Article 15 in Spanish and English are set out in the Annex to

Part I above.

“laimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, s§ 100-101.

  
 

Part 5 - Page 8

5.29. | As summarized above, the Parties disagree on the interpretation of Article 15. Whilst
the Claimant submits that the Respondent there consented to ICSID jurisdiction, the
Respondent denies that Article 15 provides such consent under Article 25 of the IC-
SID Convention. In order to determine the meaning of Article 15, the Tribunal con-
siders, as confirmed by other ICSID tribunals, that its jurisdiction is to be assessed

by reference to the following general principles.

5.30. First, under Article 41 (1) of the ICSID Convention, it is for the Tribunal, as the
judge of its competence and not for State authorities or national courts,'”” to deter-

mine the basis of that competence, whether it be derived from a treaty or a unilateral

offer made in legislation and subsequently accepted in writing by the investor.'*°

5.31. | Second, such an approach is consistent with the solution adopted by international
tribunals, such as the Permanent Court of International Justice and the International
Court of Justice, when making clear that a sovereign State’s interpretation of its own

unilateral consent to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal is not binding on the

tribunal or determinative of jurisdictional issues.'*!

5.32. Third, the question arises as to which legal rules of interpretation (here Salvadoran
domestic rules or international rules) apply to the State’s consent to arbitration con-
tained not in a treaty but in a unilateral act of a State, i.e. in the present case national

legislation such as Article 15 of the Investment Law.

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, § 75; Cemex Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30 December 2010 § 70 [Cemex v.
Venezuela].

See the Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention, § 24: “Thus, a host State might in its
investment promotion legislation offer to submit disputes...to the jurisdiction of the Centre, and the
investor might give his consent by accepting the offer in writing”, also, Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27,
§ 74; Cemex v. Venezuela, supra note 179, § 69; Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No ARB/84/3, Second Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988, 3 ICSID
Reports 131 (1995) § 60 [SPP v. Egypt]; Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, CSID Case
No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, RL-30, ss 212-213 [Inceysa v. El Salvador]; Zhinvali
Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/1, Award (24 January 2003) § 339,
Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on jurisdiction (24
December 1996), amongst others.

Electricity Cy of Sofia and Bulgaria, Preliminary objections, PCU. Series A/B No. 77 (1939); Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf (Greece v Turkey) — 19 December 1978 — ICJ Reports 1978 page 3; Fisheries
Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — 4 December 1998 — ICJ Reports 1988 page 432.

180

 

 

 

Part 5 - Page 9

5.33.

5.34.

5.35.

5.36.

182

183
184

186

187

As established by the International Court of Justice when interpreting optional decla-
rations of compulsory jurisdiction made by States under Article 36 (2) of the ICJ

'82 ond as adopted recently by other ICSID tribunals,'*? legislation and unila-

Statute
teral acts by which a State consents to ICSID jurisdiction are to be considered as
standing offers to foreign investors under the ICSID Convention and interpreted ac-
cording to the ICSID Convention and under the rules of international law governing

unilateral declarations of States.

As explained by the Mobil and Cemex tribunals,'™ whilst the ICJ has decided that a
restrictive interpretation should apply when construing acts formulated by States in
the exercise of their freedom to act on the international plane, rules of interpretation
differ when unilateral acts are formulated in the framework and on the basis of a

treaty such as, in the present case, the multilateral ICSID Convention.

In such cases, declarations must be interpreted as they stand, having regard to the
words actually used'* and taking into consideration “the intention of the govern-
ment at the time it made the declaration.”!*° Such intention can be inferred from the
text, but also from the context, the circumstances of its preparation and the purposes
intended to be served by the declaration.'*” In doing so, the relevant words should be

interpreted in a natural and reasonable way.

Applying these principles, the Tribunal returns to the wording of Article 15 of the
Investment Law, providing that, in the case of disputes arising between foreign in-
vestors and the Respondent, regarding their investment in El Salvador, “the investors
may submit the dispute to” [ICSID]. As noted above, the Tribunal determines that
Article 15 of the Investment Law, formulated in the framework and on the basis of

the ICSID Convention to which it explicitly refers, must be interpreted having re-

Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria, Preliminary Objections — ICJ Reports 1998
page 291 § 25; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — 1CJ Reports 1998 page 453 § 46.

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, § 85; Cemex v. Venezuela, supra note 179, § 79.

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, §§ 86-96; Cemex v. Venezuela, supra note 179, §§ 80-89.

Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.- Preliminary objection — Judgement — ICJ Reports 1952 page 105.

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited y. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No ARB/84/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 November 1985, 3 ICSID Reports 112, § 107:
Reports 1952 page 104; Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia, 1 PCW, Seri
Phosphates in Morocco, PCI, Series A/B, No. 74, pages 22-24 (1938).
Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, §§ 92-96; Cemex v. Venezuela, supra note 179, §§ 85-89.

; Anglo Iranian Oil Co. — ICI
A, No. 15, page 22 (1928);

 

  

Part 5 - Page 10

5.37.

5.38.

5.39.

188
189
190

gard to the words actually used, interpreted in a natural and reasonable way.

The Tribunal decides that the wording of Article 15 is clear and unambiguous. By
providing foreign investors with the option (“may”), absent for local investors, of
submitting the “disputes arising between foreign investors and the State, regarding
their investment in El Salvador” to ICSID, Article 15 of the Investment Law clearly
invites foreign investors to decide whether to submit their claims to local courts (Ar-
ticle 15, first paragraph) or to ICSID tribunals (Article 15, second paragraph, (a) and
(b)), therefore providing the consent of the Respondent required by Article 25 of the

ICSID Convention which the investor can accept.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, nothing in the ICSID Convention establishes the need for
specific wording in national legislation or other unilateral acts by which a State con-
sents to ICSID jurisdiction, still less the identical wording used in other instruments
of consent used by that State historically (whether in BITs or CAFTA). Consent

must be evident and in writing; '**

and, in the Tribunal’s opinion, both requirements
were duly met in the present case by the Respondent, as later accepted in writing by

the Claimant in commencing these ICSID arbitration proceedings.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that the wording of Article 15 of the Investment
Law contains the Respondent’s consent to submit the resolution of disputes with for-
eign investors to ICSID jurisdiction; that such intention appears unambiguously
from the text of Article 15; and that it is confirmed from the context, the circums-
tances of its preparation and the purposes intended to be served by Article 15, read
with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.'® Although the Tribunal has reached this
decision based on the language of Article 15 alone, the Tribunal also notes that, con-
fronted with the extraneous evidence adduced by the Claimant to this same effect!”
the Respondent chose not to provide to the Tribunal any rebuttal evidence indicating
that it was not the intention of the Salvadoran legislature to provide for unilateral

consent to ICSID arbitration in Article 15 the Investment Law.

Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention, § 23.

Mobil v. Venezuela, supra note 27, §§ 92-96; Cemex v. Venezuela, supra note 179, §§ 85-89.

See the power point presentation made before the Salvadoran Congress when the Investment Law bill was
debated, CL-149, an UNCTAD Report alleged to have been made with input from PROESA and other
Government officials, CL 147 and the academic opinions of Professors Schreuer and Oliva de la Cotera
referred by the Claimant.

Part 5 - Page 11

5.40.

5.41.

192

As also summarized above, the Parties also debated the effect to be given to para-
graph 332 of the Inceysa award.'°! While it is correct that the Inceysa tribunal de-
clined jurisdiction and dismissed the claimant’s claims on the basis that the invest-
ment did not meet the conditions for legality, the tribunal also interpreted Article 15
of the Investment Law in a manner which accords with the interpretation separately

reached by this Tribunal.

192

With respect to Article 146 of the Salvadoran Constitution, ~~ the Tribunal does not

find such provision incompatible or inconsistent with the consent provided to ICSID
jurisdiction in Article 15 of the Investment Law. Article 146 is included in Title VI,
Chapter I, Third Section of the Salvadoran Constitution under the heading “Trata-
dos” (Treaties). As the plain reading of Article 146 indicates, the purpose of such
provision is to limit what may or may not be negotiated in a treaty or concession.
Article 146 allows the Salvadoran State to submit disputes to arbitration or to an in-
ternational tribunal in treaties or contracts as a qualification to the restrictions made
earlier in the Constitution; !”? and it should be read in such context (i.e. what treaties
or concession contracts can contain or not). The Respondent’s interpretation, limit-
ing the instruments by which the Respondent can consent to ICSID arbitration so as
to exclude laws and other instruments not referred by in Article 146, does not have,

in the Tribunal’s opinion, any rational or other legal support.

See Inceysa v. El Salvador, supra note 180, § 332 (“The foregoing clearly indicates that the Salvadoran
State, by Article 15 of the Investment Law, made to the foreign investors a unilateral offer of consent to
submit, if the foreign investor so decides, to the jurisdiction of the Centre, to hear all “disputes referring to
investments” arising between El Salvador and the investor in question. However, in the case at hand, as
indicated in the previous paragraphs, Inceysa cannot enjoy the rights granted by said Investment Law
because its ‘investment’ does not meet the conditions of legality”).

Article 146 of the Salvadoran Constitution provides that: “No podran celebrarse o ratificarse tratados u
otorgarse concesiones en que de alguna manera se altere la forma de gobierno o se lesionen o menoscaben
la integridad del territorio, la soberanfa e independencia de la Reptiblica 0 los derechos y garantias
fundamentales de la persona humana. Lo dispuesto en el inciso anterior se aplica a los tratados
internacionales 0 contratos con gobiernos o empresas nacionales o internacionales en los cuales se someta
el Estado salvadoreifio, a la jurisdiccién de un tribunal de un estado extranjero. Lo anterior no impide que,
tanto en los tratados con en los contratos, el Estado salvadorefio en caso de controversia, someta la
decisi6n a un arbitraje o a un tribunal internacionales”. (“Treaties shall not be entered into or ratified, nor
shall any concessions be granted that would in any way alter the form of government or damage or
diminish the territorial integrity, sovereignty, or independence of the Republic or the fundamental rights
and guarantees of individuals. The provisions of the previous paragraph shall apply to all international
treaties or agreements entered into which governments or domestic or international companies in which the
Salvadoran State is subject to the jurisdiction of a tribunal of a foreign state. The aforementioned does not
prevent the Salvadoran State from submitting, in treaties and contracts, to arbitration or to an international
tribunal for a decision in the event of a dispute”. )

“Lo anterior no impide...” (the aforementioned does not prevent...)

Part 5 - Page 12

5.42.

5.43.

5.44.

194

196

The Tribunal also finds no merit in the Respondent’s argument that if Article 15
constituted consent, the Claimant’s claims were precluded for failing to initiate con-
ciliation before arbitration. The conjunction “and” in Article 15 of the Investment
Law can only mean that both dispute settlement mechanisms provided by the ICSID
Convention are available to the Claimant. Once consent has been given by the Res-
pondent (as it is in the form of Article 15), it is for the party instituting the proceed-

ings to choose between conciliation and arbitration under the ICSID Convention.'**

With regard to the Respondent’s submission that the Investment Law is not applica-
ble to the Claimant because of its lack of any investments in El Salvador, the Tri-
bunal considers that the Claimant’s nationality (and subsequent change of nationali-
ty) is irrelevant for the purpose of it qualifying as a “foreign investor” under the In-

vestment Law.'> The Claimant was registered as a “foreign investor” for the pur-

196

poses of the Investment Law from 2005; ~~" it was successively a Cayman Island

company prior to 13 December 2007 and a US company thereafter; and the Clai-
mant, as such, could have invoked Article 15 of the Investment Law by virtue of the
respective ratifications of the ICSID Convention by the United Kingdom and the

USA, which (in the case of the United Kingdom) extended to the Cayman Islands.

The Respondent’s next submission raises the question of the Claimant’s actual in-
vestments in El Salvador. The definition of “a foreign investor” contained in the In-
vestment Law is broad; and, as confirmation of this interpretation, the Tribunal notes

that register of the Respondent’s Ministry of Economy shows that the Salvadoran

SPP y. Egypt, supra note 180, § 102, R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment
Law, at page 221 (2008).
Article 2 (d) of the Investment Law provides the following definition “Inversionista Extranjero: Las
personas naturales y juridicas extranjeras y los salvadorefios radicados en el exterior por mas de un afio
ininterrumpido, que realicen inversiones en el pais” (“Foreign Investor: The foreign natural and legal
persons and the Salvadoran nationals established abroad for more than one ininterrupted year that make
investments in the country”).
is respect, Article 17 of the Investment Law provides that “Los inversionistas
S| inversiones en la ONI, quien emitira una Credencial la cual le otorgaré a su titular la calidad
de inversionista extranjero, con expresi6n de la inversi6n registrada” (Foreign investors shall register their
investments before ONI, who will issue a credential that will provide to its bearer the quality of foreign
investor, expressing the foreign investment”. See MINEC Resolution No. 288-R (21 June 2005), C-36 and
MINEC Resolutions No. 368-MR (30 July 2008) and No. 387 MR (13 August 2008), C-12.

extranjeros deberin

 
   

Part 5 - Page 13

5.45.

5.46.

197

198

199

Government had always treated the Claimant as a foreign investor.'®” In the Tribun-
al’s opinion, it is therefore unnecessary here to enter in any factual analysis of the
precise origin or timing of funds invested in El Salvador by or on behalf of the
Claimant to conclude that the Claimant is a foreign investor for the purpose of Ar-

ticle 15 of the Investment law.

With regards to the question relating to the CAFTA waiver raised by the Respon-
dent, the Tribunal considers that it fully addressed this same question in its Decision
of 2 August 2010;'%8 and it here confirms that answer. In particular, the Tribunal
finds no juridical difficulty in having an ICSID arbitration based on different claims
arising from separate investment protections and separate but identical arbitration
provisions, here CAFTA and the Investment Law.!”” To the contrary, when consent
to the same tribunal’s jurisdiction is contained in two or more instruments, the Res-
pondent’s suggestion that different ICSID arbitrations must be commenced under
each instrument would render nugatory the natural inclinations of both investors and

States for fairness, consistency and procedural efficiency in international arbitration.

As regards indivisibility, the Tribunal repeats paragraph 253 of its Decision of 2 Au-
gust 2010:

“In the Tribunal’s view, these arbitration proceedings are indivisible,
being the same single ICSID arbitration between the same Parties before
the same Tribunal in receipt of the same Notice of Arbitration registered
once by the ICSID Acting Secretary-General under the ICSID Conven-
tion. To decide otherwise would require an interpretation of CAFTA Ar-
ticle 10.18 (2) wholly at odds with its object and purpose and potentially
resulting in gross unfairness to a claimant. There is no corresponding

See MINEC Resolution No.368-MR (30 July 2008), C-12, page 10: “That pursuant to the records of foreign
capital kept by the Ministry, the company PAC RIM CAYMAN LLC, domiciled in the State of Nevada,
United States of America, has registered and invested in national companies as follows: ...”, C-12.

Pac Rim Cayman v. The Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12, 2 August 2010, ss 252-
253.

See Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, where the tribunal analysed the possibility of intervening in the case both
under the Energy Charter Treaty and the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT. The fact that it finally decided not to do so
on the basis that the MFN existing in this BIT did not provide consent to ICSID arbitration under the BIT
does not alter such conclusion. Under the reasoning of that tribunal, if consent would have been present,
the tribunal would have been acting in the same proceeding on two different legal bases, both of which
provided for ICSID arbitration. Id. Cemex v. Venezuela and Mobil v. Venezuela, where the tribunals
admitted the possibility of hearing two sets of claims (under the Venezuelan Investment Law and the
Venezuela-Netherlands BIT) in the same proceeding, although they finally declined its jurisdiction under
the Investment Law because it did not provide consent to ICSID jurisdiction.

 

Part 5 - Page 14

5.47.

5.48.

200

unfairness to the Respondent in maintaining these ICSID proceedings as
one single arbitration. In particular, the Respondent does not here face
any practical risk of double jeopardy. Lastly, it is hardly a legitimate ob-
jection to this Tribunal’s competence that it exercises jurisdiction over
these Parties based not upon one consent to such jurisdiction from the
Respondent but based upon two cumulative consents from the Respon-
dent. It is an indisputable historical fact that several arbitration tribunals
have exercised jurisdiction based on more than one consent from one
disputant party, without being thereby deprived of jurisdiction.”

The Tribunal considers that these ICSID arbitration proceedings are indivisible; but
it does not consider that the Claimant’s claims are indivisible, given the Tribunal’s
decision above to deny any jurisdiction over the Claimant’s CAFTA claims. What
now remains in these ICSID proceedings for decision on the merits are the Clai-
mant’s non-CAFTA claims; and the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide these claims in
this ICSID arbitration cannot be affected by its rejection of the Claimant’s CAFTA
Claims under this Decision. To this extent, the Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s sub-
mission that: “... Claimant commenced this proceeding by both invoking CAFTA
and the Investment Law, and the Tribunal has already held that this dual invocation
of consent did not violate Claimant’s waiver provision. Where the commencement of
the proceeding did not violate the waiver, it can hardly be imagined that its con-
tinuation would somehow do so, regardless of which claims go forward and which

do not ...”°°°

Decisions: For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides to reject the Respon-
dent’s jurisdictional objection based on Article 15 of the Investment Law and to ac-
cept jurisdiction to decide on their merits the Non-CAFTA claims pleaded by the
Claimant in its Notice of Arbitration (incorporating its Notice of Intent). This deci-
sion is strictly limited to the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection: it does not and
will not affect any issue, whether legal or factual, as to the merits or demerits of any
of the Claimant’s non-CAFTA claims or any of the Respondent’s as yet formally

unpleaded defences to such claims.

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions, §111.

Part 5 - Page 15

(01)

6.1.

6.2.

6.3.

6.4.

(02)

6.5.

201

PART 6: ISSUE E —- LEGAL AND ARBITRATION COSTS

Introduction

The Parties made submissions on the legal and arbitration costs incurred to date in
their respective written submissions on costs of 10 June 2011 and their reply sub-

missions on costs of 24 June 2011.

In summary, the Claimant claims legal costs US$ 4,338,744; and the Respondent
claims legal costs US$ 4,057,719.96, together with arbitration costs of approxi-
mately US$ 250,000. These claims are denied in full by the Respondent and the

Claimant respectively.

This issue as to costs arises under ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(1) and CAFTA Article
10.20.4 & 10.20.6 (cited in the Annex to Part | above). It also arises under Paragraph
266(3) of the Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010, whereby the Tribunal reserved
its powers to order costs under CAFTA Article 10.20.6 until the final stage of these

arbitration proceedings.

Given the conduct of this arbitration to date and the Parties’ respective allegations of
misconduct made against each other, together with the significant sums involved in
this costs issue before these proceedings have even reached the actual merits of the
Parties’ dispute, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to set out the Parties’ respective

submissions on costs at some length in this Decision.

The Claimant’s Claim

201

In summary,” the Claimant requests the Tribunal to order the Respondent to bear

all the costs of these arbitration proceedings to date.

This summary of the Claimant’s claim and the Claimant’s response below are based on the Claimant’s
written submissions on costs of 10 and 24 June 2011.

Part 6 - Page 1

6.6.

6.7.

6.8.

6.9.

202

The Claimant acknowledges that an award or allocation of costs typically accompa-
nies a final award. It submits, however, that ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(1) also al-
lows this Tribunal to make an interim determination of costs at any stage of these
proceedings, relying upon Professor Schreuer’s commentary on the ICSID Conven-

tion:

“The apportionment of costs need not relate to the entire proceeding. The Tribunal
may charge one party the costs or a major share of the costs of a particular part of
the proceeding. Often this will be in reaction to undesirable conduct by a party in
the proceedings. ... A party whose conduct has necessitated a particular measure
may have to bear the resulting costs. 702

 

The Claimant submits that the Respondent should now bear all the costs of its objec-
tions; and that the Tribunal should proceed to allocate such costs in its decision (not

award) on jurisdiction, for the several reasons which follow.

The Claimant submits that, other than CAFTA Article 10.20.6 which provides that
the Tribunal “shall” consider whether a party's positions were “frivolous” in exer-
cising its discretion to award “reasonable costs and attorney's fees” following an ob-
jection made under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 or 10.20.5, the cost provisions of
CAFTA, the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not provide any

particular standard for tribunals to use in determining how to allocate costs.

However, so the Claimant submits, both arbitration tribunals and learned commenta-
tors recognize that costs may be allocated against a party as a sanction for procedural
misconduct, or simply as a response and, hopefully, a deterrent to undesirable con-
duct by a party in the proceedings. For example, according to the Claimant, tribunals
have awarded costs against a respondent which delayed the arbitration and increased
the costs of the arbitration by making multiple objections and motions; against a re-
spondent which submitted its objections with considerable delay, leading to an un-
necessary escalation in the costs of the claimant; and against a claimant whose char-
acterisation of the evidence was unacceptably slanted and whose submissions had

been without adequate foundation.

Schreuer (et al), The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2" ed), p. 1231.

Part 6 - Page 2

6.10.

6.11.

6.12.

203

The Claimant submits that, under ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(1)(b), ICSID tribunals
have ordered a party to bear the costs of a specific part of the proceedings where
that part was requested or caused by that party and where the tribunal concluded that
it would be unfair for the other party to bear such costs. For example, in rejecting the
claimant's request for supplementary decisions and rectification following the award

in Genin v. Estonia, the tribunal decided:

“The Claimants had their “day in court.” In fact, they had their week before the
Tribunal. Not content with the result, they initiated further proceedings, as was
their right, making the Request which the Tribunal hereby denies. 7208

Accordingly, that tribunal ordered the claimant to pay in full the expenses incurred

by the parties, as well as the additional costs of the arbitration.

The Claimant contends that an allocation of costs against the Respondent is more
than warranted in the present case: the Respondent has employed its full proce-
dural arsenal to make the dual preliminary objections phases of this arbitration
as long and expensive as possible; the Respondent has raised every argument
(factual and legal) that it could devise, regardless of its merit or even plausi-
bility; and the Respondent has consistently made highly charged but utterly baseless
allegations of “concealment,” “deceit,” and “bad faith” against the Claimant, includ-

ing the Claimant’s Counsel.

The Claimant submits that its request for an allocation of costs against the Respon-
dent is warranted even if the Tribunal were to limit its consideration to the Respon-
dent's conduct during the course of this second jurisdictional phase of these arbitra-
tion proceedings. However, the Claimant submits that the Tribunal should con-
sider the Respondent's conduct during both preliminary phases, particularly as
its conduct in this second phase has only underscored the improper tactical mo-
tivations that have underlain its handling of this case from the outset of these arbi-

tration proceedings.

Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia , CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Decision on Claimants’

Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification, 4 April 2002, § 19.

Part 6 - Page 3

6.13.

6.14.

6.15.

The Claimant submits that the Respondent decided at the outset that it would “bifur-
cate” its preliminary objections. Thus, on 4 January 2010, the Respondent launched
its Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5. Although
objections under Article 10.20.4 must be made “as a matter of law” and assuming
the Claimant's factual allegations “to be true,” the Respondent made innumerable
factual arguments that it plainly knew to be disputed by the Claimant. Indeed, those
arguments necessitated the submission of 54 exhibits consisting of nearly 800 pages
of material, notwithstanding that the Preliminary Objections were supposed to be

based on the facts as alleged by Claimant in the Notice of Arbitration.

In the meantime, so the Claimant contends, the Respondent was preparing its second
set of jurisdictional objections even as its Preliminary Objections were still being
prepared. For example, by 1 March 2010, the Respondent had already carried out a
full “investigation”, which, so the Respondent informed the United States Govern-
ment, “conclusively” proved that it was entitled to deny the Claimant the
benefits of CAFTA; when the Respondent filed its Objections to Jurisdiction on 3
August 2010 (literally within hours of the Tribunal's Decision of 2 August 2010),
the Respondent based its arguments largely, if not entirely, on the same
grounds that purportedly supported its case in the letter of 1 March 2010 to the
USA (although the Respondent failed to provide either the Claimant or the Tribunal

with such letter until 3 September 2010).

Furthermore, so the Claimant contends, given the nature of the two sets of objec-
tions, there is no legitimate reason why the Respondent could not have asserted them
together. The Claimant submits that the arguments included in the Respondent’s Ob-
jections to Jurisdiction are no more fact-intensive than those that the Respondent put
forward in its first round of objections under CAFTA Article 10.20.4. Thus, so the
Claimant contends, the information on which the Respondent based its letter dated 1
March 2010 to the USA (as well as the Respondent’s subsequent denial of benefits
to the Claimant) consists almost entirely of the Claimant’s own public filings or
other information that the Claimant had made publicly available. In turn, the Re-
spondent's Objection to Jurisdiction based on Abuse of Process is, according to the
Claimant, largely based on the same underlying facts as the Objection based on De-

nial of Benefits; the facts required to demonstrate that the Tribunal has jurisdic-

Part 6 - Page 4

6.16.

6.17.

6.18.

tion ratione temporis (i.e. the continued existence of a ban on mining in El Salva-
dor) are not contested by the Respondent; and the issue of the Respondent's consent
to ICSID arbitration under the Investment Law is an issue of legal interpretation,

without any relevant factual dispute.

In contrast, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections
were based (inter alia) on numerous internal documents from the Respondent’s
regulatory agencies which had never been provided to the Claimant, numerous al-
leged communications between the Claimant and the Respondent (often al-
leged by the Respondent without any evidential support), complex issues in-
volving the application of Salvadoran mining and environmental laws and
regulations to the Claimant's applications for an environmental permit and exploi-
tation concession, and various assertions concerning highly technical aspects of

the applications and the project itself.

The Claimant concludes that there is no legitimate reason for the Respondent
to have withheld its jurisdictional objections in reserve until after the Tribunal's
Decision of 2 August 2010. Moreover, the Claimant contends that none of the Re-
spondent’s objections submitted under CAFTA Article 10.20 (with the possible ex-
ception of the waiver issue under CAFTA Article 10.18.2) should have been
raised at the preliminary phase of the proceedings. The Claimant submits that the
Respondent's decision to submit such inappropriately fact-intensive Preliminary
Objections, even as it was already preparing its Jurisdictional Objections for later
submission to the Tribunal, was aimed solely at multiplying the preliminary phases
of these arbitration proceedings, thereby deliberately delaying any adjudication on

the merits and imposing additional costs on the Claimant.

The Claimant next contends, putting aside the Respondent's “bifurcation” of its pre-
liminary objections, that the Respondent’s conduct during this second phase of these
proceedings standing alone, more than merits an order for costs in favour of the
Claimant: the entire theme of the Respondent’ jurisdictional objections is that the
Claimant secretly changed its nationality from that of the Cayman Islands to that of
the USA; that the Claimant “tried to conceal this abuse through misleading

words and actions;” and that the Respondent’s objections “exposed Claimant's

Part 6 - Page 5

6.19.

6.20.

6.21.

change of nationality.” The Claimant contends that the Respondent persisted in its
allegations that the Claimant failed to disclose its change in nationality, even as
it was pointed out to the Respondent that the Claimant had duly notified the Re-
spondent’s Government of the Claimant’s domestication to Nevada , USA, long be-
fore the commencement of this ICSID arbitration; and that the change in nationality
from that of the Cayman Islands to that of the USA was again disclosed in the ex-

hibits to the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration.

At the Hearing, so the Claimant submits, the Respondent (having repeatedly accused
the Claimant of “bad faith,” “concealment,” and “deceit”) effectively conceded that
there was no evidence to support any of these inflammatory allegations. Instead, the
Respondent was reduced to arguing that the Respondent did not have to show any
bad faith on the part of the Claimant, because bad faith is “inherent in this type of
abuse [of process].” That assertion, so the Claimant contends, is without any merit as
a matter of international law (given that good faith is always to be presumed); but,
more important for present purposes is the fact that the Respondent was forced to
make this concession at all. The Claimant submits that the Respondent's attempt to
“imply” bad faith into the Claimant's conduct is illustrative of its tendency to make
serious allegations against the Claimant that are either contradicted by the record or

that turn out to be completely unsupported.

The Claimant submits that many of the tactics employed by the Respondent
throughout this case, for example the tendency to offer unacceptably distorted asser-
tions of fact and law; to make accusations and insinuations that were utterly without
support and to hold back various allegations or information until the last minute in
an effort to ambush the Claimant, were dramatically on display in the proffered tes-
timony of the Respondent's own counsel, Mr Parada. The Claimant contends that
Mr Parada’s witness statement was offered only after the written phase for the Re-
spondent's jurisdictional objections was closed and even though the Respondent
maintained that the “information” contained in his testimony was the basis for the

Respondent's documentary and other requests made in September 2010.

The Claimant submits that, as the Respondent's counsel acknowledged as he began

his direct examination of Mr Parada, “it's quite extraordinary for a counsel for a

Part 6 - Page 6

6.22.

6.23.

6.24.

204

Party to also put in a witness statement.” Indeed, so the Claimant contends, it is not

only extraordinary; but it is also strongly discouraged and often prohibited.

The Claimant cites the American Bar Association's Model Rules on Professional Re-
sponsibility which specifically prohibit a lawyer from acting as an advocate in a trial
in which the lawyer is also likely to be a witness (absent several limited exceptions

inapplicable here):

“[a] lawyer shall not act as an advocate at a trial in which the lawyer is likely to be
a necessary witness unless: (1) the testimony relates to an uncontested issue; (2)
the testimony relates to the nature and value of legal services rendered in the case;
or (3) disqualification of the lawyer would work substantial hardship on the client.”

The Claimant also cites the United States Supreme Court’s observation that in
some cases it may be unseemly, especially where counsel is in a position to com-
ment on his own testimony; and that the practice of being an advocate and witness
in the same case should be discouraged, the reasons for such discouragement being
numerous, including, the danger of intruding upon attorney-client privilege and the

fundamentally different roles played by advocates and witnesses.”

The Claimant contends that Mr Parada's clashing roles of advocate and witness were
evident at the Hearing, for example, when he asserted in his opening argument that
he could definitively describe the position that the Respondent had taken in Inceysa
(because he had worked at Arnold & Porter, the firm which represented the Re-
spondent in that case); but he then admitted as a witness in cross-examination that he
had left Arnold & Porter before the jurisdictional objections in that case were filed

by the Respondent.

Further, so the Claimant submits, Mr Parada's testimony was marked by other incon-
sistencies and absurdities: Mr Parada testified that during a recruiting breakfast in-
terview in December 2007, two of the Claimant's counsel (i.e. Messrs. Ali and de
Gramont of Crowell & Moring) told him of their client’s plans to commence _arbi-

tration proceedings against the Respondent; according to Mr Parada, Messrs. Ali

French v. Hall, 119 U.S. 152, 154 (1886), citing also Ferraro v. Taylor, 197 Minn, 5, 12, 265 N.W. 829,
833 (1936).

Part 6 - Page 7

6.25.

6.26.

and de Gramont divulged this confidential client information even though Mr Parada
had told them of his close and long-standing professional ties to the Salvadoran
Government; Mr Parada further testified that Mr Ali told him that he (Mr Ali) had
met the week before with President Saca to inform the President that Mr Ali's client
intended to initiate arbitration against the Respondent under CAFTA; however, as
Mr Parada testified, he (Mr Parada) had concluded that the true purpose of the in-
terview was that Crowell & Moring wanted Mr Parada to inform the Respondent of

Mr Ali’s plans; and, notwithstanding Mr Parada's “conclusion” about the real reason
for the interview, Mr Parada also testified that Messrs. Ali and de Gramont “in-
vited” him to join Crowell & Moring's international arbitration practice, even as
they were planning to commence an ICSID arbitration against the Respondent and
even though Mr Parada had told them that he “would be extremely uncomfortable

working on an ICSID arbitration against El Salvador”.

The Claimant submits that any counsel appearing before this Tribunal (as counsel
or as a witness) has an obligation to make sure that his assertions, especially as-
sertions of such a serious nature, have a basic foundation. According to the Claim-
ant, the modus operandi of the Respondent has been to suggest or insinuate wrong-
doing on the part of the Claimant without any regard for whether such suggestions
have any foundation at all. The Respondent retained its own counsel (Dewey & Le-
Boeuf) by April 2009 at the latest, so that the Respondent had more than two years
to confirm the foundations for its several allegations; but the Respondent signifi-

cantly failed to do so.

The Claimant concludes that, if the Tribunal were again in its jurisdictional decision
to decline to allocate costs against the Respondent following this second phase of
objections (as it did with its Decision of 2 August 2010 following the first phase),
the Respondent will have been well rewarded for its misconduct; and the Respon-
dent will have succeeded (again) in delaying the merits phase of this arbitra-
tion and in imposing yet more expense on the Claimant, with its limited re-
sources. Moreover, so the Claimant further concludes, a decision by the Tribunal
not to order costs against the Respondent will ensure that the Respondent will
continue such misconduct as this arbitration proceeds to the merits; and it would

strongly encourage other miscreant parties to engage in the same misconduct in fu-

Part 6 - Page 8

6.27.

6.28.

ture arbitration proceedings. Indeed, so the Claimant submits, the Respondent will
have created a “blueprint” as to how all CAFTA respondents can double the length
of the period for objections and deplete the resources of all but the best-funded

CAFTA claimants.

The Claimant submits, as to arbitration costs, that according to the interim finan-
cial statement as of 3 June 2011 issued by the ICSID Secretariat, the Centre's
total disbursements as of that date totalled US $311,025.77 to which the
Claimant has contributed US $249,962.00. As to its own legal costs, the Claim-

ant submits the following statement:

I: First Phase of Objections:

C&M Legal Fees US$ 1,791,297
C&M Disbursements US$ = 72,566
Expert fees of Professor Don Wallace, Jr. US$ 35,625
Total C&M Fees and Disbursements for First Phase: USS$1,899,488

II: Second Phase of Objections:

C&M Legal Fees US$2,355,713
C&M Disbursements US$ 83,543
Total C&M Fees and Disbursements for Second Phase: USS$2,439,256
Total Fees and Disbursements for Both Phases: US$4,338,744

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue an order allocating to the Respondent

all the arbitration and legal costs of these proceedings to date.

Part 6 - Page 9

(03)

6.29.

6.30.

6.31.

6.32.

205

The Respondent’s Response

In summary,”°> by way of response to the Claimant’s case on costs, the Respondent
requests that the Tribunal order the Claimant to bear all the costs incurred by the Re-
spondent in this arbitration because the Claimant initiated this arbitration about a
mining exploitation concession which it did not have a right to receive, abusing the
international arbitration process, and because it also has made a series of false, mis-
leading and inconsistent statements before this Tribunal to try to keep its claims

alive.

The Respondent submits that the Hearing confirmed that this arbitration is the result
of an abuse of process by the Claimant and others: the Canadian company, Pacific
Rim, had a dispute with the Respondent about its application for a mining exploita-
tion concession in El Dorado; it spent three years trying to resolve the dispute by
lobbying the Respondent’s Government to change its Mining Law; those years of
unsuccessful lobbying efforts made resolving that dispute appear increasingly
unlikely; the Canadian company engaged international arbitration lawyers and then
changed the nationality of its subsidiary (the Claimant) in December 2007 in order
to procure arbitral jurisdiction under CAFTA for its pre-existing dispute with the

Respondent.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant, unable to contest the overwhelming evi-
dence that the dispute existed before its change of nationality in December 2007, has
instead repeatedly tried to change its definition of the “measure at issue” and its ex-
planation of when the dispute arose between the Parties. This tactical shifting of po-
sitions, according to the Respondent, has been the Claimant’s common practice

throughout this arbitration.

The Respondent contends that, unlike the Claimant, the Respondent has pursued its
objections honestly and in good faith, seeking the quickest and most efficient resolu-

tion possible: the Respondent brought Preliminary Objections in an attempt to end

This summary of the Respondent’s response and the Respondent’s claim below are based on the
Respondent’s written submiss

 

ns on costs of 10 and 24 June 2011.

 

Part 6 - Page 10

6.33.

6.34.

6.35.

6.36.

this arbitration with the least expenditure of time and expense; only after extensive
written submissions and denials in the Preliminary Objections phase did the Claim-
ant accept that: (i) it never had a “perfected right” to a concession; and (ii) it had
known of problems with its application and chose to try to lobby the Respondent’s

Government to change its legal requirements instead of complying with them.

In this jurisdictional phase, the Respondent submits that the Claimant sought to dis-
regard its own nationality and relevant treaty provisions, wrongly insisting on its
right to arbitrate even though it does not qualify to initiate CAFTA claims or to in-
voke ICSID jurisdiction against the Respondent; and that the Claimant again wasted
time and expense before accepting these straightforward facts. The Respondent cites,
as one example, the Claimant’s continuous invocation of the activities of the “Pa-
cific Rim Companies” to suggest that the Claimant had activities in the USA, even
though it was forced to admit that the Claimant is a passive holding company with

no activities beyond holding shares on paper.

The Respondent contends that these essential facts were not complicated; that these
jurisdictional objections could have been argued concisely; but that the Claimant
submitted a 256-page Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial and a 186-page Jurisdiction
Rejoinder, sticking to the tactic: “if the facts are against you, focus on the law; if the
law is against you, focus on the facts; if the law and the facts are against you, create

distractions and confusion.”

The Respondent submits that the Claimant cannot hide from the true facts of this
case: this dispute relates to the application for an environmental permit that was pre-
sumptively denied by the Respondent. By early 2007 at the latest, the Claimant
knew that the concession application could not be approved until it either revised
and resubmitted the application or succeeded in its efforts to change the Mining
Law; but Pacific Rim changed the Claimant’s nationality to the USA in December

2007 and later began these arbitration proceedings.

The Respondent contends that in all these circumstances, having been unfairly sub-
jected to the Claimant’s abusive process and to its abusive tactics and misconduct in

this arbitration, the Respondent should not be required to bear any of the Claimant’s

Part 6 - Page 11

(04)

6.37.

6.38.

6.39.

206

costs but, rather, that it is entitled to recover its own costs from the Claimant, as

submitted (in summary) below.
The Respondent’s Claim

The Respondent notes, as a preliminary matter, that costs only need to be addressed
at this stage if the Tribunal decides that it lacks jurisdiction as established by the Re-
spondent; and that, as the Tribunal indicated when instructing the Parties to address
costs with their post-hearing submissions, “obviously on one view of what happens
with our decision, we may have to address costs, and that's the claim ... which is
made by the Respondent.’?” Thus, according to the Respondent, despite the Claim-
ant's efforts to argue the contrary, the Claimant's claim for costs would only be rele-

vant if the Claimant were to prevail at the end of this arbitration.

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal has already seen enough to conclude
without hesitation that this arbitration must end now unfavourably for the Claimant.
The Respondent submits that the evidence establishes that this arbitration has been
abusive by the Claimant at different levels, beginning with Pacific Rim’s manipula-
tion of the Claimant's nationality to manufacture jurisdiction under CAFTA; fol-
lowed by the lack of merit in the Claimant’s main claim (an asserted entitlement to a
mining exploitation concession which the Claimant in fact did not have any right to
receive); and finally the manner in which the Claimant has conducted this arbitra-
tion; all leading to the result that this entire arbitration should now be dismissed with
an award at this jurisdictional phase; and accordingly that costs could and should be

awarded to the Respondent and against the Claimant.

The Respondent also notes that, even if the Claimant's costs claim were somehow
relevant, its claim was filed in contravention of the Tribunal's instructions to include
“a brief summary as regards both allocation and quantification of costs that are being
sought by both sides” with the Post-Hearing Submissions, which the Tribunal indi-
cated was to have a maximum length of fifty pages. Rather than abide by the Tribu-

nal’s instructions, the Claimant requested flexibility on the page limit and then

Hearing D3.764.

Part 6 - Page 12

6.40.

6.41.

6.42.

abused the Tribunal's indulgence in granting such flexibility by filing a separate thir-
teen-page written submission on costs, in addition to its full fifty-page Post-Hearing
Submissions. The Claimant thus circumvented the page-limit for the post-hearing
submissions, seeking to gain an unfair advantage over the Respondent; whereas the
Respondent fully abided by the Tribunal's fifty-page limit. Accordingly, the Respon-
dent contends that the Claimant's separate costs submission should be considered in-

admissible by the Tribunal.

Nevertheless, the Respondent states that, because the Claimant's costs submission
has been filed with the Tribunal as a part of the public record and includes many

misrepresentations, the Respondent is obliged to respond at length.

First, the Respondent submits that it did not “bifurcate” its objections to cause delay,
but to ensure that the Claimant's unmeritorious claims could be dismissed as effi-
ciently as possible; that the Claimant argued in the Preliminary Objections phase that
the Respondent brought too many objections; but that the Claimant now argues that
the Respondent, rather than limiting its Preliminary Objections, should have added
even more objections. In fact, the Respondent submits that it properly refrained in
the first phase from asserting its Abuse of Process, Denial of Benefits, Ratione Tem-
poris Objections (as well as its additional Objection to claims under the Investment
Law), because these objections needed to be decided without assuming the Claim-
ant's factual allegations to be true, required consideration of disputed facts, and
could not have been properly decided under the strict time-limit for the expedited

procedure required by CAFTA Article 10.20.5.

Second, the Respondent submits that the Preliminary Objections phase served a use-
ful purpose. It raised these Preliminary Objections to present undisputed facts to the
Tribunal that exposed fatal weaknesses in the Claimant's claims on the merits that
could have resulted in the early dismissal of the primary claims in this arbitration;
the Claimant, however, refused to provide additional facts that might have permitted
the Tribunal to come to an early decision, merely stating that its claims could not be
decided at a preliminary first phase in an expedited proceeding; that whereas the Re-
spondent had hoped to narrow the issues in this arbitration to save time and expense,

the Claimant successfully postponed an adverse decision by promising that it would

Part 6 - Page 13

6.44.

6.45.

6.46.

cure the serious weaknesses and deficiencies in the allegations made in the Notice of

Arbitration at a later time.

The Respondent contends that, even though the Tribunal decided to allow the arbi-
tration to continue with regard to all the Claimant's claims, the Tribunal noted that
the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections had served a useful purpose in the arbitra-
tion, as expressed in Paragraph 264 of the Tribunal’s Decision of 2 August 2010 (“...
as regards these particular claims, much of the costs so far incurred by the Parties
will not have been wasted. Much of the work required to bring these proceedings
forward ... to a conclusion has now been done. In the Tribunal's view, it is unlikely

that much time, effort and expenditure will have been lost overall).

The Respondent submits that the Preliminary Objections phase allowed the Tribunal
an early look at the weaknesses in the Claimant's claims; that, in addition, the filing
of the Preliminary Objections was helpful for the Tribunal's decision in this second
jurisdictional phase; that, by having engaged in an early discussion of what the dis-
pute was about (unaffected by a concurrent consideration of the Respondent’s abuse
of process objection), the Tribunal was able to see during the first phase that the Par-
ties’ dispute had started well before the Claimant's abusive change of nationality;
that had the Respondent not brought its Preliminary Objections before filing its
Abuse of Process objection, the Claimant would have without a doubt argued that it
was necessary to join the decision on jurisdiction to the merits of the dispute; and
that, because the Respondent brought its Preliminary Objections earlier, the Tribunal
had the evidence it needed to render an award declining jurisdiction at this stage.
Therefore, so the Respondent contends, there is no need to waste more time and re-
sources to reach the same result after a costly phase on the merits, which would have

included evidence and arguments on both liability and damages.

Third, the Respondent submits that the Claimant, not the Respondent, caused sig-
nificant delay and unnecessary additional expense in this arbitration: the Respondent
is the unwilling party in these proceedings; it was the Claimant which chose to initi-
ate this arbitration; the Claimant should have researched and understood the legal
and factual bases for its claims before forcing the Respondent into these arbitration

proceedings; had the Claimant done so, the costs of this arbitration could have been

Part 6 - Page 14

6.47.

6.48.

avoided; but, instead, the Respondent has had to expend considerable resources to
refute claims that should not have been made by the Claimant; and, once these
claims were refuted by the Respondent, the Claimant, rather than accepting the con-
sequences, constantly changed its positions on the facts and the law; and it now
wrongly accuses the Respondent of “hold[ing] various allegations or information in

reserve until the last minute in an effort to ambush Claimant.”

The Respondent notes that the Claimant’s complaints of “ambush” relate to matters
which should not have come as any surprise to the Claimant: (i) the Respondent’s
presentation of undisputed evidence in the Preliminary Objections first phase that its
Government had considered and rejected the Claimant's proposals to “interpret” or
amend the Mining Law to eliminate requirements that the Claimant's application for
an exploitation concession failed to meet (such as the requirement for ownership or
authorisation to use the surface land covering the concession area); and (ii) the Re-
spondent’s early notification to the USA of the Respondent’s intent to deny benefits

under CAFTA.

The Respondent submits that this evidence was not presented in order to ambush the
Claimant; but, rather, it was presented by the Respondent to prove facts that contra-
dicted the Claimant's case, which the Claimant knew or should have known when it
commenced this arbitration but which it did not present to the Tribunal. The Re-
spondent cites, as an example, the fact that the Claimant initiated this arbitration
based on a claim that it had met all the requirements for a concession application ex-
cept for the environmental permit; but when it was presented with the Respondent’s
evidence, the Claimant changed its position and admitted that it had been advised of
its failure to comply with the surface land ownership requirement in March 2005.
The Respondent argues that, after trying at the Preliminary Objections stage to cre-
ate a complicated dispute regarding the surface land issue, at the jurisdictional stage
the Claimant admitted that it had tried to get the Respondent’s Government to inter-
pret or amend the Mining Law to overcome the fact that the company's concession
application did not comply with the existing surface land requirement. As for the
Respondent’s denial of benefits under CAFTA, so the Respondent argues, that

should have come as no surprise to the Claimant, being wholly owned and controlled

Part 6 - Page 15

6.49.

6.50.

6.51.

6.52.

by a Canadian company, with no substantial business activities of its own in the

USA.

Fourth, the Respondent submits that the Respondent avoided delay by filing its ju-
risdictional objections immediately, instead of waiting until the due date for the fil-
ing of its counter-memorial on the merits (as it was entitled to do under the ICSID

Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rules).

The Respondent notes that it (the Respondent), the Claimant, and the Tribunal all
knew well in advance of the Tribunal's Decision of 2 August 2010 that some of the
Claimant's claims would not be dismissed during this first phase because such
claims were not subject to the Preliminary Objections. In keeping with its goal of
ending this arbitration as soon as possible, the Respondent decided to prepare imme-
diately to file objections to jurisdiction with regard to any surviving claims. The Re-
spondent was under no obligation to act so expeditiously; and, if it had actually
wanted to delay this arbitration and thereby increase the Claimant’s costs, it could
have waited for the Claimant to file its memorial on the merits, then raised its objec-
tions to jurisdiction and requested the suspension of the proceedings on the merits.

The Respondent did not do so.

Fifth, the Respondent contends that, in this case, there is ample evidence of the
Claimant's bad faith. The Respondent notes that the Claimant has asserted that the
Respondent was “reduced to arguing that [the Respondent] did not have to show any
bad faith on the part of Claimant, because bad faith is ‘inherent in this type of
abuse’.”” However, the Respondent submits that it presented ample evidence of the
Claimant's bad faith, and, in addition, noted that a tribunal need not find subjective
bad faith as an additional element once it is shown that a claimant manipulated its
corporate form to gain access to arbitral jurisdiction for an existing dispute, because

that manipulation (by itself) constitutes bad faith under international law.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant exhibited bad faith when it decided not to
mention to the Tribunal the crucial fact of its change of nationality anywhere in the
entire text of its Notice of Intent and Notice of Arbitration. Instead, the Claimant

only described itself as “an American investor organized under the laws of Nevada,”

Part 6 - Page 16

6.53.

6.54.

“a U.S. investor organized under the laws of Nevada,” and “a limited liability com-
pany duly organized under the laws of the state of Nevada, in the United States of
America.” Nowhere in the 131 paragraphs of the Notice of Arbitration is there any
reference to the change of nationality, much less to the date of that change. The Re-
spondent argues that the Claimant's attempts to argue that it provided notice of the
change of nationality to the Tribunal by including an exhibit for a different purpose
and not translated into English (that happened to include a reference to the change of

nationality) are, at best, disingenuous.

The Respondent also submits that the Claimant exhibited bad faith in asserting that
no one at Pacific Rim had any reason even to suspect there was a dispute with the
Respondent until reading a newspaper article in March 2008 reporting President
Saca’s speech, after the Claimant’s change of nationality, in spite of all the evidence
introduced during the Preliminary Objections first phase about the prior existence of
that dispute. The extremity of the Claimant's bad faith in this regard, so the Respon-
dent argues, was revealed when the Claimant's principal witness, Mr Shrake (as the
CEO and President of Pacific Rim), denied that the newspaper article alerted him to
the relevant measure invoked by the Claimant, namely the alleged de facto ban on

mining, which the Claimant now asserts gave rise to the Parties’ present dispute.

The Respondent further submits that the Claimant's bad faith was also demonstrated
by admissions and proof that other key factual assertions made by the Claimant were
similarly false or misleading: (i) the Claimant and its witnesses in their written wit-
ness statements repeatedly asserted that saving costs, rather than creating jurisdic-
tion, was “the primary factor behind” changing the Claimant's nationality; on oral
testimony at the Hearing, however, the Claimant's main witness (Mr Shrake) admit-
ted that saving costs was not the primary reason for the change of nationality; and
(ii) the Claimant asserted repeatedly that the Claimant was constantly assured
“through 2007 and into 2008” that it would receive the environmental permit; the
Claimant, however, could not and did not refute the Respondent’s proof at the Hear-
ing that there were no meetings with officials of the Salvadoran administration be-
tween January and December 2007; and therefore that there was no possibility that
any assurances were given in 2007, the year leading up to the Claimant's change of

nationality.

Part 6 - Page 17

6.55.

6.56.

6.57.

Accordingly, the Respondent contends that, whilst it was not required to make any
additional showing of bad faith once it had demonstrated the improper manipulation
of the Claimant’s corporate form in order to gain jurisdiction under CAFTA, it has

nonetheless proved the Claimant’s bad faith.

Sixth, the Respondent submits that Mr Parada's testimony only became necessary as
a result of the Claimant's own misconduct. According to the Respondent, Mr Parada
never imagined he would be a factual witness in this arbitration until August 2010
when the Claimant, in an effort to survive the Respondent’s Abuse of Process objec-
tion, wrongly alleged that no-one in the Claimant knew or could have known that
there was a dispute with the Respondent before reading the newspaper article on 11
March 2008 reporting President Saca’s speech. The Respondent submits that, in fact,
Mr Parada’s testimony (and all that has been associated with it) would have been
completely unnecessary if the Claimant had not raised this absurd allegation, or if
the Claimant in September 2010 had simply responded to the Respondent’s ques-
tions and admitted the true facts which it finally admitted much later in April 2011;
namely: the Claimant's retention of international arbitration counsel with regard to
the Respondent in October 2007 and such counsel's attendance with their client at a
lunch for President Saca in November 2007, before the Claimant's change of na-

tionality in December 2007.

The Respondent notes that the Claimant maintained that there was no dispute with
the Respondent before March 2008; that the Claimant asserted, “prior to March
2008, Claimant had no reason to believe that this temporary impasse would not be
resolved”; and that the report of President Saca's speech in March 2008 “was the
first time that Claimant believed that its legal rights under Salvadoran and interna-
tional law were being 'positively opposed’ by El Salvador.” As a result of these as-
sertions, the Respondent included questions about the Claimant's counsel in its re-
quest for documents and information, explaining that because “the August 17, 2010
letter denies that Pac Rim Cayman's change in nationality of December 2007 en-
abled the company to begin CAFTA arbitration about a dispute that already existed,”
the “timing of the relationship between Pac Rim Cayman and its international arbi-

tration counsel” would be “relevant and material” to the Abuse of Process objection.

Part 6 - Page 18

6.58.

6.59.

6.60.

The Respondent acknowledges, of course, that it knew that the Claimant's statements
were false, but the Respondent wanted to do everything possible to get the Claimant

itself to admit the true facts without the need for any testimony from Mr Parada.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant, however, rather than simply admitting at
this time the facts that it later admitted, responded by mischaracterising those facts
and arguing that the Respondent’s questions were irrelevant: according to the
Claimant, “[t]he issue of when Claimant or any of its affiliates decided to hire lobby-
ists or lawyers or any other service providers to assist them with the issues they were
facing in El Salvador (which, as of December 2007, principally involved the failure
of Salvadoran regulators to rule on Claimant's application for a mining concession at
the El Dorado site) has nothing to do with any question before the Tribunal”. In re-
sponse, so the Respondent submits, it was required to reiterate its request, explaining
again that the questions relating to the Claimant's counsel were directly relevant to
establishing when the Parties’ dispute existed and whether the Claimant's nationality
was changed to gain access to CAFTA jurisdiction; specifically, so the Respondent
wrote: “it would be important to know if, for example, an attorney for Claimant met
with a then-government official from El Salvador before Pac Rim Cayman's change
in nationality and mentioned the possibility of initiating arbitration against El Salva-

dor unless El Salvador granted the concession”.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant continued to refuse to provide the in-
formation, responding that such information was irrelevant; “the possibility of any
such meeting appears to be purely speculative on Respondent's part”; and “[t]his sort
of ‘fishing expedition’ might be commonplace in U.S.-style litigation”, but it is “not
permitted under the norms of international arbitration generally or the standards of

ICSID arbitration particularly.”

In its Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal granted most of the Respondent’s re-
quests for information but not those relating to the Claimant's counsel, reserving this
issue until after the first round of written pleadings. The Respondent renewed its re-
quests for information after the Claimant filed its Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial and

witness statements, insisting that, “[i]t was only after President Saca's announcement

Part 6 - Page 19

6.61.

6.62.

6.63.

of a de facto mining ban in March 2008 that we began to believe that a dispute with

the Government was a real possibility.”

As the Respondent then explained: “Claimant's continued allegations in its Counter-
Memorial make the information and documents requested in El Salvador's requests
numbers 10, 11, 12, and 13 even more relevant than before. As noted in El Salva-
dor's original request, the timing of the relationship between [the Claimant] and its
international arbitration counsel, as well as the identity of the client, are material for
the Tribunal to make a decision regarding the reason why Pacific Rim decided to
change the nationality of the Claimant from the Cayman Islands to the United States
in December 2007. The issue is fundamental to the Tribunal's decision on the Objec-
tions to Jurisdiction because Claimant and its counsel have emphatically denied El
Salvador's abuse of process objection and instead have accused El Salvador of fabri-
cating the reasons for this objection.” The Respondent ended its renewed request by
noting that, if these questions remained unanswered, the Respondent would seek
permission from the Tribunal to introduce evidence contradicting the assertions
made by the Claimant; but the Claimant continued to refuse to answer the Respon-

dent’s questions and to insist that such questions were irrelevant.

By letter dated 22 February 2011, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to order the
Respondent to produce any information it had relating to “any Crowell & Moring
lawyer having attended any meetings with Salvadoran officials prior to Pac Rim
Cayman's domestication to Nevada in December 2007.” The Respondent submits
that it was only in response to that letter, given also the Claimant's refusal to answer
the relevant questions, that Mr Parada was obliged to inform the Tribunal that he
knew that the Claimant was not stating the true facts, explaining that he had been
told directly by the Claimant's counsel (before the change of the Claimant’s national-
ity in December 2007) that such counsel represented their client in a dispute with the
Respondent and that their client was planning on commencing an arbitration under

CAFTA, if this client did not receive its mining concession from the Respondent.

In response to Mr Parada's letter to the Tribunal, the Respondent submits that it was
the Claimant which urged the Tribunal to order Mr Parada to submit a sworn witness

statement: “Not only does Claimant not oppose Mr Parada's request. To the contrary,

Part 6 - Page 20

6.64.

6.65.

6.66.

Claimant submits that under the circumstances, the Tribunal should order Mr Parada
to resubmit his 4 March 2011 letter as a sworn witness statement and to make him-
self available for cross-examination by Claimant's counsel during the hearing.” Ac-
ceding to the Claimant's request, the Tribunal then ordered the Respondent to submit
Mr Parada's sworn statement and required him to be available for cross-examination

at the Hearing, as he was.

The Respondent contends that it was only after Mr Parada was ordered to submit a
sworn statement and to be available for cross-examination that the Claimant finally
admitted, ten days before the Hearing, that “[a]n attorney-client relationship between
Crowell & Moring and Pacific Rim Mining Corp. and its subsidiaries ... commenced
on or around [24 October 2007]” and that Mr Ali and another of Claimant's counsel
attended a lunch where President Saca was the keynote speaker on 28 November
2007. According to the Respondent, there is no excuse for the Claimant to have put
the Respondent and the Tribunal through seven months of denials and evasions and
then force Mr Parada to become a witness in this arbitration before giving these an-
swers to the Respondent’s questions, when truthful, timely answers could have

avoided the entire situation.

Under these circumstances, the Respondent submits that it is ironic for the Claimant
to base its request that the Respondent should pay costs on the assertion that Mr
Parada's testimony was somehow improper. The Respondent argues that there is no
basis for this assertion: as an international arbitral tribunal, this Tribunal is not
bound by the rules of any U.S. jurisdiction; there is no rule preventing the Tribunal
from accepting Mr Parada’s testimony; and there is no rule preventing the Claimant
from submitting its own rebuttal testimony, which it chose not to do at the Hearing.
According to ICSID Arbitration Rule 34: “(t]he Tribunal shall be the judge of the
admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value’); and, thus, the
Tribunal has full discretion to decide what evidence to admit and to determine the

relevance and materiality of any proffered evidence.

The Respondent submits that even under the American Bar Association Model Rule
(cited by the Claimant) as discouraging lawyers from representing parties in trials

where the lawyer is likely to be a witness, it was acceptable and appropriate for Mr

Part 6 - Page 21

6.67.

6.68.

Parada to provide his witness statement in this case; and it would have been accept-
able and appropriate for Mr Ali and Mr de Gramont to testify as factual witnesses at
the Hearing if they believed that anything in Mr Parada's statement was inaccurate.
The Respondent repeats that Mr Parada could not have anticipated that he would
need to become a factual witness in this arbitration until the Claimant argued,
falsely, that it could not have known that there was a dispute until after March 2008.
As for Mr Ali and Mr de Gramont, if they did not believe that Mr Parada's testimony
was accurate, the model rule would not apply to them because it would not have
been in any way foreseeable that they would be necessary factual witnesses when
they agreed to represent the Claimant as counsel; and, in addition, they could have

testified under the ‘substantial hardship exception’ to protect their client's interests.

In fact, the Respondent submits that the Claimant never denied the truth of Mr
Parada's account, even in correspondence after Mr Parada filed his witness statement
with the Tribunal. In its letter of 14 March 2011, the Claimant requested documents
relating to Mr Parada's statement, claiming that the documents provided with the
original statement were “highly selective”; as the Respondent noted in its response
to this letter: “The most important aspect of Claimant's request is that Claimant has
not contested the facts in Mr Parada's Witness Statement. Claimant should not be
permitted to instead use innuendo to imply that the facts in Mr Parada's Witness
Statement are not true. If Claimant and its counsel actually believe that the facts are
not as Mr Parada asserts in his Witness Statement, they can submit witness state-
ments from Mr Ali and Mr de Gramont to that effect. They should not be allowed to

instead waste the Tribunal's time with a request for irrelevant information.”

The Claimant responded on 23 March 2011, defending its requests for documents,
but still not denying the facts stated in Mr Parada's written testimony; and the Re-
spondent again highlighted the lack of denial in its next letter to the Tribunal: “The
most significant aspect of Mr Posner's letter [for the Claimant] is not what it says,
but what it still fails to say. There is no mention in Mr Posner's letter that he has dis-
cussed Mr Parada's Statement with the two partners from Claimant's counsel that
have direct knowledge of the conversations recounted by Mr Parada to ask them to
confirm or deny the truth of his declaration [i.e. Mr Ali and Mr de Gramont].” Ac-

cording to the Respondent, the Claimant did not deny the facts in Mr Parada's state-

Part 6 - Page 22

6.69.

6.70.

6.71.

ment in the communications with the Tribunal regarding procedural issues leading
up to the hearing originally scheduled to begin on 23 March 2011 or during the pro-

cedural meeting held by telephone conference-call preceding that intended hearing.

The Respondent states that it urged the Claimant directly to respond to Mr Parada's
testimony in its letter of 22 April 2011: “El Salvador also notes - again - that Claim-
ant continues to insist on document production from Mr Parada, while failing to tell
the Tribunal whether Mr de Gramont and Mr Ali confirm or deny that they were al-
ready working for [Pacific Rim] and preparing for this arbitration before [Pacific
Rim] changed [the Claimant’s] nationality to allow it to become the Claimant in this
arbitration. Claimant's answer to this question could save the parties and the Tribu-
nal considerable time and expense in disposing of this case.” The Respondent sub-
mits that, after refusing to answer the Respondent’s questions for seven months, the
Claimant finally admitted the truth of most of Mr Parada's testimony by its letter
dated 22 April 2011; but that, even then, the Claimant persisted in having the Tribu-
nal call Mr Parada as an oral witness at the Hearing and there conducted an intensive
cross-examination aimed at impugning Mr Parada's credibility, without ever indicat-
ing that Mr Ali and Mr de Gramont denied any part of Mr Parada's factual testi-

mony.

The Respondent concludes that, given multiple opportunities, Mr Ali and Mr de
Gramont never denied the truth of any of Mr Parada's statements; that Mr Parada's
early factual knowledge about the dispute with the Respondent and the potential ar-
bitration could have only come from the Claimant's own counsel; that the Claimant's
attacks on Mr Parada's credibility as a factual witness are baseless; and that all this
can clearly not entitle the Claimant to costs based on Mr Parada's testimony but,

rather, the reverse.

In conclusion, the Respondent submits that this arbitration concerning a pre-existing
dispute between the Parties regarding claims arising from the failure to issue a con-
cession that the Claimant did not have a right to receive should never have been ini-
tiated against the Respondent; and that, having been unfairly subjected to this abu-
sive process by the Claimant and to the Claimant's abusive tactics in this arbitration,

the Respondent is entitled to recover its costs from the Claimant.

Part 6 - Page 23

6.72.

6.73.

6.74.

(05)

6.75.

As to the amount of such costs, the Respondent submits the following figures:

 

 

 

 

 

The Respondent’s Statement of Costs

Attorneys’ fees US$3,610,651.75
Other Expenses UD$447,068.21
Amounts paid or due to ICSID US$250,000.00
TOTAL: US$4,307,719.96

 

 

 

 

The Respondent notes that its own claim for attorneys’ fees for this arbitration total
US$3,610,651.75 and that the Claimant's attorneys’ fees total US$4,147,010.00 for

the two rounds of objections: a significant difference of US$536,358.25.

The Respondent submits that, given that the Respondent had to carry the burden of
proof for its two sets of objections, there is no reason that the Claimant's legal fees
should be higher than the Respondent’s legal fees. Nevertheless, the Respondent
submits that the Claimant's higher legal fees are evidence that the amount of legal
fees incurred by the Respondent is a reasonable amount for the Tribunal to include

in its award as compensation for the Respondent’s legal costs.

The Claimant’s Response

The Claimant responds that the Respondent's claim for costs is remarkable in that
nowhere does it identify a legal rule for the Tribunal to apply in deciding how to al-
locate the costs of this arbitration to date; that, rather than argue any relevant legal
points of law, the Respondent merely repeats arguments underlying its jurisdictional
objections and the baseless accusation that the Claimant has not acted “honestly and
in good faith”; that if its objections are well-founded (which they are not), that it
should then automatically be entitled to have the Claimant “bear all the costs and
expenses incurred by El Salvador in this arbitration.” The Claimant argues that the
Respondent cites no authority for this proposition, because there is none in CAFTA,
the ICSID Convention or in any other source of law applicable to this international

arbitration.

Part 6 - Page 24

6.76.

(06)

6.77.

6.78.

6.79.

The Claimant submits that the Respondent's repetition of its jurisdictional arguments
contrasts adversely with the Claimant's costs submission, which articulates the rele-
vant legal standard; explains why the application of that standard justifies an award
of costs against the Respondent in this case; and then quantifies those costs. The
Claimant notes that it has already addressed the Respondent's jurisdictional argu-
ments in its written and oral submissions; and as the Respondent has identified no
other basis for its costs submission, the Tribunal should decline the Respondent's re-

quest for an award of costs.

The Tribunal’s Analysis and Decisions

The Tribunal decides to receive in full all the submissions on costs made by the Par-
ties; and it rejects the application by the Respondent to exclude the Claimant’s sepa-

rate written submission on costs.

As regards the first phase of these arbitration proceedings resulting in the Tribunal’s
Decision of 2 August 2010, the Tribunal sees at present no reason to depart from its
original decision expressed in Paragraph 266(3) of that Decision; namely, that the
Tribunal would reserve its powers to order legal and arbitration costs under CAFTA
Article 10.20.6 relating to that first phase “until the final stage of these arbitration
proceedings.” The Tribunal notes, of course, that the Claimant’s CAFTA Claims
cannot proceed beyond this Decision on Jurisdiction; but nonetheless the Tribunal
thinks that it may be appropriate to weigh in the balance for the purpose of its discre-
tion on such costs the final result of the Claimant’s Non-CAFTA Claims, principally
because both Claims relate to the same essential complaint (albeit advanced in dif-

ferent legal terms under separate instruments).

As regards this second phase of these arbitration proceedings resulting in this Deci-
sion on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal considers that neither the Claimant nor the Re-
spondent can be regarded as having either wholly succeeded or wholly lost their re-
spective cases. Whilst the Claimant’s CAFTA Claims can no longer proceed in this
arbitration as a result of this Decision, the Claimant’s Non-CAFTA Claims may now

proceed to the merits of the Parties’ dispute.

Part 6 - Page 25

6.80.

6.81.

6.82.

6.83.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that, in the exercise of its discretion
under ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(1), the eventual result of these Non-CAFTA
Claims on the merits may provide a highly relevant factor to any decision as to the
final allocation of legal and arbitration costs between the Parties. Indeed, the Par-
ties’ respective cases on costs, as summarised above, closely mirror their different
submissions as to those eventual merits. Accordingly, as a matter of discretion, the
Tribunal declines to make an order at this stage as regards the allocation of any legal
or arbitration costs incurred during this second phase of these arbitration proceed-

ings.

The Tribunal also notes that its powers as to costs under the ICSID Arbitration Rules
are limited to an order in an award; and that this Decision is not an “award” within

the meaning of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

It remains nevertheless appropriate for the Tribunal to state at this stage certain con-
clusions regarding the Parties’ respective arguments on costs. First, the Tribunal
does not criticise the conduct of the Respondent or its Counsel (including Mr
Parada) for submitting to the Tribunal factual evidence of certain events in Novem-
ber and December 2007 apparently disputed by the Claimant and then potentially
relevant to the issues of jurisdiction. It would be possible here to say much more;
but, given that this arbitration will continue further, the Tribunal considers it best to
state this conclusion succinctly on what must now be regarded as a dead issue for the
future of these arbitration proceedings. As regards the Claimant, the Tribunal simi-
larly discounts the Respondent’s criticism of its conduct during these arbitration
proceedings. Again, the less here said, the better in what was inevitably an uncom-

fortable controversy.

Lastly, the Tribunal intends that its lengthy summary of the Parties’ other arguments
on costs, as set out above, will provide a written record which it will be unnecessary
for the Parties to duplicate later in these arbitration proceedings. In the meantime,
until an award or the final stage of these proceedings, the Tribunal reserves in full all
its powers and jurisdiction in regards to legal and arbitration costs as regards both

Parties’ existing and future claims.

Part 6 - Page 26

PART 7: THE OPERATIVE PART

TA. For the reasons and on the grounds set out above, the Tribunal finally decides

as follows:

(A) As to the Claimant’s CAFTA Claims:

(1) the Tribunal dismi: the R dent’s jurisdictional objecti based

on the “Abuse of Process” issue;

(2) the Tribunal dismi: the R dent’s jurisdictional objecti based

Pp

 

on the “Ratione Temporis” issue;

(3) the Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections based on
the “Denial of Benefits” issue; and

(4) the Tribunal accordingly declares that the International Centre for Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes (“the Centre”) and this Tribunal have no
jurisdiction or competence to decide such CAFTA Claims in these arbi-
tration proceedings pursuant to CAFTA Articles 10.16, 10.17 and ICSID
Article 25(1);

(B) As to the Claimant’s Claims under the Investment Law, the Tribunal dis-
misses the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections and declares that the Cen-
tre and this Tribunal have jurisdiction and competence to decide such Claims

in these arbitration proceedings pursuant to ICSID Article 25(1);
(C) As to Costs, the Tribunal here makes no order as to any legal or arbitration

costs, whilst specifically reserving in full its jurisdiction and powers as to all

orders for costs at the final stage of these arbitration proceedings; and

Part 7 - Page 1

(D) As to all other matters, the Tribunal retains in full its jurisdiction and
powers generally to decide such matters in these arbitration proceedings,

whether by order, decision or award.

ICSID, Washington DC, USA.

Professor Dr Guido Santiago Tawil: _

 

Date:
Professor Brigitte Stern: er (Ue Se, 4.
Date:
V.V. Veeder Esq (President): Kau Vee Por
Date:

Part 7 - Page 2

