IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL CENTRE
FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES (“ICSID”)

BROUGHT UNDER THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC-CENTRAL AMERICA-UNITED
STATES FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (“CAFTA”) AND THE INVESTMENT LAW OF
EL SALVADOR

(ICSID CASE NO. ARB/09/12)

BETWEEN:

PAC RIM CAYMAN LLC

Claimant

THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR

Respondent

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S
PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS

UNDER CAFTA ARTICLES 10.20.4 AND 10.20.5

 

THE TRIBUNAL:
Professor Dr Guido Santiago Tawil;
Professor Brigitte Stern; and
V.V.Veeder Esq (President)

ICSID Tribunal Secretary:

Marco Tulio Montanés-Rumayor

Table of Contents

I: Introduction

A: The Parties

 

 

B: The Dispute

 

C: The Arbitration Agreement
D: The Arbitral Tribunal

 

E: The Arbitral Procedure

NON WN NK

 

F: The Parties’ Claimed Relief.

II: The Relevant Issues.

 

Introduction

The Respondent's Preliminary Objections

III: The Relevant Legal Texts.

 

Introduction

CAFTA Article 10.16

 

CAFTA Article 10.18

 

CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 & 10.205 veecccsceccscecsvcccesecieeeieeeteseeies

CAFTA Article 10.22

 

IV: The Relevant Factual All

A: Introduction

B: The Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration .....c.cccccccceees sete te terete eee

C: President Saca

 

V. CAFTA Article 10.20.4.

 

A: Introduction

B: CAFTA Article 10.20.4.

 

C: The Tribunal’s Analysis

 

General Approach

 

16
16
16

19
19
19
21
22

25
25
25
44

46
46
46
47
47

Standard of Review

 

D: The Tribunal’s Conclusion:

VI: The Application of CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 & 10.20.5 c.ccccccceess sete eset eseeeeneneeeiees

A: Introduction
B: The Respondent’s Case
El Dorado Claim

 

 

Santa Rita Claim

 

Other CAFTA Claims

 

Non-CAFTA Claims

 

C: The Claimant’s Case.

 

El Dorado Claim

 

Santa Rita Claim

 

Other CAFTA Claims

 

Non-CAFTA Claims

 

D: The Tribunal’s Decisions.
El Dorado Claim

 

Santa Rita Claim

 

Other CAFTA Claims

 

Non-CAFTA Claims

 

VII: The Tribunal’s Summary

 

VUII: Costs

 

IX: The Operative Part

 

52
54

55
55
55
55
64
65
66
72
72
78
79

84
84
85
85
86

88

89

91

Glossary of Defined Terms

“CAFTA” means the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement
of 2004.

“DOREX” means Dorado Exploraciones, Sociedad An6énima de Capital Variable.

“Enterprises” means Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable (also
called “PRES”) and Dorado Exploraciones, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable (also called
“DOREX”).

“Governmental Ethics Law” means Ley de Etica Gubernamental (the Respondent’s
Governmental Ethics Law).

“ICSID Convention” means the International Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes of 1965.

“Investment Law” means Ley de Inversiones (the Respondent’s Investment Law).

“MARN” means Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (the Respondent’s
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources).

“MINEC” means Ministerio de Economia (the Respondent’s Ministry of Economy).
“Mining Law” means Ley de Mineria (the Respondent’s Mining Law of 1995, amended in 2001).

“ONT” means Oficina Nacional de Inversiones (the National Office of Investments, a division of
MINEC).

“Pacific Rim” means Pacific Rim Mining Corporation.
“PRC” means the Claimant (Pac Rim Cayman LLC).

“PRES” means Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad An6énima de Capital Variable.

iii

List of Selected Legal Materials

Treaties:

The Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement of 2004
The ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes of 1965

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969

Salvadoran Laws:

Investment Law, Legislative Decree No. 732, 14 October 1999

Mining Law, Legislative Decree No. 544, 14 December 1995, amended by Legislative Decree
No. 475, 11 July 2001

Regulations of the Mining Law and its Amendments, Legislative Decree No. 47, 20 June 2003
Arbitral Materials:

Brandes Investment Partners LP v. Venezuela, \CSID Case No ARB/08/3, Decision on
Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 2 February 2009

Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil SA v. Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/19,
Award, 12 August 2008

Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, UNCITAL Arbitration Rules, IIC 166 (2002),
Partial Award, 7 August 2002

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction under CAFTA Article 10.20.5, 17 November 2008

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Decision on Clarification Request of the Decision on Jurisdiction, 13 January 2009

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No ARB/07/23,
Second Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 18 May 2010

TCW Group, Inc. and Dominican Energy Holdings, L.P. v. The Dominican Republic,
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 21 November 2008

TCW Group, Inc. and Dominican Energy Holdings, L.P. v. The Dominican Republic, Claimant’ s
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 13 February 2009

Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CS1D Case No. ARB/07/25,
Decision on Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 12 May
2008

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award,
2 June 2000

Other Materials:

Antonietti, Aurélia. “The 2006 Amendments to the ICSID Rules and Regulations and the
Additional Facility Rules”, 27 ICSID Review: Foreign Investment Law Journal 427 (2006)

, 129 S. Ct. 1937 (2009)

 

Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S.
Kinnear (et al). Investment Disputes under NAFTA, An Annotated Guide to Chapter 11 (2006)

Leathley, Christian. /nternational Dispute Resolution in Latin America: An Institutional
Overview (2007)

Menaker, Andrea J. “Benefiting from Recent Experience: Developments in the United States’
Most Recent Investment Agreements”, 12 U.C. Davis Journal of International Law & Policy 121
(2005)

Message from the President of the United States Transmitting Legislation and Supporting
Documents to Implement the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade
Agreement, 23 June 2005

Neitzke v. Williams, 490 U.S. 319 (1989)

Parra, Antonio R. “Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations,” Working Paper of
the ICSID Secretariat, 12 May 2005

Parra, Antonio R. “The Development of the Regulations and Rules of the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes,” 41 The International Lawyer 47 (2007)

Schreuer, et al. The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd ed. 2009)

Sheppard, Audley. “The Jurisdictional Threshold of a Prima-Facie Case” in The Oxford
Handbook of International Investment Law (2008)

Williams, David. “Jurisdiction and Admissibility” in The Oxford Handbook of International
Investment Law (2008)

PART I: INTRODUCTION

A: The Parties

1. The Claimant: The named Claimant is Pac Rim Cayman LLC (also called “Pac Rim
Cayman” or “PRC”), a legal person organized under the laws of Nevada, USA, with its
principal office at 3545 Airway Drive, Suite 105, Reno, NV 89511, USA. The
Claimant is owned by Pacific Rim Mining Corporation (also called “Pacific Rim’), a
legal person organized under the laws of Canada. In these arbitration proceedings, the
Claimant advances several claims against the Respondent both on its own behalf and

on behalf of its subsidiary companies, collectively described as the “Enterprises.”

2. The Enterprises: The Enterprises are legal persons organized under the laws of the
Respondent, namely: (i) Pacific Rim El Salvador, Sociedad Anénima de Capital
Variable (also called “PRES”), with its principal office at 5 Avda. Norte, No. 16,
Barrio San Antonio, Sensuntepeque, Cabafias, El Salvador; and (ii) Dorado
Exploraciones, Sociedad An6énima de Capital Variable (also called “DOREX”’’), with
its principal office at the same address. PRES is the owner of certain rights in the
mining areas denominated as “El Dorado Norte,” “El Dorado Sur” and “Santa
Rita,” and DOREX is the owner of certain rights in the mining areas denominated
as “Huacuco,” “Pueblos” and “Guaco.” These mining areas are located in Cabafias and

San Vicente, in the northern part of El Salvador.

3. ICSID & CAFTA: The Claimant is a national of a Contracting State to the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “ICSID Convention”), namely the USA.
The USA is a Contracting State to the Dominican Republic-Central America-United
States Free Trade Agreement (“CAFTA”), in force for the USA as from August 2005.

4. The Claimant’s legal representatives are Arif H. Ali, R. Alexandre de Gramont,
R. Timothy McCrum, and Theodore Posner Esgqs, all of Crowell & Moring LLP, 101
Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington DC 20004, USA.

The Respondent: The Respondent is the Republic of El Salvador. For present
purposes, the relevant Ministries of the Respondent’s Government are (i) the Ministry
of Economy, Ministerio de Economia, (also called “MINEC”); and (ii) the Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources, Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales
(also called “MARN”); and the relevant division within MINEC is the National Office

of Investments, Oficina Nacional de Inversiones (also called “ONT’).

The Respondent is a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention. It is a Contracting

State to CAFTA, in force for the Respondent as from March 2006.

The Respondent’s legal representatives are Lic. Romeo Benjamin Barahona, Fiscal
General de la Reptiblica, Fiscalfa General de la Reptiblica, Final 48 Calle Oriente y 19
Avenida Sur, Residencial Primavera, Santa Tecla, La Libertad, EI Salvador; and
Derek C. Smith and Luis Parada Esqs, both of Dewey & LeBoeuf LLP, 1101 New
York Avenue, NW., Suite 1100, Washington D.C. 20005, USA.

B: The Dispute

8.

The Claims: As asserted by the Claimant (but denied by the Respondent), the claims
pleaded by the Claimant and the Enterprises allege (i) the Respondent’s arbitrary and
discriminatory conduct, lack of transparency, unfair and inequitable treatment in
failing to act upon the Enterprises’ applications for a mining exploitation concession
and environmental permits following the Claimant’s discovery of valuable deposits of
gold and silver under exploration licenses granted by MINEC for the Respondent;
(ii) the Respondent’s failure to protect the Claimant’s investments in accordance with
the provisions of its own law and (iii) the Respondent’s unlawful expropriation of the

investments of the Claimant and the Enterprises in El Salvador.

It will be necessary for the Tribunal to examine more closely the factual allegations
made by the Claimant later in this decision. For present purposes, the factual and legal

bases for the Claimant’s claim may be summarized as follows:

As alleged, the Claimant advances claims arising out of unlawful and politically
motivated measures taken against the Claimant’s investments by the Government of
the Respondent, acting by its President (President Saca), the Ministries, MARN and
MINEC.

It is alleged that in 2002 the Respondent induced and encouraged Pacific Rim, the
Claimant and the Enterprises to spend tens of millions of US dollars to undertake
mineral exploration activities in El Salvador acting with licenses duly granted by the
Respondent’s Government, in accordance with Salvadoran law and with the approval
of Salvadoran officials; and that the Enterprises proceeded to explore for and find gold
and silver and then to prepare for their extraction. It is alleged that under Salvadoran
law and according to the Government’s direct and explicit representations, the
Enterprises were entitled to proceed to extract such minerals upon the successful
completion of the exploration phase. The Claimant and the Enterprises had devoted
enormous resources to approved exploration activities and in pursuing the proper

regulatory procedures in order to pursue the subsequent extraction phase.

It is alleged that the investments made by the Claimant and the Enterprises included
(inter alia) building infrastructure, community development initiatives, mineral
exploration and mine development conducted in an environmentally and socially

responsible manner.

However, in March 2008, it is alleged that President Saca abruptly and without any
justification announced that, as President, he opposed granting any new mining
permits to the Enterprises. This announcement followed an extended period during
which the Respondent had ceased to communicate with the Enterprises. Without
governmental action, the Enterprises could not exercise what they considered as their
vested rights, which had been earned through the costly and time-consuming mineral

exploration phase, to proceed to the extraction and exploitation phase.

It is alleged that, although the Enterprises pressed for an explanation of why they had

been effectively shut off from communication with the Government, only after

3

President Saca’s announcement did the Enterprises understand that they had become
the target of something other than mere bureaucratic delay or incompetence. Rather,
President Saca, without any legal or other valid reason, had simply decided to shut
down the Enterprises and deprive them and the Claimant of their substantial and long-

term investments in El Salvador.

As a result of the Government’s actions and inactions, it is alleged that the rights held
by the Enterprises were rendered virtually worthless and the Claimant’s investments in
El Salvador were effectively destroyed, causing losses to the Claimant and the

Enterprises measured in hundreds of millions of US dollars.

In light of the Government’s actions and inactions, it is alleged by the Claimant that

the Respondent breached its obligations under Section A of CAFTA, namely:

(i) CAFTA Article 10.3: “National Treatment”;

(ii) CAFTA Article 10.4: “Most-Favored Nation Treatment”;

(iii) CAFTA Article 10.5: “Minimum Standard of Treatment”;

(iv) CAFTA Article 10.7: “Expropriation and Compensation”; and

(v) CAFTA Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B): as to “investment authorizations.”

The Claimant also alleges that the Respondent has breached the Salvadoran Investment
Law, which prohibits expropriation without compensation, as well as unjustified or
discriminatory measures which may hinder the establishment, administration, use,
usufruct, extension, sale and liquidation of foreign investments (Articles 5 — Equal

Protection, 6 — Non-discrimination and 8 — Expropriation).

The Claimant also alleges that the Respondent has breached the Salvadoran Mining
Law (Articles 8, 14, 19 and 23), Article 86 of the Salvadoran Constitution, Article 1 of
the Salvadoran Civil Code and Article 4(j) of the Salvadoran Governmental Ethics

Law.

20.

The Claimant alleges that, as a result of the Respondent’s unlawful actions and
inactions, the Claimant and the Enterprises have incurred damages measured in
hundreds of millions of US dollars, including investment expenses in excess of US$ 77

million, together with interest.

The Answers: The Respondent denies all the Claimant’s allegations in the strongest
terms. The Respondent also does not accept the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to decide
these claims on their merits. More immediately, the Respondent submits that almost
all these claims are ‘inadmissible’ under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5, which

submission is the subject-matter of this decision.

C: The Arbitration Agreement

21.

22.

23.

The arbitration agreement between the Parties, as invoked in paragraph 19 of the
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, results, on the one hand, from the consents expressed
by the Respondent in Article 10.17 of CAFTA and Article 15(a) of the Investment
Law and, on the other hand, from the consent expressed thereto by the Claimant in its

Request for Arbitration.

Article 10.17 of CAFTA provides (in the English version), in relevant part:

“I. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under
this Section [i.e. Section B: “Investor-State Dispute Settlement”] in
accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent under paragraph I and the submission of a claim to
arbitration under this Section shall satisfy the requirements of: (a)
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) ... for
written consent of the parties to the dispute ...”

Article 15(a) of the Investment Law provides (as translated by the Claimant from the

original Spanish into English), in relevant part:

“In the case of disputes arising among foreign investors and the State,
regarding their investments in El Salvador, the investors may submit the

controversy to: (a) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), in order to settle the dispute by ... arbitration, in
accordance with the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Investors of Other States (ICSID Convention) ... vl

24. The Claimant submits that each of its claims, disputed by the Respondent, give rise, as
regards the ICSID Convention, to a legal dispute between the Respondent as a
Contracting State and the Claimant as a national of another Contracting State, arising
directly out of an investment, which the Claimant and the Respondent have consented
in writing to submit to the Centre (ICSID), within the meaning of the ICSID

Convention.

25. The Claimant also submits, as regards the Investment Law, that its disputed claims
likewise give rise to a dispute between the Claimant as a foreign investor and the
Respondent as the State relating to an investment made by the Claimant in El
Salvador, within the meaning of the Investment Law, which the Claimant and the
Respondent have consented in writing to submit to the Centre (ICSID), within the

meaning of the ICSID Convention.

26. Pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.18.4, the Claimant affirmed in its Notice of Arbitration
that neither the Claimant nor the Enterprises had previously submitted any of the
breaches alleged in the Notice of Arbitration to any other binding dispute resolution
procedure for adjudication or resolution (paragraph 23); and, further, the Claimant
pleaded in its Notice of Arbitration, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.18.2(b)(ii), that the
Claimant and the Enterprises waived their rights to initiate or continue any domestic
proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach in the Notice of

Arbitration (paragraph 24).

 

' The original Spanish text of Article 15 of the Investment Law provides: “En caso que surgieren controversias 6
diferencias entre los inversionistas nacionales o extranjeros y el Estado, referentes a inversiones de aquellos,
efectuadas en El Salvador, las partes podran acudir a los tribunales de justicia competentes, de acuerdo a los
procedimientos legales. En el caso de ias surgidas entre inversi jeros y el Estado, ref

a inversiones de aquellos efectuadas en EI Salvador, los inversionistas podran remitir la controversia: (a) Al Centro
Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones (CIADI), con el objeto de resolver la controversia
mediante conciliacién y arbitraje, de conformidad con el Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de otros Estados (Convenio del CIADI); ...”

 
  

 

6

27.

28.

A copy of such waiver, the original of which was delivered to the Respondent with the
Notice of Arbitration, was attached as Exhibit 1 to the Notice of Arbitration. It was

later amended, as described below.

In addition to such waiver, the Claimant and the Enterprises sought to reserve the right
in the Notice of Arbitration, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.18.3, to initiate or
continue any proceedings for injunctive relief not involving the payment of damages
before any administrative or judicial tribunal of the Respondent for the purposes of

preserving their rights and interests during this arbitration (paragraph 25).

D: The Arbitral Tribunal

29.

30.

31.

The Claimant, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.16(6) and the ICSID Convention,
appointed as arbitrator by its Notice of Arbitration in these arbitration proceedings:
Professor Dr Guido Santiago Tawil of M&M Bomchil, Suipacha 268, 12" Floor,
C1008AAF, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The Respondent, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.19 and the ICSID Convention
appointed by letter dated 14 July 2009: Professor Brigitte Stern, 7 rue Pierre Nicole,
Paris, 75005, France.

The Parties, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.19 and ICSID Convention Article 37(2)(a),
agreed to appoint as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal, on 13 November 2009:
V.V.Veeder Esq of Essex Court Chambers, 24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A
3EG, United Kingdom.

E: The Arbitral Procedure

32.

Written Pleadings: The Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitration on 30 April 2009
pursuant to Article 36 of the ICSID Convention, CAFTA Article 10.16 and Article
15(a) of the Respondent’s Investment Law, following the Claimant’s Notice of Intent

to submit a claim made to the Respondent pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.16(2) on 9

33.

34.

35.

December 2008, such claim said to relate to events taking place more than one year
previously (for ease of reference, here called the “Notice of Arbitration” and the

“Notice of Intent” respectively).

The Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration is not a short document. It comprises 131
numbered paragraphs over 54 pages, not including attached exhibits. Moreover by
paragraphs 7 and 105, the Notice of Arbitration refers back to the Claimant’s Notice of
Intent, also by itself a substantial document. The Notice of Intent was Exhibit 9 to the

Notice of Arbitration.

Later in these proceedings, given the terms of these references back to the Notice of
Intent, it was not entirely clear whether the Notice of Arbitration formally incorporated
the Notice of Intent. It would not ordinarily matter, save that the Notice of Intent
expressly alleges arbitrary, unjustified and discriminatory conduct by the Respondent
whereas the Notice of Arbitration does not make the same allegations, save for the
reference to and summary of the Notice of Intent in paragraph 105 of the Notice of
Arbitration. On the second day of the Oral Hearing (see below), whilst contending
primarily that the Notice of Arbitration sufficiently pleaded its Claims, the Claimant
requested, in the alternative, an amendment to its Notice of Arbitration by specifically
incorporating the relevant words from its Notice of Intent into paragraph 105 of its

Notice of Arbitration [D2.4137].

There was no question of the Respondent being thereby caught unfairly by surprise,
having received both the Notice of Intent and the Notice of Arbitration; nor is the

Respondent otherwise prejudiced by the Claimant’s proposed amendment. In the

 

  

Tribunal’s view, it is indeed arguable that the Notice of Arbitration is sufficiently
pleaded by incorporating the Notice of Intent. For present purposes, however, to
curtail this somewhat technical debate, the Tribunal is here content to treat the Notice

of Arbitration as amended in the manner requested by the Claimant.

? References to the verbatim transcript of the Oral Hearing are here made thus: “2.413” signifies the second day of
the Oral Hearing, at page 413 of the transcript.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

The Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Claimant’s Notice of
Arbitration as a request for arbitration under Article 36(2) of the ICSID Convention on

15 June 2009.

The Respondent submitted its Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4
and 10.20.5 on 4 January 2010 (for ease of reference, here called the “Preliminary

Objections”).

A preliminary meeting with the Tribunal and the Parties was held by telephone
conference-call on 12 January 2010 to establish (inter alia) the time-table for
addressing the Preliminary Objections on an expedited basis, the proceedings on the

merits being suspended pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.4(b) and 10.20.5.

The Claimant submitted its Response to the Preliminary Objections on 26 February
2010 (for ease of reference, here called the “Response”), in accordance with the
procedural time-table established following the preliminary meeting as amended by

order of the Tribunal.

The Respondent submitted its Reply to the Response on 31 March 2010 (for ease of
reference, here called the “Reply”). It contained, inter alia, the expert legal opinion of
Professor W. Michael Reisman on “The International Legal Interpretation of the

Waiver Provision in CAFTA Chapter 10.”

The Claimant submitted its Rejoinder to the Reply on 13 May 2010 (for ease of
Reference, here called the “Rejoinder”). It contained, inter alia, the expert legal

opinion of Professor Don Wallace Jr in response to Professor Reisman’s opinion.

Procedural Orders: Upon receipt of the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, the
Tribunal suspended these arbitration proceedings as to the merits pursuant to CAFTA
Articles 10.20.4(b) and 10.20.5 and established the schedule for considering these

objections (described above) until further order or award.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

The Tribunal has made several other procedural orders in these proceedings leading up
to the Oral Hearing, principally its orders issued on 5 March, 21 April, 24 May and 10
June 2010.

As required by CAFTA Article 10.21(1), the written phase of these arbitration

proceedings has been made publicly available on the Respondent’s web-site’.

The Oral Hearing: As requested by the Parties pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.5, the
oral hearing took place at the World Bank, Washington DC, USA over two days on 31
May and 1 June 2010. It was recorded by English and Spanish stenographers; and as
required by CAFTA Article 10.21(2), the hearing was made publicly available,
contemporaneously by live-stream, in both English and Spanish languages, on ICSID’s

web-site. It remains available on ICSID’s web-site.*

The Respondent was represented by Mr. Benjamin Pleités (Secretary General of the
Attorney General’s Office), Mr. Daniel Rios (Legal Adviser from the Ministry of the
Economy), Ms. Arely Elizabeth Mejia and Ms. Celia Beatriz Lizama (both from the
Ministry of the Economy), Mr. Enilson Solano (from the Respondent’s Embassy in
Washington DC) and from Messrs. Dewey & LeBoeuf: Mr. Derek Smith, Mr. Aldo
Baldini, Mr. Luis Parada, Mr. Tomas Solis, Ms. Erin Argueta, Ms. Paula Corredor,
Ms. Mary Lewis, and Mr. Eric Stanculescu. The Claimant was represented by
Mr. Tom Shrake (President and CEO of Pacific Rim); and from Messrs. Crowel &
Moring LLP: Mr. Arif H. Ali, Mr. Alexandre de Gramont, Mr. R. Timothy McCrum,
Mr. Theodore Posner, Ms. Ashley R. Riveira, and Ms. Erica Franzetti.

The USA, as a Non-Disputing Party, attended the Oral Hearing, being represented by
Mr. Mark Feldman, Ms. Jennifer Thornton, Mr. Neale Bergman, and Ms. Kimberley
Claman (all from the US Department of State).

> See the Respondent’s web-site:
http://www.minec. gob.sv/index.php?opti IF d&vi &id=30 p-Vrs-
republica-de-el-salvador&Itemid=63

 

 

* See ICSID’s web-site: http://icsid. worldbank.org.

48.

49.

50.

At the end of the Oral Hearing, the Parties confirmed that (i) the deadline for issuing
this decision should be extended to 2 August 2010, as an “extraordinary cause”
pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.5 [D2. 459 & 461] and (ii) that the decision could be
first issued in the English version, with the Spanish version to follow at a later date

[D2. 472].

Post-Hearing: The Tribunal made arrangements for the submission of written
comments by CAFTA Contracting States (other than the Respondent) pursuant to
CAFTA Article 10.20.2; and it also made separate arrangements for third persons to
apply to the Tribunal for permission to make written submissions as amici curiae

pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.3 and ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2).

As regards amici curiae, the Tribunal made and publicised the following procedural

order on 10 June 2010:

“In accordance with Article 10.20.3 of the Dominican Republic-Central
America-United States Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA-US) and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2), the Tribunal invites any person or entity
that is not a Disputing Party in these arbitration proceedings or a
Contracting Party to DR-CAFTA-US to make a written application to the
Tribunal for permission to file submissions as an amicus curiae.

All such written applications should:

(1) be emailed to ICSID at icsidsecretariat@ worldbank.org by
Wednesday, 16 June 2010;

(2) in no case exceed 20 pages in all (including the appendix described
below);

(3) be made in one of the languages of these proceedings, i.e. English or
Spanish;

(4) be dated and signed by the person or by an authorized signatory for
the entity making the application verifying its contents, with address and
other contact details;

(5) describe the identity and background of the applicant, the nature of
any membership if it is an organization and the nature of any
relationships to the Disputing Parties and any Contracting Party;

ll

Sl.

(6) disclose whether the applicant has received, directly or indirectly, any
financial or other material support from any Disputing Party,
Contracting Party or from any person connected with the subject-matter
of these arbitration proceedings;

(7) specify the nature of the applicant’s interest in these arbitration
proceedings prompting its application;

(8) include (as an appendix to the application) a copy of the applicant’s
written submissions to be filed in these arbitration proceedings, assuming
permission is granted by the Tribunal for such filing, such submissions to
address only matters within the scope of the subject-matter of these
arbitration proceedings; and

(9) explain, insofar as not already answered, the reason(s) why the
Tribunal should grant permission to the applicant to file its written
submissions in these arbitration proceedings as an amicus curiae.

Pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.21.2, a webcast of the oral hearing on
preliminary objections held on 31 May and 1 June 2010, is available at
the Centre's website.”

No such submissions were received under CAFTA Article 10.20(2); and no
applications were received by the Tribunal pursuant to its order made under CAFTA

Article 10.20(3) and ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2).

F: Relief Claimed by the Parties

52.

The Claimant: The Claimants’ formal prayer for relief from the Tribunal is set out in
the Notice of Arbitration (paragraph 128, pages 53-54), there stated to be without
prejudice to the Claimant’s rights to amend, supplement or restate such relief in these

arbitration proceedings:

“(1) Declare that El Salvador has breached the terms of CAFTA and of
the Salvadoran Investment Law.

(2) Award compensation in excess of US $77 million for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in connection with mineral exploration activities upon
the Exploration Licenses and associated rights and obligations, including
real estate, materials, equipment, labor, and attorneys’ fees and costs.

12

53.

54.

(3) Award a sum in compensation to be proven in the arbitration for
losses sustained as a result of PRC and the Enterprises being deprived of
their investment and property rights pursuant to CAFTA, the Exploration
Licenses, and Salvadoran law, including, inter alia, the right to complete
exploration activities at all sites subject to their control, the right to
obtain exploitation concessions for those same sites, the right to develop
the valuable minerals discovered, reasonable lost profits, and indirect
losses; while this sum has not yet been quantified, it is far in excess of the
amount of expenditures made by PRC and the Enterprises.

(4) Award costs associated with any proceedings undertaken in
connection with this arbitration, including all professional fees and costs.

(5) Award pre- and post- award interest at a rate to be fixed by the
tribunal.

(6) Grant such other relief as counsel may advise and that the Tribunal
may deem appropriate.”

The Respondent: The Respondent stated the relief currently sought from the Tribunal

first in its Preliminary Objections and lastly at the end of the Oral Hearing.

As set out in its Preliminary Objections (paragraph 125), the Respondent requests from

the Tribunal the following relief:

(1) | “Suspend the proceedings on the merits while these preliminary
objections are pending, with the exception of the issues on the merits
raised in these preliminary objections” [Suspension was ordered by the
Tribunal: see above]

(2) “Dismiss all claims in this arbitration related to Pacific Rim El
Salvador’s application for a mining exploitation concession in the El
Dorado project.”

(3) “Dismiss all claims in this arbitration related to the exploration
license for the Santa Rita project.”

(4) “Dismiss all claims related to allegations of violations of CAFTA
Articles 10.3 (National Treatment), 10.4 (Most-Favored-Nation
Treatment), and 10.16.1(b)(i)(B).”

(5) “Declare that the Tribunal does not have competence to decide
Claimant’s claims under the Investment Law of El Salvador and, as a

13

consequence, dismiss all claims under the Investment Law and any other
domestic law of EI Salvador.”

(6) “Issue an order awarding the Republic of El Salvador its share of
the arbitration costs and its attorney’s fees incurred related to these
objections, plus interest from the time of the decision until payment is
made, at a rate to be established at the appropriate time.”

(7) “Grant the [Respondent] any other remedy that the Tribunal
considers proper.”

55. Atthe end of the Oral Hearing, the Respondent set out the relief it currently seeks in

the Tribunal’s decision on its Preliminary Objections, as follows:

(1) “With respect to Claimant’s claims concerning an application for
El Dorado exploitation concession the Tribunal finds that, as a matter of
law, Claimant’s claims are not claims for which an award in favor of
Claimant may be made. Therefore, Claimant’s claims are dismissed;”

(2) “With respect to Claimant’s claims concerning alleged breaches of
the Santa Rita exploration license the Tribunal finds that, as a matter of
law, Claimant’s claims are not claims for which an award in favor of
Claimant may be made. Therefore, Claimant’s claims are dismissed;”

(3) “With respect to Claimant’s alleged breaches of CAFTA Articles
10.3 National Treatment and 10.4 Most-Favored-Nation Treatment the
Tribunal finds that, as a matter of law, Claimant's claims are not claims
for which an award in favor of Claimant may be made. Therefore,
Claimant’s claims are dismissed;”

(4) “With respect to Claimant’s alleged breaches of investment
authorizations the Tribunal finds that, as a matter of law, Claimant's
claims are not claims for which an award in favor of Claimant may be
made. Therefore, Claimant's claims are dismissed; ”

(5) “Claimant has expressly waived its right to initiate an arbitration
proceeding under the dispute settlement provision of the Investment Law
of El Salvador for the same measures alleged to constitute breaches of
CAFTA. In view of the terms of the Claimant's express waiver, the
Tribunal finds that it has no competence to entertain such a proceeding
and/or hear any claims arising thereon. Therefore, Claimant's claims
that have been raised by invoking jurisdiction under the Investment Law
of El Salvador are dismissed.”

(6) “As to costs, in view of all the above findings, and pursuant to
CAFTA Article 10.20.6, the Claimant is ordered to pay for all the costs
and attorney’s fees incurred by both Parties in these Preliminary
Objections. The Parties will submit to the Tribunal a statement of the
costs and legal fees incurred in this arbitration as well as any other
relevant circumstances that the parties consider relevant for the
Tribunal’s consideration.”

56.

57.

58.

59.

PART H: THE RELEVANT ISSUES

Introduction: This is a complex, controversial and important case. It appears to have
engendered substantial controversy and widespread disquiet, not limited to the
Claimant and the Respondent. By this decision, the Tribunal addresses only the
limited procedural issues raised by the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under
CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5. As will appear below, the Tribunal does not
otherwise address any other procedural issues or any of the merits, particularly
whether or not any of the Claimant’s pleaded claims are well-founded in law or fact.
Apart from the Tribunal’s decision on these limited issues under CAFTA Articles
10.20.4 and 10.20.5, it should not be assumed that the Tribunal has made any decision
on the merits of any of the Claimant’s claims or on any of the Respondent’s several

responses (pleaded or unpleaded), both as to the merits or otherwise.

In making this decision, the Tribunal has considered all the written and oral
submissions of the Parties. In order to explain the grounds for the Tribunal’s decision,
it is necessary below to cite or summarise a certain number of these submissions at
some length, but not all of them. The fact that a submission is not cited or summarised

below does not signify that it was not considered by the Tribunal.

The Respondent’s Preliminary Objections: As already indicated in Part I above, the
Respondent filed Preliminary Objections pursuant to CAFTA’s expedited procedure in
CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 to request the dismissal by the Tribunal of the
Claimant’s claims relating to the application for a mining exploitation concession in El
Dorado, as well as the dismissal of the Claimant’s other CAFTA claims and the
dismissal of all the Claimant’s non-CAFTA claims in these ICSID arbitration

proceedings, together with an order for costs against the Claimant.

The Claimant disputes each of the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections and requests a
decision from the Tribunal dismissing them all, together with an order for costs against

the Respondent.

60.

61.

62.

63.

It is convenient here to summarise briefly each of the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections, before returning to them more fully later below seriatim, together with the
Claimant’s responses. (This summary reflects the submissions advanced by the

respondent and does not reflect the views of the Tribunal).

The El Dorado Claim: The Claimant’s principal claim relates to El Dorado. As
regards this claim, the Respondent submits that the Claimant has failed to discharge its
burden with regard to PRES’ alleged entitlement to such a concession on two specific
grounds. First, contrary to the Claimant’s suggestion, there is no automatic right to a
concession under Salvadoran law. Second, instead of pleading the required factual
bases in its Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant merely asserts a legal conclusion that
PRES has purportedly “perfected” a legal right to an exploitation concession, subject
only to the Government’s failure to approve an Environmental Impact Study and issue
an Environmental Permit. The Respondent contends that the Claimant has therefore
failed to plead essential facts to demonstrate that PRES complied with, as the Claimant
admits, the “plain and explicit” requirements under Salvadoran law which must be
satisfied before a company may seek, still less obtain, a mining exploitation

concession from the Respondent.

The Claimant’s failure to plead the necessary facts, so the Respondent contends,
follows from PRES’ failure to comply with those legal requirements, as demonstrated
by the “undisputed facts” evident from the Claimant’s own documents. Thus, even if
the Respondent’s Government were to approve the Environmental Impact Study and
grant the necessary Environmental Permit, the “undisputed facts” show that PRES
would still not have any legal right to obtain the exploitation concession. In short,
even assuming as true all of the Claimant’s factual allegations regarding the
Environmental Permit, the alleged actions or inactions of the Respondent’s

Government can have caused the Claimant no legal harm.

The Respondent submits that the El Dorado claim, as pleaded by the Claimant, must

therefore fail. The Respondent concludes that all claims by the Claimant relating to El

64.

65.

66.

Dorado are not claims “for which an award in favour of the Claimant may be made”

within the meaning of CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.26.

Other CAFTA Claims: As regards the Claimant’s other CAFTA claims relating to the
exploration licenses granted to the two Enterprises, the Respondent seeks the dismissal
of all claims related to the Santa Rita exploration licence. The Claimant has similarly
failed to plead the factual or legal basis to bring any claim related to the Santa Rita
exploration licence; and, in any event, the Claimant has already lost any rights it may
have had to renew the Santa Rita exploration licence when PRES failed to seek the
renewal of the exploration license on the requisite timely basis. The Respondent also
seeks the dismissal of other secondary CAFTA claims for which the Claimant has not

provided a factual basis, pursuant to CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.26.

Non-CAFTA Claims: The Respondent likewise seeks the dismissal of all non-CAFTA
claims advanced by the Claimant on the ground that the Claimant has violated
CAFTA’s exclusivity clause and its own express waiver by introducing claims under
the Investment Law that are based on the same measures which the Claimant alleges

are breaches of CAFTA, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.5.

Reservation: As already noted above, the filing of preliminary objections under
CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 was not intended by the Respondent to signify
that the Respondent accepted the jurisdiction of ICSID or the competence of the
Tribunal to decide the merits of the Parties’ dispute. The Respondent recorded in its
Preliminary Objections (paragraph 7) that if the Claimant were to continue with these
arbitration proceedings beyond the stage of the Tribunal’s decision on the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, the Respondent reserved the right to object to
the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal regarding any
remaining claims, pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.4(d), the ICSID Convention and
the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

67.

68.

PART Ill: THE RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

Introduction: It is convenient to set out here, in full, the relevant provisions of
CAFTA Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement, to which subsequent reference
is made later in this decision; namely CAFTA Articles 10.16, 10.18, 10.20.4, 10.20.5
and 10.22.

CAFTA Article 10.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

J. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment
dispute cannot be settled by consultation and negotiation:

(a) _ the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration
under this section a claim

(i) _ that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A [of Chapter Ten]
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement

and

(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach; and

(b) _ the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that
is a juridical person that the claimant owns or controls
directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this
Section a claim

(i) _ that the respondent has breached

(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or

(C) an investment agreement;

19

and

(iii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

2. Atleast 90 days before submitting any claim to arbitration under
this Section, a claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written notice of
its intention to submit the claim to arbitration (“notice of intent”). The
notice shall specify:

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

the name and address of the claimant and, where a claim is
submitted on behalf of an enterprise, the name, address, and
place of incorporation of the enterprise;

for each claim, the provision of this Agreement, investment
authorization, or investment agreement alleged to have been
breached and any other relevant provisions;

the legal and factual basis for each claim; and

the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages
claimed.

3. Provided that six months have elapsed since the events giving rise
to the claim, a claimant may submit a claim referred to in paragraph I:

(a)

(b)

(c)

under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of
Procedures for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both
the respondent and the Party of the claimant are parties to
the ICSID Convention;

under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that
either the respondent or the Party of the claimant is a party to

the ICSID Convention; or

under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

4. Aclaim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section
when the claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration (“notice of
arbitration”):

(a)

referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention is received by the Secretary-General;

20

(b) _ referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules is received by the Secretary-General; or

(c) _ referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, are received by the
respondent.

A claim asserted for the first time after such notice of arbitration is
submitted shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section on
the date of its receipt under the applicable arbitral rules.

5. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 3, and in effect
on the date the claim or claims were submitted to arbitration under this
Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this
Agreement.

69. CAFTA Article 10.18: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party

I. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more
than three years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first
acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged
under Article 10.16.1 and knowledge that the claimant (for claims
brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the enterprise (for claims brought
under Article 10.16.1(b)) has incurred loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted under this Section unless:

(a) _ the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance
with the procedures set out in this Agreement; and

(b) _ the notice of arbitration is accompanied,

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article
10.16.1(a), by the claimant's written waiver, and

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article

10.16.1(b), by the claimant's and the enterprise’s
written waivers

of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative
tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute

21

settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any
measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article
10.16.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought
under Article 10.16.1(a)) and the claimant or the enterprise (for claims
brought under Article 10.16.1(b)) may initiate or continue an action that
seeks interim injunctive relief and does not involve the payment of
monetary damages before a judicial or administrative tribunal of the
respondent, provided that the action is brought for the sole purpose of
preserving the claimant’s or the enterprise’s rights and interests during
the pendency of the arbitration.

4. Noclaim may be submitted to arbitration:

(a) for breach of an investment authorization under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(B) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B), or

(b) for breach of an investment agreement under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(C) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(C).

if the claimant (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the
claimant or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article 10.61.1(b))
has previously submitted the same alleged breach to an administrative
tribunal or court of the respondent, or to any other binding dispute
settlement procedure, for adjudication or resolution.

70. CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 & 10.20.5: Conduct of the Arbitration

4, Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other
objections as a preliminary question, a tribunal shall address and decide
as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a
matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in
favor of the claimant may be made under Article 10.26.

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as
possible after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later
than the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit
its counter-memorial (or, in the case of an amendment to the
notice of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the
respondent to submit its response to the amendment).

22

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal
shall suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a
schedule for considering the objection consistent with any
schedule it has established for considering any other
preliminary question, and issue a decision or award on the
objection, stating the grounds therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal
shall assume to be true claimant’s factual allegations in
support of any claim in the notice of arbitration (or any
amendment thereof) and, in disputes brought under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred
to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The
tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to
competence or any argument on the merits merely because
the respondent did or did not raise an objection under this
paragraph or make use of the expedited procedure set out in
paragraph 5.

5. In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after the
tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an
objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not
within the tribunal’s competence. The tribunal shall suspend any
proceedings on the merits and issue a decision or award on the
objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no later than 150 days after the
date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a hearing, the
tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the decision or award.
Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a tribunal may, on a
showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by an
additional brief period, which may not exceed 30 days.

6. When it decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 4 or 5,
the tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party
reasonable costs and attorney's fees incurred in submitting or opposing
the objection. In determining whether such an award is warranted, the
tribunal shall consider whether either the claimant's claim or the
respondent’s objection was frivolous, and shall provide the disputing
parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

71. CAFTA Article 10.22: Governing Law

1. Subject to paragraph 3, when a claim is submitted under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(A) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(A), the tribunal shall decide the

23

issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules
of international law.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and the other terms of this Section, when a
claim is submitted under Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(B) or (C), or Article
10.16.1(b)(i)(b) or (C), the tribunal shall apply:

(a) the rules of law specified in the pertinent investment
agreement or investment authorization, or as the disputing
parties may otherwise agree; or

(b) _ if the rules of law have not been specified or otherwise
agreed:

(i) _ the law of the respondent, including its rules on the
conflict of laws; and

(ii) such rules of international law as may be applicable.

3. A decision of the Commission declaring its interpretation of a
provision of this Agreement under Article 19.1.3(c) (The Free Trade
Commission) shall be binding on a tribunal established under this
Section, and any decision or award issued by the tribunal must be
consistent with that decision.

24

PART IV: THE RELEVANT FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

A: Introduction

72.

73.

74.

Given the terms and effect of CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c), cited in Part III above, it is
necessary for present purposes to bear carefully in mind the factual allegations made

by the Claimant in its Notice of Arbitration.

These are, at this stage, only allegations pleaded by the Claimant; each material
allegation is denied or expressly not admitted by the Respondent; and the Tribunal
cannot here address, under CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c), whether or not any of these

disputed allegations are or could be established or negated by actual evidence.

Moreover, given the significance of the Claimant’s pleading allegedly supporting its
factual case, it is necessary here to cite at length part of the Claimant’s Notice of
Arbitration (with its own footnotes). For obvious reasons, it would here be wholly
inappropriate for the Tribunal to seek to summarise these factual allegations in its own

words.

B: The Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration

75.

The following numbered paragraphs 26 to 81 are taken verbatim from the Claimant’s
Notice of Arbitration, ostensibly as the Claimant’s pleaded “Factual Bases for the

Claim” relevant to CAFTA Article 10.20.4:

26. “The Claimant’s and Enterprises’ claims arise out of El Salvador’s
arbitrary and discriminatory conduct, lack of transparency, and unfair
and inequitable treatment in failing to act upon the Enterprises’
applications for a mining exploitation concession and for various
environmental permits following PRC’s discovery of valuable deposits of
gold and silver under exploration licenses granted by MINEC, as well as
EI Salvador’s failure to protect Claimant’s investments in accordance
with the provisions of its own law, and its expropriation of Claimant’s
and the Enterprises’ investments. The relevant factual background
underlying these claims is summarized below.

  
 

 

25

A. — Overview of the Legal Framework for Mining in El Salvador

27. In 1996, El Salvador enacted a new and modern Ley de Mineria
(“Mining Law). It replaced an antiquated mining law that had been in
place since 1922. The new law was born of the Government’s stated
desire to attract increased investment in - and increased exploration and
extraction of - the country’s natural minerals. The Preamble of the 1996
Mining Law explicitly states that the law was enacted as a result of the
obsolescence of the Mining Code of 1922, and the need to adopt new
legal rules for modern times. Thus, according to its Preamble, the 1996
Mining Law was designed to “} the expli ion and exploii

of mining resources by means of the application of modern techniques
allowing an integral use of the minerals, ”® Moreover, the same Preamble
acknowledged the paramount importance of modern legislation, which
would be desirable to mining investors and promote the social and
economic development of the areas where the minerals might be located.’

 

28. Pursuant to the Mining Law’s corresponding regulations (“Mining
Law Regulations “ss MINEC is the authority charged with regulating all
mining activity within El Salvador. All mining companies, whether local
or foreign, must apply to MINEC in order to receive a license to explore
for precious metals in a specific area, and subsequently for an
exploitation concession once precious metal deposits are confirmed.

J. MINEC Licensing Requirements

5 See Legislative Decree No. 544 of December 14, 1995, published in the Official Diary No. 16, Book 330, of
January 24, 1996. Until 1996, mining activities in El Salvador were governed by the Cédigo de Mineria of 1922
and the Ley Complementaria de Mineria of 1953. The Mining Law was amended in 2001. Legislative Decree No.
475 of July 11, 2001, published in the Official Diary No. 144, Book 352, of July 31, 2001. The Mining Law has not
been modified since then.

© Id., Preamble (emphasis added). The original Spanish text of the second preambulatory clause reads: “Que el
Cédigo de Minerfa fue emitido por Decreto Legislativo sin ntimero, de fecha 17 de mayo de 1922, publicado en el
Diario Oficial N° 183, Torno 93, del 17 de agosto de ese mismo aiio, resultando a la fecha obsoletas sus
disposiciones, lo que hace necesario emitir normas que ademas de ser acordes a la época actual, promuevan la
exploracién y explotacién de los recursos mineros mediante la aplicacién de sistemas modernos que permitan el
aprovechamiento integral de los minerales....”

 

7 The original Spanish text of the third preambulatory clause reads: “Que es de primordial importancia que nuestro
pais cuente con un cuerpo normativo que armonice con los principios de una economia social de mercado,
conveniente para los inversionistas del sector minero; a efecto de propiciar la creacién de nuevas oportunidades de
trabajo para los salvadorefios; promoviendo el Desarrollo Econémico y Social de las regiones en donde se
encuentran localizados los minerales, permitiendo de esta manera al Estado la percepci6n de ingresos tan necesarios
para el cumplimiento de sus objetivos.”

* Contemporaneously with the Mining Law of 1996, the President of EI Salvador enacted the Regulations to the
Mining Law, with the purpose of developing the application of the newly-adopted legal rules and defining several
technical terms contained therein. See Executive Decree No. 68 of July 19, 1996, published in the Official Diary
No. 144, Book 332, of August 8, 1996. The Mining Law Regulation was modified in 2003. See Executive Decree
No. 47 of June 20, 2003, published in the Official Diary No. 125, Book 360, of July 8, 2003.

26

29. Article 9 of the Mining Law provides that only those applicants that
demonstrate the technical and financial ability to develop mining projects
can obtain mining rights.

30. Exploration licenses are granted by resolution issued by MINEC’s
Direccion de Hidrocarburos, y Minas (“Department of Mines”)? The
applicant seeking an exploration license must file an application with the
Department of Mines, enclosing certain requirements, which include a
technical exploration program, evidence of the applicant’s technical and
financial ability, and experience in mining activities. '© Once an
application is filed, the Department of Mines performs a physical
inspection of the proposed exploration area.! Upon completing this
inspection and evaluating the application, the Department of Mines must
issue a resolution that either grants or denies the exploration license. B

 

31. If an exploration license is granted, the Mining Law imposes a
number of obligations on the licensee. Specifically, Article 22 of the
Mining Law sets out the obligations of an exploration licensee to
demonstrate the extent of its investment activities to MINEC in detail. For
example, licensees are required to: (a) comply with a technical program
for exploration activities approved by the Department of Mines; 3 (p)
demonstrate on an annual basis to the Department of Mines the activities
and investments that were undertaken by the licensee pursuant to the
technical program; (c) file annual reports describing, inter alia, the
nature of the minerals being explored, the nature and extent of the
licensees’ exploration efforts, the results of those efforts, the
corresponding expenses incurred, and plans for future explorations; 4
and (d) pay the annual license fee. In short, licensees must undertake and
maintain substantial exploration activities, in compliance with the
requirements of the Mining Law, in order to preserve their right to
continue to explore. A licensee cannot simply “sit on its rights” to
develop a claim merely by paying a license fee.

° Article 13. Pursuant to this provision, the Mining Law instructed the Department of Mines to establish “special
areas of mining interest.”

'© Mining Law, Article 37.
'! Mining Law, Article 38.
2 Mining Law, Article 39.

 

8 Pursuant to Article 37 of the Mining Law, an applicant interested in an exploration license must provide, inter
alia, a technical program of exploration, which shall include the intended mining activities and the minimum
investment amount for each activity.

 

' ‘The last annual report must include the estimate mineral reserves and the model for exploration of the depo:
In addition to these requirements, Article 17 of the Mining Law Regulation establishes that the annual report must
include a summary of the works performed by the licensee and the total investment amount.

27

32. While the Mining Law imposes detailed obligations on exploration
licensees, it also extends to them significant rights and assurances. In
particular, the Mining Law establishes a two-phase framework applicable
to mining extraction activities. Article 23 of the Mining Law provides in
relevant part:

Once the exploration is concluded and the existence of
economic mining potential on the authorized area is proved,
the granting of the Concession for the exploitation and
utilization of minerals shall be requested; which Concession
will be verified through an Accord with the Ministry, followed
by the granting of a Contract between the Ministry and the
Holder, for a thirty (30) year term, which may be extended if
the interested party requests it, if in the judgment of the
Department [of Mines] and the Ministry, the requisites
established by this Law are fulfilled.'°

33. As already set out above, during the mineral exploration phase,
licensees are required to make substantial investments while also
assuming significant risk. In accordance with the regime established by
the Mining Law, the exploration phase may last up to eight years, ‘6
during which time the mining company expends significant capital in its
attempt to locate and develop mineable deposits of minerals.

34. Therefore, under the two-phase framework, a licensee who
completes the exploration phase is entitled to proceed to the mineral
extraction or “exploitation” phase - without which all of the investment
and effort devoted to the exploration phase would be wasted. Once the
exploration phase is concluded and the licensee has determined that there
is “economical mining potential” at a site, the licensee has the right to
request an exploitation concession for the purpose of mineral extraction
in order to protect its exclusive rights over the license area. '7 Moreover,
the Government is required to grant the licensee an exploitation
concession once the exploration phase is concluded, the existence of
mineable deposits has been demonstrated, and the licensee has both filed

'S Mining Law, Article 23. The original Spanish text reads: “Concluida la exploracién y comprobada la existencia
del potencial minero econémico en el area autorizada, se solicitara el otorgamiento de la Concesién para la
explotacién y aprovechamiento de los minerales; la cual se verificara mediante Acuerdo del Ministerio seguido del
otorgamiento de un contrato suscrito entre éste y el Titular por un plazo de treinta afios, el cual podra prorrogarse a
solicitud del interesado, siempre que a juicio del Ministerio cumpla con los requisitos que la Ley establece.”

 

 

'© Mining Law, Article 19. Exploration licenses are granted for an initial period of four years, which can be
extended by the Department of Mines for periods of two years, up to a maximum of eight years.

" Mining Law, Article 23.

28

the application provided in Article 36 of the Mining Law and enclosed the
documents described below."*

35. For purposes of submitting an application to receive an
exploitation concession, the pertinent documents provided by the law to
be attached to a concession application are set out in Article 37 of the
Mining Law. These documents include presentation of:

<A description of the area for which the concession is requested;

A showing that the licensee owns or is authorized to use the real
estate property where the mine project is located;

© The relevant Permiso Ambiental’ (“Permit”) issued by MARN
and accompanied by a copy of the corresponding Estudio de
Impacto Ambiental ° (“EIA”);

An Estudio de Factibilidad Técnico Econémico (“Feasibility
Study”); and

A five-year Program a de Explotacién (“Development Plan”).

36. In addition to the requirements of the Mining Law, Article 18 of the
Mining Law Regulation requires that the applicant for the exploitation
concession submit a summary of the proposed work and investment to be
made during the initial exploitation phase.

37. Inaccordance with Article 38 of the Mining Law, as well as
applicable principles of Salvadoran administrative law, if a qualified
licensee fails to comply with any of these requirements for presentation of
a concession application, MINEC must grant the licensee a reasonable
period to cure. However, the licensee does not lose its right to obtain the
exploitation concession because of such a failure; that right is perfected
upon the discovery and demonstration of the existence of mineable ore
deposits in the license area in accordance with Article 23. Indeed, the
Mining Law makes it clear that the right to develop a mine constitutes a
property right, subject to all the protections of the Salvadoran
Constitution and other applicable laws.

'8 Mining Law, Articles 23, 36 and 37.

'° Environmental Permit.

°° Environmental Impact Study.

*! Mining Law, Article 10 (concessions are deemed property rights (bienes inmuebles) and can be the subject matter
of security interests); Mining Law, Article 11 (constructions and equipment become accessories to exploration or

exploitation rights

 

; Mining Law, Article 14 (mining rights can transferred as other property rights); Mining Law,

29

38. Under the legal framework established by the Mining Law, the
mining company assumes the great risks inherent in the exploration
phase. However, it undertakes those risks with the expectation that, if it is
able to prove that a discovery of a valuable mineral deposit has been
made and otherwise complies with the requirements of the Mining Law, it
will be able to obtain an exploitation concession. Without that
expectation, no one would undertake exploration. Only during the
exploitation phase can a mining company extract metal from the land and
begin to generate a return on the substantial upfront investment it has
made during the exploration phase. Receiving an exploitation concession
after demonstrating that the discovery of a valuable mineral deposit has
been made and otherwise complying with the requirements of the Mining
Law represents the benefit to be derived from the large expense incurred
by a mining licensee during the exploration phase. In short, the promise
of an exploitation concession is the reason why companies undertake
their investments in the first place.

39. To be sure, the mining company undertakes the risk that the mine
will not be viable for valid technical or engineering reasons. But the
mining company does not undertake the risk that the Government will
arbitrarily or capriciously either deny the company its right to proceed to
the exploitation phase, or, as in this case, destroy its investment simply by
failing to act once the company has successfully completed the
exploration phase and complied with all of the legal requirements to
obtain an exploitation concession.

2. MARN’s Environmental Permit Process

40. As indicated above, Article 37 of the Mining Law requires that the
applicant for an exploitation concession attach an environmental permit
to its application. In addition, pursuant to Articles 19 and 82 of the Ley
del Medio Ambiente (“Environmental Law”), an entity seeking to
engage in mining exploration or exploitation must apply to MARN for an
environmental permit before undertaking those activities.

41. The administrative procedure to obtain an environmental permit is
detailed in Article 19 of the Regulations to the Environmental Law (the
“Environmental Law Regulations ”)3 In order to obtain the required

 

 

Article 49 (exploration licenses and exploitation concession subject to public registration as other property rights);
Mining Law, Article 54 (mining rights create servitudes affecting third parties’ property rights, in favor of
titleholders of licenses or concessions).

* See Legislative Decree No. 233 of March 2, 1998, published in the Official Diary No. 79, Book 339, of April 5,
1998.

3 See Executive Decree No. 17 of March 21, 2000, published in the Official Diary No. 73, Book 347, of December
4, 2000.

30

environmental permit, the company must initially file an environmental
form containing the preliminary information requested by MARN.** Once
it has received the form, MARN issues the terms of reference for the
preparation of a “multidisciplinary” EIA. The EIA then filed by the
applicant is subject, first, to a technical review by MARN, second, to
public comment, 26 and, third, to a report on the public comments to be
issued by MARN. MARN is only authorized to provide a single set of
observations on the EIA during the process. Once the applicant has
responded to these observations, MARN is authorized to provide further
comments only in relation to new facts or information that the applicant
may have provided in its responses. 27 In turn, if the applicant cannot
adequately respond to these further comments, the permit may be
denied.* If the applicant does respond adequately, the permit will be
granted.” In any case, the permit must be either granted or denied within
sixty (60) working days of submission of the original EIA.

 

42. As discussed below, the Enterprises complied strictly with all of the
requirements imposed on them under the Mining Law and its regulations,
the Environmental Law and its Regulations, and all other applicable law
to obtain the requisite exploration and exploitation environmental
permits.

B. Pacific Rim Invests in El Salvador

43. In consideration of and reliance on the legal framework set forth
above, in April 2002, Pacific Rim set its sights on investing in El Salvador
by merging with Dayton Mining Corporation (“Dayton”), a Canadian
mining company that had been operating in El Salvador on its own or
through affiliated companies since 1993. In particular, Dayton had two
exploration licenses: one for El Dorado Norte, and one for El Dorado
Sur.

* Environmental Law, Article 22; Environmental Law Regulations, Articles 20 and 21.
°5 Environmental Law, Article 23; Environmental Law Regulations, Article 19.

?6 Pursuant to Articles 25 of the Mining Law and 32 of the Environmental Law Regulations, the EIA must be
published in a national newspaper and be presented before the local communities potentially affected by the project.

*” Environmental Law, Article 33.

°8 Id.

 

 

° Environmental Law, Article 29; Environmental Law Regulations, Article 34. Once MARN has issued a
resolution approving the EIA, the applicant is required to deposit an environmental compliance bond. Upon the bond
being deposited, MARN must issue the environmental permit.

*° Environmental Law, Article 24; Environmental Law Regulations, Article 34. This period can be extended for
sixty (60) additional business days in the case of “complex” applications.

*! The original titleholder of the EI Dorado exploration area was the New York and El Salvador Mining Company,

Inc., which sold its license to explore the area to Kinross El Salvador, Sociedad Anénima de Capital Variable
(“Kinross-ES”) in 1993. Kinross-ES was wholly owned by Mirage Resource Corporation, which merged with

 

31

44. Because of El Salvador’s unique geological features, it was and is
an ideal location for an environmentally responsible mining company
such as Pacific Rim. In particular, El Salvador is a country dominated by
“low sulfidation” geological systems, which allow for non-acid-
generating precious metals recovery, and therefore for mining with
minimal environmental impacts. In addition, the high-grade, vein-type
precious metal deposits found in EI Salvador, and specifically in the area
of Las Cabafias, are suitable for underground mine development, which
has a significantly reduced impact on the environment and community
surrounding the mine site as compared to “open-pit” mines.

45. In connection with its due diligence for the Dayton merger, Pacific
Rim of course studied and relied upon the new Mining Law and Mining
Regulations that had been enacted in 1996, as well as the 2001
amendments. While those amendments - which extended the number of
years for which exploration licenses could be granted - were under
review, on June 28, 2001, the Government issued Decree No. 456." This
decree extended the validity of all exploration licenses due to expire in
2001 until the end of the year, in order to allow the Legislative Assembly
sufficient time to promulgate the amendments to the Mining Law that
were necessary to allow for further extensions of the relevant licenses.
Significantly, the Preamble to Decree No. 456 stated that the reasons for
the “emergency” extension of the exploration licenses included the
“great importance [of mining activity] to the economy of the country; as
it generates investments by national and foreign companies, contributing
in this way to the creation of jobs and development in the areas where
these activities are made.** Moreover, the decree acknowledged that the
expiration of the exploration licenses would cause “great prejudice” to
the investors in light of the investments that they had made in pursuit of
their exploration activities.*4

 

Dayton Acquisitions Inc, a wholly owned subsidiary of Dayton Mining Corp., in April 2000. In 1996, in accordance
with the new mining legislation that had been introduced that year, the Government confirmed Kinross-ES’s
exploration rights over the area for a period of three years, pursuant to Resolution No.1, dated July 10, 1996, and
Resolution No.2, dated July 23, 1996. By means of those same resolutions, MINEC divided the EI Dorado
exploration area into two separate claim areas, denominated “El Dorado Norte” and El Dorado Sur.” The
Government then twice renewed these licenses, granting a second two-year extension via resolutions dated
December 10, 2001.

* Legislative Decree No. 456 of June 28, 2001, published in the Official Diary No. 130, Book No. 352, of July 11,
2001.

 

3 coe , “ a
The original Spanish text of Decree No.456 states, in relevant part: “Que la actividad minera es de mucha

importancia para la economia del pais; ya que genera inversiones de empresas nacionales y extranjeras,

contribuyendo de esta manera a la generacién de empleo y desarrollo en las areas donde éstas se efecttian ...”

* The original Spanish text of the Preamble Decree No. 456 states, in relevant part: I. Que la actividad minera es de
mucha importancia para la economia del pais; ya que genera inversiones de empresas nacionales y extranjeras,
contribuyendo de esta manera a la generacién de empleo y desarrollo de las 4reas donde éstas se efectiian; ... III.
Que las empresas antes mencionadas han realizado inversiones millonarias para llevar a cabo tal actividad, por lo

32

 

46. In addition to relying on the country’s specific promotion of the
mining sector, Pacific Rim was impressed by the pro-foreign investment
legal framework that recently had been introduced and that was actively
being promoted by EI Salvador during the same time frame. In 1999, for
example, the Government had adopted a new Investment Law, which,
inter alia, granted equal conditions for national and foreign companies,*®
and prohibited the Government from expropriating foreigners’ property
without compensation.*° Indeed, the purported aim of this law was to
avoid the application of any unjustified or discriminatory measures that
could impede the normal activities of foreign investors. Paragraph IV of
the Preamble to the Investment Law specifically states:

That to increase the level of foreign investment in the country,
an appropriate legal framework should be established that
contains clear and precise rules in accordance with best
practices in this area, enabling the country to compete
internationally in the effort to attract new investment... a
47. Furthermore, in 2000, the Government founded the Agenda de
Promoci6n de Inversién de El Salvador (“PROESA 38 The specific aim
of PROESA is to generate employment, transfer technology, and aid the
country’s development process through the attraction of foreign
investment to Salvadoran industries. And in that same time period, El
Salvador had signed or ratified various bilateral and multilateral

 

que, la circunstancia antes sefialada les causaria grandes perjuicios, en raz6n de que actualmente existe depresién en
los precios en los precios internacionales del oro, dificulténdose la captacién de capital.

*5 Investment Law, Legislative Decree No. 732, 1999, Article 5 (El Sal.) (“Foreign investors and the commercial
companies in which they participate, shall enjoy the same rights and be bound by the same responsibilities as local
investors and partnerships, with no exceptions other than those established by law, and no unjustified or
discriminatory measures which may hinder the establishment, administration, use, usufruct, extension, sale and
liquidation of their investments, shall be applied to them.”). The original Spanish text states: “Los inversionistas
extranjeros y las sociedades mercantiles en las que estos participen, tendran los mismos derechos y obligaciones que
los inversionistas y sociedades nacionales, sin mas excepciones que las sefialadas por la ley, sin que puedan
aplicérseles medidas injustificadas o discriminatorias que obstaculicen el establecimiento, administracién, uso,
usufructo, extensién, venta y liquidacién de sus inversiones.”

 

*° Investment Law, Article 8 (EI Sal.) (“According to the Constitution of the Republic, expropriation shall proceed,
due to legally established cause of public need or social interest, prior advance payment of fair indemnity...”). The
original Spanish text of Article 8 states: “De conformidad a lo establecido en la Constitucién de la Reptblica, la
expropiaci6n procederd por causa de utilidad publica o de interés social, legalmente comprobados, previa una justa
indemnizacién....”

*' The original Spanish text states: “Que para incrementar el nivel de inversiones extranjeras en el pats, debe
establecerse un marco legal apropiado que contenga reglas claras y precisas, de acuerdo a las mejores practicas en
esta materia, que le permita competir internacionalmente en el esfuerzo de atraer inversiones nuevas.”

*® National Investment Promotion Agency of EI Salvador. See PROESA Home Page, http:www.proesa.com.sv (last
visited April 27, 2009).

33

investment protection and promotion treaties aimed at further assuring
the rights of foreign investors in the country. Thus, between 1995 and
2002, El Salvador undertook a number of actions specifically aimed at
increasing foreign investment flows and securing the rights of foreign
investors.

48. In addition to the financial, legal, scientific, technical, and
operational due diligence that is customarily completed in merger and
acquisition transactions such as the one undertaken by Pacific Rim, the
company’s senior management also held due diligence meetings with the
Government. In the course of these meetings, Pacific Rim’s
representatives received assurances from the Ministers of both MINEC
and MARN that the mineral rights in the El Dorado license areas had
been legally acquired and properly administered under the relevant laws.
In particular, high-level officials from MINEC’s Department of Mines
gave their assurances that the company’s local operating subsidiary
(which, at the time, was called Kinross-ES) would be granted an
exploitation concession upon confirming the commercial mining potential
of the El Dorado exploration site.

49. Assured by its due diligence into the legal, economic, political, and
technical aspects of the Salvadoran mining claims, in April 2002, Pacific
Rim consummated its merger with Dayton and thereby acquired the
assets of Dayton in El Salvador, Chile, and the United States. As a result
of the transaction, Pacific Rim became the owner of Kinross-ES,
Dayton’s wholly owned Salvadoran operating authority, and of Kinross-
ES’ mineral exploration rights in various license areas in El Salvador. Of
principal importance among these areas (as noted above) were two
contiguous license areas known as “El Dorado Norte” and “El Dorado
Sur,” located in the administrative department of Cabafias.

50. In January 2003, Kinross-ES was renamed “Pacific Rim El
Salvador” (previously defined as “PRES”’). PRES’ mining rights in the El
Dorado Sur and El Dorado Norte license areas were acknowledged by
the Government of El Salvador in Resolutions No. 181, dated December
5, 2003, and No. 189, dated December 18, 2003. Resolutions 181 and 189
specifically modified all previous exploration licenses issued with respect
to the El Dorado Norte and El Dorado Sur areas, recognizing PRES as
the owner of all exploration rights in those areas.

51. On November 30, 2004, Pacific Rim vested sole ownership rights in
PRES in its subsidiary, PRC. On August 11, 2005, MINEC’s Oficina
Nacional de Inversiones (previously defined as “ONI”’) acknowledged
PRC’s status as the new owner of PRES via Resolution No. 383-R.”

* See Resolution No. 383-R dated August 11, 2005, here attached as Exhibit 2. PRC’s last updates of its registered
investment in the Enterprises are here attached as composite Exhibit 3.

34

52. In June 2005, PRC incorporated a second Salvadoran enterprise,
DOREX, in order to acquire exploration rights over three additional
license areas contiguous to, and partially overlapping with, the El
Dorado Norte and El Dorado Sur license areas.*° As stated above, these
three areas are known as “Huacuco”, “Pueblos” and “Guaco”
(collectively with El Dorado Norte and EI Dorado Sur, the “El Dorado
Project”).

53. Since 2002, Pacific Rim, PRC, and the Enterprises have spent many
tens of millions of U.S. dollars in El Salvador on infrastructure,
community development initiatives, and mineral exploration and
development activities related to the El Dorado Project. Their activities
in El Salvador have been undertaken in reliance on and with the
reasonable investment-backed expectation of being able to engage in
income-generating mine development pursuant to a legally authorized
exploitation concession. To ensure their entitlement to such a concession,
the Enterprises have complied at all times with the provisions of the
Mining Law, the Environmental Law, and all other relevant Salvadoran
laws. Their continued investment in El Salvador has been based on the
Government's express support for the Enterprises’ mining operations in
the country.*! As of this filing, Pacific Rim, PRC, and the Enterprises
have invested in excess of US$ 77 million in mining operations and
related activities in El Salvador.

 

  

4° As explained in greater detail below, when PRES sought an exploitation concession for El Dorado Norte and El
Dorado Sur in 2004, MINEC explained that it could not approve a concession covering such a large area. The parties
agreed to “carve out” the smaller areas of Huacuco, Pueblos, and Guaco, which would be the subject of a separate
administrative process.

4! Tn December 2003, for example, MINEC recognized PRES as the new holder of the El Dorado Norte and El
Dorado Sur exploration licenses, and also granted PRES additional extensions to both exploration licenses via
MINEC Resolutions Nos. 191 and 192. See composite Exhibit 4. Likewise, MARN granted the company
environmental permits for exploration activities undertaken on the El Dorado Norte and El Dorado Sur license areas
on June 15, 2004, by means of MARN Resolution No. 151-2004. See Exhibit 5.

 

 

A further example of the Government’s prior interest and willingness to allow and support PRC’s mining
operations is shown by PRES’s experience with the Santa Rita exploration license. On July 8, 2005, MINEC
granted an exploration license to PRES to search for minerals in Santa Rita, a mining claim near El Dorado.
Accordingly, in September 2005, PRES applied to MARN to receive the environmental permit related to the
exploration of the Santa Rita License. During this process, PRES filed an EIA and participated in the public
consultation process as required by the Environmental Law. On May 30, 2006, MARN granted the requested
environmental permit. These Government’s actions with respect to the initial development of Santa Rita
strengthened PRC’s expectations that it would receive similar environmental permits for its other claims,
including El Dorado.

Time would tell that the Santa Rita permit would be the last that PRC and the Enterprises would receive from the
Government. Although PRES has received both the exploration license and environmental permit for Santa Rita,
and has invested substantial resources in exploration activities, the Government’s recent actions and current
attitude towards mining has made any further development of this claim area impossible. PRC’s claim includes
its lost investments in connection with Santa Rita.

 

35

C. The El Dorado Exploitation Concession

54. During 2002 and 2003, PRES” carried out significant exploration
activities at the El Dorado site under valid exploration licenses. By early
2004, PRES had verified the substantial gold ore deposits at the El
Dorado Norte and El Dorado Sur License areas. PRES immediately
undertook the necessary steps to secure an exploitation concession from
MINEC, and accordingly, in March 2004, filed an application with
MARN for an environmental permit in order to be able to commence
exploitation activities on those areas.

55. In furtherance of its application for the environmental permit,
PRES prepared the required EIA for exploitation activities (the
“Exploitation EIA”) for submission to MARN. The Exploitation EIA was
a thorough and detailed study, fully assessing the baseline environmental
conditions and the projected environmental impacts of the mining and
reclamation activities using best available operating practices and
mitigation measures.

56. Ina letter dated August 25, 2004, PRES received assurances from
the Director of the Department of Mines, Ms. Gina Navas de Hernandez,
that the company’s rights to solicit a concession over the El Dorado
Norte and El Dorado Sur license areas would not be affected by any
potential delay in receiving the environmental permit.

57. In September 2004, PRES filed its Exploitation EIA with MARN. By
December 2004, the company had not yet received a response to its EIA.
Notwithstanding this lack of information, in order to comply with the
requirements of the Mining Law - which mandates that a licensee apply
for an exploitation concession upon termination of the exploration phase
—and in reliance on MINEC’s earlier representations that delays at
MARN would not affect its application, PRES formally submitted its
application for a mining exploitation concession to MINEC on December
22, 2004. Pursuant to preliminary discussions between PRES and
MINEC, the concession application covered only a portion of the area
previously covered by the El Dorado Norte and EI Dorado Sur
exploration licenses. Specifically, MINEC explained that it could not
approve a concession covering such a large area. Accordingly, PRES and
MINEC worked together to define an acceptable portion of the two
license areas over which PRES could solicit an exploitation concession.
The areas that were “carved out” of the original proposed concession
areas were the Huacuco, Pueblos, and Guaco areas, where PRES had not

* Previously known and doing business as Kinross-ES.

* See Exhibit 6.

36

carried out significant exploration work, and for which DOREX later
acquired exploration licenses.

58. In the meantime, in February 2005, MARN responded to the EIA
that PRES had submitted in September 2004 with a series of
observations. These observations were fully addressed by the company
via a supplemental volume to the EIA, which PRES submitted to MARN in
April 2005.

59. After receiving additional input from MARN, PRES submitted a
final Exploitation EIA in September 2005, which addressed not only the
comments provided by MARN in April, but also responses to further
observations PRES received from MARN in August 2005.

60. In October 2005, in accordance with the Environmental Law and
MARN’s instructions, PRES published information related to the EIA in
local newspapers in order to allow the public the opportunity to provide
comments on the assessment. At the same time, PRES held public
meetings with the local communities to present and explain the EIA.
Then, in March 2006, MARN provided PRES with the observations to the
EIA that had been submitted during this required public comment period.

61. In July 2006, MARN supplemented these observations with thirteen
additional comments. Although the provision of these additional
comments was not contemplated within the permitting process - which
was supposed to conclude with the public comment period - PRES
nevertheless provided detailed written responses to each of them. Thus,
by September 2006, PRES filed a response to the public comments on the
EIA, and in October, the company filed a response to MARN’s additional
thirteen comments.

62. Finally, in December 2006, PRES presented the Ministry with a
plan for a state of-the-art water treatment facility that the company
proposed to build in order to treat any effluent from the mining and
processing operations. This proposal, like the company’s responses to
MARN’s additional thirteen c ents, was not plated within the
permitting process, but was rather provided upon the informal request of
MARN.

 

63. With the submission of the water treatment facility proposal, PRES
had addressed every observation and concern expressed by MARN
(whether reasonable, substantiated, or otherwise) throughout the
extended EIA review process. Indeed, since December 2006, MARN has
not once expressed any concerns as to the adequacy of the company’s
EIA. It has likewise never expressed any doubt as to PRES’s full
compliance with all of the requirements of the permitting process. As

37

such, in accordance with Salvadoran law, PRES is entitled to receive an
environmental permit for mining on the EI Dorado site.

64. From December 2006 through December 2008, however, MARN
ceased all official communication with the company in regards to its
application, notwithstanding the fact that Salvadoran law clearly
stipulates that MARN must take definitive action on EIA submissions
within 60 business days, and even under exceptional circumstances,
within a maximum of 120 business days. Despite this requirement, MARN
did not provide, and still has not provided, PRES with any justification
for MARN’s inexplicable silence. Indeed, on December 5, 2008, MARN
requested that PRES provide information about the same water treatment
plant that PRES had already submitted in December 2006." As discussed
below, it is now apparent that MARN’s inaction had been directed from
above, and specifically from the offices of President Saca.

65. Asa result of the Government’s inaction, PRES has been unable to
obtain the exploitation concession to which it is legally entitled, and
which it legitimately expected to receive upon complying with the
requirements of the environmental permitting process. With the exception
of the environmental permit that remains unjustifiably withheld by the
government, PRES has met all of the requirements to receive the
concession. Nevertheless, the company has been unable to develop any
mining activities in EI Salvador over the last two years.

D. The Exploration Licenses for Pueblos, Guaco, and Huacuco

66. As mentioned above, in anticipation of the expiration of the
exploration licenses for EI Dorado Norte and EI Dorado Sur in 2004,
PRES engaged MINEC in discussions that same year with respect to the
possibility of converting the entire area covered by the two EI Dorado
exploration licenses into one exploitation concession. These discussions
led to a “carve out” of a central portion of the two license areas, over
which the exploitation concessions had been formally solicited. The area
surrounding this carve-out was then divided into three small exploration
areas, denominated Huacuco, Pueblos, and Guaco. MINEC agreed to
grant PRC’s new-established subsidiary, DOREX, three additional
exploration licenses for these three areas.

67. Thus, in September 2005, DOREX was granted exploration licenses
for Huacuco, Pueblos, and Guaco by, respectively, Resolution No. 205
(dated September 28, 2005), Resolution No. 208 (dated September 29,
2005), and Resolution No. 211 (dated September 29, 2005). DOREX

* On December 8, 2008, in response to this request, PRES informed MARN that its request had already been
answered during the EIA review process.

38

immediately began the process of receiving the necessary environmental
authorizations to continue exploration of the newly-designated sites,
which had been commenced by PRES under the El Dorado Norte and El
Dorado Sur exploration licenses.

68. In November 2005, DOREX submitted an environmental permit
application for the Huacuco license area to MARN. In December, MARN.
responded to the application with a request for an EIA regarding the
impact of the exploration activities to be undertaken. The requested EIA
was submitted to MARN by DOREX on February 17, 2006. MARN then
asked for, and DOREX posted, public announcements regarding the EIA
in May 2006. In November 2006, MARN indicated that the environmental
permit for Huacuco was all but ready to be awarded, and asked that
DOREX submit the required environmental financial assurance bond —a
bond which is normally requested and deposited only after final approval
of the relevant EIA.

69. DOREX submitted the bond to MARN as requested. Since then,
however, the Ministry has failed to act on its application, even though the
Environmental Law itself requires MARN to execute the license within ten
business days of approving the EIA. Moreover, although there had been
some communication between DOREX and MARN in the months
following the submission of the application, all communication channels
inexplicably shut down in December of 2006, the same month that PRES
submitted the final proposal in connection with its exploitation permit
application for EI Dorado. Clearly, this silence could not be attributed to
any technical problems with the applications. Indeed, with respect to
Huacuco, as with respect to EI Dorado, no such problems or concerns
were ever expressed.

70. MARN’s subsequent actions vis-a-vis the Enterprises followed the
same pattern. Thus, in October 2006, DOREX had submitted
environmental applications for both the Pueblos and Guaco exploration
license areas. MARN responded to both applications within that same
month, requesting that DOREX submit an EIA for each license area,
which DOREX proceeded to provide in August 2007. The Ministry
acknowledged receiving the Guaco EIA in November 2007, and requested
that DOREX respond to observations on it. In turn, MARN acknowledged
the Pueblos EIA in January 2008, and requested that the company
answer observations regarding that assessment as well. Rather than
express legitimate concerns, however, many of MARN’s observations to
the two EIAs simply requested information that had already been
included within the original assessments provided to it.

71. Nevertheless, in order to be responsive to the request, DOREX
answered all the observations presented to it by the Government

39

regarding the Guaco license on February 8, 2008 and regarding the
Pueblos license on March 26, 2008. DOREX’s responses largely
reiterated and expanded upon many of the same details discussed within
the original EIAs, since MARN’s observations concerned information that
had already been provided therein.

72. Since responding to the observations, which should have resulted in
the EIAs passing on to the public phase of the evaluation, DOREX has
received no further communications from MARN regarding either the
Guaco or Pueblos applications. In short, as with PRES’s environmental
permit application for exploitation activities on the El Dorado Sur and El
Dorado Norte license areas, MARN’s conduct with respect to DOREX’s
environmental permit applications for exploration of Huacuco, Pueblos,
and Guaco reflects the arbitrary about-face in the Government’s policies
with respect to the Enterprises’ operations in El Salvador.

E. President Saca’s 2008 Announcement of Opposition to PRC’s
Investment Activities

73. Initially, the Enterprises legitimately believed that MARN’s inaction
was an unofficial temporary aberration, perhaps the result of
bureaucracy, incompetence, inter-agency lack of communication, or some
combination of those factors. As such, the Enterprises continued to meet
with MARN in the hope of achieving a negotiated solution to what they
considered to be only a temporary impasse, and were repeatedly assured
by senior government officials that the permits would be issued
imminently.

74. In 2008, it became clear that the Government's delay tactics with
respect to the issuance of the Enterprises’ various permits had been
designed and implemented with the unlawful, discriminatory, and
politically motivated aim of preventing the Enterprises’ mining
operations.

75. In March 2008, President Saca*® publicly stated that he opposed
the granting of any pending mining permits. At a press conference,
President Saca announced that he intended to revisit the entire legal
framework that was already in place to regulate mining in EI Salvador,
the very system on which PRC and the Enterprises had relied in investing
many tens of millions of dollars in the country. According to press
accounts, President Saca stated (among other things):

45 President Saca came into power in March 2004. He was recently voted out of office and will be replaced by
President-elect Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena as of June 1, 2009.

40

What I am saying is that, in principle, I do not agree with
granting [pending mining] permits. 46

76. PRC and the Enterprises were astonished by President Saca’s
assertions, which were contrary to the duly adopted El Salvadoran
Mining Law and the stated 2001 policy of the Government in favor of
“mining activity” because it “is of great importance to the economy of
the country[,] as it generates investments by nationals and foreign
companies, contributing in this way to the creation of jobs and
development in the areas where these activities are made. mr By letter
dated April 14, 2008, Mr. Tom Shrake, who serves both as a Director and
a Manager of PRC, wrote to President Saca:

We have been unable to obtain a formal response from the
government with respect to our proposed exploitation project
for El Dorado. Similarly, our other exploration projects are
awaiting receiving their respective permits, as well as our
new applications for exploration licenses.

Through the press, we have noticed that you have stated that
you are opposed to awarding us our operating permits. In
these public statements, you have stated that, ‘In principle I
do not agree with granting these permits.’

I would also like to explain to you that the situation of Pacific
Rim in El Salvador is extremely critical and precarious.
Should we not receive a response on behalf of your
government that addresses our rights as investors, our
company would be in unavoidable situation of having to
initiate the resolution of controversies procedure established

4 See Exhibit 7. The original Spanish text reads in pertinent part: “El presidente de El Salvador, Elias Antonio
Saca, aseguré este martes que ‘en principio’ se opone a la concesién de permisos para nuevas explotaciones mineras
enel pais y pidié al Congreso estudiar el tema a profundidad. ‘El tema de la minerfa es un tema que hay que
estudiarlo a profundidad. Yo entiendo que los diputados han formado una comisién (y) que hay que hacer una ley, el
ministerio del Medio Ambiente y el ministerio de Economia estén caminando de la mana con los diputados,”
aseguré Saca en una rueda de prensa. ‘Lo que estoy diciendo es que, en principio, yo no estoy de acuerdo con
otorgar esos permisos,” sefialo el mandatario en referencia a 26 proyectos mineros que estan requiriendo los

permisos de explotacién. La explotacién minera es adversada por la iglesia y la oposicién de izquierda por
considerar que contaminara los mantos acufferos y destruira el medio ambiente en general, en el escaso territorio de
20.742 km2 de El Salvador...” See Presidente de El Salvador pide cautela ante proyectos de explotacién
minera, INVERTIA, Mar. II, 2008, http://cl.invertia.com/noticias/noticia.aspx?idNoticia=200803 | 12248 AFP 224800-
TX-SXH27&idtel.

 

4” Decree 456, supra note 34.

4l

in the Free Trade Agreement between Central America, the
United States and the Dominican Republic (CAFTA-DR).**

77. Nonetheless, President Saca adhered to his newly announced
“policy” of opposing the issuance of mining permits. President Saca
continued to assert that EI Salvador’s existing mining law had to be
rewritten. He also vaguely asserted that a “country-wide environmental
strategic study” needed to be undertaken - while offering no other details.
Ina press interview dated July 15, 2008, President Saca was specifically
asked about PRC and the Enterprises’ pending permits. He responded:

[F]or now, I will not grant mining permits, until two
requirements are satisfied.”

78. The first requirement, according to President Saca, was that new
mining legislation had to be passed, notwithstanding the vested rights of
PRC and the Enterprises under the existing Mining Law enacted in 1996,
and amended in 2001, which remains the law today. The second
requirement, he said, was for MINEC and MARN to complete a vague
“study” on the possible effects of mining on the entire country. President
Saca acknowledged, however, that he did not know what the study would
entail, or even whether it had been started.” In fact, as of the date of this
Notice, no such study has been completed (or to our knowledge, even
commenced).

79. Notwithstanding President Saca’s comments, and the Government’s
actions and inactions, the Enterprises engaged in several meetings with
the Government in 2008 in an effort to resolve the matter amicably.
Nonetheless, President Saca’s public statements adhered to the position
he had announced in March 2008. Thus, in February 2009, President
Saca was quoted in the press as stating:

While Elias Antonio Saca is in the Presidency, he will not
grant a single permit [for mining exploration], not even
environmental permits, which are issued prior to [the mining
permits ’] being granted by the Ministry of Economy.

8 See Exhibit 8.

* See Saca afirma que no concederd permisos de extraccién minera, cadenaglobal.com, July 15, 2008,
http://www.cadenaglobal.com/noticias/default.asp?not= 182976&sec=8%20-%2056k. The original Spanish text of
the article reads: “AI ser consultado sobre declaraciones de la empresa canadiense Pacific Rim, que podrfa iniciar un
proceso de arbitraje internacional contra el Estado, Saca dijo que ‘hoy por hoy no daré ningtin permiso para la
mineria, mientras no se cumplan’ dos requisitos.”

42

[PRC and the Enterprises] are about to file an international
complaint and I would like to reaffirm, I would prefer to pay
the $90 million then give them apermit.*!

80. Despite the Enterprises’ best efforts to reach a negotiated solution
with the Government, as of the time of this Notice, the Government’s
conduct has impeded the ability of the Enterprises to conduct mining
activities and benefit from their investments. The Government has also
impeded their ability to obtain further financing for their activities -
financing which would without doubt be forthcoming were the permits in
hand - and has thereby rendered further operation of their activities
virtually impossible.

 

81. In addition to EI Salvador’s refusal to act upon its obligations, the
Government has further compounded the unfairness of its treatment of
PRC’s investments by requiring the Enterprises to continue costly
exploration work on those very license areas for which they have
requested, but have not yet been granted, environmental permits. For
example, DOREX filed all of the required annual reports for its
exploration licenses over Guaco, Pueblos, and Huacuco in 2007 and
2008, and has - at significant expense - complied with the Mining Law
and the Environmental Law to the extent possible without having received
the environmental permits. On the other hand, MINEC representatives
informed company officials that physical work such as drilling and
trenching would also need to be completed on those license areas in 2008
in order to maintain them in good standing, even though DOREX cannot
legally conduct these activities due to MARN’s unjustified refusal to
approve the EIAs submitted by DOREX in connection with those areas.

82. The Enterprises have satisfied all legal requirements and have
responded to all of the observations presented by MARN, in most cases
exceeding the requirements of the law and international standards.
Significantly, the Government has not actually denied any of the
Enterprises’ applications; indeed, it cannot, as it has no legal basis to do
so. Instead, it has unlawfully failed to act upon these applications, thus
effectively preventing the Enterprises from continuing their operations
without providing them the benefit of due process, and indeed without
providing any justification whatsoever for its decision. This conduct
constitutes a gross abuse of administrative discretion, which is
impermissible under both Salvadoran and international law.”

5" See http://www. laprensagrafica.com/index.php/economia/nacional/20190.html. The original Spanish text reads:
“Mientras Elias Antonio Saca esté en la presidencia, no otorgaré ni un tan solo permiso, (para 1a explotacién
minera) ni siquiera permisos ambientales, que son previos a los que otorga el Ministerio de Economia” and “Estén a
punto de entablar una demanda internacional y les quiero dejar claro algo, prefiero pagar los $90 millones a darles
un permiso.”

43

C: President Saca

76.

77.

It will be noted that the Claimant’s allegations address specifically several statements
attributed to the Respondent’s Head of State from 2004 to 2009, President Saca,
particularly the statements allegedly made by him in March 2008 (as set out above in
paragraph 75 of the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration), July 2008 (paragraph 77, ibid)
and February 2009 (paragraph 78, ibid).

It suffices for present purposes to address only the first of these alleged statements. As
published, it formed part of a press report from AFP dated 11 March 2008, exhibited to
the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration (Exhibit 7); and it merits citing here in full, as

translated into English:

‘Salvador — Mining

President of El Salvador asks for caution regarding mining exploitation
projects

The President of El Salvador, Elias Antonio Saca, stated on Tuesday that
“in principle” he is against the granting of permits for new mining
exploitations in the country and asked the Congress to review this issue in
depth.

“The issue of mining is a matter that must be reviewed in depth. I
understand that the members of the House of Representatives have
formed a committee (and) that a law must be made, the Ministry of the
Environment and the Ministry of the Economy are working hand in hand
with the representatives.” Saca stated at a press conference.

“What I am saying is that, in principle, I am not in favor of granting
those permits”, the president said in reference to the 26 mining projects
that are applying for exploitation permits.

 

Mining exploitation is opposed by the church and the left-wing
opposition, since it is believed to contaminate the aquifers and to destroy
the environment in general, within the limited territory of 20,742 kn?
belonging to El Salvador.

“We want to generate a space to reflect on the benefits or disadvantages
of mining. And after we reflect on it, and we’re shown proof that green
mining exists and that it is possible to grant the exploitation permits,

44

728.

79.

which is what we have not given them, at that time, a law must be made to
make everything very clear,” emphatically declared President Saca.

Last February, the Salvadoran Congress began the consultations for the
approval of this controversial law with warnings, from environmental
organizations and the Church, asking representatives to act “prudently”
while alleging that the health of the population is at stake.

One of the first persons to oppose these mining projects was the
archbishop of San Salvador. Fernando Sdenz, who considered the use of
cyanide and cadmium for gold exploitation unacceptable, since they were
“extremely poisonous” and because they “contaminate the aquifers.”

Mining companies, to diminish criticism, have emphasized in several
messages the advantages of the so-called “green mining” for the country,
which, with new techniques — they claim — may reduce damages to the
environment.’

Under CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c), as further explained immediately below in Part V,
the Tribunal is not permitted, at this early stage of these arbitration proceedings, to
investigate whether or not President Saca in fact made any of the statements recorded
in this or other press reports quoted by the Claimant, nor even to decide whether these
reports (if accurate) support a quite different interpretation from that alleged by the

Claimant, when taking into account a more complete factual context.

In regard to the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4, the
Tribunal is accordingly obliged to assume, at this stage of these proceedings and
taking all relevant factors into account, that the Claimant’s interpretation of President
Saca’s reported statements, as pleaded in the Notice of Arbitration, are not fanciful or
so unreasonable as relevant alleged facts as to be disregarded by the Tribunal for
present purposes. In other words, here as elsewhere recorded in this decision, the
Claimant’s factual allegations pleaded in the Notice of Arbitration, as set out above,
must be assumed to be true in accordance with the express requirements of CAFTA
Article 10.20.4(c) for the purpose of deciding the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections.

45

PART V: CAFTA ARTICLE 10.20.4

A; Introduction

80. The Tribunal’s necessary starting-point in addressing the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections (it being common ground between the Parties) is the meaning and effect of
CAFTA Article 10.20.4 (with Article 10.20.5), interpreted and applied as part of
CAFTA under international law: see also CAFTA Article 10.22 cited in Part III above.

B: CAFTA Article 10.20.4

81.

82.

83.

The Respondent submits that the Parties agreed to use CAFTA’s expedited procedure
for the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections to the Claimant’s claims because (i) these
arbitration proceedings are subject to the ICSID Arbitration Rules; (ii) the first
sentence of ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) expressly provides that the procedure under
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) does not apply if “the parties have agreed to another

expedited procedure for making preliminary objections ...”; and (iii) the Parties are
here taken to have consented to “another expedited procedure” in the form of CAFTA

Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5.

The Respondent further submits that CAFTA Article 10.20.5 allows a respondent to
make a preliminary objection with regard to competence to be decided on an expedited
basis; and that CAFTA Article 10.20.5, when used in conjunction with CAFTA Article
10.20.4, also allows a respondent to have a preliminary objection decided on an
expedited basis. Therefore, so the Respondent concludes, CAFTA Article 10.20.5,
either alone or in conjunction with CAFTA Article 10.20.4, constitutes an agreement
by the CAFTA Contracting States to “another expedited procedure” for making

preliminary objections.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant also agreed to submit to the CAFTA

expedited procedure for making preliminary objections when it submitted its Notice of

46

84.

85.

Arbitration. In its amended Exhibit 1 to its Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant

affirmed:

“Pursuant to Article 10.18(2)(a) of the Central America - United States -
Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement (“CAFTA”), Pac Rim
Cayman LLC (“PRC”) hereby consents to arbitration in accordance with
the procedures set out in CAFTA.”

In addition, so the Respondent submits, CAFTA Article 10.16.5 makes clear that
CAFTA provisions pre-empt any different provision in the ICSID Arbitration Rules.
Therefore, so the Respondent concludes, the Parties to this arbitration have agreed to
use the CAFTA expedited procedure for preliminary objections, to the exclusion of
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5); and the Parties’ agreement extends to all claims made

by the Claimant in these ICSID arbitration proceedings.

The Tribunal is content to accept the Respondent’s submissions on the application to
these ICSID proceedings of CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 as an expedited
procedure. Indeed, the Tribunal understood that these submissions were not materially

disputed by the Claimant.

C: The Tribunal’s Analysis

86.

87.

88.

The Parties disputed the general approach to and standard of review under CAFTA

Article 10.20.4. In the Tribunal’s view, these matters can be decided as follows:

The General Approach: The procedure under CAFTA Article 10.20.4 mandates the
tribunal to assume the relevant factual allegations made by the claimant to be “true”,

without any express qualification, namely:

“In deciding an objection under this paragraph [10.20.4], the tribunal shall assume to
be true claimant’s factual allegations in support of any claim in the notice of

arbitration (or any amendment thereof).”

47

89.

90.

91.

92.

It is to be noted that these factual allegations can extend beyond the original notice of
arbitration to include further factual allegations in an amended notice of arbitration up
to the time of the tribunal’s decision. This ability of a claimant to cure a notice of
arbitration by pleading further factual allegations confirms that the procedure is not
intended to be a technical pleading exercise where mere linguistic form should prevail

over substance to the detriment of an ill-pleaded notice of arbitration.

However, it is only the notice (or amended notice) of arbitration which benefits from a
presumption of truthfulness: there is to be no assumption of truth as regards factual
allegations made elsewhere, for example in other written or oral submissions made by
a claimant to the tribunal under the procedure for addressing the respondent’s
preliminary objection. In the present case, therefore, this assumption does not extend
to any factual allegation in the Claimant’s Response, Rejoinder and submissions at the

Oral Hearing.

It is also only “factual allegations” that are assumed to be true under this procedure.
The phrase does not include any legal allegations. It could not therefore include a
legal allegation clothed as a factual allegation. Nor could it include a mere conclusion
unsupported by any relevant factual allegation without depriving the procedure of any
practical application. In short, the Tribunal concludes, again, that substance must

clearly prevail over form under this procedure.

Moreover, the procedure under CAFTA Article 10.20.4 is to be read with CAFTA
Articles 10.16.1 and 10.16.2 which requires a claimant’s notice of intent to claim

liability for a breach and to “specify” (inter alia):

“(b) for each claim the provision of [CAFTA], investment authorization,
or investment agreement alleged to have been breached and any other
relevant provisions;

(b) _ the legal and factual basis for each claim; and

(c) the relief sought and the approximate amount of damages claimed.”

48

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

It would therefore be impermissible for a claimant to evade pleading the factual basis
for each of its claims in the notice of intent: a mere conclusion could not specify a
factual basis. Accordingly, liability, causation and damages must be pleaded under
CAFTA Article 10.16.1 and Article 10.16.2(b), (c) and (d) as regards the notice of

intent.

Under CAFTA, the same requirement does not apply expressly to the subsequent
notice of arbitration under the ICSID Convention, because of the limitation contained
in CAFTA Article 10.16.5. It provides (as here relevant) that the ICSID Convention
and the ICSID Institution and Arbitration Rules shall govern the arbitration “except to
the extent modified by this Agreement”; and there is no such modification in CAFTA
regarding the content of the notice of arbitration (or “Request for Arbitration”) in

ICSID arbitration proceedings.

Accordingly, the Claimant’s pleading in its Notice of Arbitration must here meet the
requirements of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Institution and Arbitration
Rules. Article 36(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 2(e) of the Institution Rules
impose like obligations to plead liability, causation and damages. (Although
differently worded from the equivalent provisions in CAFTA, these differences are not

material in the present case).

There is however an essential difference between the initial pleading by a claimant,
such as a notice of arbitration, and a claimant’s full presentation of its case at a hearing
on the merits under the ICSID Convention. The initial pleading cannot and is not
required to be a complete documentary record of the claimant’s factual evidence and
legal argument. Indeed, a notice may contain few factual exhibits and still fewer legal

materials.

It is clear from the ICSID Convention (as also CAFTA), that the initial pleading will
ordinarily be followed within the written phase by several more substantive written
submissions, documentary exhibits, witness statements and expert reports (including

document production from the adverse party), before even passing to the oral phase

49

98.

99.

100.

101.

and an evidential hearing on the merits. If the initial pleading was intended to be

complete, there would be no purpose in these subsequent steps.

The Tribunal notes the particular approach to Article 36 and Rule 2 taken by Professor
Schreuer and his distinguished colleagues in The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(2009), at page 463: “Article 36(2) requires that ‘information’ on these points be
contained in the request. Institution Rule 2 says that the request must ‘designate’,
‘state’, ‘indicate’ and ‘contain information.’ Therefore no proof is required at this
stage. On most points a mere assertion in the request will suffice and the information
thus given may be developed at a later stage ....”. By assertion, the Tribunal assumes
these authors to mean an appropriate statement specifying the factual and legal bases

of the claim, without evidential proof.

Whilst the request of arbitration must be adequately pleaded, with relevant factual
allegations under the ICSID Convention and Rules, it cannot therefore be equated to
the fine-tuned instrument which emerges at the later stages of ICSID arbitration
proceedings; for example: a party’s main pleadings, closing oral submissions or
comprehensive post-hearing brief. Accordingly, a notice of arbitration, at the very
start of the arbitration, is not therefore to be judged by a formalistic standard more

appropriate to a later pleading.

In addition to factual allegations in the Notice of Arbitration, by CAFTA Article
10.20.4(c)’s last sentence, the tribunal may also consider relevant facts not in dispute

between the parties:

“The tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

The meaning of these words is plain. First, unlike the previous mandate (“shall”), it
grants to the tribunal a power which the tribunal may or may not choose to exercise in
the circumstances of the particular case (“may”). The Tribunal returns below to a

similar factor, “may,” in the context of CAFTA Article 10.20.4 (line 4).

50

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

Second, it operates bilaterally, meaning that a factual admission by a claimant of a fact
alleged by a respondent can be considered by the tribunal, just as a factual admission

by a respondent of a fact alleged by a claimant.

Third, although undisputed facts are not necessarily required to emerge from the notice
(or amended notice) of arbitration for this procedure, these facts must be undisputed at
the time of the tribunal’s decision given the opening words of Article 10.20.4(c) (“In

deciding an objection under this paragraph ...”).

Fourth, there can in practice be no dispute between the parties as to whether or not a
fact is undisputed. For example, it would suffice for a claimant to withdraw its
assertion or admission of a fact by an amended notice of arbitration to convert a
hitherto undisputed fact into a disputed fact before the tribunal’s decision. In the
Tribunal’s view, if that can be achieved in regard to a formal pleading, it can be
equally achieved informally by a claimant or respondent as regards a fact not pleaded
in the notice of arbitration. It is significant that, unlike the earlier part of this sub-
article, the tribunal is not mandated to assume an undisputed fact to be true: it can only
consider “a fact”, not a factual allegation, because the fact is effectively agreed

between the parties.

Accordingly, for all these reasons, the Tribunal approaches the procedure under
CAFTA Article 10.20.4 tempered by a lack of formalism, with an emphasis on

substance and practical common-sense.

As regards the expedited procedure under Article 10.20.5, it is twinned with the
procedure under Article 10.20.4 with an additional ground of objection as to

competence:

“In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after the
tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an
objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not
within the tribunal’s competence ....””

Sl

107.

108.

109.

110.

It is significant that the several deadlines under this expedited procedure are stringent,
both for the parties (and the parties’ legal representatives) and also for the tribunal. It

is not intended to be a ‘mini-trial’, even without evidence.

The Standard of Review: The Tribunal does not consider that the standard of review
under Article 10.20.4 is limited to “frivolous” claims or “legally impossible” claims,
contrary to the submissions of the Claimant. These words could have been used by the
Contracting Parties in agreeing CAFTA; but all are significantly absent. Moreover,
the implied addition of these or similar words would significantly restrict the arbitral
remedy under Article 10.20.4, when the structure of this provision permits a more

natural and effective interpretation consistent with its object and purpose.

The Tribunal does consider that the word “may” in Article 10.20.4 (line 4) confers an
important arbitral power in whether to grant or refuse a preliminary objection, to be
exercised reasonably in all the circumstances of the particular case. The word “may”
is not “must” or otherwise mandatory. The same meaning is evident from CAFTA’s
authentic language: the Spanish phrase “se pueda” is to the same effect as the English
“may.” In context, reversing the negative approach in Article 10.20.4, the word
recognises a position where a tribunal considers that an award could eventually be
made upholding the claimant’s claim or, equally, where the tribunal considers that it
was premature at this early stage of the arbitration proceedings to decide whether or

not such an award could not be made.

In other words, returning to the negative language of Article 10.20.4, to grant a
preliminary objection, a tribunal must have reached a position, both as to all relevant
questions of law and all relevant alleged or undisputed facts, that an award should be
made finally dismissing the claimant’s claim at the very outset of the arbitration
proceedings, without more. Depending on the particular circumstances of each case,
there are many reasons why a tribunal might reasonably decide not to exercise such a
power against a claimant, even where it considered that such a claim appeared likely

(but not certain) to fail if assessed only at the time of the preliminary objection.

52

111.

112.

113.

114.

At all times during this exercise under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5, the
burden of persuading the tribunal to grant the preliminary objection must rest on the

party making that objection, namely the respondent.

Given the tight procedural timetable and deadlines under CAFTA Article 10.20.5, as
already indicated above, it is clear that an expedited preliminary objection is not
intended to lead to a ‘mini-trial.’, A contrary conclusion would attribute to the CAFTA
Contracting Parties a perverse intention to render investor-state arbitration even more
expensive and procedurally difficult for the disputing parties, when it would seem
from these provisions (read as a whole) that the actual intention of the Contracting
Parties was, manifestly, the exact opposite. The procedure under CAFTA Article
10.20.4 is clearly intended to avoid the time and cost of a trial and not to replicate it.
To that end, there can be no evidence from the respondent contradicting the assumed
facts alleged in the notice of arbitration; and it should not ordinarily be necessary to
address at length complex issues of law, still less legal issues dependent on complex

questions of fact or mixed questions of law and fact.

Moreover, it may be correct, as the Claimant submitted, that the non-waiver provision
in Article 10.20.4(d) as to competence may allow a further intermediate stage under
the ICSID Arbitration Rules before the claimant can reach the merits, thereby leading
a respondent to have, in the Claimant’s words, “more than one bite at the cherry.” If
this approach were correct (albeit recently doubted by another CAFTA tribunal), there
would therefore be a further reason not to make the procedure under Articles 10.20.4

and 10.20.5 even more onerous for the disputing parties than it may be already.

Lastly, as already indicated, as the party invoking these procedures it is of course for
the Respondent to discharge the burden of satisfying the Tribunal that it should make a
final decision dismissing the relevant claim or claims pleaded by the Claimant in these

arbitration proceedings.

53

D: The Tribunal’s Conclusion:

115.

116.

117.

118.

The Tribunal has reached this interpretation of CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5
based upon the plain and unambiguous meaning of their respective wording and the
principles of customary international law declared in Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. (The Respondent and the USA have signed but

not ratified the Vienna Convention).

The Tribunal concludes that the object and purpose of these two provisions is to create,
under CAFTA, an effective and flexible procedure for the swift and fair resolution of
disputes between claimant investors and respondent host states, to be exercised

reasonably by a tribunal according to all the circumstances of the particular case.

The Tribunal was not materially assisted by comparisons between these provisions and
national court procedures in one Contracting Party, the USA, as evidenced by its
President’s Message of 2005 and several decisions of US courts, including the
decisions of the US Supreme Court in Neitzke v. Williams and Ashcroft v. Iqbal. Not
only is that message from one Contracting Party not replicated by other Contracting
Parties to CAFTA, there is also no reason to equate such common law court
procedures to provisions in CAFTA agreed by Contracting Parties with different legal

traditions and national court procedures.

The Tribunal was also not materially assisted by comparisons with NAFTA or the
New ICSID Arbitration Rule 41.5, which have different wording and do not share
exactly the same object and purpose. Accordingly, the Tribunal has placed no reliance
in this decision on the Decision of 12 May 2008 in Trans-Global v. Jordan and the
Decision of 2 February 2009 in Brandes v. Venezuela. Nonetheless, the Tribunal has
considered these and other legal materials, from which doubtless much more could still

be learnt in other more appropriate cases.

54

PART VI: THE APPLICATION OF CAFTA ARTICLES 10.20.4 AND 10.20.5

A; Introduction

119.

120.

It is now appropriate to apply to the Parties’ respective cases the Tribunal’s

interpretation of CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5.

Of the four exploration areas of which the Claimant complains in the Notice of
Arbitration, three exploration areas (Guaco, Huacuco and Pueblos) surround the area
of the intended El] Dorado concession. The Respondent does not currently object to
these claims in its Preliminary Objections; but the Respondent seeks to reserve all its

rights regarding these claims to a later stage of these arbitration proceedings.

B: The Respondent’s Case

121.

122.

First, tracking the Respondent’s written and oral submissions, albeit not verbatim and
omitting documentary and legal references, the Tribunal here summarises the
Respondent’s submissions regarding the Claimant’s claims subjected to the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections: (i) the El Dorado Claim; (ii) the Santa Rita
Claim, (iii) Other CAFTA Claims; and (iv) Non-CAFTA Claims. As already indicated
above, this summary records the Respondent’s submissions and not the views of the

Tribunal.

The El Dorado Claim: The Respondent submits that, as acknowledged by the
Claimant in the Notice of Arbitration, the provisions for the granting of a mining
exploitation concession under Salvadoran law are “plain and explicit” under Article 37
of the Mining Law. The specific documents the Claimant identifies as being required
to obtain the mining exploitation concession are described in paragraph 35 of the

Notice of Arbitration (quoted above in Part IV).

55

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

In addition to an Environmental Permit, these include: (i) a showing that the licensee
owns or is authorised to use the real estate property where the mine project is located

and (ii) an Estudio de Factibilidad Técnico Econ6mico (or “Feasibility Study”).

In its Notice of Arbitration, according to the Respondent, the Claimant asserts the legal
conclusion that PRES is entitled to obtain the El Dorado concession but for the
lack of the Environmental Permit. The Claimant asserts that, under Salvadoran law,
a company that holds an exploration license has a “right to obtain the exploitation
concession . . . [and] that right is perfected upon the discovery and demonstration
of the existence of mineable ore deposits in the license area in accordance with
Article 23 [of the Mining Law]”: see paragraph 37 of the Notice of Arbitration
(quoted above in Part IV).

The Respondent submits that the Claimant is legally wrong in both its assertion that
there is an automatic right to a mining exploitation concession under Salvadoran law
and its conclusion that it has complied with the minimum requirements of the

Mining Law for the granting of an exploitation concession.

First, the Mining Law does not give to holders of exploration licenses automatic
rights to exploitation concessions. The Claimant provides a self-serving interpretation
of the Mining Law by focusing exclusively on one clause of Article 23 and ignoring
the rest of that provision and the related provisions in Articles 40-43. These
provisions specify the governmental decision-making process applicable to
exploitation concessions, as well as the Ministry of Economy’s authority to grant
or deny such applications. Full compliance with all the formal requirements of
the Law simply affords an applicant the legal right of having its application

considered by the Ministry and not a legal right to the grant of such application.

Second, whilst the Claimant makes allegations related to PRES’ inability to obtain an
Environmental Permit, nowhere in its Notice of Arbitration does the Claimant
allege that PRES submitted the other specified documents or complied with the

other individual requirements to obtain the concession.

56

128.

12

130.

131.

132.

©

The Respondent contends that this lack of any factual allegations relating to these legal
requirements does not meet the demands of CAFTA Article 10.16.2(c) for the “legal
and factual basis for each claim” for a Notice of Intent, still less for a Notice of

Arbitration.

According to the Mining Law, the Respondent contends that there is no automatic
right to a concession, even if the applicant has submitted all the required documents.
The Mining Law sets out a series of steps for reviewing the application after its
submission, including publication and solicitation of comments from interested
parties opposing the application. The solicitation of comments from interested
parties would be a meaningless requirement if, as the Claimant asserts, the
Respondent had no option but to issue the concession to the Claimant and the

Enterprises.

Under the Mining Law, so the Respondent also contends, the Ministry of
Economy’s Department of Hydrocarbons and Mines (also called the “Bureau of
Mines”) can reject or accept the application; and, in accordance with Article 43 of
the Mining Law, the final decision on whether to grant the concession is left to the

Minister of Economy.

Thus, the Resolution by the Ministry of Economy (“Acuerdo del Ministerio”) under
Article 23 of the Mining Law is only one of several possible outcomes for a
concession application under Articles 36 to 43 of the Mining Law. As was the
position at the time when Pacific Rim decided to make its investment in El] Salvador in
2002, far from being “required to grant the licensee the concession”, the Ministry of
Economy is given authority within the limits of Salvadoran law to approve or deny an
exploitation concession application, taking into consideration the public interest and

several other factors.

The Respondent contends that Articles 36 to 38 of the Mining Law regulate the
verification by the Bureau of Mines that the application includes the formal

requirements stated in the Mining Law. If these formal requirements are included

s7

133.

134.

135.

136.

in the application, and after completing an initial inspection, the Bureau of Mines
will register the application and will begin the administrative process for

adjudicating upon the application.

If, however, there is a failure by the applicant to meet any of these requirements, the
Bureau of Mines will grant a maximum, non-extendable period of thirty days for the
applicant to remedy the deficiency. If the deficiency is not cured in the thirty-day

period, the Bureau of Mines must deny the application and close the file.

Moreover, contrary to the Claimant’s case, even if the application meets the formal
requirements in the Mining Law and is registered by the Bureau of Mines, the Mining
Law does not provide for the concession to be automatically granted. Rather, the
registration of the application triggers an administrative decision-making process

that may still result in the denial of the application at different stages.

First, according to the Respondent, Article 40 of the Mining Law sets out a process for
publication. The Bureau of Mines must make sure that the applicant publishes a
note in the official gazette and in two newspapers with the largest circulation in the
country, with a summary of the application for the exploitation concession. In
addition, the Bureau of Mines must send the summary of the application to the

municipality where the mining project is located to be posted in the town hall.

Second, according to the Respondent, Article 41 of the Mining Law provides for a
period of fifteen days after the publication of the notice in the official gazette for
persons from the general public who have a legitimate interest in the application, or
who believe that they will be negatively affected by the proposed concession, to
express their opposition to the application. Article 41 provides that the Bureau of
Mines will consider the objections and the applicant’s response, and then decide
whether to allow the process to continue or to stop there if the objections are
well-founded. Either the objecting members of the public or the applicant can appeal

the decision of the Bureau of Mines to the Minister of Economy.

58

13

13

139.

140.

141.

7.

oo

Third, according to the Respondent, if the application process is allowed to continue,
Article 42 of the Mining Law requires the Bureau of Mines to demarcate the area of
the requested concession with sturdy markers. Once this process is concluded, the

Bureau of Mines submits the matter to the Minister of Economy for his decision.

. Finally, according to the Respondent, Article 43 of the Mining Law gives to the

Minister the power to deny the concession if granting the concession would be
unjustified. This provision gives to the Minister authority to evaluate the contents of
the application file and order any investigations and inspections the Minister
considers necessary. Article 15 of the Mining Regulations also provides factors
that the Minister (and previously the Bureau of Mines) must take into account in
deciding whether or not to grant the mining exploitation concession, including
the national interest, the financial and technical capacity of the applicant, and the

characteristics of the proposed mining operation.

In accordance with Article 43 of the Mining Law, the applicant can request
reconsideration of an unfavourable resolution regarding the concession, which will be
decided upon by the Minister. The Minister’s decision on a request for reconsideration

cannot be appealed.

Thus, the Respondent submits that Articles 40 to 43 of the Mining Law demonstrate
that there is no such thing as an “automatic” right to a mining exploitation concession;
and the Claimant’s allegation in regard to El Dorado is legally wrong. In other
words, even if PRES had met all the formal requirements of Articles 36 and 37 of
the Mining Law (which it did not), PRES’s application would still have been
subject to the substantive technical evaluation of the submission, the public
comment process and the legal power of the Minister of Economy to grant or deny

the application.

The Respondent submits that it is therefore clear, as a matter of law (not fact), that
PRES did not have a “perfected” right to a mining exploitation concession; and that

the Claimant cannot receive any relief in this arbitration for the alleged breach of a

59

142.

143.

144.

145.

right which PRES never had. Accordingly, as a matter of law, the Respondent submits
that the claim relating to El Dorado is not a claim for which an award in favour of the

Claimant may be made under CAFTA Article 10.26.

Moreover, in addition to the lack of the automatic right to an exploitation
concession under the Mining Law as alleged by the Claimant, even assuming the
existence of such a right, PRES’ application for a concession could not have been
approved by the Bureau of Mines or by the Minister of Economy because the
application did not comply with two separate requirements of the Mining Law

recognized by the Claimant in its Notice of Arbitration.

As to these, the Respondent contends that the Claimant did not plead any factual
allegations in the Notice of Arbitration demonstrating that PRES had met the separate
requirements of Article 37 of the Mining Law, other than claiming that PRES was
entitled to the Environmental Permit. The Respondent submits that the
Claimant’s silence was not surprising, as the undisputed facts (all deriving from
the Claimant) demonstrate that PRES had in fact not complied with these legal

requirements in these two respects, as described below.

As the Claimant contends, there is a two-stage framework for mining in El Salvador:
(i) an exploration phase and (ii) an extraction, or exploitation, phase. The
Mining Law contains procedures for petitioning the Government for (i) exploration
licenses and (ii) exploitation concessions. The requirements for an exploitation

concession are necessarily distinct from the requirements for an exploration license.

An exploration license is obtained with the goal of identifying whether there are
valuable minerals in the ground and where they are located. The area for the
exploitation concession must be determined based on what was found during
exploration. Article 24 of the Mining Law provides that the mining exploitation
concession area must be within the exploration area and that the surface area must be
determined by the size of the mineral deposits and the technical justifications of the

exploration license holder.

60

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

According to Article 37 of the Mining Law, an applicant for an exploitation
concession must present, among other requirements, (i) documentation of ownership
or authorization to use all the property that corresponds to the area of the concession
and (ii) a technical and economic feasibility study, as the Claimant acknowledges in

its Notice of Arbitration (see paragraph 35, quoted above in Part IV).

According to the Respondent, the Claimant not only failed to allege relevant facts to
show that PRES complied with these two requirements, but the undisputed facts
(from the Claimant’s own documents) demonstrate that PRES actually did not
comply (and still does not comply) with these two requirements. Nor is there any
allegation that the Respondent in any way hindered PRES from complying with these
two essential requirements. In short, the Claimant has failed to plead the relevant facts
demonstrating PRES’ entitlement to the exploitation concession at issue, not by
inadvertence but because such facts do not exist to its own knowledge and could

not be pleaded in good faith in its Notice of Arbitration.

The Property Issue: The first of these two requirements requires a showing that the
applicant owns or is authorised to use the real estate property where the mine project
is located; that is, the requirement to own or have authorization to use all the
property covering the area of the exploitation concession being requested by the

applicant.

Nowhere in its Notice of Arbitration does the Claimant allege any facts to support an
allegation of such ownership or authorization. The reason is again simple: the

undisputed facts show that it has no such ownership or authorization.

Beginning with the application itself, PRES did not allege that it owned or had
permission to use the surface area over the requested concession. The concession for
which PRES applied consists of an area of 12.75 square kilometres. Yet PRES
provided proof of ownership or authorization to use only approximately 1.6 square

kilometres, i.e. a mere 13% of the total area requested for the concession.

61

15

152.

153.

154.

155.

. This deficiency in its application for a mining exploitation concession was indicated

to PRES by a letter from the Bureau of Mines dated 2 October 2006, pursuant to
Article 31 of the Mining Regulations. This letter gave to PRES thirty days to
submit (among other documents) certified copies of the registered land purchases

or authorizations for the land subject to the concession.

In response to this letter, PRES merely re-submitted the same documents which PRES
had already submitted with its original application, making no mention of any
additional land. The Claimant has never alleged that PRES owns or has
authorisation to use all the property included in its application. PRES does not
have and has never claimed to have authorization to use the rest of the area applied
for (11.985 square kilometres); and PRES has therefore not complied with the
requirement of Article 37 of the Mining Law regarding ownership or authorization to

use this land.

The Respondent submits that, based both on the Claimant’s failure to allege facts in its
Notice of Arbitration showing compliance with the requirements of the Mining Law
and upon the undisputed facts from the Claimant’s own documents, that PRES never
met what the Claimant admits is one of the “plain and explicit” requirements to
obtain a mining exploitation concession under Salvadoran law: namely, making a
showing that the applicant licensee owns or is authorissed to use the property where
the mine project is located. Having not met this essential requirement, PRES did
not have any right to the mining exploitation concession in El] Dorado; and the

Claimant’s pleaded claim must therefore fail on this ground alone.

Feasibility Study: The Respondent submits that the second requirement that PRES

did not meet concerned the Feasibility Study under Article 37 of the Mining Law.

The Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration notes this requirement; but, according to the
Respondent, it then fails to allege anywhere that PRES ever submitted a completed
Feasibility Study, still less any study covering the entire area in respect of which

PRES applied for a mining exploitation concession.

62

156.

157.

158.

159.

According to the Respondent, PRES submitted only a “Preliminary Pre-Feasibility
Study.” At the time, PRES distinguished this from the required final Feasibility
Study, which it admitted was not complete. PRES submitted a “final” but still “Pre-
Feasibility Study” in January 2005; but it never submitted the Feasibility Study
required by the Mining Law.

According to the Respondent, the application explained that PRES would need more
time and money fully to explore the area for which it had exploration licenses.
Nevertheless, in its application, PRES included a request for the right to exploit areas
that had not been completely explored, and for which it had not submitted an
environmental impact assessment. This addition was not based on the Mining Law,
but rather on PRES’s unilateral opinion of how it could maximize its own benefits:
PRES argued that due to the cost of constructing the mine and beginning
operations, it would not be reasonable to limit the area of the exploitation

concession.

The Bureau of Mines’ letter of October 2006 to PRES also alerted PRES to its failure
to provide the required Feasibility Study. It likewise gave to PRES thirty days to
submit the Feasibility Study with detailed plans. Again, PRES simply re-submitted
its Pre-Feasibility Study and added the requested plans for the six specific areas

requested; and the required Feasibility Study was never submitted by PRES.

According to the Respondent, the difference between a Pre-Feasibility Study and a
Feasibility Study is not merely in name. For example, Article 24 of the Mining Law
specifically ties the surface area of the concession to the size of the mineral deposits
and the technical justifications provided by the license holder. Thus, an applicant
has to justify in a Feasibility Study the reason why it deserves to be awarded the
concession area which it is requesting. The Pre-Feasibility Study commissioned
by Pacific Rim by its terms demonstrates that it was clearly insufficient for this
purpose; and PRES was not, in fact, in a position even to prepare the required
Feasibility Study because it was requesting a concession area larger than it could

justify based on the exploration and technical work it had undertaken.

63

160.

161.

162.

163.

The Respondent submits that PRES thus never completed the required Feasibility
Study to allow the Ministry of Economy properly to evaluate whether or not to grant
the concession and, if so, whether PRES had provided justification, and showed the
technical and economic capacity, for the 12.75 square kilometres area it was requesting

for the exploitation concession.

The Respondent concludes that this failure to complete and submit a Feasibility Study,
at the time when PRES submitted its application (and ever since), is a failure to
comply with the second essential requirement clearly stated in the Mining Law for
obtaining an exploitation concession. Thus, so the Respondent submits, the
Claimant’s conclusionary statement that, “[w]ith the exception of the environmental
permit that remains unjustifiably withheld by the Government, PRES has met all of
the requirements to receive the [exploitation] concession”, is wholly unsupported by

its own factual allegations.

In summary, as regards these two requirements the Respondent submits that the
provisions in Salvadoran law requiring an exploitation concession applicant to
submit specific documents do not violate any provisions of CAFTA or the
Salvadoran Investment Law; that the Respondent complied with the Mining law in
granting to PRES thirty days to remedy its deficient application; that PRES did
not submit the required documentation; and that PRES thus failed to meet the
essential requirements for the mining exploitation concession under Salvadoran law.
As a result, any failure by the Government to issue the Environmental Permit has
caused the Claimant no legal harm. The Claimant’s claim for El Dorado is frivolous;
it must fail in limine; and it should be dismissed by the Tribunal under CAFTA Article
10.20.4.

Santa Rita Claim: The Respondent seeks the dismissal of the Claimant’s claim relating

to the fourth exploration area included in the Notice of Arbitration, known as Santa

Rita.

64

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant does not include any allegation of
wrongdoing by the Respondent in its Notice of Arbitration relating to Santa Rita. To
the contrary, the Claimant pleads that the Respondent has granted all permits with
regard to Santa Rita. However, without any factual or legal basis, the Claimant has
decided to include its alleged “lost investments in connection with Santa Rita” in

this arbitration.

In any event, the claims related to Santa Rita are completely without factual or legal
basis because PRES no longer holds an exploration license in Santa Rita. PRES failed
to request the renewal of the exploration license before its term expired, as required

by the Mining Law and Mining Regulations.

Therefore, so the Respondent concludes, because neither the Claimant nor the
Enterprises hold an exploration license in Santa Rita, the Claimant does not have
any rights in Santa Rita upon which to base any claim against the Respondent in
these arbitration proceedings. The claim relating to Santa Rita should therefore be

dismissed by the Tribunal under CAFTA Article 10.20.4.

Other CAFTA Claims: The Respondent first contends that the Claimant has failed in
its Notice of Arbitration to provide any factual bases for its claims of violation of
CAFTA Articles 10.3 (National Treatment) and 10.4 (Most-Favored-Nation
Treatment). Specifically, according to the Respondent, the Claimant does not
allege how the Respondent has treated its own nationals (or nationals of any other
State) more favourably than the Claimant. Accordingly, the Respondent submits that
these unsubstantiated claims should be dismissed by the Tribunal under CAFTA
Article 10.20.4.

The Respondent next objects to the Claimant’s allegation of a breach by the
Respondent of CAFTA Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B) with regard to alleged “investment
authorizations”, where the Claimant asserts that the Respondent “has breached the

express and implied terms of the Enterprises’ investment authorizations, including,

65

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

without limitation, all resolutions issued by MINEC in relation to the

investments in El Salvador.”

The Respondent submits that CAFTA defines an “investment authorization” as “an
authorization that the foreign investment authority of a Party grants to a covered

investment or an investor of another Party.”

According to the Respondent, the resolutions by the Oficina Nacional de Inversiones
(ONI) registering the investments in El Salvador are not “authorizations” but
“registrations” of investments. The Claimant’s Enterprises requested such
registration after the funds being registered had already been transferred to El
Salvador; and there is thus no investment authorization from the Respondent that can

form the basis for a CAFTA claim by the Claimant.

In any event, according to the Respondent, the Claimant’s general reference to alleged
investment authorizations is insufficient for a CAFTA claim. CAFTA Article
10.16.2(b) requires that the notice of intent “shall specify . . . the provision of
this Agreement, investment authorization, or investment agreement alleged to have
been breached.” The Claimant does no more than refer generally to “all resolutions
issued by MINEC.” The Respondent submits that, because there is no investment
authorization (much less one with enforceable provisions) and there is no
reference to alleged breaches to the provisions of any resolution, there is no viable

claim under CAFTA Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B).

Accordingly, the Respondent submits that these other CAFTA claims should be
dismissed by the Tribunal under CAFTA Article 10.20.4.

Non-CAFTA Claims: The Respondent objects to the competence of the Tribunal over
all claims under the Investment Law. The exclusivity requirement in CAFTA, which
precludes the Claimant from initiating any non-CAFTA proceeding involving the
same measures alleged to constitute a breach of CAFTA, bars the competence of

the Tribunal for all claims made by Claimant under the Investment Law and any

66

174.

175.

176.

other domestic laws of the Respondent. The Respondent here also relies upon the

expert opinion of Professor Reisman.

The Respondent submits that CAFTA requires exclusivity of arbitration proceedings
with regard to any measures alleged to constitute a breach of CAFTA. This
exclusivity requirement is included in CAFTA Article 10.18. The scope of this
exclusivity requirement extends beyond the typical ‘fork-in-the-road’ provisions in
many bilateral investment treaties. CAFTA requires exclusivity of the CAFTA dispute
settlement provisions with respect to any claims related to the same measures alleged

to constitute violations of CAFTA.

The Respondent contends that NAFTA Article 1121 has waiver requirements similar
to CAFTA’s requirements. These waiver requirements have also been invoked by
respondents with regard to local judicial and local arbitration proceedings, with
the resulting dismissal of claims, either voluntarily or by order of the tribunal. For
example, in the first NAFTA arbitration between Waste Management Inc. and
Mexico, the claimant was attempting to maintain two domestic judicial proceedings
and one domestic arbitration proceeding based on the same measures which the
claimant was alleging constituted a violation of NAFTA in the NAFTA
arbitration. The claimant argued that it was allowed to keep the concurrent
proceedings because they were based on other sources of law, i.e., Mexican law
and not the NAFTA provisions upon which the claims in the NAFTA arbitration
were based. The tribunal rejected the claimant’s interpretation of the waiver
requirement because the measures being challenged in the concurrent proceedings

were also the basis for the NAFTA claims in the NAFTA arbitration.

Until now, according to the Respondent, arbitral decisions and awards involving
waivers under CAFTA and the similarly-worded waivers under NAFTA have only
decided challenges involving parallel domestic proceedings based on the same
measures that were alleged to constitute a breach of CAFTA or NAFTA in the non-
domestic international arbitration. This was only so because that was the particular

issue presented in these cases. According to the Respondent, there is nothing in the

67

177.

178.

oo

179.

plain text of CAFTA Article 10.18.2(b) to limit its application to domestic

proceedings.

The Respondent cites, as an example, the first CAFTA arbitration, TCW Group Inc
and Dominican Energy Holdings, LP v. The Dominican Republic, where the
respondent made a jurisdictional objection based on the impermissible existence of
two parallel international arbitrations in addition to the CAFTA arbitration, one
alleging breaches of a BIT and one alleging violations of a contract but based on the
same measures also alleged to constitute a breach of CAFTA in the CAFTA
arbitration. The claimants disputed the requirement of identity of claimants in the
parallel international arbitration which was necessary to trigger the waiver
provisions, but the claimants never alleged that the waiver required by CAFTA
Article 10.18.2(b) applied to domestic proceedings only. Thus, if this arbitration
had not been terminated by the parties’ settlement, the tribunal’s decision on
jurisdiction (regardless of its ruling on the claimants’ identity argument) would
have involved the application of the requirement of CAFTA Article 10.18.2(b)
and the invocation of the corresponding waiver with regard to parallel

international arbitrations.

Therefore, according to the Respondent, any notion that the waiver requirement
applies only to parallel domestic proceedings is contradicted by the plain text of the
treaty, the plain text of the waiver and the previous invocation of a waiver under

CAFTA in a situation involving parallel international arbitrations.

The Respondent submits that these earlier NAFTA and CAFTA cases regarding
exclusivity requirements and waivers lead to the conclusion that the Claimant cannot
initiate parallel proceedings in domestic courts, in domestic arbitration proceedings
or in another international arbitration (even in a separate ICSID arbitration)
invoking jurisdiction under the Investment Law to bring claims under the
Investment law (or other Salvadoran laws) based on the same measures alleged to
constitute a violation of CAFTA before this Tribunal in these ICSID arbitration

proceedings.

68

180. In the present arbitration, so the Respondent submits, the Claimant is bringing before

181.

18:

183.

2.

w

this ICSID Tribunal two separate proceedings, one under CAFTA and the second one
under the Investment Law. If allowed to proceed, the Claimant would be asserting

two quite different sets of claims with regard to the exact same measures.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant cannot do in a single arbitration what it is
not allowed to do in two separate arbitrations. Such a result would force the
Respondent effectively to defend itself against two proceedings relating to
precisely the same measures, with the possibility of inconsistent results because of
different legal standards and different jurisdictional requirements. This is not
allowed by the plain text of CAFTA Article 10.18.2(b), which was a condition to
the Respondent’s consent to arbitration when the Respondent became a party to
CAFTA, as well as when the Claimant executed its waivers and commenced

arbitration under CAFTA; and it remains a condition to the Respondent’s consent.

The Respondent notes that several tribunals, parties to arbitration proceedings and
commentators have raised the possibility of double recovery of damages as the
purpose behind the waiver provisions in both NAFTA and CAFTA. The
Respondent does not share that narrow interpretation, because there are other ways
to address the issue of double recovery, as the claimant in TCW v. The Dominican
Republic suggested. Instead, the Respondent focuses its objection on the plain text of
CAFTA and the double jeopardy to which it would be subject in this case if CAFTA
Article 10.18.2(b) did not provide otherwise.

According to the Respondent, the Claimant expressly accepted that the following
waiver required by CAFTA was a precondition to the Parties’ consent to jurisdiction

under CAFTA:

“Pursuant to Articles 10.18(2)(b)(i) and 10.18(2)(b)(ii) of CAFTA, PRC
waives its right to initiate or continue before any administrative
tribunal or court under the law of any Party to CAFTA, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any measure

69

184.

185.

186.

alleged in PRC’s Notice of Arbitration, dated April 30, 2009, to

constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16 of CAFTA.
In addition, according to the Respondent, the Claimant expressly consented to submit
itself to CAFTA procedures earlier in that same document: “Pursuant to Article
10.18(2)(a) of the Central America — United States — Dominican Republic Free
Trade Agreement (“CAFTA”), Pac Rim Cayman LLC (“PRC”) hereby consents to
arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in CAFTA.” According to the
Respondent, the Claimant has unequivocally waived its rights to initiate or continue
“any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged in PRC’s Notice of Arbitration ...
to constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16 of CAFTA” (emphasis added by
the Respondent).

The Respondent submits that all claims under the Investment Law pleaded in the
Notice of Arbitration are based on the exact same measures which the Claimant
alleges to be breaches of CAFTA, namely: the Claimant’s allegations that the
Respondent failed to grant a mining exploitation concession for El] Dorado, and that
the Respondent failed to issue Environmental Permits necessary for the renewal of the
exploration licenses for the Guaco, Huacuco, and Pueblo. In fact, the Claimant
addresses the factual basis for both the CAFTA and the Investment Law proceedings
in a single section of the Notice of Arbitration, using the same measures as the
factual basis for all claims in the two sets of legal claims. Therefore, according to
the Respondent, there is an impermissible identity of measures in the two sets of

legal claims advanced by the Claimant before this Tribunal.

Having waived its rights to initiate or continue any proceeding with respect to any
measure alleged to constitute a breach of CAFTA, the Respondent contends that the
Claimant has acted inconsistently with the terms of its waiver when it simultaneously
invoked jurisdiction and introduced claims under the Investment Law over the same

measures which the Claimant alleges are breaches of CAFTA.

70

187.

188.

189.

According to the Respondent, previous CAFTA and NAFTA cases involving improper
waivers with regard to pending parallel proceedings have resulted in the dismissal of
the CAFTA or NAFTA claims affected by the overlapping measures. That remedy
was appropriate in those cases because the tribunal deciding the objection only had
the power to dismiss the claims before that tribunal, and did not have the power to
terminate the concurrent proceedings. That remedy also was appropriate because that

was what the respondent requested or agreed to.

In this case, however, the Respondent contends that this Tribunal has before it both
sets of claims; and that it therefore has the power to dismiss the second set of
claims. In this situation, according to the Respondent, the proper remedy for
this Tribunal is to enforce the Claimant’s waiver under CAFTA and to dismiss all
non-CAFTA claims. This would resolve the problem, as identified by the
Respondent, created by the contradiction between the Claimant’s waiver and its

Notice of Arbitration.

In conclusion, pursuant to CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5, the Respondent
submits that it has demonstrated that the Claimant’s allegations of fact (if taken as
true) and the undisputed facts show that PRES has failed to meet the requirements to
obtain a mining exploitation concession in El Dorado; and that the Claimant has
no valid legal claims regarding the Santa Rita exploration license. Therefore, the
Claimant is not entitled to any award regarding these claims because the
Respondent’s alleged conduct has not caused any legal harm to the Claimant. In
addition, the Claimant has not made any factual allegations to substantiate its legal
allegations regarding breaches by the Respondent of CAFTA Articles 10.3
(National Treatment), 10.4 (Most-Favored-Nation Treatment), and
10.16.1(b)(i)(B). Consequently, the Respondent submits that these claims should
be dismissed. Lastly, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal does not have
any competence in these arbitration proceedings to decide any of the Claimant’s

claims under the Investment Law (or any other domestic law of the Respondent).

71

C: The Claimant’s Case

190.

191.

192.

193.

It is similarly appropriate for the Tribunal to summarise here the Claimant’s responses
to the Preliminary Objections. As with the Respondent’s case, this summary is
necessarily incomplete; and in tracking the Claimant’s own submissions, it should not

be thought that this summary represents the views of the Tribunal.

The El Dorado Claim: According to the Claimant, the Respondent erroneously asserts
that PRES did not meet the two necessary requirements under the Mining Law for
submitting an application for an exploitation concession from the Respondent. The
Claimant submits that (i) PRES did demonstrate that it owned or was authorized to use
the property where the El Dorado mine is to be located; and (ii) PRES did submit a
proper Feasibility Study. The Claimant submits that these are issues of fact, both (a)
as to what did or did not happen and (b) as to Salvadoran law, being treated as facts

under international law before this Tribunal.

The Property Issue: As to the property issue, the Claimant submits that it must be
assumed for present purposes that PRES did not fail to comply with Article 37 of the
Mining Law concerning the documentary requirement for demonstrating ownership or
authority to use the relevant land. The Claimant specifically pleaded in its Notice of
Arbitration that PRES complied with this specific requirement of the Mining Law; see
particularly paragraphs 35 and 42 of the Notice of Arbitration (quoted above in Part
IV). According to the Claimant, this factual allegation, being assumed to be true under
CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c) should, for present purposes, suffice to defeat the

Respondent’s Objection.

In any event, so the Claimant submits, the Respondent’s interpretation of Salvadoran
law is wrong. It is not the case that PRES was required to provide MINEC with proof
of ownership or authorization comprising the entire surface area requested for the El
Dorado concession. Article 37 of the Mining Law does not require the applicant to
provide ownership of or authorization to use the entire surface of the concession area.

The requirement is limited to the property within the concession area where mining

72

194.

195.

196.

activities are to be conducted, or, as pleaded in the Notice of Arbitration, “where the

mine project is located.” (Paragraph 35: quoted above in Part IV).

According to the Claimant, it is important to bear in mind that the mining concession
sought by PRES was for an underground mine and not an open pit mine. It is a general
principle of Salvadoran law that the sub-surface (with all mineral deposits thereof) is
the property of the State and not of individual landowners. As stated in Article 103 of
the Respondent’s Constitution: “The subsurface belongs to the State, which may grant

concessions for its exploitation.”

The Claimant submits that this general principle is reflected in several provisions of
the Mining Law. These provisions, read with Article 37, make it clear that, for an
underground mine, the applicant need only demonstrate ownership or authorization of
the limited surface area where mining activities are actually to be conducted, i.e. where
the entrance to the underground mine and the above-ground mining facilities are to be
physically located on the surface. The ownership of or authorization to use other
surface areas under which minerals may be located (but which surface area is not to be
used, disturbed or impacted by the applicant) is clearly not required by Article 37 of
the Mining Law.

Thus, according to the Claimant, Article 2 of the Mining Law provides that “the State
is the owner of all mineral deposits existing in the subsoil of the territory of the
Republic, irrespective of their origin, form and physical state.” Article 10 establishes
that mineral deposits existing in the subsoil constitute property distinct from the
surface land under which they are located. Article 21 provides that authorization from
third party landowners is required only for works to be performed on the soil surface.
Article 54 provides that beneficiaries of mining rights can obtain a legal easement if
use of real property owned by a third party is necessary for the development of their

mining activities.

73

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

All these provisions confirm, in the Claimant’s submission, that ownership or
authorization to use all of the surface area comprising a concession area for an

underground mine is not necessary under Article 37 of the Mining Law.

Moreover, so the Claimant contends, it would make no practical sense for the applicant
to be required to obtain ownership of or authorization to use the surface land from
private land-owners located above the deposit, but which surface land the applicant
does not intend to use or disturb in order to mine the sub-surface. Article 37 only
requires property ownership or authorization for works to be performed on the soil
surface — not for the surface area overlaying underground deposits that will not be

affected by the applicant’s mining activities.

In summary, the Claimant submits that Respondent’s case that PRES did not comply
with this first requirement of Article 37 of the Mining Law in making its application
for an exploitation concession is based on an incomplete, inaccurate and misleading
presentation of the relevant facts, including facts concerning Salvadoran law and the

relevant administrative record.

Feasibility Study: As to this issue, the Claimant submits that, as a matter of fact, PRES
complied with Article 37 of the Mining Law because PRES did submit a Feasibility
Study. Similarly to the first issue above, the Claimant contends that its factual
allegation to such effect pleaded in paragraphs 35 and 42ff of the Notice of Arbitration
(cited above in Part IV), being assumed to be true under CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c),

should suffice to defeat the Respondent’s Objection without more.

In any event, the Claimant contends that PRES submitted a Feasibility Study in the
form of a “Preliminary Pre-Feasibility Study” with its application for the exploitation
concession in December 2004, followed by a “Final Pre-Feasibility Study” in January

2005.

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s submission that this “Final Pre-Feasibility

Study” did not comply with the requirements of Article 37 of the Mining Law. The

74

203.

204.

205.

Respondent wrongly alleges that the difference between a Pre-Feasibility Study and a
Feasibility Study is not merely a difference in name but a difference in substance. In
fact, according to the Claimant, the Respondent has (inter alia) confused terms that
have a meaningful distinction in the context of U.S. and Canadian securities laws, but
which have no significance in the context of an application for an exploitation

concession to the Respondent under the Mining Law of El Salvador.

The Claimant submits that Article 37 of the Mining Law requires an exploitation
concession applicant to submit an “Estudio de Factibilidad Técnico Econémico,
elaborado por professionales afines a la materia” — i.e. a Study of Technical and
Economic Feasibility, prepared by professional persons with expertise in the relevant
field. In the Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant provided a “shorthand” definition to

refer to this document: a “Feasibility Study.”

According to the Claimant, the Mining Law and Mining Regulations set out the
requirements for what is to be included in a Feasibility Study. Article 23 of the
Mining Law (“Concession for the Exploitation of Mines”) provides that an application
for a mining concession is made upon completion of exploration and proof of the
“existence of economic mining potential on the authorised area; and Article 23 also

refers to “verification of economic potential.”

Section 18 of the Mining Regulations (“Application for Exploitation Concessions”)
provides that when: “applying for a Mine Exploitation Concession after receiving an
Exploration License, proof of the existence of a deposit or deposits as described in
Article 23 of the Law shall be provided via documents that are congruent or consistent
with the activities and studies that were executed during the term of this License, and
the final report described in the preceding section ... when the concession is requested
directly, as set forth in Section 23, paragraph 3, of the Law, documentation shall be
based on information on expired mining rights or from Technical Studies carried out

that indicate the existence of minerals.”

75

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

According to the Claimant, the Respondent itself confirms that the Estudio de
Factibilidad Técnico Econémico is intended to serve this limited purpose.
Specifically, the Respondent refers to the purpose of this study as “allow[ing] the
Ministry of Economy to properly evaluate whether to grant the concession and, if so,
whether PRES had provided justification and showed its technical and economic
capacity, for the 12.75 square kilometres area it was requesting for the exploitation

concession” (Paragraph 80 of its Preliminary Objections).

By these terms, according to the Claimant, the Final Pre-Feasibility Study submitted
by PRES plainly met or exceeded the requirements of the Estudio de Factibilidad
Técnico Econémico. It is a professional report, exceeding 200 pages and prepared by
numerous specialist firms under the coordination of SRK Consulting, one of the

leading independent producers of feasibility studies in the mining world.

According to the Claimant, the Mining Law and Regulations do not define a “mineable
deposit.” In preparing the study, SRK therefore used the definitions employed by the
Canadian Institute of Mining, being consistent with the purpose of Salvadoran law

described above.

Thus, as used in the study, a “mineral resource” is defined as a resource “in such form
and quantity and of such a grade or quality that it has reasonable prospects for
economic extraction; and a “mineral reserve” means “the economically mineable part
of a Measured or Indicated Mineral Resource demonstrated by at least a Preliminary
Feasibility Study.” The study must include adequate information on mining,
processing, metallurgical, economic and other relevant factors that demonstrate, at the

time of reporting, that “economic extraction can be justified.”

Consistent with these requirements, according to the Claimant, the Pre-Feasibility
Study submitted by PRES included a “Statement of Mineral Reserves,” totalling
535,586 gold equivalent ounces; and this conclusion alone is sufficient to show that an
economically mineable deposit exists, even after taking into account the proposed

mining method; metallurgical and processing methods; and other economic, legal,

76

21

212.

213.

214.

environmental, and other relevant factors which are discussed in detail throughout the

study.

. Therefore, the Claimant submits that the study submitted by PRES plainly satisfies

both the letter and intent of Article 37(2)(d) of the Mining Law.

According to the Claimant, the Respondent confuses the standards for an Estudio de
Factibilidad Técnico Econémico under the Mining Law with those under the U.S. and
Canadian securities laws for publicly traded mining companies. Again, under the
mining regulatory framework in El Salvador (and most other countries), the purpose
for a feasibility study is to show that there is a sufficient existence of economic mining
potential in the authorized area as to justify exploitation activities. By contrast, in the
context of the U.S. and Canadian securities laws, the purpose of such studies is to
inform potential investors of how developed the financial model is for the intended
mine. Under these securities laws, guided by industry standards used to construe these
laws, a “pre-feasibility study” must provide a degree of economic reliability that is
within a range of 20% to 30%. The economic reliability of a feasibility study should
be within 15%.

The Claimant submits that it is therefore difficult (if not impossible) to prepare a study
with the level of economic reliability required under that standard for a “feasibility
study” before an environmental permit and an exploitation concession have been
issued. The timing alone of the permit and concession could affect, for example, the
costs of various commodities used to gauge the likely financial performance of a
mining project. As stated in PRES’s application: “The studies related to a mining
project are largely iterative and change according to the costs, metal prices, operating

upgrades, available technology and exploration program results.”
The Claimant contends that the fact that PRES could not label the report a “Final

Feasibility Study” (because of U.S. and Canadian securities laws) does not mean that

the “Final Pre-Feasibility Study” did not satisfy the requirements of the Mining Law.

77

215.

216.

217.

218.

The US and Canadian requirements are higher, not lower, than the requirements under

Article 37 of the Mining Law of El Salvador.

Lastly, so the Claimant concludes, even assuming that MINEC believed that there
were any deficiencies with respect to PRES’ Feasibility Study, MINEC was required
actually to inform PRES and allow it to cure any such deficiencies under Salvadoran
law. After that process, to the extent that PRES disagreed with MINEC’s conclusions
and MINEC still denied the application, PRES would have been entitled to pursue an
appeal through the appellate process also provided for by Salvadoran law. MINEC
never ruled one way or the other, thereby effectively destroying the Claimant’s
investment and leaving the Claimant without any recourse to any of the procedural or

substantive protections that Salvadoran law could provide against an adverse ruling.

In summary, the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s submission that PRES did
not comply with this second requirement of Article 37 of the Mining Law, in making
its application for an exploitation concession, should be rejected by the Tribunal both

under Article 10.20.4(c) and in any event.

Santa Rita Claim: The Claimant submits that the Respondent overlooks the principal
allegations of the Claimant’s claim, namely: that long before PRES decided not to
renew its Santa Rita exploration license in July 2009, the Respondent had destroyed
the investment that the Claimant had made by making it clear that, no matter what
applications the Claimant filed or what the Claimant did, PRES would not be allowed

by the Respondent to mine at Santa Rita or elsewhere.

According to the Claimant, under CAFTA and international law generally, an investor
does not have to continue formal compliance with a regulatory regime that the
respondent government has effectively swept away in order to maintain a claim by the
investor under CAFTA. The Claimant cites the arbitration awards in Glamis Gold v.
USA and Vivendi v. Argentina: “[I]nternational and domestic courts do not require
futile attempts that will merely waste a claimant’s resources and fail to change an

inevitable final decision” by the host State (Glamis Gold Ltd. v. USA, Award of 14

78

219.

220.

221.

222.

May 2009, paragraph 333; and Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi
Universal SA v. Republic of Argentina, Award of 20 August 2007, paragraph 7.5.28);
and accordingly a claimant is under no obligation to continue operations after the

treaty obligation invoked by the investor has already been breached by the host State.

In summary, the Claimant concludes that, by the Respondent’s illegal acts and
omissions, the Respondent made it impossible for the Claimant as an investor to
pursue its mining activities anywhere in the country, including Santa Rita; and that the

Objection to the Santa Rita Claim should therefore be dismissed by the Tribunal.

Other CAFTA Claims: The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s allegation that the
Claimant has failed to provide any factual basis for its claims of violation of CAFTA
Articles 10.3 (National Treatment) and 10.4 (Most-Favored Nation Treatment).
According to the Claimant, the Respondent also asserts wrongly that the Claimant does
not allege in the Notice of Arbitration how the Respondent has treated its own

nationals (or nationals of any other State) more favourably than the Claimant.

Contrary to the Respondent’s assertions, the Claimant submits that it pleaded the
relevant legal and factual bases for its claims in its Notice of Intent. It there alleged:
“The Salvadoran Government’s discriminatory behaviour toward the Enterprises is
also reflected by the fact that other industries whose operations raise similar
environmental concerns, such as power plants, dams, ports, and fishing operations,
have received environmental permits during the same timeframe that the Enterprises’
applications have been pending. By, inter alia, refusing to grant the environmental
permits to PRES and DOREX while issuing those permits to other companies, El
Salvador has denied to PRC the same treatment that it is required to afford, and has
afforded, to investments of its own nationals and to nationals of other states.”

(Paragraph 35 of the Notice of Intent).

The Claimant contends that this pleading in the Notice of Intent was both sufficient
and also effectively summarised in the Notice of Arbitration (paragraph 91); and that it

should now be treated by the Tribunal as incorporated into the Notice of Arbitration

79

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

either by its original wording or under the Claimant’s request to amend the Notice of
Arbitration to such effect. As to the latter, as already indicated, the Tribunal is content

to do so: see Part I above, at paragraph 35.

Moreover, according to the Claimant, the Respondent’s effective ban on mining
activities appears to be limited to metallic mining. In the meantime, non-metallic
exploitation activities (which are conducted primarily by Salvadoran companies)
continue unhindered. These contrasting facts provide further support for the
Claimant’s National Treatment and Most-Favoured-Nation (“MFN”) Treatment claims

in these arbitration proceedings.

In support of its case, inter alia, the Claimant cites the arbitral decisions in Corn
Products International, Inc. v. Mexico, where a NAFTA tribunal set forth the similar
requirements for demonstrating a breach of National Treatment (which are said to be

equally applicable to MFN Treatment under CAFTA).

The Claimant submits that the Respondent has therefore failed to meet its burden of
showing that Claimant’s National Treatment and MFN Treatment claims are, as a
matter of law, not claims for which an award in favour of the Claimant may be made;

and accordingly its Objection should be dismissed by the Tribunal.

As regards investment authorizations, the Claimant submits that it alleged in the
Notice of Arbitration that the Respondent had breached CAFTA Article
10.16.1(b)(i)(B) and, specifically, that MINEC had issued “investment authorizations”
in the form of (i) resolutions granting exploration licenses to PRC’s Enterprises and
(ii) resolutions from ONI authorizing the registration of PRC’s investment in El

Salvador.

The Claimant notes that the Respondent advances two separate arguments directed at
the Claimant’s claims arising from its investment authorizations. First, the Respondent
wrongly submits that the Claimant has not identified the resolutions at issue with the

requisite specificity in its Notice of arbitration. According to the Claimant, the

80

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

Respondent is well aware of what resolutions MINEC issued to the Enterprises.
Moreover, elsewhere in the Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant identified the
resolutions with great specificity and included several as exhibits. According to the
Claimant, this argument is simply wrong at the early stage of these ICSID arbitration

proceedings.

Second, according to the Claimant, the Respondent is wrong to submit that the
resolutions granting exploration licenses and registering the Claimant’s investments do
not constitute “investment authorizations” within the meaning of CAFTA Article

10.28.

The Claimant contends that CAFTA Article 10.16.1(a)(i) sets out three different types
of instruments, the obligations of which can form the basis for a claim under CAFTA

(see the full text cited above in Part IID).

According to the Claimant, the second instrument, an “investment authorization”, was
meant to capture those cases where a State authorizes an investor to make investments
within the State’s territory, but not through an investment agreement (being the third
instrument). The concept is that where, as in this case, the State has invited an investor
of a Party to invest in the State through an investment authorization and has conferred
rights on the investor in exchange for its investment, those rights should be

enforceable under CAFTA.

Article 10.28 of CAFTA defines an “investment authorization” as “an authorization
that the foreign investment authority of a Party grants to a covered investment or an
investor of another Party.” Article 10.28 further defines an “investment” as including
“licenses, authorizations, permits, and similar rights conferred pursuant to domestic

law.

A footnote to this definition states: “Whether a particular type of license,
authorization, permit, or similar instrument (including a concession, to the extent that

it has the nature of such an instrument) has the characteristics of an investment

81

233.

234.

235.

depends on such factors as the nature and extent of the rights that the holder has under
the law of the Party. Among the licenses, authorizations, permits, and similar
instruments that do not have the characteristics of an investment are those that do not
create any rights protected under domestic law. For greater certainty, the foregoing is
without prejudice to whether any asset associated with the license, authorization,

permit or similar instrument has the characteristics of an investment.”

As alleged by the Claimant in its Notice of Arbitration, the exploration licenses at
issue conveyed substantial rights under Salvadoran law, including (specifically) the
exclusive right to pursue an exploitation concession free from extra-legal changes to
the regulatory framework. The resolutions at issue authorized licenses, which
constituted covered investments under CAFTA. Hence, these resolutions and the

licenses granted by them are “investment authorizations” under CAFTA.

The Claimant submits that there is also no question that these resolutions were in fact
issued by the “foreign investment authority of a Party” because MINEC is the
authority under Salvadoran law charged with responsibility over foreign investment by

the Respondent.

Similarly, according to the Claimant, by registering these investments with ONI, a
department of MINEC, the Enterprises received investment authorizations from
MINEC and the Respondent. Article 17 of the Investment Law specifically requires
that foreign investors “must register their investments at the ONI, which shall issue a
Credential (“una Credencial’”) granting the foreign investor status and identifying the
registered investment.” A foreign investor whose investment registrations are accepted
at ONI are deemed authorized to do business in El Salvador and to enjoy all the rights
and protections of the Investment Law. Article 26 of the Investment Law provides that
“[e]xisting foreign investment registered at the Ministry of Economy are recognized
and their validity accepted, as long as they remain in good standing, for which they
will automatically be afforded the guarantees and rights stipulated by this law, except

on the subject of disputes arising before enforcement of this law.”

82

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

Thus, the Claimant submits that the resolutions issued by ONI authorizing the
registration of the Claimant’s investments in El Salvador unambiguously constitute

investment authorizations under CAFTA.

In summary, the Claimant concludes that its review of the text of CAFTA and relevant
materials (including the Investment Law) demonstrates that the Respondent’s second
argument is devoid of any merit. The resolutions issued by ONI authorizing the
capital invested by the Claimant in El Salvador and the resolutions issued by MINEC
allowing PRES to develop exploration activities in that country, constitute “investment

authorizations” under CAFTA Article 10.16(1)(a)(i)(B).

However, according to the Claimant, that is not even the question currently before the
Tribunal under the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections: the question is whether the
Respondent has met the burden of demonstrating that the Claimant’s claims with
respect to investment authorizations are, as a matter of law, claims for which an award
in favour of the Claimant may not be granted under CAFTA Article 10.26. The
Claimant submits that the Respondent has failed to meet that burden; and its Objection

should therefore be rejected by the Tribunal.

Non-CAFTA Claims: Next, as to the Respondent’s Objection under Article 10.20.5 as
to the Tribunal’s competence, the Claimant contends that by ratifying CAFTA and
enacting the Investment Law, the Respondent provided its consent to arbitrate claims
under both CAFTA and the Investment Law before this Tribunal; by submitting its
Notice of Arbitration asserting claims under both CAFTA and the Investment Law, the
Claimant has provided its reciprocal consent to arbitrate such claims before this
Tribunal; and the Claimant has not waived, nor been required to waive, its right to
arbitrate such claims under both CAFTA and the Investment Law before this Tribunal
in these arbitration proceedings under the ICSID Convention. The Claimant here also

relies on the expert opinion of Professor Wallace.

According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s argument to the contrary springs from its

own interpretation of CAFTA Article 10.18.2. It necessarily requires the phrase “or

83

241.

242.

243.

other dispute settlement procedures” in the concluding sub-paragraph to apply to that
part of these proceedings by which the Claimant advances its claims under the
Investment Law. That is not a permissible reading of this provision under

international law, nor an appropriate characterisation of these ICSID proceedings.

The Claimant submits that there is no risk of double jeopardy to the Respondent, given
that the Claimant advances all its claims at the same time within the same ICSID
arbitration before the same Tribunal. There can be no unfair prejudice to the
Respondent from such proceedings; nor any corresponding unfair advantage to the
Claimant. If there were, the Tribunal has available powers to apply any remedy later
in these proceedings, without declaring itself incompetent at this early stage of these

proceedings.

Nor is it unusual, still less unacceptable, so the Claimant contends, for an arbitral
tribunal to enjoy concurrent jurisdiction under a treaty and a municipal investment or
other law. The Claimant cites as recent examples the ICSID awards in Rumeli v.

Kazakhstan (2008) and Duke v. Ecuador (2008).

In summary, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s case that this Tribunal lacks

competence under CAFTA Article 10.20.5 should be rejected by the Tribunal.

D: The Tribunal’s Decisions

244.

245.

Given the Tribunal’s decisions below and its concern not to prejudge, or even be seen
to prejudge, the Parties’ respective cases hereon in these arbitration proceedings, it is
necessary for the Tribunal to state the grounds for its decisions as succinctly as

possible.
The El Dorado Claim: This claim is the largest and most significant claim made by

the Claimant. On the alleged facts in the Notice of Arbitration, cited in Part IV of this

decision, the Tribunal does not consider that the Respondent has demonstrated that this

84

246.

247.

248.

249.

claim, as a matter of law, is not a claim for which an award in favour of the Claimant

may be made under CAFTA Article 10.26.

In the Tribunal’s view, the issue of liability raises questions as to the interpretation and
application of the Mining Law (whether treated as fact or law) which are either to be
assumed to be true for present purposes or which cannot at present be decided finally
in favour of the Respondent; and the issue of causation (assuming liability) raises
questions of fact or mixed law and fact which cannot at present be decided finally in
favour of the Respondent. As regards the issue of damages (assuming liability and
causation), the Tribunal considers that it may be possible for such damages to be
quantified as compensation for the loss of a chance even if (which the Tribunal does
not here decide) such damages could not be characterised as compensation for the loss
of an “automatic” or “perfected” right to a mining exploitation concession; and thus, if
this were so, that issue too cannot at present be decided finally in favour of the

Respondent.

The Santa Rita Claim: This is a relatively small claim, which appears to contribute
little additional burden to the Respondent in defending these proceedings.
Notwithstanding this claim’s terse pleading in the Notice of Arbitration, on balance,
the Tribunal considers it inappropriate to accept the Respondent’s Objection under

CAFTA Article 10.20.4 given this claim’s adjectival and minor status.

Other CAFTA Claims: As regards the claims under CAFTA Articles 10.3 and 10.4,
given the Notice of Arbitration and the Claimant’s request to amend the Notice of
Arbitration, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent has not established that these
claims are insufficiently pleaded or that these claims, as a matter of law, are not claims
for which an award in favour of the Claimant may not be made under CAFTA Article

10.26.

As regards the claims based on the alleged investment authorizations, the Tribunal
considers that these claims raise issues of Salvadoran law which (whether treated as

fact or law) cannot be decided finally at this stage in favour of the Respondent; and

85

250.

251.

252.

253.

accordingly, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s Objection under CAFTA
Article 10.20.4.

Non-CAFTA Claims: The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s Objection as to
its lack of competence under CAFTA Article 10.20.5.

The Tribunal has carefully considered the expert opinions of Professor Reisman and
Professor Wallace. It has not found it necessary to decide the broader issues canvassed
in these two opinions, which are best left to other tribunals in other cases. In this case,

the Tribunal considers that the decisive issue is relatively short.

Given CAFTA’s stated objective in providing an effective procedure for dispute
resolution and the important practical need, wherever possible, for ‘one stop
adjudication’, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s interpretation of CAFTA
Article 10.18(2) and its treatment of these ICSID proceedings as comprising two quite

separate “dispute settlement procedures.”

In the Tribunal’s view, these arbitration proceedings are indivisible, being the same
single ICSID arbitration between the same Parties before the same Tribunal in receipt
of the same Notice of Arbitration registered once by the ICSID Acting Secretary-
General under the ICSID Convention. To decide otherwise would require an
interpretation of CAFTA Article 10.18(2) wholly at odds with its object and purpose
and potentially resulting in gross unfairness to a claimant. There is no corresponding
unfairness to the Respondent in maintaining these ICSID proceedings as one single
arbitration. In particular, the Respondent does not here face any practical risk of
double jeopardy. Lastly, it is hardly a legitimate objection to this Tribunal’s
competence that it exercises jurisdiction over these Parties based not upon one consent
to such jurisdiction from the Respondent but based upon two cumulative consents
from the Respondent. It is an indisputable historical fact that several arbitration
tribunals have exercised jurisdiction based on more than one consent from one

disputant party, without being thereby deprived of jurisdiction.

86

254. Accordingly, for all these reasons, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s

Preliminary Objections.

87

255.

256.

257.

258.

PART VI: THE TRIBUNAL’S SUMMARY

As indicated above, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5.

In regard to each of the Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4, as also indicated
above, the Tribunal is legally obliged to assume that the Claimant’s factual allegations
pleaded in the Notice of Arbitration, albeit disputed by the Respondent, are “true” in
accordance with the express requirements of CAFTA Article 10.20.4(c) for the
purpose of deciding these objections. Conversely, it is not permissible for the Tribunal
to negate this assumption by constructing to contrary effect “relevant facts not in
dispute” from other materials for the purpose of the last sentence of Article 10.20.4(c),
when it is clear that such facts, as invoked by the Respondent, are disputed by the

Claimant.

That assumption of truthfulness, as explained above, is made by the Tribunal for the
limited purpose of this Decision only. It does not represent or reflect any other
decision by the Tribunal itself as to the truth or falsity of any of the factual allegations

pleaded by the Claimant and denied by the Respondent.

In summary, the Tribunal does not here grant the preliminary relief claimed by the
Respondent set out above in Part I, at paragraph 54(2) to (5) and paragraph 55(1) to
(6).

88

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

PART VII: COSTS

Introduction: There still remain the disputed issues of costs to be decided by the

Tribunal, as claimed by both Parties respectively.

The Claimant: The Claimant requested that the Tribunal order the Respondent to bear
all the costs and expenses of this Preliminary Objections’ phase. The Claimant
submits that its costs should be reimbursed because it has been forced to defend
itself against “frivolous” Preliminary Objections made by the Respondent, within

the meaning of CAFTA Article 10.20.6.

The Respondent: The Respondent requested that the Tribunal order the Claimant to
bear all the costs and expenses of this Preliminary Objections’ phase, including
the Tribunal’s expenses, the Respondent’s costs for legal representation, with
interest. The Respondent submits in turn that its costs should be reimbursed
because it has been forced to defend itself against “frivolous” claims made by the
Claimant, also within the meaning of CAFTA Article 10.20.6: see also its claimed

preliminary relief set out in Part I above at paragraphs 54(6) and 55(6).

The Tribunal’s Decision: Given the Tribunal’s decision not to accept the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, it must follow that the Respondent’s application
for costs must be rejected. It does not follow, however, that the Claimant’s application

for costs should here be allowed, for two reasons.

First, the Tribunal is conscious that this was the first application made under CAFTA
Article 10.20.4 and also the first time that the expedited procedure under Article
10.20.5 was invoked for a preliminary objection under Article 10.20.4. There was thus
something to be learnt for all involved; and what might seem inappropriate after that
lesson would not have seemed so beforehand, at the time when it mattered. In any
event, in the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections cannot be

regarded, even now, as “frivolous” within the meaning of CAFTA Article 10.20.6.

89

264. Second, as regards these particular claims, much of the costs so far incurred by the

265.

Parties will not have been wasted. Much of the work required to bring these
proceedings forwards to a conclusion has now been done. In the Tribunal’s view, it is

unlikely that much time, effort and expenditure will have been lost overall.
For these reasons, the Tribunal decides to make no order as to costs at this stage under

CAFTA Article 10.20.6 but to reserve its decision to the final stage of these arbitration

proceedings.

90

PART IX: THE OPERATIVE PART

266. For the reasons and on the grounds set out above, the Tribunal decides:

(1) As to the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Article
10.20.4, these objections are not granted by the Tribunal;

(2) As to the Respondent’s Objection under CAFTA Article 10.20.5, this

objection is not granted by the Tribunal;

(3) As to costs, the Tribunal here makes no order under CAFTA Article 10.20.6,
whilst reserving all its powers as to orders for costs at the final stage of these

arbitration proceedings; and

(4) As to all other matters, the Tribunal retains its full powers to decide any
further matters in these arbitration proceedings, whether by order, decision

or award.

ICSID, Washington DC, USA.

+

Professor Dr Guido Santiago Tawil:
Date: 2 August 2010

“Bri € fe Stem

Professor Brigitte Stern:
Date: 2 August 2010

ke, Peel. Verve

V.V. Veeder Esq (President)
Date: 2 August 2010

91

