4)

OCEANAGOLD
MEDIA RELEASE

14 October 2016

ICSID TRIBUNAL FINDS IN FAVOUR OF GOVERNMENT OF EL SALVADOR IN
ARBITRATION PROCESS

(MELBOURNE) OceanaGold Corporation (TSX/ASX/NZX: OGC) (the “Company”) has been advised that the
arbitration tribunal constituted by the World Bank’s International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID”) has found in favour of the Government of El Salvador (the “Government’) in its dispute with an
OceanaGold indirect subsidiary company, Pac Rim Cayman LLC. ICSID granted an award of US$8 million
to the Government of El Salvador to cover its legal fees and costs.

OceanaGold inherited the arbitration process when it acquired Pacific Rim Mining Corp. in November 2013
and the Company has stated from the beginning that its goal was to reach an amicable resolution of this
matter which would benefit all parties.

Whilst disappointed, OceanaGold will review the ICSID’s ruling in detail before evaluating the next steps
related to its El Salvador business unit. The Company believes that a modern resource industry that operates
in a safe and sustainable manner and within internationally recognised best practices has the potential to
unlock a sustainable and multi-decade development opportunity for the Republic of El Salvador. However,
the Company recognises that the Government will need to take positive and definitive steps towards
establishing a stable business environment if it wishes to attract foreign investment to establish this
opportunity.

As a world class producer for over two decades, Canadian-Australian mining company OceanaGold has
been a valued member of the communities where it operates, including environmentally sensitive areas such
as New Zealand, the Philippines, and the United States. Over this time the Company has formed a strong
track record of establishing itself as a partner and employer of choice that works in a spirit of cooperation
and respect with its stakeholders in a sustainable and ethical way.

- ENDS -

For further information, please contact:

Investor Relations Media

Sam Pazuki Jill Thomas

Tel: +1 416 915 3123 Tel: +61 3 9656 5308

Email: sam.pazuki@oceanagold.com Email: jill.thomas@oceanagold.com

Jeffrey Sansom
Tel: +61 3 9656 5321
Email: jeffrey.sansom@oceanagold.com

info@oceanagold.com | www.oceanagold.com | Twitter: @OceanaGold

About OceanaGold

OceanaGold Corporation is a mid-tier, low-cost, multinational gold producer with assets located in the
Philippines, New Zealand and the United States. The Company's assets encompass its flagship operation,
the Didipio Gold-Copper Mine located on the island of Luzon in the Philippines. On the north island of New
Zealand, the Company operates the high-grade Waihi Gold Mine while on the South Island of New Zealand,
the Company operates the largest gold mine in the country at the Macraes Goldfield which is made up of a
series of open pit mines and the Frasers underground mine. In the United States, the Company is currently
constructing the Haile Gold Mine, a top-tier asset located in South Carolina along the Carolina Terrane. The
Company expects the Haile Gold Mine to commence commercial production in early 2017. OceanaGold also
has a significant pipeline of organic growth and exploration opportunities in the Australasia and Americas
regions.

OceanaGold has operated sustainably over the past 25 years with a proven track record for environmental
management and community and social engagement. The Company has a strong social license to operate
and works collaboratively with its valued stakeholders to identify and invest in social programs that are
designed to build capacity and not dependency.

In 2016, the Company expects to produce 385,000 to 425,000 ounces of gold from the combined New
Zealand and Didipio operations and 19,000 to 21,000 tonnes of copper from the Didipio operation at All-In
Sustaining Costs of US$700 to US$750 per ounce.

NOT FOR DISSEMINATION OR DISTRIBUTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND NOT FOR
DISTRIBUTION TO U.S. NEWSWIRE SERVICES.

