ICSID Arbitration Case No. ARB/05/8

 

PARKERINGS-COMPAGNIET AS

Claimant

REPUBLIC OF LITHUANIA

Respondent

 

AWARD

 

TRIBUNAL
Dr. Julian Lew Q.C., Arbitrator
The Hon. Marc Lalonde P.C., O.C., Q.C., Arbitrator

Dr. Laurent Lévy, President

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Martina Polasek

Date of dispatch to the parties: September 11, 2007

21

2.2

2.3

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

41

4.2

43

 

...MAIN FACTS RELATING TO THE MERITS OF THE DISPUTE

TABLE OF CONTENTS

.. THE PARTIES 5

 

 

The Claimant 5
The Respondent 5
... THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 6

 

 

Co-Arbitrator Nominated by the Claimant

 

Co-Arbitrator Nominated by the Respondent....

 

Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal ....................

 

 

 

 

 

... SUMMARY OF THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDING 7
Initiation of the arbitration and constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal ... wT
First Session of the Tribunal 8
Pre-Hearing Written Phase 9
The Evidentiary Hearing 12
The Post-Hearing Briefs. 13

 

 

 

 

The Tender 13
4.1.1 The Bidders 14
4.1.2 Parkering: 15

 

4.1.3 The Award of the Bid to the Egapris Consortium

 

 

 

 

 

The Agreement between the Egapris Consortium and the Vilnius Municipality............ 18
4.2.1 The Negotiations Regarding the Agreement .............0. ee 18
4.2.2 The Agreement 21
4.2.2.1. The Consortium’s Obligations under the Agreement
4.2.2.2 The Municipality’s Obligati under the Agre 24

 

4.2.2.3. Revenue Sharing Mechanism under the Agreement.

 

4.2.3 The incorporation of the Operator............

Legality of the agreement and modifications of laws 30

 

 

4.3.1 The legality of the parking fee.......0..00.0..

 

4.3.2 The new Law on Fees and Charges.
4.3.3 The new Law on Clamping

 

 

4.3.4 The amendment of the Law on Self-Government.

2/96

44

5.2

7.1

7.2

7.3

... ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED BY THE TRIBUNAL.

The performance of the agreeement................. 234

 

4.4.1 The submission of Parking Plans
4.4.2 The Joint Activity A it
4.4.3 The Pinus Proprius Project

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.4.4 The modification of the Agreement of 30 December 1999 40
4.4.5 The termination of the Agreement by the Municipality.............. 43
...POSITION OF THE PARTIES 44
The Claimant 44
5.1.1 On jurisdiction 44
5.1.2 On the merits 45
5.1.2.1 Breach of the duty to grant equitable and reasonable treatment........... 45

5.1.2.2 Breach of the obligation of protection

 

5.1.2.3 Breach of the duty to afford no less favourable treatment

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

5. 4 Breach of the duty not to expropriate without compensation

5.1.2.5 Di
5.1.3 Prayers for relief 48
The Respondent 48
5.2.1 On jurisdiction 48
5.2.2 On the merits 48

5.2.2.1 Lithuania has not frustrated Claimant's legitimate expectations............ 48

5.2.2.2 There has been no expropriation by Lithuania

 

 

§.2.2.3 Lithuania has not violated its duty to grant Claimant protectio!
5.2.2.4. The Claimant was not subject to any discrimination

 

5.2.2.5 The Claimant is not entitled to compensation

 

5.2.3 Prayers for relief 51

 

 

 

.... JURISDICTION 52
Issues for determination 52
The parties’ position 52

 

7.2.1 Parkering
7.2.2 The Republic of Lithuania...

 

Discussion on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction .

7.3.1 The Claimant's Investment ..............0+

   

3/96

 

8.1

8.2

8.3

8.4

7.3.2 Did the claims fall under the Treaty? ...... 56

 

.-MERITS 58

Claims for violation of the duty of equitable and reasonable treatment (article III of
the Treaty)

 

 

8.1.1 The distinction between the notions of fair and reasonable

8.1.2 Was the Treatment “unfair and discriminatory’?

 

8.1.2.1 The position of the parties.
8.1.2.2 Dit ic 62

8.1.3 Was the conduct or the Respondent “arbitrary” ?........0..

 

8.1.3.1 Position of the parties

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.1.3.2 Dis

a) The Sorainen Memo .

b) The Force majeure.

c) The ination of the A 67
8.1.4 Legiti ions

8.1.4.1 Position of the parties

8.1.4.2 Dit

a) Did Lithuania frustrate Parkerings’ legitimate expectation that it

would respect and protect the legal integrity of the Agreement ?.......... 70

Claims for violation of the obligation of protection (article Ill of the Treaty) ............ 74
8.2.1 Position of the parties 74
8.2.2 Discussion 75

 

Claims for violation of the obligation to accord treatment no less favorable than the
Treatment accorded to investments by investors of a third State (article IV of the
Treaty) 76
8.3.1 Position of the parties 77
8.3.1.1 The situation of the Gedimino MSCP.
8.3.1.2 The situation of the Pergales MSCP...

 

 

 

 

 

 

Expropriation 91
8.4.1 Position of the parties 91
8.4.2 Discussion 92
.... THE ISSUE OF COSTS. 95
.. THE AWARD 96

 

4/96

1. THE PARTIES

1.1. THE CLAIMANT

1. Parkerings-Compagniet AS (“Parkerings” or “the Claimant”) is a corporation organized
and existing under the laws of Norway.

2. Parkerings’ principal business activity consists in the development and operation of
public and private parking facilities, including the collection of parking fees and the
enforcement of parking regulations.

3. Its corporate headquarters are located at:

@kernveien 145, 9. etg.
PO Box 158 @kern
N-0509 Oslo, Norway

4. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by:

Mr. David W. Rivkin

Mr. Gaetan J. Verhoosel
Mr. William H Taft V
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
919 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10022

USA

Mr. Zilvinas Kvietkus
Norcous & Partners
A. Go8tauto str. 12 A
01108 Vilnius
Lithuania

Ms. Carita Wallgren

Roschier Holmberg, Attorneys Ltd.
Kreskuskatu 7A

00100 Helsinki

Finland

1.2 THE RESPONDENT
5. The Respondent is the Republic of Lithuania (“Lithuania” or “the Respondent”).
6. | The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by:

Mr. Petras Baguska, Minister of Justice

Mr. Paulius Koverovas, State Secretary of the Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Justice

5/96

24

2.2

Gedimino pr. 30/1
011104 Vilnius
Lithuania

Mr Alexander Yanos

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
520 Madison Avenue, 34th floor
New York NY 10022

USA

Ms. Lucy Reed

Mr. Constantine Partasides

Mr Noah Rubins

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2, rue Paul Cézanne

75008 Paris

France

Ms. Renata Berzanskiené

Law Office Adamonis, Berzanskiené and partners Sorainen Law Offices
Jogailos 4

01116 Vilnius

Lithuania

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Co-ARBITRATOR NOMINATED BY THE CLAIMANT
Nominated by the Claimant in its Request for Arbitration dated 11 March 2005:

Dr Julian D. M. Lew, Q.C.
20 Essex Street

London WC2R 3AL
United Kingdom

Co-ARBITRATOR NOMINATED BY THE RESPONDENT
Nominated by the Respondent by letter dated 9 September 2005:

The Honorable Marc Lalonde P.C., O.C., Q.C.
1155 René-Levesque Blvd West

33" floor

Montreal, QC H3B 3V2

Canada

6/96

2.3 CHAIRMAN OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

9.

3.1

Jointly appointed by the parties by letter dated 3 October 2005:

Dr. Laurent Lévy
Schellenberg Wittmer
15 bis, rue des Alpes
P.O. Box 2088

1211 Geneva 1
Switzerland

SUMMARY OF THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS

INITIATION OF THE ARBITRATION AND CONSTITUTION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

On 11 March 2005, the Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration with the Secretary-
General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”).
With respect to the “method of appointment of the Tribunal and appointment of
arbitrator,” J 72 of the Request set forth the following:

The Treaty does not set forth any particular method of appointment of the Tribunal.
Having regard to Article 37 of the Convention and Rule 2 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
Parkerings proposes that the Tribunal consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each
party and the President of the Tribunal appointed by agreement of the parties.

Under {| 73 of the Request for Arbitration, the Claimant appointed as its arbitrator Dr.
Julian D. M. Lew, Q.C. On 21 June 2005, ICSID informed the parties that Dr. Lew had
accepted his appointment as arbitrator.

On 17 March 2005, ICSID addressed to the Respondent a copy of the Request for
Arbitration.

On 22 April 2005, ICSID requested, in accordance with Rule 2(1)(c) of the Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), that the Claimant communicate to the Centre, on the one hand, “information
concerning the consent of Parkerings-Compagniet AS to submit the dispute with the
Republic of Lithuania to ICSID,” and, on the other hand, “evidence of entry into force of
the bilateral investment treaty between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania
and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway of June 16, 1992.” The Claimant
provided the requested information by letter dated 29 April 2005.

On 16 May 2005, the Secretary-General of ICSID issued a “Notice of Registration,”
stating that the Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by counsel for the Claimant's
letter of 29 April 2005, had been registered in the Arbitration Register. He also invited
the parties to “communicate [...] any provisions agreed by them regarding the number
of arbitrators and the method of their appointment.”

7/96

3.2

20.

By letter dated 27 May 2005, the Respondent informed ICSID that “it raises no
objection to the Parkerings-Compagniet AS proposal regarding the Arbitral Tribunal
consisting of three arbitrators.”

By letter dated 8 August 2005, the Respondent requested an extension of the 15
August 2005 deadline for the constitution of the Tribunal to 15 September 2005. By
letter dated 12 August 2005, the Claimant declared that it did not object to such time
extension.

By letter dated 9 September 2005, counsel for the Respondent appointed the
Honorable Marc Lalonde P.C., O.C., Q.C. as arbitrator. On 15 September 2005, ICSID

informed the parties that Mr. Lalonde had accepted his appointment.

On 3 October 2005, counsel for the parties jointly informed ICSID of the parties’
agreement to appoint Dr Laurent Lévy as President of the Tribunal. By letter dated 10
October 2005, Dr Lévy accepted his appointment.

On 12 October 2005, ICSID informed the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted
their appointment and that the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted
and the proceedings to have begun on that same day.

FIRST SESSION OF THE TRIBUNAL
The Arbitral Tribunal held a first session on 25 November 2005 in London, UK. In
addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary, the following persons
attended the hearing:
(i) | Representing Parkerings:

. Ms. Carita Wallgren, Roschier Holmberg, Attorneys Ltd.,

. Mr. Gaetan J. Verhoosel, Debevoise Plimpton LLP, and

. Mr. Zilvinas Kvietkus, Norcous & Partners.
(ii) | Representing Lithuania:

° Mr. Paulius Koverovas, State Secretary of the Ministry of Justice of the
Republic of Lithuania,

. Mr. Constantine Partasides, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP,
. Mr. Noah Rubins, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP, and

. Ms. Renata Berzanskiené, Law Office Adamonis, Berzanskiené and
partners Sorainen Law Offices.

8/96

21.

22.

23.

3.3

24.

25.

26.

27.

A sound recording was made of the hearing, copies of which were sent to the parties.
The Secretary also prepared summary minutes of the session, a certified copy of which
was sent to the parties on 18 January 2006.

At the outset of the hearing, a number of procedural issues were dealt with. In
particular, it was agreed that, pursuant to Article 44 of the ICSID Convention, the
proceedings would be conducted in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration Rules in
force since 1 January 2003. It was also agreed that the place of the proceedings would
be Paris, France, and that, in accordance with Article 22 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
the language of the proceeding would be English. During the course of the session,
the parties acknowledged that the Tribunal has been duly constituted.

The Arbitral Tribunal and the parties agreed on the following time table:

The Claimant shall file its memorial on the merits by February 10, 2006;

The Respondent shall file its counter-memorial on the merits, any jurisdictional objections
and any request for bifurcation of the proceeding by June 12, 2006;

The Claimant shall file its observations on the Respondent's request for bifurcation, if any,
by July 3, 2006;

A pre-hearing conference limited to pending procedural questions will be held in Paris on
August 28, 2006; and

A hearing on the merits or on jurisdiction or on both will be held in Paris on November 6-
10, 2006.

PRE-HEARING WRITTEN PHASE
On 17 January 2006, the Claimant filed a request for the production of documents.

On 20 January 2006, the Respondent acknowledged receipt of the Claimant's
document production request, and filed its comments thereon.

On 24 January 2006, the President of the Tribunal invited, on the one hand, the
Claimant to submit its reply to the Respondent's observations within four days, and, on
the other hand, the Respondent to submit its rejoinder within four days of the reply.
The President of the Tribunal also invited the Respondent to gather and communicate
to the Claimant all the documents that it accepted to produce without awaiting a
decision from the Tribunal.

By letter dated 27 January 2006, counsel for the Claimant informed the Tribunal that
the parties had agreed upon the following production schedule, subject to the
agreement of the Tribunal:

1. By February 6, 2006, Respondent shall: (i) produce to Claimant the documents
responsive to categories (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) of the Application; and (ii) inform
Claimant whether and, if so by when, it expects to be in a position to produce to Claimant
the documents responsive to categories (c), (i), (j), (k), (I), and (m) of the Application.

2. If by February 6, 2006, Respondent confirms a schedule for the production of the
documents responsive to categories (c), (i), (j), (k), (I), and (m), the parties shall endeavor
to reach an agreement on any adjustments to the schedule of the arbitral proceedings
required by such proposed schedule, on the understanding that: (i) any such adjustments

9/96

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Shall not affect the August 28, 2006 pre-hearing conference or the evidentiary hearing
scheduled for November 6-10, 2006; (ii) Claimant's Memorial shall be due by a date no
earlier than February 17, 2006; and (iii) any extension accorded to Claimant, at a
minimum, shall not diminish the amount of time allotted to Respondent for the submission
of its Counter-Memorial.

3. Should the parties have any dispute over the scope or schedule of production
proposed by Respondent by February 6, 2006 in accordance with J] 1 or 2 above, they
Shall promptly submit such dispute to the Tribunal for resolution. The parties agree that,
should such a dispute arise, Claimant's Memorial shall be due by a date no earlier than
February 17, 2006, and the parties shall consult to agree on a mutually acceptable
schedule for submissions, again with the understanding that the August 28, 2006 pre-
hearing and the iary hearing for 6-10, 2006 shall
not be affected and that such schedule, at a minimum, shall not diminish the amount of
time allotted to Respondent for the submission of its Counter-Memorial.

 

Counsel for the Claimant added that “in light of the [...] agreed Schedule, Claimant
withdraws the Application at this time. Claimant's right to revive the Application in
whole or in part is reserved in accordance with J 3 of the Schedule.”

By letter dated 17 February 2006, counsel for the Claimant informed the Tribunal that
the parties had agreed on the following further adjustments to the schedule of the
arbitral proceedings, subject to the agreement of the Tribunal:

. Claimant shall submit its Memorial on February 24, 2006.

° Respondent shall submit its Counter-Memorial on June 26, 2006.

. Claimant shall file its observations on Respondent's request for bifurcation, if any,
by July 17, 2006;

The dates scheduled for the pre-hearing conference (August 28, 2006) and the
evidentiary hearing (November 6-10, 2006) remain unchanged.

On 17 February 2006, the Secretary wrote to the parties to confirm the new schedule
for the submission of written pleadings as agreed upon by the parties.

On 27 February 2006, the Secretary received the Claimant's Memorial, with
accompanying documentation (two witness statements, one expert report, exhibits
numbered CE 1 through CE 259, and authorities numbered CA 1 through CA 57),
under cover of a letter dated 24 February 2006

By letter dated 5 June 2006, the Claimant filed, in agreement with the Respondent, the
following additional documents to complement its submission of 24 February 2006:

(i) a supplemental statement by Mr. Carlos Lapuerta responding to corrected parking
revenue data provided by Respondent following submission of Mr. Lapuerta’s
expert report on February 24, 2006;

(ii) four new exhibits (CE 260-263) consisting of documents produced by Respondent
on May 22, 2006 in response to a supplemental document request by Claimant,
including excerpted translations; and

(iii) in accordance with Arbitration Rule 25, the annexed list of corrections of accidental
errors in Claimant's February 24, 2006 submission, as well as corrected versions of
four exhibits submitted with Claimant’s Memorial and/or their translations (CE 21,
54, 70 and 247). This list and these corrected exhibits were previously provided to
Respondent on May 4, 2006.

10/96

33.

34.

35.

36.

By letter dated 27 June 2006, counsel for the Respondent sought “the Tribunal’s
approval of the parties’ agreement to grant the Republic an extension for the filing of its
Counter-Memorial until July 24, 2006, subject to the following two conditions: (i) the
Republic’s commitment not to seek any bifurcation of the proceedings; and (ii) the
maintenance of the remainder of the schedule as agreed at the procedural hearing
(including the dates of the August 2006 pre-hearing/preliminary conference on
procedural questions and the November 2006 hearing on the merits).”. Counsel for the
Respondent further confirmed that “the Republic will comply with the above conditions
and will be filing its Counter-Memorial within the agreed deadline.”

By email of 28 June 2006 and letter dated 30 June 2006, the Secretary informed the
parties of the Tribunal’s approval of their agreement to extend the time limit for the filing
of the Counter-Memorial until 24 July 2006.

On 25 July 2006, counsel for the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial and
accompanying documents (two witness statements, one expert report, exhibits
numbered RE 1 through RE 94, and authorities numbered RA 1 through RA 49).

On 28 August 2006, the Tribunal, the parties, and the Secretary held a pre-hearing
telephone conference, at the close of which the President of the Tribunal issued
directions regarding the parties’ opening statements and the evidence that counsel for
the parties would wish to present during the hearing. The President of the Tribunal
further authorized the Claimant to file, by 15 September 2006 at the latest, two
additional statements of new witnesses as well as new exhibits, provided that the
issues discussed in the additional witness statements and the new exhibits be strictly
limited to rebuttal of allegations made by the Respondent in its written submission or by
the Respondent's witnesses, and do not pertain to allegations already made by the
Claimant or contemplated by its witnesses in prior submissions. The President also
authorized the Respondent to file, by 20 October 2006 at the latest, additional
statements of new witnesses (in principle, no more than two) or supplemental
statements of existing witnesses, as well as additional exhibits, provided that the facts
discussed in these additional/supplemental witness statements and exhibits be strictly
limited to rebuttal of allegations made by the Claimant's new witnesses or of the
contents of the Claimant's additional exhibits. The President of the Tribunal invited the
parties to inform the Tribunal, by 27 October 2006 at the latest, which additional
witness(es) would be called for oral examination and which adjustments would need to
be made with respect to the sequence and timing of witness examination. Finally, the
President of the Tribunal issued the following additional directions:

. Witnesses will be allowed in the hearing room at any time (i.e before and after their
examination). Either party may, however, apply for the exclusion of one or more
witnesses from the hearing room, at certain or all times. To avoid wasting time on
procedural issues during the hearing week, counsel are invited to confer before
filing any such application.

. The issue whether counsel shall have the opportunity to make oral closing
and/or to file post-hearing briefs shall be dit d at the hearing. The
Tribunal shall issue a determination in this respect by Wednesday 12 November

2006 at the latest, upon request from the parties, if not ex officio.

 

11/96

37.

38.

39.

40.

3.4

A.

42.

. Upon agreement between the parties, the hearing shall end on Friday at 1:30 p.m.
at the latest.

On 15 September 2006, Parkerings filed:

. two additional statements of new witnesses (Bjérn Oberg and Sigitas Burnickas);

. two new legal authorities that had allegedly only been issued and become
available after Parkerings’ submission of 24 February 2006 (CA 58 and CA 59);
and

. 37 new exhibits (CE 264-CE 300).

On 20 October, Lithuania filed:

. two additional statements of new witnesses (Jonas Endriukaitis and Ingrida
Simonyte);

. two new legal authorities (RA 50 and RA 51); and
. 9 new exhibits (RE 95-RE 103).
On the same date, Parkerings filed five additional documents (CE 301-CE 305).

On 30 October 2006, Lithuania wrote that it had no objection to the Claimant's
submission of Exhibits 301-305. On the same date, Lithuania filed additional
documents (RE 104 — RE 108). The Claimant did not object to the new exhibits.

THE EVIDENTIARY HEARING

On 27 October 2006, the Claimant addressed to the Tribunal a letter regarding the
witnesses it would put forward at the hearing. On 30 October 2006, the Respondent
filed a similar communication in this respect.

The evidentiary hearing was held in Paris on 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 November 2006, in the
course of which the following witnesses and experts were heard:

1. Mr. Bjorn Havnes

2. Mr. Sigitas Burnickas

3. Mr. Jonas Tamulis

4. Mr. Bjorn Oberg

5. Professor Gintautas Bartkus
6. Mr. Robertas Staskevicius

7. Mr. Raivydus Rukstele

12/96

43.

44.

3.5

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

41

51.

52.

8. Mr. Jonas Endriukaitis
9. Ms. Ingrinda Simonyté
10. Mr. Carlos Lapuerta
11. Mr. Tim Giles

During the hearing, the Claimant filed additional documents (CE 306 — CE 311) and
two additional authorities (CA 60 and CA 61)

Shortly after the hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal and the parties agreed on the procedural
follow-up to the hearing. In particular, they agreed that the parties would file
simultaneous post-hearing briefs on 8 December 2006; the parties would file
simultaneous reply post-hearing briefs consisting in a short letter response within one
week of the first submission; and the parties would submit their respective statements
on costs jointly with their post-hearing briefs and a statement summarizing the costs by
22 December 2006.

THE POST-HEARING BRIEFS
The parties simultaneously filed their first post-hearing briefs on 8 December 2006.

On 15 December 2006, Parkerings sent a letter to the Tribunal which identified errors in
Lithuania's Counter-memorial and Lithuania’s post-hearing brief.

On 22 December 2006, the parties filed their statement of costs.

On 19 January 2007, the Tribunal informed the parties that it did not find necessary to
hold an additional hearing.

On 9 May 2007, Parkerings filed a revised statement of costs.
On 25 May 2007, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in accordance with

Rule 38(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

MAIN FACTS RELATING TO THE MERITS OF THE DISPUTE

THE TENDER

Following Lithuania’s gradual transition between 1991 and 1997 from a Soviet Republic
to a candidate for EU membership and a market economy, the Municipality of the City
of Vilnius decided to create a modern, integrated parking system for the City of Vilnius,
in order to control traffic and protect the integrity of the City’s historic Old Town.

The Municipality announced a tender (the “Vilnius Tender’) for the purpose of obtaining

private investment in connection with the design and operation of this parking system,
including the construction of two multi-storey car parks (“MSCP”).

13/96

53.

4.11

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

On 13 November 1997, the “Organisation of Investment Development Tender
Regulations” was approved by the Board of Vilnius City by Decision No. 1819V (RE 7).
The Mayor charged the “Commission on Organization of Tenders for the Lease of Land
Plots” with the organization of investment development tenders, and appointed his
advisor, Robertas Staskevicius, as “head of the working party” (RE 7). The
Commission retained the services of a Dutch consulting firm, Tebodin Consultants and
Engineers (“Tebodin”), for technical advice on the tender process.

The Bidders

Of the seven potential bidders which responded to the City’s tender and expressed an
interest in the construction of MSCP (RE 8), only two returned signed letters of intent to
the City (RE 9 and RE 10). These two bidders (the “Bidders”) were Egapris, a
Lithuanian waste management company, and the “Getras Consortium” composed of
Getras, a French investor acting through its Lithuanian subsidiary, UAB Getras Lietuva,
and three Lithuanian partners, namely AB Ekinsta, Bank Hermis, and UAB Savy.

Together with a Swiss company, Egapris submitted a proposal (“Investment Project
Vilnius Parking System”) to construct “automated car parking lots and garages.” More
specifically, according to Egapris’ proposal, the funds were to be invested, inter alia, in
ticket machines, MSCP, and various equipments and tools (RE 13).

The Getras Consortium, on the other hand, proposed, in its business plan on the
“development and exploitation of car parking lot system in Vilnius city,” the construction
of two underground parking lots near the Opera and Ballet Theatre, on the one hand,
and the Railroad Station, on the other hand. The Getras Consortium predicted that the
construction of the facilities could be completed within six years (RE 12).

On 7 July 1998, Tebodin issued an “Evaluation of Proposals for the Parking System in
Vilnius — Final Report’ (RE 16). In this Final Report, Tebodin concluded that “the
Egapris proposal generates higher risk to Vilnius Municipality. The quality provided to
Vilnius’ residents a[n]d other system users will be lower and the risk of inconvenience
is therefore higher. The parking offered by GETRAS may be constructed without any
increased risk, following the rules for parking design (by the European Parking
Association).[...]”

A new commission created by the City, known as the “Investment Development
Commission” (the “Commission”), in turn, issued the following recommendation:

Considering evaluation done by international experts, to suggest to Vilnius city Board to
approve consortium Vilniaus miesto urbanistinis vystymas (enterprise Getras, share
company Ekinsta, private limited liability company Savy, share company bank Hermis,
Lietuvos vystymo bankas) as a further negotiation partner in the contest of Investment
Development regarding creation of Vilnius city parking lots system [(RE 16)].

The City thereafter instructed that a second stage of negotiations take place with the
above-mentioned two entities (Egapris and the Getras Consortium) under the existing
tender. Indeed, on 10 September 1998, the Board of Vilnius City issued the following
Decision No. 1709V:

14/96

60.

61.

1. To approve the consortium Vilniaus miesto urbanistinis vystymas (company
Getras, public company Ekinsta, private company Savy, share company bankas
Hermis, Lithuanian Development Bank) and private company Egapris as further
partners of negotiations in the Investment development tender for the development
of Vilnius city car parking system.

2. To obligate the commission for organization of investment development tenders to
select, by 10 October 1998, one object at a time from the 1st stage of Multi-storey
parking investment project program for technical planning in the following manner:
1) consortium Vilniaus urbanistinis vystymas, 2) private company Egapris [(RE
19)].

The City then transferred the responsibility of the tender process to the Commission
and replaced Tebodin with a German firm, MAS Consult, which was to provide services
with respect to further submissions by Egapris and the Getras Consortium (RE 22).

In the course of a meeting held in March 1999, the Bidders advised the City that they
did “not agree to construct multi-storey parking lots without being entitled to manage
the on-street parking system” (RE 24). The City agreed to grant to the Bidders the
management of the on-street parking system as well.

4.1.2 Parkerings

62.

63.

64.

Parkerings was established in 1996. The founder and managing director of Parkerings
since 1999 is Roger Skaug. Parkerings’ majority shareholder, through the majority
holding in Indre by Eindom AS, is Skips AS Tudor (“Skips”), an investment firm with a
diversified industrial portfolio ultimately controlled by Mr. Wilhelm Wilhelmsen. Mr.
Wilhelmsen is a well-known Norwegian entrepreneur and chairman of the Wilh.
Wilhelmsen Group, a publicly listed conglomerate and a global leader in the car carrier
industry. Skips acquired its participation in Eindom AS/Parkerings from Conceptor, a
Norwegian development company, in December 2000.

With a view to participating in the Vilnius Tender, Parkerings incorporated Baltijos
Parkingas UAB (“BP”), its wholly-owned Lithuanian subsidiary (CE 195).

On 8 April 1999, Egapris informed the City that BP would join the Egapris bid. A power
of attorney signed on that date indicated that Egapris authorized, inter alia, “Mr. Jonas
Tamulis — the consultant of UAB ‘Baltijos Parkingas’, ” and “Mr. Roger Skaug — the
director of ‘Parkerings — Compagnies AS” to “lead negotiations regarding ‘Vilnius City
on-street parking and construction of multi-storey car parks and creation of a unified
system’ conducted by the municipality’ (RE 25). A consortium agreement (the
“Consortium Agreement”) was signed by Egapris and BP on 14 April 1999. Egapris
and BP thereafter formed the “Egapris Consortium” (RE 26). The Consortium
Agreement provided, inter alia, the following:

1. By this agreement the Parties agree to establish a consortium and to participate
jointly as consortium in the tender for the design, establishment and
implementation of Vilnius City parking system announced by Vilnius City
municipality, in such a way broadening financial and technical possibilities to satisfy
the tender requirements.

2. The Parties agree that from now on the Consortium shall participate in the tender,
shall render offers and carry on negotiations as indivisible person, instead of UAB

15/96

65.

“Egapris”, all the rights and obligations whereof related with the participation in the
tender, shall be transferred to the Consortium.

 

The Parties to jointly participate in iatic with the rep!

of Vilnius City municipality, taking into account the possibilities and aims of each

other, by giving the preference to reasonable agreement to render efforts to the
only after on the joint financial and

technical sources thereof. The negotiations shall be carried out by the joint

negotiation group [...].

 

The shareholders of UAB “Baltijos parkingas” — Parkerings Compagniet AS, a
Norwegian enterprise, shall render technical consultations to consortium and
provide the consortium with know-how, necessary for the successful completion of
negotiations and implementation of the agreement with the City. UAB “Baltijos

shall be for p all i ion and proposal as
required by Vilnius City Municipality. UAB “Egapris” shall provide all required
information on the company and technical information on equipment planned to be
used. [...] [(RE 26)]

 

In April 1999, UAB Savy left the Getras Consortium.

4.1.3 The Award of the Bid to the Egapris Consortium

66.

67.

On 25 May 1999, the Getras Consortium, on the one hand, and the Egapris
Consortium, on the other hand, submitted summary letters outlining the terms of their
final proposals.

The proposal prepared by the Getras Consortium read as follows:

6.
6.1

6.2

Investment obligations
The construction of multi-storey car parks:

6.1.1 The Consortium obliges to construct approximately 14 multi-storey car parks,
i.e. to create approximately 5300 multi-storey parking places, taking into
consideration the prepared Vilnius city parking plan.

6.1.2 The Consortium obliges to project and construct not less than a minimal
number (2) of multi-storey car parks within one year from the beginning of
the construction works.

6.1.3 The Consortium obliges to construct approximately 14 multi-storey car parks
within 8 years from the beginning of the construction of the first two car
parks, taking into consideration the prepared Vilnius city parking plan and
the commercial validity.

6.1.4 The Consortium obliges to invest necessary funds, not less than 120 million
Litas, into the construction of multi-storey car parks during the defined
period.

6.1.5 The Consortium obliges to perform all necessary investments and works
related to the construction of multi-storey car parks under the approved
parking plan and schedule.

The Consortium obliges to install ticket machines, serving for on-street parking
places in Vilnius city under the plan and requirements, approved by the
Municipality.

6.2.1 The Consortium obliges to install 1 ticket machine for 15 on-street parking
places. Ticket machines will be installed within 3 months after the signing of
the Agreement, after interception of parking activities from SP UAB
“Komunalinis kis”. [(emphasis added)]

16/96

6.3

6.4

6.2.2 The Consortium obliges to perform all other investments related to on-street
parking under the parking plan, approved by the Municipality.

6.2.3 The Consortium obliges to invest not less than 1800 Litas for one available
and to be created in the future on-street parking place.

The Consortium obliges to invest into the development of car parks, transferred

under the exploitation agreement.

All investments into the development of the parking system, established in the

, Ie p by declaring contests
works and machinery supply).

 

[.--] (RE 27)]

68. In turn, the proposal dated 25 May 1999, prepared by the Egapris Consortium read as

follows:

6.2

Investment obligations
Construction of multi-storey car parks:

6.1.1 The Consortium undertakes to construct not less than 10 multi-storey car
parks, i.e. to develop not less than 3000 multi-storey parking places.

6.1.2 The Consortium undertakes to start designing a minimum number (?) of
Iti-storey car parks after the Si of this A
to commence their construction immediately after receipt or permits ‘an
relevant institutions and the Municipality.

6.1.3 The Consortium undertakes to construct not less than two multi-storey car
parks each year starting from 2000, subject to the general parking plan.

6.1.4 During a defined period of time, the Consortium undertakes to invest in the
construction of multi-storey car parks not less than LTL 140 million. This
period will depend on the terms for approval of the general parking plan, the
results of the pre-project works and the possibility to obtain requisite building
permits from relevant institutions.

6.1.5 The Consortium undertakes to make all necessary investments and to
perform the works all in connection with the constitution of multi-storey
parking lots according to the approved parking plan.

The Consortium undertakes to install ticket machines serving the on-street parking
places in the city of Vilnius according to the requirements approved by the
Municipality, ensuring the possibility to make settlements in cash and by different
types of cards.

6.2.1 The Consortium undertakes to install, within 6 months as from the signature
date of the Agreement, requisite number of ticket machines in the currently
existing on-street parking places.

6.2.2 The Consortium undertakes to install in Vilnius city, within 24 months as from
the signature date of the Agreement, not less than 350 ticket machines
according to the parking plan approved by the Municipality.

6.2.3 The Consortium undertakes to install in total not less than 350 ticket
machines in Vilnius city and to place 1100 parking signs according to the
parking plan approved by the Municipality, upon receipt of relevant permits
from the Municipality, the Police and other institutions.

6.2.4 The Consortium undertakes to make other investments relating to the on-
street parking according to the parking plan approved by the Municipality.

6.2.5 The Consortium undertakes to invest not less than LTL 10,3 million in the
on-street parking.

17/96

69.

70.

71,

72.

4.2

6.2.6 The Consortium will seek to build not less than 6000 on-street parking lots
within the 5 years period.

6.3 All investment in the development of the parking system contemplated in this
Agreement will be made by way of tender (Including tenders for construction and
equipment supply works).

[.--] (RE 28)]

MAS Consult thereafter issued a report recommending that the City refrain from
naming a winner (RE 29). With respect to the technical aspects of the project, MAS
Consult stated that “it is foreseen that the awarded tender will have to construct and
develop 3,000 multi-storey parking spaces, as well as to automate and manage 6,000
on-street parking spaces (the data may be corrected in the process of preparation of
the parking layout)” (RE 29).

On 6 June 1999, the Commission, on the other hand, “approve[d] the position
suggested by the negotiation group to orientate in further negotiations to a 10-.year
agreement validity term [...!” (RE 30). The Commission concluded that “taking into
consideration the agreement validity terms suggested by the consortium of UAB
Egapris and UAB Baltijos parkingai and the consortium Vilniaus miesto urbanistinis
vystymas [...], and having adopted the initial position regarding the agreement validity
term [mentioned above], the proposal of the consortium of UAB Egapris and UAB
Baltijos parkingai [was] more favourable to Vilnius City Municipality’ (RE 30). The
Commission therefore resolved to “recommend to the committees of Vilnius City
Council and the Board of Vilnius City to consider the possibility of negotiations on the
conditions of the agreement with the consortium of UAB Egapris and UAB Baltijos
parkingai, and to familiarize them with the proposals made by the consortium Vilniaus
miesto urbanistinis vystymas” (RE 30).

On 29 July 1999, the Egapris Consortium sent to the City a first draft agreement (the
“First Draft” ). Article 7.3 read: “The Municipality undertakes to insure the investments
of the Consortium partners against political risk” (RE 33).

By decision No. 1478V issued on 19 August 1999, the Board of the City of Vilnius
“approve[d] the Consortium of UAB Egapris and UAB Baltijos parkingas as further
partner of negotiations regarding the creation of conditions for development of Vilnius
city parking system” (RE 35), thus awarding the bid to the Egapris Consortium.

THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE EGAPRIS CONSORTIUM AND THE VILNIUS MUNICIPALITY

4.2.1 The Negotiations Regarding the Agreement

73.

In the course of a negotiation meeting held on 19 October 1999, the representatives of
the Municipality, UAB Komunalinis Gkis, MAS Consult, and the Egapris Consortium
discussed the issue of the “collection of parking fee and distribution thereof between
the Municipality and the Consortium” (RE 36). According to the minutes of this
meeting, it was “proposed to divide the parking fee in pay parking places into two parts
— local charges for the Municipality and the fee for the Consortium; the relative part of
the local charge, as compared to the total fee, will be defined in further stages of

18/96

74,

75.

76.

77.

negotiation; it will be approved by Vilnius City Council; [...)” (RE 36). The solution
proposed for the on-street parking concession was thus that of a hybrid fee, according
to which the parking fee would be divided into a local parking fee component, on the
one hand, which the Egapris Consortium would collect for the City and give to the latter
in its entirety, and a service fee component, on the other hand, which would not be a
parking fee and which the Egapris Consortium would therefore be entitled to keep.

During meetings held on 23 and 28 October 1999, the issue of the “mechanism and
legal grounds for granting land to the Consortium for construction of multi-storey car
parks” was discussed (RE 37 and RE 38).

According to the minutes of the meeting of 23 October 1999, it was resolved that “the
negotiation group of VCM ["Vilnius City Municipality”] [would] analyse the draft ‘Basic
provisions of the Joint Venture Agreement’ submitted by the Consortium, defining the
proposals of the latter regarding granting of land for the construction of multi-storey car
parks, and [would] submit its comments and recommendations’ (RE 37).

At the meeting of 28 October 1999 regarding the “use of land plots intended for multi-
storey car parks and the obligations of VCM and the Consortium relating thereto,”
“VCM propose[d] that all multi-storey car parks be considered as infrastructure objects
and that formation of land plots in the location of the parking lots be postponed until the
expiry of the agreement with the Consortium. The Consortium [, in turn] wishe[d] that
VCM prepared a project anticipating the mechanism of such land use, which would be
analysed by the Consortium and which would be discussed in the course of further
negotiations” (RE 38).

On 20 December 1999, MAS Consult issued a “Report on negotiations with the
Consortium of UAB Egapris and UAB Baltijos Parkingas”. The report provided that (RE
39):

2.3.1 The Consortium shall:

- work out the parking plan on the basis whereof the parking system will be
developed;

- develop the parking system in the manner defined in the Agreement and the
parking plan as approved by the Municipality:

. Building at least 450 ticket machines;
. Building of at least 10 multi-storey car parks
. Co-ordination of all actions with the Municipality and performance

thereof in the manner prescribed by the European Standards;
2.3.2 The Municipality shall:

- consider and determine the changes in the level of public parking order and
the fees, consider and adopt the decisions regarding the normative acts and
issues relating to parking, adopt the decision on the approval of the parking
plan;

- provide the Consortium with the full information requisite for the preparation
of the parking plan, as well as the information concerning the existing
parking system, give necessary assistance and ensure participation of its
employees in the preparation of the parking plan;

19/96

78.

- transfer the right to the Consortium allowing to collect local charges in the
street parking place and set the limits of the extra fee that can be collected
by the Consortium for the parking.

On 28 December 1999, the Sorainen Law Office issued, at the City’s request, a legal
opinion (the “Sorainen Memo”), based on the “legal acts of the Republic of Lithuania
which were in effect on December 27, 1999” (CE 11). This Memo discussed, in
particular, the issue of the legality of the hybrid fee, stating, in substance, that
Lithuanian courts were likely to view both components of the parking fee as a unitary
whole and, therefore, to consider them as being regulated by the Law on Fees and
Charges. According to the Sorainen Memo, if the fee were to be treated as a unitary
whole, then the collection of money by the Egapris Consortium would be contrary to the
law, due to the fact that the initial tender did not provide for such payment to be made
to the concessionaire by the City. Indeed, with respect to this issue, the Sorainen
Memo opined the following:

[...] In view of the provisions of Article 5.1.3 of the Agreement, a conclusion should be
drawn that the local fee, which, in accordance with Articles 2 and 3 of the Law on [sic] of
the Republic of Lithuania on Local Fees, may be fixed for the time vehicles were parked
in the on-street parking places designated by the Vilnius City Council, will be comprised
partly for the vehicle parking time in the public on-street parking places designated by the
Vilnius City Council. In this instance, the legal basis of the remaining part of the fee for
the vehicle parking time in the on-street parking places designated by the Vilnius City
Council, which in accordance to Article 5.1.3 of the Agreement goes to the Consortium,
becomes questionable.

We are of the opinion that any tax, fee or payment of any kind, which is paid or is
demanded to be paid, including the exceptions applied to certain person categories, for
the vehicle parking time in on-street parking places designated by the Vilnius City
Council, is the regulatory subject-matter of the aforementioned Law on the Republic of
Lithuania on Local Fees, and should be considered the local fee, as it is defined in Article
2 of the same Law with all the ensuing consequences (Article 7 of the aforementioned
Law).

While analyzing the legality of the commitment of the Municipality to transfer the right to
collect a fee for vehicle parking time and for violations of the Parking Regulations for on-
street parking places designated by the Vilnius City Council, we draw the conclusion that
the legal acts of the Republic of Lithuania do not create any legal obstacles to make such
a commitment and exercise its existing right, which is a precondition of such obligation.

Whereas the legal basis of the fee, which goes to the Consortium according to articles
5.1.3-5.1.7 of the Agreement for the vehicle parking time for on-street parking places
designated by the Municipality Council, raises doubts. Such conclusion shall be drawn
due to the following reasons, listed hereinafter:

1) Vehicle parking lots are the property, which belongs to the Municipality by the
Public property right, which was obtained by basis of the Law on State property
transfers to the property of Municipalities based on Law or created anew;

2) The Consortium does not obtain ownership of vehicle parking lots on the grounds
of the Law on Lease or other grounds to administrate the property, for the usage of
which the arbitrary fee may be collected from users of parking places.

3) Any fee or other payment for vehicle on-street parking places designated by the
Vilnius City Council, in our opinion, is the regulatory subject-matter of the Law of
the Republic of Lithuania on Local Fees, and should be considered a local fee, as it
is defined in Article 2 of the same Law.

In view of what was presented in clause 3 hereinbefore, we would take the view that the
legal acts of the Republic of Lithuania and contractual deeds and obligations, indicated in

20/96

79.

80.

the Agreement of the Municipality and the Consortium, do not create sufficient and clear
legal ground for the Consortium to have a right to collect a portion of the fee for vehicle
parking time for on-street parking places designated by the Municipal Council, which is
derived from the entire fee, established in Article 5.1.3, less local charges approved by
the Municipality Council. [...] [(CE 11)]

On the other hand, a legal opinion prepared of 29 December 1999 by Lideika,
Petrauskas, Valiiinas ir Partneriai (or “Lawin” firm), the Lithuanian legal counsel of the
Egapris Consortium, provided that the hybrid fee was in accordance with the law.
Indeed, this opinion provided the following:

Following your request, we would like to comment the legal situation relating to collection
of payment for car parking in places designated by the Municipality (streets and squares).
The agreement between Vilnius City Municipality and the Consortium establishes that
such payment will consist of local charges and the portion of payment falling on the
Consortium.

The portion of payment falling on the Consortium is to be legally qualified as payment for
service, which will be rendered by the Consortium to car drivers. The scope of this service
is the development of parking system in the city and its administering. Car parking in pay
place is to be qualified as a behaviour of a driver expressing his/her will to use the service
rendered by the Consortium and to pay for it according to the rate set by the Consortium
[(RE 40)].

On 29 December 1999, the Vilnius City Council adopted Decision No. 482, approving
the draft agreement between the parties, and authorizing Mayor Imbrasas to sign the
agreement with the Egapris Consortium on behalf of the Municipality (CE 12). On the
same day, the City also adopted Decision No. 483 regarding the performance of the
Agreement (RE 41).

4.2.2 The Agreement

81.

82.

83.

On 30 December 1999, the Egapris Consortium and the Municipality signed an
agreement (“the Agreement”)(CE 13). The Agreement was signed by each of the
Egapris Consortium members. According to the Agreement, BP and Egapris were
jointly and severally liable for the Egapris Consortium’s performance of the Agreement
(Article 1.2 of the Agreement).

The Agreement pertained to the creation, development, maintenance and enforcement
of the public parking system in the City of Vilnius. More specifically, the Agreement
provided for an exclusive concession to operate the city’s street parking and to operate
ten MSCP.

The Consortium was granted an exclusive right to act as a “sole partner of the
Municipality’ for the organization, maintenance, development and enforcement of the
public parking system in the areas of the City of Vilnius designated by the Agreement.
Article 1.2 of the Agreement defined the terms “sole partner of the Municipality” as “a
person, that is granted the exclusive rights to collect local charges and penalties for
violation of parking regulations in the streets and squares as established in the city
Council, and to construct multi-storey car parks in the locations specified in Annex No.
1 to this Agreement.”

21/96

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

Thus, the Egapris Consortium was granted an exclusive thirteen-year right to operate
all the street parking, that is specifically to collect the parking fees, and to enforce the
parking regulations namely through the clamping of vehicles. With respect to the
Consortium’s right to enforce parking regulations through clamping, the Agreement
foresaw the transition to a fine system as soon as the applicable legislation would have
been passed (Article 5.3.4 of the Agreement).

With respect to the parties’ liability, Article 7.2.1 of the Agreement provided the
following:

The liability of the Parties deriving from the terms and conditions of the present
Agreement is understood as responsibility for the actions of the Party itself or failure to
perform such actions due to which the undertakings of the Party will not be properly, fully
and in due time fulfilled. Neither Party shall be liable and no sanctions shall be imposed
on it if the breaches of this Agreement will occur due to the actions or failure to act by the
other Party or any other third party, as well as due to irresistible forces (force majeure), as
defined in the Government Resolution No. 840 “On the Approval of Rules for Release
from Liability due to Irresistible Forces (force majeure)” dated 15 July, 1996.

The latter Resolution provided the following:

1. The term “force majeure” shall serve to define extraordinary circumstances that
cannot be foreseen or avoided, or removed by using any means.

2. A party shall not be financially held liable for failure to perform any of its obligations
if it is capable of proving that:
2.1 it has failed to fulfill the obligations due to the obstacle being beyond its
control;

2.2 it cannot be anticipated that at the moment of entering into the contract the
party could have foreseen that obstacle or its [ejffect on the ability to perform
the obligations;

2.3 it could not avoid or overcome the obstacle or at least its effect;

3. The obstacles, mentioned in clause 2 hereof, may arise as a result of the following
events below:

3.5 lawful or unlawful acts of state government institutions (except for those acts
which, pursuant to other contractual provisions, were taken by a party
requesting release from liability [...] [(RE 5)].

4.2.2.1. The Consortium’s Obligations under the Agreement

Under the Agreement, the Consortium was to comply, inter alia, with the following main
obligations.

First, the Consortium was to “initiate, prepare, co-ordinate and submit to Vilnius city
Council for approval a plan of public parking system in Vilnius city [(the “Parking Plan”)]
L..]” (Article 1.4.2 of the Agreement; see also Article 2.1.1 of the Agreement). The
Parking Plan was to “include parking signs, parking zones, the recommended fee
structure, parking control and regulations, and conditions and priorities for construction
of multi-storey car parks. Upon preparation and approval of the Parking plan the

22/96

89.

90.

91.

92.

Parties [were to] agree upon its implementation schedule” (Article 1.4.2 of the
Agreement). “ The objective of the Parties [was] to design a plan which [could] provide
the basis for a detailed regulation of traffic flow and parking” (Article 2.1.3 of the
Agreement).

The Consortium was to create, manage and operate the “public parking system for
Vilnius city, including installation of ticket machines and construction of multi-storey car
parks, complying with the Standards; [...] invest into the present parking system in
order to establish the public parking system and structure of Vilnius city in accordance
with the approved plan, terms and conditions of this Agreement; [and] plan and design
the modifications of the current parking system in accordance with the Agreement and
the approved Parking plan and carry out the investments related thereto” (Article 1.4.2
of the Agreement).

The key elements of the so-called “Investment Program” were the following:

- the Consortium constructs multi-storey car parks — no less than 10 in total;
- the Consortium improves the current street parking system (purchases and installs
quit , trains the , other t, including IT
hardware, vehicles etc.);

 

- the Consortium installs 450 new ticket machines with the terms established in the
schedule of implementation of the Parking plan;

- the Consortium installs new parking signs and traffic flow control signs —
approximately 1050 signs;

- the Consortium creates integrated parking information system;

- the Consortium develops the street parking system according to the Standards and
this Agreement;

- the Consortium develops the street infrastructure according to this Agreement, the
Joint Activity Agreement and the approved Parking plan (Sub-Clause 4.1.1 of the
Agreement). (CE 13, Article 4.1.1)

With respect to MSCP, the Consortium had to “plan, design, and construct multi-storey
car parks in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Republic of Lithuania and
in a line with this Agreement, the Parking plan and its implementation schedule in order
to develop an adequate car parking structure and capacity” (Sub-Clause 1.4.2 of the
Agreement). The Consortium was to construct no less than ten MSCP in the city of
Vilnius, “two [...] every year during the life-time of this Agreement, except for the first
year’ (Article 4.4.5 of the Agreement), in the locations specified in Annex No. 1 to the
Agreement. The full ownership of the MSCP was to be retained by the Consortium (CE
13).

The Agreement provided the following with respect to the planning and construction

process of the MSCP:
4.4.2 After the Municipality issues the full collection of the design conditions, in each
individual case the parties shall sign the Joint Activity Agreement, [...] in the form of

Annex No. 8. [setting forth the time allocated for the design and construction of the
MSCP] [...].

23/96

93.

94.

4.4.3 Not later than within 9 months after the Joint Activity Agreement is signed, unless
the shorter term is established in the Joint Activity Agreement, the Consortium shall
prepare and co-ordinate the design project of a multi-storey car park [which] shall
be submitted to the Municipality. After the design projects are approved, the
Municipality, with the participation of the Consortium, shall obtain construction
permits in the name of itself and/or the Consortium, or the Consortium, with the
participation of the Municipality, shall obtain construction permits in the name of
itself and/or the Municipality.

4.4.4 After the Municipality obtains the construction permits in the name of the
Municipality and/or Consortium [...], the [latter] shall construct said car parks in
accordance with this Agreement and the Joint Activity Agreement [...], and shall
ensure that the multi-storey car parks are constructed and made ready for use
pursuant to the Procedure for Approving of the Constructions for Use STR.1
1.01:1996, approved by Order No. 108 of the Ministry of Construction and Urban
Development as of 23 August 1996, and not later than within 24 months after the
construction permits were issued, unless the Joint Activity Agreement provides for
the shorter period.

4.4.8 Within [twenty] one day after the date of this Agreement, the Consortium
Shall evaluate the preliminary locations for construction of multi-storey car
parks specified in Annex No. 1, and shall indicate two locations for which the
detailed plans are already prepared and shall file applications for the issue
of design conditions. The Municipality of Vilnius City shall, upon receipt of
the application submitted by the Consortium, issue to the Consortium the

Ih of the design it for the iff , whereupon
the Consortium shall commence the design works under the terms of this
Agreement.

With respect to street parking, “the Consortium [undertook] to install 450 new ticket
machines within the period established in the schedule of implementation of the
Parking plan in the spaces of the streets and squares of Vilnius City which locations
are defined by the Decision of the Vilnius city Council and correspond to the parking
program. [...] The additional locations of the streets and squares where the Consortium
shall be granted the right to collect payments for the parking of vehicles, shall be
established by the Decision of the Vilnius City Council in accordance with the Parking
plan approved according to the established procedure after the ticket machines in the
above mentioned places are installed by the Consortium accordingly with the schedule
of implementation of the parking plan” (Articles 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 of the Agreement).

4.2.2.2 The Municipality’s Obligations under the Agreement

Article 1.5.1 of the Agreement provided that “in order to achieve its aims and create
favourable conditions for the Consortium to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement,
the Municipality shall, within the [?] time limits of its competence, undertake the

 

- to consider and establish the public parking order in the city and the adjustments of
parking fee level taking into account suggestions and recommendations made by
the Consortium and the needs of the city's population;

 

an for of its
obligations hereunder. This “obligation does not include the adjustments to local
duties if such adjustments are made before March 1, 2000, in accordance with the
conditions of this Agreement;

- to refrain from any amendments to the present city parking order that would
the Ce id fol

24/96

- to assign to the Consortium the right to collect local charges established by the
Vilnius city Municipality Council, including penalties imposed for the violation of the
parking order, in the streets and squares as defined by the Vilnius city Council in

with the itions of this and the app: parking plan;

 

- within one month from the date of coming into force of the Agreement to hand over
to the Consortium all necessary information (agreements for use of the parking
spaces) related to the parking in the streets and squares specified in Annex No. 4
to this Agreement [(Annex No.4: list of streets and squares in which car-parks have
been equipped pursuant to the established procedure and in which the
Consortium, consisting of UAB Baltijos parkingas and UAB Egapris, will have the
right to collect local duty, clamp vehicles for the non-observance of the provisions
relating to the Collection of Charges established for the owners of the vehicles
(drivers) for the use by the latter of watched car-parks in the streets and squares of
Vilnius and to collect charges for the unclamping of the vehicles)];

- timely and in accordance with appropriate procedure to consider legislative and
regulatory issues related to parking, including parking signs, penalty level and
structure (clamping, other means of blocking of the vehicle or a fine charge notice);

- in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement and valid legal acts
to consider and make decisions regarding the approval of the public parking
system plan as worked out by the Consortium;

- to ensure the way of use of the land plots, permits and approvals necessary for the

ion of multi-storey car parks in with the it of the Joint
Activity Agreement attached as Annex No. 8 hereto;

 

- to consider and determine the fee structure and fee rates for street and ground
parking in with the it and pi by this
Agreement;

 

- to ensure the service rendering according to the city maintenance and cleaning
rules;

- to use all its efforts in order to ensure that the necessary decisions of the
institutions not subordinated to the Municipality are taken for successful
development of the parking system (including appropriate modifications of the laws
and other statutory acts, relevant traffic signs, fee levels and structure, use of land
and other relevant issues);

- to provide the Consortium with all information necessary for drawing up of the
Parking plan which information is defined in Annex No. 3, or provide with a
possibility to get access to such information and photocopy it, and to ensure the
participation of appropriate Municipality's subdivisions within the limits of their
competence in the process of the drawing up of such plan. The Parties understand
that the Municipality does not possess all the information necessary for the drawing
up of the plan and that this may affect the quality of the Parking plan;

- not to extend agreements concluded prior to the Agreement, if that does not
constitute the breach of such agreement, and to refrain from making any new
agreements that would impede creation of the unified parking system in the city
according to the conditions of this Agreement;

- to provide the Consortium with the possibility to use the city GIS in the process of
drawing up the Parking plan;

- to fulfill all other obligations under this Agreement.
95. The Agreement specifically provided, under Article 1.5.2 in fine, that “undertakings of

the Municipality shall be limited to the scope of its competence, or the competence of
institutions subordinated to it.”

25/96

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

4.2.2.3 Sharing ism under the Ag

 

The Consortium - which had to prepare the Parking Plan - was responsible for the
equity and debt financing for the construction of the MSCP and the establishment of
the Parking Plan. In order to ensure that the Consortium would obtain a reasonable
return on its investments, Article 5 of the Agreement provided that the proceeds of the
maintenance and enforcement of the Vilnius public parking system would be shared
among the parties to the Agreement. The Consortium was entitled to three different
income streams.

First, in accordance with its exclusive right to operate for thirteen years all the street
parking in the city, collect the parking fees, and enforce the parking regulations through
the clamping of vehicles, the Consortium was entitled to a service fee portion of the
public parking fee that it was to collect. The public parking fee indeed consisted
contractually of two elements: a local charge for the Municipality and a service fee for
the Consortium.

With respect to the determination of the local charge and the service fee, Articles 5.1.1,
5.1.2, and 5.1.3 of the Agreement provided that “the Consortium shall collect charges
established by the Vilnius City Council for the duration of parking in the places of
streets and squares that are determined by the Municipality Council, and shall transfer
such charges to the account indicated by the Vilnius City Municipality. [...] The local
charges for the parking time of the vehicles in the places of streets and squares that
are determined by the Municipality Council shall be fixed by the Vilnius City Council
according to the Law On Local Charges for the Republic of Lithuania. [...] The local
charges constitute a part of the parking fee for the parking time in the places of streets
and squares that are determined by the Vilnius City Council. The other part of the
parking fee falls upon the Consortium.” The part of the fee that was allowed to the
Consortium thus depended on the amount of the local charge for one hour of parking
established by the Vilnius City Council, its ceiling being fixed in the Agreement under
Article 5.1.3.

The service fee was to be fixed either by the Consortium, in which case it was to be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of Articles 5.1.3.1 through 5.1.3.5 of the
Agreement, or by separate agreement between the parties, in which case it was to be
calculated in accordance with Article 5.1.4 of the Agreement. The Consortium was to
collect the entire amount and then transfer the portion corresponding to the local
charges to the Municipality.

Second, the Consortium was entitled to the full amount of the parking fees it would
collect in MSCP.

In this respect, Article 3.1.5 of the Agreement provided that “multi-storey car parks
col shall not be t d to the Municipality, and they will remain the
property of the Consortium or its members. All rights regarding management and
operation of the multi-storey car parks shall be retained by the Consortium or the
companies established by it." According to the Agreement, there was no time limitation

 

26/96

102.

103.

104.

105.

on the right to operate MSCPs. Furthermore, Article 5.1.9 of the Agreement stipulated
that “the parking fee for the parking time in the multi-storey car parks owned by the
Consortium shall be fixed by the Consortium.”

Third, the Consortium was entitled to seventy percent of unclamping charges. It was
the Consortium’s right to enforce parking regulations thus generating an independent
revenue stream. Indeed, the Agreement granted to the Consortium the right to collect
“clamping fees” for the release of each clamped vehicle, seventy per cent of which the
Consortium was entitled to keep, the remaining thirty per cent going to the Municipality.

In this respect, Articles 5.1.11, 5.1.12, and 5.1.13 of the Agreement provided the
following:

The Consortium shall as from the day it is granted the right to collect local charges in
accordance with Item 5.1.6, be obliged to clamp the vehicle by technical means or limit
the usage of the vehicle by other means established by statutory acts, if the vehicle
owner has failed to pay according to the established procedure prescribed for parking in
the payable parking places or has parked the vehicle in violation of the rules of parking
established for the places specified in Annex No. 4 to this Agreement. The Consortium
Shall, as from the day on which it is entitled to collect legal charges according to Item
5.1.6 hereof, collect the fee from vehicle owners in the streets and squares as indicated in
Annex No. 4 to this Agreement for unclamping of the vehicles, which fee shall be based
on tariffs approved by the Vilnius City Council [...]. The Consortium shall be obliged to
transfer 30 per cent of the collected fee for unclamping to the account indicated by the
Vilnius City Municipality for every month in arrears until the tenth day of the next month.

The Agreement provided that the transition to a fining system would occur “as soon as
there is a legal base and the technical means of state authorities create appropriate
conditions” (Article 5.3.4 of the Agreement).

In accordance with the above, the Consortium thus undertook to pay to the City:

. a fixed fee of LTL 200,000 (EUR 57,924) to be paid in equal monthly installments
(Article 5.1.14 of the Agreement);

. thirty percent of the fees collected by the Consortium in connection with the
unclamping of vehicles that would have failed to pay the parking fees;

. Additionally, Article 5.1.15 of the Agreement provided that

In case the aggregated sum of the revenues received in the financial year by the
Municipality under Items 5.1.1, 5.1.13 and 5.1.14 of this Agreement is less than
1.000.000 Litas, the fixed amount established in Item 5.1.14 shall be increased by such
amount that the annual revenue of the Municipality received under Items 5.1.13 and
5.1.14 equals to 1.000.000 Litas. The consortium undertakes within 30 days after the end
of the financial year to transfer to the account indicated by the Vilnius City Municipality the
sum equal to the amount by which the fixed amount established in Item 5.1.14 is
increased.

4.2.3 The incorporation of the Operator

106.

According to the Agreement, the Consortium was to establish a management company
that would run the street parking concession.

27/96

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

Article 1.2 of the Agreement defined the “management company” as

a private company incorporated by the Consortium in accordance with Item 3.1.3 of [the]
Agreement that shall own the ticket machines installed in accordance with the
Agreement, integrated management information system and other resources needed for
operation of the parking system and collection of the local charge for the public parking of
vehicles in the city of Vilnius.

On 28 January 2000, BP and Egapris entered into an Agreement on Business
Principles (the “ABP,” CE 14) to allocate to each of the Consortium members the
functions, responsibilities and liabilities related to the exercise of the Consortium’s
rights and obligations under the Agreement. One of the purposes of the ABP was to
provide a determination on the issue of ownership of the above-mentioned
management company.

The ABP granted BP the right to incorporate and operate the project management
company that would be responsible for the performance of all of the obligations of the
Egapris Consortium under the Agreement, except the construction of MSCP. The
Consortium’s rights and duties relating to the construction of the MSCP were to be
equally shared by its members. Once duly delivered, all the MSCP would be leased to
the project management company.

It was agreed in the ABP that BP would incorporate the management company Vilniaus
Parkavimo Kompanija (“VPK”).

Pursuant to Sub-Clause 1.3 of the ABP,

With effect from the date of the Company's registration and up until the execution by
EGAPRIS of the Call Option referred in clause 2 below, BP shall be sole and lawful
successor to all the rights and obligations assumed by Consortium under the Agreement
with Municipality in respect to »p ion of the Company.

It was agreed that Egapris would have the right to purchase 49 percent of VPK from BP
for LTL 1,960,000 (EUR 567,655) (Call Option) (Article 2.4 of the ABP).

Egapris could also waive its right to purchase the VPK shares in exchange for a
payment from BP of LTL 4,000,000 (EUR 1,200,000) (Article 2.11 of the ABP). Article
2.12 of the ABP further provided that, should BP fail to pay Egapris the amount due in
case of waiver of Egapris’ right to participate, “out of 1 000 000 (one million) Litas
initially contributed by BP for the shares of the Company, 500 000 (five hundred
thousand) Litas will be deemed as a penalty for non-performance and will count as
having been made for the benefit of Egapris as its contribution/payment for 50% of the
shares in the Company. Notwithstanding the above, the rights of the shareholder
holding 50% (fifty percent) of the shares in the Company will be granted to Egapris only
upon contribution by BP and Egapris in equal sums — 1 500 000 (one million five
hundred throusand) Litas each — of the remaining Company’s share issue price.”

On 17 February 2000, BP registered VPK as the project management company in
accordance with the “Articles of Association of the Private Company ‘Vilniaus

28/96

115.

116.

117.

118.

Parkavimo Kompanija” (the “Articles of Association of VPK,” CE 23), paying LTL 4
million into VPK’s capital.

On 1° February 2000, Egapris notified that it irrevocably and unconditionally waived its
right to claim compensation under Article 2.11 of the ABP and also irrevocably declared
its decision not to elect to exercise its Call Option provided under Article 2.2 of the ABP
(RE 43).

In January 2001, Egapris purported to exercise the call option. BP however refused to
tender the shares. The dispute was taken to court, and on 19 November 2003, the
Vilnius district court ruled as follows:

The court, upon hearing the case,

(..)

DECIDED:

Not to examine a part of the law suit where the Claimant requested:

1) to acknowledge a non performance by the Defendant UAB Baltijos Parkingas of
the obligations set forth in Clauses 2.5, 2.10, 2.11 and 2.12 of the Agreement on

Business principles made between UAB Egapris and UAB Baltijos Parkingas on
January 28, 2000, for which reason the said Agreement was not implemented;

2) to obligate the Defendant to perform the obligations set forth in Clause 2 of the
Agreement on Business Principles to execute the agreement on purchase-sale of
50% of the shares of UAB Vilniaus Parkavimo Kompanija;

3) to restitute the violated rights of UAB Egapris to acquire 50% of the shares of UAB
Vilniaus Parkavimo Kompanija;

4) to repeal the Loan Agreement No. 144000902069/22 and pledge of 50% of shares
of UAB Vilniaus Parkavimo Kompanija, which transactions were made in violation
of the Agreement on Business Principles between UAB Egapris and UAB Baltijos
Parkingas, as of January 28, 2000.

To reject the remaining part of the law suit.

Le]

This Decision may be appealed against before the Lithuanian Court of Appeals by appeal
filed via this court within 30 days [(CE 187)].

On 1 July 2004, however, the Court of Appeals repealed the decision of the court of
first instance, and instructed “Defendant UAB ‘Baltijos parkingas’ [...] to perform the
obligation, i.e. to conclude the agreement with Plaintiff UAB ‘Egapris’ [...] regarding
sale-purchase of fifty percent (50%) of shares in UAB ‘Vilniaus parkavimo kompanija’
[...] in accordance with the terms laid down in clauses 3.12 and 2.13 of the Agreement
on Business Principles (made between UAB ‘Egapris’ and UAB ‘Baltijos parkingas’ on
January 28, 2000) and in exchange of consideration of LTL 1 500 000” (CE 216).

On 1 March 2000, the Municipality adopted Decision No. 519, determining “that the
collection of local fees and charges shall be effected by UAB Vilniaus Parkavimo
Kompanija, established by the Consortium, constituted by UAB Baltijos Parkingas and
UAB Egapris,” and that “the collection of fees and charges shall be executed by the
employees of UAB Vilniaus Parkavimo Kompanija holding the certificates of UAB
Vilniaus Parkavimo Kompanija” (CE 25).

29/96

4.3 LEGALITY OF THE AGREEMENT AND MODIFICATIONS OF LAWS
4.3.1 The legality of the parking fee

119. By letter dated 8 February 2000, the local representative of the National Government in
Vilnius’ (the “Government Representative”) wrote to Mayor Imbrasas, stating that
“certain provisions of the [...] Agreement approved by Vilnius City Council’s Decision
No 482 [were] in contradiction with effective laws and regulatory acts” (CE 17). This
Government Representative therefore requested that at the next meeting of the Vilnius
City Council, the issue of the amendment or revocation of Decision No 482, which
approved the Agreement, be discussed (CE 17; see also CE 18). More specifically, the
Government Representative raised the following three issues and provided the
following explanations:

[...] Income received on local fees and charges must be accounted for in the Municipal
budget item as “other payments”. However, under the approved Agreement, the
Consortium is granted the right to collect a local charge, fixed by the Vilnius City Council,
for the duration of parking. Local charge is treated as a constituent element comprising
the tax for the duration of parking in the places specified by the Municipality. Another
portion of the tax goes to the Consortium; the portion of the tax is defined by the
Consortium itself. However, the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Local Fees and
Charges does not provide for the possibility that collection of local charges might be
delegated to enterprises; moreover, it does not provide for the possibility that enterprises
Shall fix the portion of the local charge that goes to them.

Le]

Under the Agreement on Joint Activity, the Municipality undertakes to ensure that any
free plots of state-owned land located in the construction place of the infrastructure object
will not be formulated and those plots of land will not go to land sales or lease auctions
following the procedure established by the Government Resolution No 692 “On Sales and
Lease of New Plots of State-owned Land Designated for Non-agricultural Purposes
(activity)” as of 2 June 1999, and none of the third persons will be authorized to use land
in the above area or to hindrance management and use of the mentioned land. In
addition, the Municipality undertakes to provide the Consortium with a possibility to
construct the infrastructure object in the specified place. The Law of the Republic of
Lithuania on Construction prescribes that the right of the builder shall be exercised in
cases when the builder owns a plot of land or holds and uses it on other grounds
established by the laws of the Republic of Lithuania, and the builder has a prepared, ina
prescribed manner, and approved design documentation of a construction work, and
builder has a construction permit issued in the prescribed manner. Since the Municipality
wil not formulate new plots of land, and construction permits are issued by the Inspection

i of a Const Work of of County Governor, it might be

that construction of multi-storey car parks is in general it

 

added)].

The main Agreement prescribes that the Consortium shall be sole partner of the
Municipality, which is entitled with an exclusive right to collect a local charge and be
engaged in construction of multi-storey car parks in the places specified by the

However, the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Competition prescribes
that any arrangement with the purpose to restrict competition or any arrangement which
restricts or might _restrict_competition shall _be ibited and therefore null_and void
[(emphasis added). [...][(CE 17)]

 

 

The Government Representative has the constitutional authority and duty to supervise the legality of all
municipal acts. Specifically, the Government Representative has to ensure consistency of municipal acts
with Lithuanian laws and decrees and protect the rights of individuals and organizations.

30/96

120.

121.

122.

123.

In the course of a meeting held on 11 February 2000, the Vilnius City Council rejected
the Government Representative’s request and voted to uphold Decision No. 482 (CE
19). By letter dated 25 February 2000, Mayor Imbrasas informed the Government
Representative of the Vilnius City Council’s decision to uphold Decision No 482 (CE
24).

This decision was supported by a report issued by the Municipality's legal counsel (CE
20).

On 8 March 2000, notwithstanding the decision of 11 February 2000 of the Vilnius City
Council, the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Lithuania stated the following in a
letter to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania:

[...] it is assumed that a fee/charge and a tax by nature are different categories.
Consequently, local fee/charge cannot be treated as a constituent element of tax.
Moreover, the laws do not grant private legal entities the right to collect local fees/charges
defined by the Municipal Council. Granting of exclusive rights normally restricts
competition within a certain field of activity. Therefore, it is maintained that granting of
exclusive rights should neither be in contradiction with the interests of other economic
entities nor restrict competition. Therefore, the statements of the Government
Representative in Vilnius County, produced in presentation No 2T as of 8 February 2000,
with respect to treating a local charge as a constituent element comprising the tax, with
respect to delegating to a private legal entity the right to collect local charges, with
respect to granting a private legal entity exclusive rights, in our opinion are based on the
Law on Local Fees and Charges and the Law on Competition [(emphasis added)] [(CE
27)).

Arguing that “certain provisions of the Contract approved by Vilnius City Municipal
Council Decision No. 482 are inconsistent with the applicable laws and secondary
legislation,” the Government Representative filed, on 9 March 2000, a complaint with
the Administrative Court of Vilnius District, requesting that the latter “satisfy the
complaint and [...] recognis[e] as invalid and repeal Decision of 29 December 1999 of
Vilnius City Council’ (CE 28). The Government Representative reiterated the
explanations provided in his letter of 8 February 2000, as follows:

[...] the approved Contract grants the right to the Consortium to collect the local charge
established by Vilnius City Municipal Council for car parking time. The local charge is
treated as a component part of the fee for car parking time in the areas established by the
Council of the Municipality. The other part of the charge is received by the Consortium
who determines on its own discretion the amount of charge due to it. However, the
Republic of Lithuania Law on Fees and Charges does not provide for the possibility to
delegate the collection of local charges to companies, let alone the right to determine the
amount of such local charge by such companies themselves.

[...] The Law of the Republic of Lithuania promulgates that the builder's right shall be
realized after the available land plot acquired by right ownership, lease of any other right
provided for by law is prepared, the construction project is coordinated and a construction
authorization is acquired in the established manner. In view of the fact that the
Municipality will not form new land plots, and authorizations are issued by the
Constructions Building Inspectorate of the County Governor's Administration, in general,
construction of multi-storey parking areas should be considered as not possible.

According to the Framework Contract, the Consortium will be a single partner of the
Municipality enjoying exclusive right to collect local charge and construct multi-storey
parking areas on the sites designated by Vilnius City Council. The Republic of Lithuania
Law on Competition promulgates that all agreements aimed at limiting competition or

31/96

124.

125.

126.

which limit or might limit competition, shall be prohibited and recognized as null and void
as from the moment of their drafting. [...] [(CE 28)]

On 19 May 2000, the Vilnius District Administrative Court issued a decision in which it
“resolved [...] to satisfy petition by Government's Representative in Vilnius District in
part [and] repeal the Decision No. 482 of Vilnius City Council as of 29 December 1999
Regarding Approval of the Agreement between Vilnius City Municipality and
Consortium formed between UAB Baltijos Parkingas and UAB Egapris to the extent
approving Paragraphs 2.4.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.3.1, 5.1.3.2, 5.1.3.3, 5.1.3.4, 5.1.3.5, 5.1.4 and
5.1.13 of the Agreement, as well as paragraph 1 of Article 5 of Joint Activity Agreement
under Annex No. 8 hereof’ (CE 33).

Although this Court rejected the Government Representative’s claim that Lithuanian
law prevented the Municipality from giving the parking fee collection service into private
concession (the Court stressed that Articles 4.2 and 6.1 of the Law on Local Fees and
Charges grant the Municipal Council the right to delegate collection of local charges to
other entities), the Court found the hybrid parking fee to be inconsistent with existing
laws and regulations. The Court consequently annulled Decision No 482 to the extent
that it authorized the Municipality to include in the Agreement provisions considered
inconsistent with Lithuanian law, on the basis of the following considerations:

Under the Agreement between Vilnius City Municipality and Consortium a local charge is
treated as a component part of the fee (tax) for car parking time in the areas established
by the Council of the Municipality. Such treatment does not correspond to the
provisioning of the Law on Tax Administration and the Law on Local Fees and Charges.

The Law on Local Fees and Charges does not provide for a possibility to split a local
charge into two means of payment — local charge and parking fee (tax) — [and paragraph
4 of Article 3 of the said law] treats the local charge as a single and indivisible. [Besides,
according to Article 7] of the said law, income received from local fees and charges shall
be credited to the item of other payments of the budget of the municipality. Therefore, a
part of Paragraph 2.4.1 of the Agreement establishing transfer from the municipality to the
Consortium of the right to collect parking fees, as well as a part of Paragraph 5.1.3
establishing that a local charge is a component part of the parking fee (tax) and that the
other part of the charge is received by the Consortium who determines in its own
discretion the amount of charge due to it, as well as Paragraphs 5.1.3.1, 5.1.3.2, 5.1.3.3,
5.1.3.4, 5.1.3.5 and 5.1.4 establishing ratio between the local charge due to the
municipality and the fee due to the Consortium are not compatible with the law.

 

[...] the said fee for unclamping shall be treated as a variety of the local charge and shall
be subject to collection and accounting rules governing local charges. Therefore,
Paragraph 5.1.13 of the Agreement, to the extent establishing contribution of 30 per cent
of the collected fee for unclamping to the account of municipality, is not compatible with
the Law on Tax Administration and the Law on Local Fees and Charges. [...] [((CE 33)]

The Municipality appealed the decision of the Vilnius District Administrative Court,
which was repealed in April 2001 by the Supreme Administrative Court, for lack of
jurisdiction of the lower court. The Supreme Administrative Court decided to “repeal
the Decision passed by Vilnius Administrative Court and hand over the case for a
hearing by Vilnius First County Court’ (CE 85).

32/96

4.3.2 The new Law on Fees and Charges

127.

On 13 June 2000, the Parliament adopted a new Law on Fees and Charges (the “new
Law on Fees and Charges”), which replaced the 1996 Law (see Article 18 of the new
Law on Fees and Charges) (CE 136). The new Law on Fees and Charges provided, in
its Article 11(2) — authorizations subject to local fees and charges — that “a payer of
local fees and charges may not be required to pay for an object on which local fees or
charges are levied in any other way than by paying a local fee or charge”. This new
Law further provided, in its Article 13.2, that “the rates of local fees and charges shall
be established in LTL in round numbers.”

4.3.3 The new Law on Clamping

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

On 5 September 2000, the Government passed Decree No. 1056 Regarding Authority
to Define and Approve Procedures for Forced Removal or Clamping of Vehicles Using
Clamping Devices. This Decree “authorize[d] the Ministry of Interior to define and
approve before the 1° of October 2000, the Procedures for Forced Removal or
Clamping of Vehicles Using Clamping Devices.” Decree No. 1056 nullified the Decree
of 29 July 1991 Regarding Approval of Regulations of Forced Removal or Clamping of
Vehicles (CE 41).

On 24 November 2000, the Mayor of the Municipality of Vilnius wrote to the
Government of the Republic of Lithuania (CE 56): “Upon the entering into force of the
present Resolution [the decree No. 1056], municipalities lose their legal basis to block
vehicle running gear in cases of paid parking rules violations; rights and functions of
municipalities, defined by the Law on Local Fees [...] are violated”. The Municipality
requested the Government to re-authorize the municipalities to regulate clamping on
their territory.

On 27 November 2001, the Government adopted Decree No. 1426 (CE 97). This
Decree re-authorized clamping, provided that clamping be done in the presence of a
police officer. Indeed, Article 14 of the Decree provided that “in cases specified in
paragraph 13.1 above the vehicles shall be clamped by the police officer using
clamping devices, and in cases specified in paragraph 13.2 — by police officer together
with the person authorized so by municipality by taking use of the clamping devices
provided by municipality.”

On 3 December 2001, BP alleged that it was losing substantial amounts of money as a
result of this change in the regulatory system. BP characterized the legislative
changes with respect to clamping as a force majeure (CE 98).

On 10 April 2002, the Vilnius City Council implemented Decree No. 1426 through its
Decision No. 542 Regarding Partial Amendment of the Vilnius City Council's Decision
No. 151 of 11 September 1996 Regarding Imposition on Vehicle Owners (Drivers) of
Duty for the Use of Pay Car Parking Spaces and Parking Lots (CE 115). Article 12 of
this Decision provided that “vehicles ignoring the pay parking regulations [...] shall be
clamped using mechanical devices. Clamping of vehicles shall be undertaken by a

33/96

police officer, acting concertedly with an employee of UAB Vilniaus Parkavimo
Kompanija possessing a special authorization certificate [...].”

4.3.4 The amendment of the Law on Self-Government

133.

134.

4.4

4.41

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

On 12 October 2000, the Law on Self-Government was amended (CE 47). Until then,
this Law did not establish, at least not expressly, any restrictions on the ability of
municipalities to enter into Agreements on Joint Activity (JAAs) with private entities.
Article 9 of the October 2000 version of the Law on Self-Government reads as follows:

1. Municipalities may exercise other State functions (public administration and public
service rendering), which are not provided for in this Law, under contracts
concluded with State institutions or agencies. A municipality may conclude such
contracts only in the event that the municipal council gives its consent. [...]

2. For general purposes a municipality may conclude joint activity contracts or public
procurement contracts with State institutions and (or) other municipalities.

Thus, in this new version, the Law on Self-Government restricted the right of municipal
authorities to conclude JAAs to other public counterparties only.

THE PERFORMANCE OF THE AGREEEMENT
The submission of Parking Plans

In the course of a meeting held on 28 January 2000, the Consortium submitted to the
Municipality a “list of information necessary to draft the parking plan” (CE 15).

Also in January 2000, “the Consortium submitted a tender to the Vilnius Development
Department of the Vilnius Municipality tender on issuing the technical requirements of
construction of the underground parking lot next to the Opera and Ballet Theatre” (CE
15). Each Consortium partner proposed its first site for the construction of a MSCP.
BP proposed a site near the Pergales Movie Theatre (the “Pergales MSCP”) and asked
the Municipality to issue a list of the conditions for the design (CE 30). Egapris
proposed another location for its own MSCP.

The Municipality’s Development Department asked BP to start planning work for a
second MSCP in Gedimino site instead of the Pergales MSCP.

On 24 August 2000, BP addressed to the Municipality a draft Parking Plan (CE 37) and
on 1% September 2000, completed draft parking plans were officially submitted (CE
40).

On 6 October 2000, the Municipal Enterprise Vilniaus Planas proposed that (CE 44)
“the draft in essence could be approved provided certain supplements and adjustments

were made [...]”.

On 11 October 2000, the Municipality’s Energy and Facility Department suggested that
the draft should be adjusted. The Department observed that (CE 45) “/...] some

34/96

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

elements in terms of scope of the parking plan as defined an Annex 2 of the Agreement
between Vilnius city municipality and the consortium [...] were missing [...]”.

On 13 October 2000, the Municipality's Transport Council discussed the Plans and
resolved (CE 48):

1.1. Reconstruction of Pylimo street as a segment comprising the Old City ring under
the draft Vilnius City Parking Plan, by introducing two-ways traffic is not supported
by any calcul [...] Calculation should be pi that would

of the p ic of the traffic ion when 1p
with current situation.

 

 

1.2 The street net and traffic organisation provided in the draft is not quite definite.
Detailed planning of the street net is necessary.

1.3. The draft should be supplemented by a scheme of public transport communication
system.

On 20 October 2000, the National Monument Protection Commission (“NMPC”)
objected to the parking plan. The NMPC decided to object to the project of
construction of the parking for the following reason (CE 49):

Projects of such type and scale like the project of the construction of planned
underground garages in the Old Town of Vilnius should be developed concurrently taking
into consideration the possible direct and indirect environmental impact of planned works
and also the impact on cultural properties. In the opinion of the State Monumental
Protection Commission, the planned garages [...] would change the character of the Old
Town of global value; destroy large areas of unexplored cultural layer. Also, the intensity
of traffic and air pollution in the Old Town is likely to increase. The Old Town might
become less attractive in terms of tourism and to the residents and visitor, and this would
be a great loss.

On 24 November 2000, the Environmental Protection Department of Vilnius Region
stated that (CE 57):

The plan does not contain the assessment of consequences of solutions from the
viewpoint of environment.

Based on the first assessment, we do not approve of the construction of underground
garages in Sereikiskiu Park. Their need in this place is not sufficiently grounded, and the
territory is unique and valuable both from environmental and other aspects. [...]

Opinion: We do not in essence object to the Vilnius city car parking plan. In further
project-making stages, to assess environmental impact, project the means of
compensation for cutting down greenery and built-up squares.

On 12 December 2000, the Vilnius Urban Development Department stated (CE 60) that
“the division approves of the main ideology stated by the preparers of the plan with
regard to the organisation and management of the traffic in the city’s historical centre,
vehicle parking on the streets, and the necessity of construction of underground (multi-
storey) garages, and, essentially, to their positioning as specified in the plan.”

On 22 December 2000, the Vilnius Territorial Division underlined that (CE 61):

1.1 the solutions presented in the referred documents directly affect a cultural
monument old city of Vilnius [...];

35/96

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

1.2 the delivered document was drafted without having obtained under the established
procedure the conditions with regard to special planning document formulation
issued by the Department of Cultural Heritage protection (Vilnius Territorial
Division) and without having implemented the requirements established by the
procedures and rules with respect of special planning documents formulation as
prescribed by relevant laws of the Republic of Lithuania and other legal acts, i.e.:
1.2.1 the requirements with respect of formulation of certain purpose special

planning as prescribed by the Law on the Territorial Planning;

1.2.2 the requirement with respect to formulation of certain purpose special
planning laid down in the general regulations for formulation, coordination
and approval of special planning documents;

1.2.3 the requirements with respect to formulation of certain purpose special
planning laid down in the regulations for formulation and issue of the
conditions with respect to territorial planning documents. [...]

Despite all the oppositions, the Municipality decided, on 4 January 2001, to “permit to
the UAB to design an underground parking lot on the Gedimino Ave. section from
Jogailos Str. to Katedros SQ” (CE 67). On 26 January 2001, the Mayor of Vilnius City
Arturas Zuokas (CE 70) “approves the construction of the underground garage in
Gedimino Avenue between Odmiiniu and Savivadybes Squares and notifies that the
Municipality will provide the required assistance to realize this project”.

However, on 12 March 2001, the State Monument Protection Commission of the
Republic of Lithuania issued unfavorable opinions regarding the project and stressed
that (CE 81) “upon installation of garages, a big portion of archaeological heritage of
the old city of Vilnius will be destroyed; use of multiple up-to-date materials and
technologies will damage the authenticity of the old city of Vilnius [...]”. Nevertheless,
the Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania wrote that (CE 84) “while being
well-aware of the importance of the Old Town of Vilnius and the need to preserve the
cultural and natural heritage, we are of the opinion that it’s too early to declare the loss
of authenticity of the Old Town of Vilnius. Similar parking areas have been constructed
in the centres of many cities throughout Europe while reconciling the needs of heritage,
modern economy and social development”. [...]

Finally, the Municipality changed its mind and decided, on 22 March 2001, to develop
exclusively the Pergales MSCP (see RE 63).

Two weeks after the decision to abandon the Project of MSCP on Gedimino Avenue,
the Mayor Arturas Zuokas, in a letter of 27 April 2001, reminded BP that the first
Parking Plan (near the Pergales Theater) “after coordination, public debate and
checking by the territorial planning supervisory authority had to be furnished to the
Council of Vilnius on 11 08 2000” (CE 86).

The Mayor added “/wJe hereby propose the 6-month term calculated from the receipt of
this official letter for furnishing the parking Plan coordinated, deliberated and checked
in the established manner for approval to the council of Vilnius city. In the Event of the
failure to submit the Parking Plan by the specified deadline, the Municipality or Vilnius
City will terminate the Contract with the consortium [...]” (CE 86).

36/96

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

During a meeting of 19 June 2001 with the Vilnius City Development Department
Commission for the Construction of Underground Garages, BP argued that (CE 87) on
the initiative of the heads of the City it was decided to implement the project of
Gedimino Avenue which did not justify itself, and, as a result realization of the project
for construction of multi-storey underground parking areas was delayed.

In September 2001 (CE 90), BP submitted its second Parking Plan.

During a meeting of the Working Group (see {] 161) on 22 November 2001, the City
accused BP of non-compliance with its contractual obligation, that is the delivery of
concrete plans for the construction of the Pergales MSCP as stated on 27 April 2001
(CE 96 and RE 70). In its letter dated 3 December 2001, BP alleged that the delay was
also due to the City’s delay in taking the necessary action to procure the necessary
land and in the delivery of the design conditions for the Pergales Parking (CE 98).

In February 2002, Mayor Zuokas requested BP to “provide written reasons of the
failure to submit within the established deadlines the parking plan” (CE 106).

On 20 March 2002, BP wrote to Mayor Zuokas (CE 108). In its letter, BP explained
that

“the main reasons to the delayed approval of the parking plan are as follows:

a) the city had not all the necessary information, and it had to be collected separately;

b) the technical task was submitted to the company with a long delay;

c) discussions of the plan in committees were not properly organized;

d) terms of heritage preservation were submitted just in March 2001;

e) the Municipality changed its position regarding the car parks under Gedimino
Avenue and car parks in the Old Town in March 2001;

f) the Municipality has still not made a clear decision on the ways of solution of
parking problems (construction of car parks) in the Old Town.

We would like to draw your attention to that the approved parking plan is the company’s
concern first of all, and very important one. The plan is necessary for the company in
order to plan a proper and effective parking system, to know and evaluate the business
development, the required investments, terms and return. [...]

We are enclosing the prepared parking plan to this letter once again. In the plan, you find
two alternative versions, basically of the uncertainty concerning the Old Town”.

In his response of 19 April 2002, Mayor Zuokas stated that “delayed preparation of the
Parking Plan may not be i by ab. of the ical task, b legal
acts regulating territorial planning establishes that the technical task is not necessary
for the preparation of the special plan. Provisions of the Contract and Law on Territorial
Planning require furnishing the Municipality with the Parking Plan after its coordination,
public debates and verification by the territorial planning supervisory authority. The
Municipality is not obligated to deliberate the Parking Plan which does not satisfy this
requirement, and submission of such plan may not be considered a proper discharge of
the Consortium’s obligation. The term of the preparation of the Parking Plan should not
be influenced by the Municipality’s position on the construction of multi-storey parking
areas in the sites other than those specified in Annex No.1 to the Contract. By virtue of

 

37/96

4.4.2 The Joint Acti

157.

158.

159.

160.

Clause 2.2.2 of the Contract, the Parking Plan shall be prepared in observance of sites
specified in the Annex. No.1 for the construction of multi-storey parking areas and their
detailed plans. Neither decision of the Municipality regarding the ways of settlement of
parking problems in the Old Town of public transport system development strategy is
an obstacle for the discharge of the consortium’s obligation to prepare the Parking
Plan” (CE 16)).

 

 

ity Agreement

A form of Agreement on Joint Activity ("JAA”) was appended to the Agreement as
Annex No. 8 (CE 13). The JAA pertained among others to the transfer to the
Consortium of land for the construction of the MSCP.

On 26 March 2002, Mayor Arturas Zuokas sent to the Consortium a draft of Joint
Activity Agreement for the Pergales parking (CE 110) emphasizing:

Construction of over ground building with commercial functions [...] is not a priority of the
Municipality of the City of Vilnius, is not foreseen in the Main Agreement and existing
detailed plans of sites, and should not be foreseen in the joint activity agreements on
multi-storey underground parking constructions.

On 9 April 2002, BP sent a revised draft of Joint Activity Agreement in which all
references to construction above the Pergales parking were deleted (CE 113).

However, the Municipality refused to sign the Joint Activity Agreement, given that, in
the meantime, the legislation of Lithuania seemed to have taken a negative view of
JAAs with private parties (see CE 104; the Republic of Lithuania’s Counter-Memorial,
{1 121-122 and the Claimant's Memorial, ff] 107-108). On 5 July 2002, the Mayor
Zuokas wrote to BP (CE 126):

Construction of the multi-storey parking lots is one of the major obligations of the
Consortium consisting of UAB Baltijos Parkingas and UAB Egapris foreseen by the
agreement signed on 30 December 1999 by the Municipality an the Consortium. The
agreement foresees that the multi-storey parking lots will be constructed on the basis of
joint activity agreements. However, according to the Local Autonomy Law of the Republic
of Lithuania (edition of 12 October 2000) Article 9 Part 2 the Municipality can make joint
activity agreements or common public purchase agreements with the state institutions
and (or) other municipalities for common purposes. This provision of the law is still not
interpreted unanimously and there is a great probability that the joint activity agreement
signed by the Municipality will be in court as the above

provision of law. It also could be impeded by the fact that the multi-storey parking lots will
be private property, not the Municipality‘s. Considering this factor we suggest, in the short
run, considering the possibility of amending the agreement signed on 30 December 1999
rejecting the Consortium’s obligation to construct multi-storey parking lots foreseen by the
agreement and respectively | the Municipality's obligation to ensure the method of, land use
for the Cc and to the
provisions of the joint activity or eomban According to the amended agreement of 30
December 1999, as suggested the Consortium would preserve the right and obligations
connected with | providing parking services and charging local fees on overground parking
lots, also, the volumes of it into of parking
infrastructure, correcting the expiry date of the Agreement and revenue allocation
between the Consortium and the Municipality.

 

 

38/96

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

Thus, on 29 July 2002, Mayor Zuokas established a Working Group for reconsideration
of the Agreement of 30 December 1999 (CE 127).

On 5 September 2002, BP proposed the conversion of the Joint Activity Agreement into
a Cooperation Agreement as the Municipality had done with the Company Pinus
Proprius (see J] 167-171) (CE 133).

On 9 September 2002, the Working Group decided to (CE 134) “conclude partnership
agreements instead of joint activity agreements on the construction of multi-storied car
parks [...].

On 24 February 2003, the Vilnius District Court decided to (CE 155) “nullify [...] annex
8 [the form of JAA] of the Agreement made between Vilnius City Municipality and UAB
“Baltijios parkingas” and UAB “Egapris”, which Agreement was approved by Decision
No. 482[...)”.

On 6 May 2003, the Director of the Administration of the Municipality of Vilnius,
Raivydas Ruk&telé wrote to the Government Representative that (CE 169)

[during the meeting of the representatives of the Parties held on 9 September 2002, on
proposal of the Municipality it was decided to sign cooperation agreements instead of
joint activity agreement. However, changing only the title of the contract and of the
designation of the Parties’ obligations might be insufficient for eliminating the
inconsistencies. Therefore, it would be very important to the Municipality to know the
opinion of the Government Representative, as of the authority supervising the legitimacy
of the legal acts passed by the Municipality [...].

On 22 May 2003 (CE 168), the Lithuanian Court of Appeals decided to “uphold the
Decision passed by Vilnius District Court on 24 February 2003, and reject the Appeal’.

4.4.3 The Pinus Proprius Project

167.

168.

169.

In April 2001, the City discussed the possibility of building a Parking under Gedimino
Avenue and southern part of Municipality Square with the company Pinus Proprius
UAB. Pinus Proprius was proposing the development of property it owned partly while
the City owned the rest. Pinus Proprius owns a building on Gedimino Avenue and was
planning the renovation of the building into a hotel (RE 56).

On 24 October 2001, the Municipality approved, by Decision No. 417, the signing of a
Joint Activity Agreement with Pinus Proprius (CE 95). However, on 18 January 2002,
the Representative of the Government, Gintautas Jakimavicius, requested the Vilnius
District Administrative Court to revoke the Decision No. 417 on the approval of the JAA:

a conclusion should be made that the Law does not provide for the right for municipalities
to conclude joint venture agreement with private persons and that Vilnius City Municipality
Council having passed the decision No.417 of 24 October 2001 and by Clause 1 thereof
approved the draft joint venture agreement with Pinus Proprius UAB exceeded the scope
of competence of public authorities [(CE 104)].

The Vilnius District Administrative Court sent the case to the Vilnius District Court,
which was within its jurisdiction.

39/96

170.

171.

On 27 March 2002, the Vilnius City Council decided (Decision No. 530) to approve a
Cooperation Agreement between the Municipality on Vilnius and Pinus Proprius. On
19 April 2002, the Government Representative, Gintautas Jakimavicius, wrote the
Vilnius District Court (CE 117):

The Vilnius city Council on March 27, 2002, issued decision No. 530 “On the Approval of
the Cooperation Agreement” whereby item 1 approved the Cooperation Agreement
between the Municipality of the City of Vilnius and Joint Stock Company “Pinus Proprius.”
By this decision the Vilnius City Council actually changed decision No. 417 of 10/24/01
“On Approval of the Partnership Agreement,” i.e. it became out of force. Since the
decision became out of force, the legal issue also disappeared. Consequently, the case
was dismissed.

Considering the presented circumstances [...] | withdraw the claim and therefore ask the
Court: To dismiss the case [...].

Thus, on 20 August 2002, the City of Vilnius concluded a Cooperation Agreement with
Pinus Proprius (CE 128).

4.4.4 The modification of the Agreement of 30 December 1999

172.

173.

174.

The Agreement of 1999 provided that the multi-storey parking lots will be constructed
on the basis of a Joint Activity Agreement. However, the Municipality considered that,
by virtue of the 12 October 2000 amendment of the Law on Self-Government, it had
became impossible to conclude such kind of contracts with private companies, namely
with persons other than State institutions or municipalities (see | 168). Thus, with the
avowed purpose of ensuring the lawfulness of the Agreement, the Municipality decided
to establish a working group in order to bring the Agreement in conformity with the
revised Law on Self-Government.

During the meeting of 9 September 2002, the representatives of the City of Vilnius and
the representatives of BP agreed (CE 134):

1. To exclude the provisions of the Agreement on the rights and obligations of the
Consortium to collect parking fees and fines for violation of parking rules. To
appeal to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania with the request to issue a
consent granting the right to Vilnius city Municipality to carry out public
procurement from the single source. [...]

3. To conclude partnership agreements instead of joint activity agreements on the
construction of multi-storied car parks. [...]

However, on 2 October 2002, Mayor Zuokas and Bjorn Avnes, a representative of
Parkerings, discussed also the opportunity to cancel the Agreement. Following this
discussion, Bjorn Avnes addressed a letter dated 11 October 2002 to Mayor Zuokas
summarizing the remarks made during the meeting of 2 October 2002 (CE 137):
The unexpected obstacles, that have been met during the implementation of the
Agreement, might prove that the step was a bit too brave. We have suffered serious
economical losses and setbacks in the development of the project. | am therefore
prepared to meet with your request to renegotiate the Agreement, in order to arrive at a
mutually acceptable solution.

As we discussed, there are two main options available to us:

(a) The Municipality cancels the Agreement.

40/96

(b) the Agreement is renegotiated on all terms, basically so that the Municipality takes
back the right to the land for construction of car parks as requested in your letter
dated 5 July 2002 [CE 126], and our company becomes the subcontractor to the
City solely for street parking and parking house management.

Alternative (a) is regulated under the Agreement and would imply that we are reimbursed
for our expenses (investments and losses) plus ten percent, and the Municipality retains
all rights and obligations, but also including the parking house close to the market place,
parking plan and operational systems.

According to my knowledge, the amount would be in the order of 15 millions LITAS,
including the ten percent.

Alternative (b) is more elaborate. As we would be giving up the real-estate opportunities
present in the Agreement at this time, this will need to be economically compensated. [...]

Making a reasonable assumption on the outcome of a renegotiation as outlined above,
the total cost to the Municipality to regain major parts of the Agreement would be in the
order of 11 million LITAS. [...]

175. On 8 November 2002, Mayor Arturas Zuokas replied to Bjorn Avnes:

[...] This Agreement is very important to Vilnius Municipality. | entirely agree with you that
both partners must cooperate in seeking the way out of the difficult situation we are in
now. [...]

Therefore, | would like to stress the main points determining Municipality's decision on the
issue, once again:

- The object of the competition that took place in 1997 and was followed by
competitive negotiations and by signing the Agreement with Consortium in 1999,
was the construction of parking lots — not any other real estate development
projects which could be profitable even if separate from the whole parking system.
This meant to us and to both competitors that a part of the parking fees collected in
public places should cover the expenses of construction of parking lots. [...]

[...] | may only express serious doubts about the amounts of funds, indicated in you letter
as desired compensations for the member of Consortium in case of changing or
terminating the Agreement.

of the A is a complex problem.
Possible ways of solving it should be pointed out by the specialists representing both
partners. Therefore | suggest you to present your proposals, considering the change and
termination of the Agreement, for the negotiations which are being carried out by specially
appointed representatives. [...] [(CE 140)]

176. Regardless of the correspondence between Bjorn Avnes and Mayor Arturas Zuokas,
the Working group continued the negotiation. On 27 November 2002, during a meeting
of the Working Group, BP asked the representatives of the Municipality why (CE 142):

[...] despite an agreement reached between the Parties, Vilnius City Municipality does not
implement the decision adopted by the working groups to apply to the Government with
regard to the permission granting the right to carry service procurement from the single
.. [...] In the opinion of BP representatives, the decision of the working groups was
not influenced by any other additional circumstances and its implementation lies
exclusively within the competence of the Mayor of the Municipality. BP representatives
outlined that inactivity of responsible authorities of the Municipality poses a threat to the
continuity of the Agreement of 30 December 1999 and raises doubts about the
effectiveness of initiated negotiations.

 

177. The representatives of the Municipality responded (CE 142) that there were [...] “two
reasons due to which no application was submitted to the Government: [...] the

41/96

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

Consortium hasn't yet implemented an obligation set forth in point 5.1.15 of the
Agreement regarding the payment of the sum of LTL 626,187 for the year 2001 to the
Municipality and hasn't yet provided information indicated in points 3.2 and 3.3 of the
Agenda” [...]. Thus, a dispute was arising over BP’s performance of the Agreement
especially over its payment.

In its letter dated 28 November 2002, Skips AS Tudor (Parkerings’ parent corporation)
underlined the failure by Vilnius Municipality to address the Lithuanian Government for
permission to carry out public procurement of the Consortium’s parking service. Skips
AS Tudor also argued that the Agreement [of December 1999] allowed commercial
development on the top of the multi-storey car parks (CE 143). Moreover, concerning
the payment of the amount set forth in point 5.1.15 of the same Agreement, Skips AS
Tudor emphasized that (CE 143):

As you may know, the key source of the consortium’s income are originating from the two
contractual rights - the right to collect parking fees and the right to collect re-clamping
penalties - which rights have been temporarily assigned to us by Vilnius Municipality by
virtue of the Agreement, made in 1999. As a consequence of force majeure situation,
resulting from the actions of the Government and the Parliament, one of those rights and
related income streams was vanished, and the other one was significantly reduced.
Accordingly, the total income of the consortium was adversely affected and we have
suffered a serious financial loss. The Agreement defines the revenue sharing scheme
that is based on the income, not on profit. Therefore, once force majeure had a direct
impact on the income, it had a direct impact on overall revenue sharing. We cannot
understand how Vilnius Municipality, having lost the right that was temporarily assigned to
the consortium, still requests the same amount of the revenue originating from such right.

On 3 February 2003, during a meeting with the Working Group, both parties maintained
the same position. BP representatives proposed to submit the dispute concerning the
payment of the sum under point 5.1.15 of the Agreement to a court or to any other
impartial authority. However, the parties agreed to continue the negotiation (CE 150).

During the next meeting of the Working Group on 13 February 2003, the Municipality
representatives informed BP that (CE 153) ‘the Municipality is preparing to appeal to the
court regarding the fulfillment of the obligation provided for in point 5.1.15.”

On 24 February 2003, the Vilnius District Court ruled in favour of a challenge to the
hybrid fee structure brought by the Government Representative under the New Law on
Fees and Charges (see {| 124 and CE 155). As a result, the parking fee provision of
the Agreement of December 1999 was cancelled. This decision was confirmed on 22
May 2003 by the Lithuanian Court of Appeals (CE 168).

By letter dated 25 March 2003, the Mayor of the City of Vilnius proposed to the
Consortium various actions, especially the termination of the Agreement that had
became incompatible with applicable law and the conclusion of a new contract for fee
collection service (CE 156).

On 16 May 2003, BP made a counter proposal, consisting in a direct agreement with
VPK, namely the Operator, that is the management company for the BP-Egapris
Consortium for the collection of local fees and charges, and a second and separate
agreement with BP for the construction of the Multi-storied Parking (CE 166).

42/96

183.

184.

185.

186.

187

4.4.

188.

. On 24 October 2003, VPK submitted its proposal for a renegotiated agreement for
collection of parking fees (CE 180):

1.1. VPK shall provide the following service to the Municipality:
a) operate and develop the car parking system of the Municipality [...];
c) collect parking charges [...];

2.1 The contract shall be valid for 20 years, and VPK shall have the right of option to
extend it by 10 years.

3.1 The Municipality shall pay to VPK the consideration for services [...] on a monthly
basis. The amount of payment shall be calculated as a percentage from collected
income. [...]

On 17 November 2003, a provisional agreement was concluded between the
Municipality and VPK (CE 186), to ensure the continued collection of parking charges
pending negotiation.

On 9 December 2003, the Municipality responded to the VPK proposal of 24 October
2003 with a counter-proposal for an agreement with a duration of four years, at the end
of which all shares of VPK would be transferred to the Municipality free of charge (CE
190).

On 18 December 2003, VPK responded to the Municipality counter-proposal of 9
December 2003. In substance, VPK proposed either a 15-year agreement without the
construction of the multi-storey parking or a 10-year agreement with VPK’s rights and
obligations to construct multi-storey parking (CE 192).

. The Municipality responded on 15 January 2004 (CE 204):

Due to the amended legal acts, further implementation of the Agreement concluded [...]
on December 1999 is no longer possible and there are no legal preconditions for revising
this Agreement.

The conditions specified in the written proposal submitted by VPK on 18 December 2003
regarding the establishment of new legal relations with Vilnius City Municipality are not
acceptable to Vilnius City Municipality. We remind you that a proposal from Vilnius City
Municipality of 9 December 2003 regarding the conclusion of the Agreement with VPK
and the fulfillment of the obligations set in the Agreement of 30 December 1999 has
already been submitted to you.

[...] [Wle also would like to remind you that the deadline set by Vilnius City Municipality
Council for negotiations expires on 27 January 2004. Upon the expiry of this term and in
case of failure to conclude a new Agreement, VPK will be deprived of its right to collect
local charges for parking in Vilnius City.

5 The termination of the Agreement by the Municipality

. By decision N° |-221 dated 21 January 2004, the Municipality of Vilnius decided to
terminate the Agreement between the Municipality of the City of Vilnius and the
Consortium Formed by UAB Baltijos Parkingas and UAB Egapris dated 30 December
1999 with effect from 1 March 2004 (CE 206).

43/96

189. By another decision N° |-222 date 21 January 2004, the Municipality of Vilnius decided

to annul the local regulations that allowed VPK to collect the parking fee (CE 207).

190. The notice of termination of the Agreement was sent to the parties on 27 January 2004.

191.

In substance, the reasons for termination were the followings (CE 210):

The Agreement dated 30 December 1999 is terminated [...] by reason of material breach
on the part of the Consortium formed by UAB Baltijos Parkingas and UAB Egapris of the
following provisions of the Agreement:

1) Omission to draw up, coordinate and submit for approval by the Vilnius City
Council of the Parking Plan introducing the public parking system in the Vilnius City
within the time-limits defined in the Agreement [...];

2) Failure to ensure to the Municipality [...] the availability of, and direct and real time
access to, all information specified [...];

 

3) Failure to make investments defined in the Agreement, including failure to build
and equip multi-storey car parks within the time-limits defined in the Agreement
Lok

 

4) Failure to pay to the Municipality of the City of Vilnius the amounts due under the
Agreement [...];

Moreover, the Municipality requested the immediate and gratuitous transfer of 100
percent of the shares of VPK.

192. Following the Agreement's repudiation, the Municipality sued BP and VPK in recovery

of the Clause 5.1.15 amount (see J 179). On 29 June 2005, the Vilnius Regional
Court decided that (CE 234):

The consortium was deprived of the right to collect from the owners of cars a fee for
unblocking road wheels and thus lost one of contractual sources of income. Plaintiff [the
Municipality] indicates that the increase of the fixed fee under Clause 5.1.15 of the
Agreement is unconditional and not subject to any circumstances. However, such
argument of Plaintiff is not recognized as grounded. Defendants [BP] substantially show
that if such argument of Plaintiff is accepted, it should be recognized that LTL 1,000,000
must be paid even if the consortium’s right to collect local charge is annulled by a certain
legal regulation. The court decides that such interpretation of the Agreement would
obviously conflict with the principles of good faith and common sense in general and
would mean breach of such principles while interpreting this particular Agreement.

193. The decision of the Vilnius Regional Court was confirmed on appeal on 20 October

5.

5.1

2005 (CE 235).

POSITION OF THE PARTIES

THE CLAIMANT

5.1.1 On jurisdiction

194. As set out in fuller summary in Section 7.2.1 below, Claimant argues that the Tribunal

has jurisdiction.

44/96

5.1.2 On the merits

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

Parkerings contends that it is an investor subject to the protection of the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and the Government of the
Kingdom of Norway on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments dated 16
June 1992 (hereinafter the “Treaty” or “BIT”).

The Claimant alleges that through the acts and omissions of its municipal and national
authorities, Lithuania has violated Parkerings’ investors rights under the Treaty and
must be held responsible.

Parkerings has thus based its claim on a three-pronged argumentation:

(i) Lithuania has violated its duty to grant the investment equitable and reasonable
treatment and protection under Article III of the Treaty;

(ii) Lithuania has violated its duty under Article IV of the Treaty to afford the
investment protection no less favourable than that afforded to investors from a
third State;

(iii) Lithuania has violated its duty not to indirectly expropriate without compensation
under Article VI of the Treaty.

5.1.2.1 Breach of the duty to grant equitable and reasonable treatment

According to the Claimant, the Treaty obligation to grant “equitable and reasonable
treatment” holds Lithuania to a stricter standard of conduct than the “fair and equitable
treatment” standard more commonly found in other bilateral investment treaties. A
showing of breach of Article III of the Treaty therefore requires less than a showing of
breach of the standard of “fair and equitable treatment” (see {| 272 below).

The Claimant submits that Lithuania’s conduct falls within the concept of unfair,
inequitable or unreasonable treatment prohibited by the Treaty. Through the acts and
omissions of its central and municipal authorities, Lithuania did:

(i) | Engage in grossly unfair and discriminatory conduct (see Section 8.1.2.1 below);
(ii) | Engage in arbitrary and opaque conduct (see Section 8.1.3.1 below);
(iii) | Frustrate Parkerings’ legitimate expectations (see Section 8.1.4.1 below);

In light of the above, the Claimant submits that Lithuania breached Article III of the
Treaty beyond any possible doubt.

5.1.2.2 Breach of the obligation of protection

The Claimant alleges that the Respondent failed to protect its investment in violation of
Article Ill of the BIT (see full summary in Section 8.2.1 below).

45/96

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

5.1.2.3 Breach of the duty to afford no less favourable treatment

The Claimant argues that the core of Lithuania’s obligation under Article IV of the
Treaty is to provide Norwegian nationals engaging in commercial activities the same
standard of treatment as nationals from any other State (see Section 8.3.1 below).

According to the Claimant, Lithuania has treated Pinus Proprius, an investment of
Litprop Holding BV, a Dutch investor, more favourably than BP. The Claimant submits
that Lithuania breached Article IV of the Treaty.

5.1.2.4 Breach of the duty not to expropriate without compensation

The Claimant alleges that Lithuania destroyed BP’s value by undermining and then
terminating the Agreement. The Claimant argues that Lithuania indirectly expropriated
Parkerings’ ownership interest in BP. By failing to provide compensation, Lithuania
breached its obligations under Article VI of the Treaty (see full summary in Section
8.4.1 below).

5.1.2.5 Damages

The Claimant argues that Parkerings is entitled to full compensation for all injuries
arising out of Lithuania's violations of the Treaty. The purpose is to eliminate all
consequences of the violations and reinstate the situation which would have likely
existed in the absence of any violation.

Pursuant to Article VI (2) of the Treaty, the appropriate measure of compensation in
cases of lawful expropriation is the market value of the investment immediately before
the date of expropriation. While this provision requires the expropriation to be lawful,
Parkerings contends that it also provides the relevant standard for determining the
appropriate measure of compensation for Lithuania's violations of the Treaty, which
entailed the destruction of BP.

The definition of fair market value has been established under international law as
being the price a buyer would be willing to pay the seller under circumstances in which
each party had reliable information in order to maximize its financial gain and neither
party was under duress or threat. Fair market value should be measured at the time
the investor suffered the injury that gave rise to a right to compensation, that is 21
January 2004 in the present case, i.e. the date on which the Municipality decided to
terminate the Agreement in breach of the Treaty.

According to the Claimant, the fair market value compensation must take into account
the future profitability of BP, given that continued demand for its services was
guaranteed in the relevant market. In other words, the fair market value of BP in
January 2004 would reflect the strong demand for its service and the predictability of
revenue streams guaranteed by the Agreement. Accordingly, BP’s value should be
determined by reference to the company’s reasonably anticipated profitability using the
discounted cash flow (DCF) method.

46/96

209.

210.

211.

212.

Tribunals have long accepted that forecasting future cash flows will necessarily
implicate some degree of uncertainty but that the mere existence of such uncertainty
does not warrant preclusion of compensation for future profitability. The use of a DCF
valuation in the present case is particularly appropriate for two reasons:

(i) first, the parking business stands out for its stability, low risk, and predictability,
which reduces the margin of uncertainty to a minimum. In BP’s case,
predictability was enhanced by the nature of its contractual rights under the
Agreement, in that it was to be the sole partner of the Municipality in the design,
development and operation of the integrated parking system;

(ii) | second, several buyers (e.g. NCC and Skanska) made arms-length offers for a
stake in BP in 2000 and 2001 using the DCF method to establish their offer price,
which is consistent with general valuation practice in the parking industry.

The Claimant further argues that any diminution of value attributable to or associated
with Lithuania’s conduct should be discarded. The purpose of this rule is to preclude
the host State from using its executive, legislative or judicial branches to progressively
reduce the value of an asset and then expropriate it. This is of particular importance in
the present case where Lithuania gradually eroded the value of BP, first by litigating
and legislating away the legal framework of the investment, then by refusing to either
perform or renegotiate the Agreement in good faith, and finally by unlawfully
terminating the Agreement. Thus, full compensation of the fair market value of BP on
21 January 2004 requires the Tribunal to disregard any diminution in the value of BP
that might have been caused by each of these various steps leading up to the
destruction of BP.

In light of the above, the Claimant contends that its expert, Mr. Lapuerta, has correctly
valued BP as of January 2004 in the amount of EUR 38.5 million taking into account
the following assumptions:

(i) | BP would build the five MSCPs assigned to Egapris under the ABP, given that
BP and Egapris were jointly and severally liable and that the latter had no
prospect of carrying out the work itself pursuant to its insolvency;

(ii) Egapris was not able to enforce its call option under the ABP for 50% of the
shares in VPK.

After deduction of the projected investment in the construction of 10 MSCPs that BP
was unable to make due to Lithuania’s breach, as well as of the returns BP could have
made using these funds elsewhere, Mr. Lapuerta reaches the amount of EUR 20.4
million (NOK 176.4 million at the exchange rate on 21 January 2004) as compensation
owed to Parkerings for the destruction of BP, in addition to the interest computed
thereupon.

47/96

5.1.3 Prayers for relief

213.

5.2

Based upon all the above submissions, Parkerings requests the following relief:?

Parkerings respectfully requests that the Tribunal:

(a) Declare that Lithuania has breached its obligations under the Treaty and
international law;

(b) | Award Parkerings damages in the amount of NOK 176.4 million as the fair market
value of BP as of January 21, 2004;

(c) | Award Parkerings interest at the NIBOR rate, compounded monthly for the period
January 22, 2004 through the day of payment;

(d) Direct Lithuania to pay all of Parkerings’ costs and expenses, including legal fees,
incurred in connection with this arbitration; and

(e) Order any such further relief as may be available and appropriate in the
circumstances.

THE RESPONDENT

5.2.1 On jurisdiction

214.

As set out in fuller summary in Section 7.2.2 below, the Respondent argues that most
of Parkerings’ claims are groundless and fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction under the Treaty. Therefore, Lithuania submits that the claims should be
dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

5.2.2 On the merits

215.

216.

217.

According to the Respondent, all of the Claimant's claims must fail on the following
grounds.

§.2.2.1 Lithuania has not frustrated Claimant’s legitimate expectations

The Respondent argues that the Claimant's attempt to lower the standard for a
violation of the duty to treat the investment fairly and equitably is meritless (see J 282
et seq.).

The Respondent argues that a claim based upon the frustration of legitimate
expectations due to governmental action requires the investor to show that such action
frustrated expectations that the host State created or reinforced through its own
conduct. In the present case, Lithuania cannot be held responsible for Parkerings’
failure to conduct the required due diligence prior to signing the Agreement nor its
failure to obtain other guarantees that investors typically demand in agreements with
States or their agencies (see Section 8.1.4.1 below).

See Claimant's Memorial, | 272

48/96

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

Concerning Claimant's allegation of arbitrary conduct, the Respondent alleges that it
clearly explained during the negotiations that the Agreement was untested and was
subject to legal challenges. Moreover, the Respondent argues that the claims set out
by the Claimant are only allegations of contract breach (see Section 8.1.3.1 below)

5.2.2.2 There has been no expropriation by Lithuania

The Respondent submits that Parkerings cannot bring a claim for expropriation on the
basis of the alleged wrongful termination of the Agreement.

The Respondent also argues that Parkerings has not been substantially deprived of its
ownership of BP.

Furthermore, a claim of contract breach cannot form the basis of an expropriation claim
where, as here, the Claimant, pursuant to the Agreement, could seek redress before
the Lithuanian courts (see Section 8.4.1 below).

§.2.2.3 Lithuania has not violated its duty to grant Claimant protection

According to the Respondent, protection within the meaning of the Treaty is not
intended to generate an all-encompassing duty for the host State. The Respondent
alleges that the guarantee of protection is characterized by the standard of due
diligence.

As to Parkerings’ specific argument that the Government should have backed up BP in
its contractual dispute with the Municipality and challenge the termination of the
Agreement, the Respondent argues that it is inconsistent with the purpose of the Treaty
(see Section 8.2.1 below).

Therefore, the Respondent argues that it has not violated its duty to protect the
Claimant.

5.2.2.4 The Claimant was not subject to any discrimination

The Respondent alleges that in order to make out a claim for discrimination, that is to
say a violation of the Treaty’s Equitable and Reasonable Treatment provision and/or a
violation of the Treaty’s Most Favored Nation’s provision (MFN), the Claimant must
show that two separate investors were similarly situated and that the two investors
were treated differently.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant did not show that a third investor was
similarly situated and treated differently (see full summary in Section 8.1.2.1 and 8.3.1
below).

5.2.2.5 The Claimant is not entitled to compensation

The Respondent has shown that Parkerings’ claims are meritless. Accordingly, no
compensation can be claimed.

49/96

228.

229.

230.

231.

Further, Parkerings’ claim for damages is entirely speculative and flawed on several
grounds, namely:

(i) |The Claimant has not established any causation between the alleged Treaty
violations and the damages it seeks. The Claimant is only entitled to damages
with respect to harm that was the direct result of the State’s unlawful acts. The
specific provision on expropriation of which the Claimant avails itself cannot
provide any guidance on the measure of compensation for other Treaty
violations;

(ii) | The Claimant’s claim for damages based upon an estimation of BP’s future
profits had it built all 10 MSCPs and operated them until 2012 is equivalent to a
claim for lost profits. No tribunal has awarded lost profits where as here, the
claiming party has not made the investment which would give rise to the cash
flow claimed. On the contrary, tribunals have adopted a cautious approach to the
use of the DCF method.

It is undisputed that the Claimant's integrated parking system never became
operational. Parkerings never made any investment in any of the MSCPs nor did it
begin construction of a single one. As a result, the parking project never existed as
required in the DCF model.

According to the Respondent, damages should be limited to proven net out-of-pocket
expenditures. However, the Claimant has made no submissions in this respect and
has not met the onus of proving its damages accordingly. The Respondent submits
that Parkerings actually never made any significant investment expenditures. At any
rate, any investment costs that the Claimant incurred must be reduced by the benefit
that it received from BP.

Furthermore, the claim for lost profits per se is erroneous for the following reasons:

. the valuation date is not 21 January 2004, as it overlooks the preceding four
years during which many intervening factors could have altered BP’s value. The
only reliable date for calculation is the year 2000, which is closer to the alleged
detrimental State actions and thus minimizes any speculation about the ensuing
period;

. BP and VPK are not devoid of any value. On the contrary, BP’s assets are worth
at least LTL 188'590 and BP further owns all shares of VPK, a fully operational
company;

. Mr. Lapuerta’s analysis is overstated, as it should not have (1) included a
corruption-risk related discount, (2) excluded expenditures or revenues for 2000
and 2001, (3) disregarded Egapris’ call option upon VPK’s shares, or (4) included
an eleventh MSCP (i.e. the Turgaus MSCP) in the calculation. As a matter of
fact, the net present value (NPV) of Claimant’s investment was near zero,
whether valued in 2000 or 2004: it was negative in 2000 and below EUR 0.95
million as of 2004;

50/96

the two arms-length offers the Claimant refers to do not provide any indication as
to the fair market value of its investment. In any event, such offers made in 2000
and 2001 are only useful insofar as a DCF analysis is carried out for 2000 as
opposed to 2004. Further, the Respondent points out that NCC and Skanska’s
offers were contingent upon certain events and conditions that were contrary to
the assumptions made in Mr. Lapuerta’s report (e.g. the right to develop
additional MSCPs, the premium for project legality or the premium for the
extinction of Egapris’ call option).

5.2.3 Prayers for relief

232. Based upon all the above submissions, Lithuania requests the following relief:?

233.

For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent respectfully requests that the Tribunal:
(a) DISMISS all of the Claimants’ claims in their entirety; and

(b) ORDER the Claimant to pay all of the costs and expenses of this arbitration,
including the fees and expenses of the Republic’s expert, Mr. Tim Giles, the fees
and expenses of any experts to be appointed by the Tribunal, the fees and
expenses of the Republic's legal representation in respect of this arbitration, and
any other costs of this arbitration.

ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED BY THE TRIBUNAL

In light of the facts and submissions of the parties set forth above, the questions arising
for the Tribunal’s determination are the following:

(i)

(ii)

(iii

(iv)

(v)

Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over Parkerings’ claims? (see Section 7
below);

What is the applicable standard for the duty of “equitable and reasonable
treatment” within the meaning of Article III of the Treaty? (see Section 8.1 below)
Has Lithuania violated Article III of the Treaty? In particular, did Lithuania engage
in unfair and discriminatory or arbitrary and opaque conduct with respect to
Parkerings’ investment? (see Section 8.1.2 and 8.1.3 below) Did Lithuania
frustrate Parkerings’ legitimate expectations? (see Section 8.1.4 et seq. below);

Has Lithuania violated its obligation of protection pursuant to Article Ill of the
Treaty? (see Section 8.2 below);

Has Lithuania violated its duty to afford no less favourable treatment under Article
IV of the Treaty? (see Section 8.3 below);

What is the applicable standard in terms of expropriation within the meaning of
Article VI of the Treaty? (see Section 8.4 below) Has Lithuania breached its duty
not to expropriate Parkerings’ investment? (see Section 8.4.2 below);

Idem, 1 342.

51/96

71

234.

235.

236.

7.2

7.2.1

237.

238.

(vi) Is Parkerings entitled to any compensation and if so, what is the measure
thereof? This question may be moot depending on the decision in the foregoing
issues;

(vii) What are the costs of this case and how should they be apportioned between the
Parties?

JURISDICTION

ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the claims of the Claimant will be examined in light of
the requirement of the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

Article IX of the BIT contains the following dispute settlement clause:

1. Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one contracting party and the
other contracting party in connection with an investment on the territory of that
other contracting party shall be subject to negotiations between the parties in
dispute.

2. If any dispute between an investor of one contracting party and the other
contracting party continues to exist after a period of three months, the investor shall
be entitled to submit the case:

A. Either to the International Centre of Settlement of Investment Disputes
having regard to the applicable provisions of the Convention on the
Settlement of investment disputes between States and Nationals of other
States opened for signature at Washington D.C. on 18 March 1965,

B. or in case both contracting parties have not become parties to this
Convention, to an arbitrator of International ad hoc Arbitral Tribunal
established under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
the International Trade Law. The parties to the dispute may agree in writing
to modify these rules. The Arbitral Award shall be final and binding on both
parties to the dispute.

THE PARTIES’ POSITION
Parkerings
Parkerings contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction.

The Claimant argues that it is a company incorporated under the laws of Norway and is
an investor subject to the protection of the Treaty. The Claimant specifies that it owns

52/96

239.

240.

241.

242.

100 percent of the shares of the Lithuanian company BP, which constitutes an
investment in Lithuania.

The Claimant contends that through the acts and omissions of its municipal and
national authorities, Lithuania has violated the Treaty.*

The Claimant argues that Article IX of the Treaty, which governs the dispute between a
contracting party and an investor, "grants the Tribunal jurisdiction over any and all
disputes ‘in connection with’ an investment, including disputes arising out of breaches
of contract or violation of domestic law”®.

The Claimant underlines that it pleaded breaches of Lithuania’s obligations under the
Treaty and not breaches of the Agreement. The Claimant alleges that the Respondent
cannot deny its Treaty claims arguing that some facts do not rise to the level of a
Treaty breach.

Finally, the Claimant is opposed to the Respondent's opinion that the Lithuanian Courts
were able to remedy to the present problems.®

7.2.2 The Republic of Lithuania

243.

The Respondent argues that Parkerings’ claims fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction under the Treaty. Specifically, more than half of the claims concern alleged
breaches of the Agreement; these commercial disputes cannot be the basis of a claim
under the BIT. Furthermore, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction under the BIT on several grounds:

(i) Parkerings is not a party to the Agreement and has no rights thereunder;’

(ii) Lithuania as host State is not responsible on an international level for acts of its
agencies. The conduct of State organs including municipalities is not attributable
to the State, unless such conduct had legal effects on an international level’”®

(iii) BP and the Municipality agreed to submit all disputes arising under the
Agreement to the Lithuanian Courts. In order to observe this contractual choice,
ICSID tribunals do not have jurisdiction over purely contractual claims which do
not amount to claims for Treaty violations. Claims arising out of contracts
between investors or their subsidiaries and the Government or its agencies do
not constitute claims cognizable under bilateral investment treaties. Further, the
Treaty does not, in the present case, contain an umbrella clause. However, the
Respondent admits that where the foreign investor is denied a remedy for a
contractual breach in a domestic forum, such breach of contract may constitute

See Claimant's Memorial, {| 190.

See Claimant's Post-hearing Brief, p. 4.

See Claimant's Post-hearing Brief, p. 6-7.

See Respondent's Counter-memorial, {| 140.

See Respondent's Counter-memorial, {J 148-151.

53/96

244.

7.3

245.

246.

247.

an international wrong. This is not the case here, given that the Agreement
provided for dispute resolution before the Lithuanian Courts. The Respondent
alleges that the Lithuanian Courts were perfectly able to protect Claimant's
rights.°

Therefore, Lithuania submits that the following claims should be dismissed for lack of
jurisdiction:"°

(a) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Equitable and Reasonable Treatment Clause
by virtue of the City's supposed failure to properly recognize an event of force
majeure under Section 7.2.1 of the Agreement;

(6) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Equitable and Reasonable Treatment Clause
by virtue of the City's supposed failure to disclose material information during
contract negotiations, as required under the good faith duty set out under
Lithuanian law;

(c) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Equitable and Reasonable Treatment Clause
by virtue of the City's supposed failure to issue consistent directions to BP
regarding its performance under the Agreement, as required under Section 1.5.1 of
the Agreement;

(d) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Equitable and Reasonable Treatment Clause
by virtue of the City's supposed failure to defend the Agreement against measures
adopted by the Government as required under Section 1.5.1 of the Agreement;

(e) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Equitable and Reasonable Treatment Clause
by virtue of the City's supposed failure to renegotiate in good faith as required
under the good faith duty set out under Lithuanian law;

(f) Claimant's allegation of breach of the Full Security and Protection Clause by virtue
of the City's supposed failure to renegotiate in good faith as required under the
good faith duty set out under Lithuanian law; and

(g) | Claimant's allegation of breach of the Expropriation Clause by virtue of the City's
supposed termination of the Agreement on grounds that were not permitted under
Article 7 of the Agreement.

DISCUSSION ON THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

There is no doubt that the conditions rationae personae of the ICSID Convention are
met, as the parties are, on the one hand, a national of the Kingdom of Norway,
Parkerings, and on the other hand, the Republic of Lithuania.

The parties gave their consent to arbitration: the Republic of Lithuania, on 16 June
1992, by signing the BIT and Parkerings, on 11 March 2005, with its Request for
Arbitration.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that pursuant to Article IX of the BIT, any dispute in

connection with an investment shall be subject to negotiations between the parties. If
the dispute continues to exist after a period of three months, the investor is entitled to

See Respondent's Counter-memorial, | 152-158 and Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, p.1.
See Respondent's Counter-Memorial, pp. 56-57.

54/96

248.

7.3.1

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

submit the case to an arbitral tribunal. In the absence of parties’ determination on that
matter, the Tribunal considers that the conditions of Article IX of the BIT are met.

Thus the first question for the Tribunal to resolve here is whether the Claimant is an
investor in Lithuania.

The Claimant’s Investment

In accordance with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, an arbitral tribunal established
pursuant to the ICSID Convention has jurisdiction ratione materiae over “any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment.” No definition of “investment’ is to be
found in the ICSID Convention.

Article | of the BIT gives the definition of the term “/nvestment’:

The term “Investment” means every kind of asset invested in the territory of one
contracting party in accordance with its laws and regulations by an investor of the other
contracting party and includes in particular, though not exclusively:

(..)

(Il) Shares, debentures or any other forms of participation in companies.

UAB Baltijos Parkingas (BP) is a Lithuanian company, registered with the Lithuanian
Company Register. Parkerings, which is a company registered in Norway, is “the
owner of sixty five thousand (65,000) ordinary shares of the Company [BP] for the
value of one hundred (100) Litas each, comprising 100% of the authorized capital of
the Company.”"'

In the Vivendi case, the ICSID ad hoc Committee held that “[...] the foreign
shareholding is by definition an investment and its holder an investor [...]".

 

In this case the Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s contention that “Parkerings’ direct 100
percent ownership interest in BP constitutes an investment in Lithuania within the
meaning of the Treaty.”””

The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore of the opinion that Parkerings is an investor in
Lithuania for the purpose of the ICSID Convention and within the meaning of the BIT,
since it owns the entirety of the shares of a Lithuanian company which is BP.

The issue is thus to determine whether the dispute arises in connection with such
investment in Lithuania.

See Exhibit C 195.

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, reprinted in 19 ICSID Rev.—FiLJ 89 (2004), | 50.

See Claimant's Memorial p. 60; Exhibit CE 195.

55/96

7.3.2 Did the claims fall under the Treaty?

256.

257.

258.

259.

The Claimant asserts that its claims arise from action that the Republic of Lithuania
undertook in violation of the BIT. The Claimant does not base its request on breaches
of the Agreement."*

The Respondent, however, rightly distinguishes between disputes arising out of
contract breaches and disputes under the BIT. In particular, the Respondent states
that investor-state arbitration is only available to adjudicate rights contained in the
Treaty.’®

However, the issue lies elsewhere. It is uncontroversial that this dispute is between
Parkerings and the Republic of Lithuania whilst the Agreement was entered into by two
different entities, namely BP and the City of Vilnius, both of which are not parties to this
arbitration. It is undisputed that States are responsible on an international level for acts
of municipalities (and other State constituent subdivisions) ‘* that are contrary to
international law and that States are not liable internationally for acts of their agencies
that are wrongful under domestic law. For instance, the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi
held:

[...] in the case of a claim based on a treaty, international law rules of attribution apply,
with the result that the state of Argentina is internationally responsible for the acts of its
provincial authorities. By contrast, the state of Argentina is not liable for the performance
of contracts entered into by Tucuman, which possesses separate legal personality under
its own law and is responsible for the performance of its own contracts.’

In the present case, the Claimant alleges that the Republic of Lithuania itself, and not
the City of Vilnius, violated its obligations under the BIT by virtue of the attribution to
the State of the acts of the Municipality. As a result, the proper parties to the dispute
are Parkerings and the Republic of Lithuania. That the Claimant was not a party to the
Agreement is irrelevant as the Arbitral Tribunal is not ruling on breaches of the
Agreement but on violation of the BIT. Put differently, the Claimant is alleging treaty
violation and there is nothing convincing in the record that may lead to the suspicion of
the Claimant having disguised contract claims with Treaty claims for the benefit of
jurisdiction. Whether the Respondent did in fact violate the Treaty (or the international
law) is a matter of substance and merit rather than of jurisdiction.

See Claimant's Memorial, p. 60 ef seq.

See Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 48-49.

See Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, September 16, 2003, p. 39,

reprinted in 44 ILM 404 (2005). See, e.g., Luigi Condorelli, L imputation a I’état d'un fait internationalement

illicite: solutions classiques nouvelles tendances,1984 («sont attribués a I'Etat, d'aprés le droit

international, fous les comportements de tous ceux qui, dans Fonte interne de I'Etat concerné, exercent
de la puissance Fre The attribution to a State of an

intematonaly ‘wrong fact: classical solution, new tendencies (‘According to international law, will be

attributed to a State, all the conduct of those who, in the domestic body of law of the State, will actually

exercize the prerogatives of sovereignty’).

See Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.

ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, supra note 12 7] 96.

56/96

260.

261.

262.

263.

264.

265.

Furthermore, the Claimant is rightfully alleging that its claim is based on its investment
that went sour. This is an adequate response to Respondent's argument that the
Lithuanian Courts do have jurisdiction over claims based on the Agreement. As a
matter of rights, the Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the claims based on the
Agreement.

The phrase “any dispute [...] in connection with the investment’ as provided by Article
IX (1) of the BIT is a general provision that provides the basis for an international
Arbitral Tribunal’s competence over any disputes related to an investment.

This is recognized in the decisions of past international tribunals."® For instance, in the
case SGS v. Republic of the Philippines, the Arbitral Tribunal held that:

[t]he term “dispute with respect to investments” is not limited by reference to the legal
classification of the claim that is made. A dispute about an alleged exprgpriation contrary
to Article VI of the BIT would be a “dispute with respect to investments’."®.

In Vivendi, the ad hoc Committee stated that:

it is not open to an ICSID tribunal having jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim
based upon a substantive provision of that BIT, to dismiss the claim on the ground that it
could or should have been dealt with by a national court. In such a case, the inquiry
which the ICSID tribunal is required to undertake is one governed by the ICSID
convention, by the BIT and by applicable international law.”

Led

It is not the Committee's function to form even a provisional view as to whether or not the
Tucuméan conduct involved a breach of the BIT, and it is important to state clearly that the
Committee has not done so. But it is nonetheless the case that the conduct alleged by
Claimants, if established could have breached the BIT. The claim was not simply
reducible to so many civil or administrative law claims concerning so many individual acts
alleged to violate the Concession Contract of the Administrative law of Argentina. It was
open to Claimants to claim, and they did claim, that these acts taken together, or some of
them, amounted to a breach of [...] the BIT.?'

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Claimant alleged exclusively violations of the BIT
and particularly failure to afford its investment equitable and reasonable treatment and
protection, to accord its investment treatment no less favorable than the treatment
accorded to investment by investors from a third State, and last, a breach of its
obligation not to expropriate without compensation.”

Prima facie, the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania through its subdivision constituent
(the Municipality of the City of Vilnius) had an impact on the investment of the

The Tribunal is of the opinion that it must pay due consideration to earlier decisions of international
tribunals.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004, reprinted in 8 ICSID Rep. 518
(2005), ¥] 131.

See Compafia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, supra note 12, | 102.

Idem, 1.112.
See Claimant's Memorial p. 60-77.

57/96

266.

267.

8.1

268.

269.

Claimant. The claims are therefore in connection with the investment and fall under the
Treaty. The Arbitral Tribunal emphasizes that the substantive justification of the
Claimant's claims is not a matter of jurisdiction but of merit. This question will be
developed below.

As the claims fall under the Treaty, whether the Claimant should have submitted the
dispute before the Lithuanian courts is not relevant at the stage of examination of the
jurisdiction. The Arbitral Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction under Article IX of
the Treaty.

MERITS

The Claimant's substantive claim under the BIT is, as stated in paragraph 197 above
under three main headings:

i Lithuania has violated its duty to grant the Claimant’s investment in Lithuania
“equitable and reasonable treatment and protection” as required under Article
Ill of the Treaty;

ii Lithuania has violated its duty to accord the Claimant's investment in Lithuania
“treatment no less favourable than that accorded to investments made by
investors of any third state as required under Article IV of the Treaty;

iii Lithuania has violated its duty not to indirectly expropriate the Claimant's
investment without compensation as required under Article VI of the Treaty.

CLAIMS FOR VIOLATION OF THE DUTY OF EQUITABLE AND REASONABLE TREATMENT
(ARTICLE III OF THE TREATY)

Article Ill of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Lithuania and
the Government of the Kingdom of Norway on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of
Investments provides that:
Each contracting party shall promote and encourage in its territory investments of
investors of the other contracting party and accept such investments in accordance with
its laws and regulations and accord them equitable and reasonable treatment and

protection. Such investments shall be subject to the laws and regulations of the
contracting party in the territory of which the investments are made.

The Claimant alleges that Lithuania breached its obligation to accord Parkerings’s
investment equitable and reasonable treatment. The Claimant alleges:

e “the Treaty accord equitable and reasonable treatment holds Lithuania to a
stricter standard of conduct than the fair and equitable treatment standard
more commonly found in other investment treaties””* (see below 8.1.1);

See Claimant's Memorial, p.61

58/96

270.

¢ “Lithuania subjected BP to grossly unfair and discriminatory treatment ‘** (see
below 8.1.2);

¢  “Lithuania’s conduct was grossly arbitrary and opaque” (see below 8.1.3);

926

and finally, that: "Lithuania frustrated Parkerings’s legitimate expectations’
(see below 8.1.4).

The Arbitral Tribunal will examine each of these arguments separately.

8.1.1 The distinction between the notions of fair and reasonable

271.

272.

273.

274.

Unlike other BITs, the Treaty refers to “equitable and reasonable” in its Article Ill. This
led to a discussion on the content of such standard and to whether it has the same
meaning as “fair and equitable” standard.

Regarding the applicable standard, the Claimant alleges that “the Treaty obligation to
accord equitable and reasonable treatment holds Lithuania to a stricter standard of
conduct than the fair and equitable treatment standard more commonly found in other
investment treaties”.

To support its opinion, Claimant relies on the French text of Olivier Corten that
discusses the notion of “équitable” and “raisonnable”: what is “reasonable” could not be
inequitable but an equitable solution might be unreasonable if it is insufficiently
rational’”.

The Respondent alleges that “Claimant’s analysis does not comport with the dictates of
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the Vienna Convention) which governs
the Treaty’s interpretation.” The Respondent underlines that “a Treaty should be
interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose.” Moreover,
the Respondent contends that the terms “reasonable” and “fair” are “virtually
synonymous.”° The Respondent finally argues that “the set of bilateral investment
treaties signed by Norway, where the formulae “fair and equitable “ and “equitable and
reasonable” seem to have been used indistinctively within the standard clause
generally devoted to the promotion and protection of investments” confirms that the two
phrases are synonymous.””°

Idem, p. 64.
Idem, p. 66.
Idem, p. 68.

See Oliver Corten, L'utilisation du "raisonnable” par le juge international, Editions de |'Université de
Bruxelles, 1997.

See Respondent's Counter-Memorial, {| 167.
Idem, J 169.
Idem, 1.171.

59/96

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the interpretation of the Treaty is effectively
governed by the Vienna Convention which provides that a Treaty should be interpreted,
pursuant to Article 31, “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose.”

The interpretation given by the Claimant, based on Corten’s interpretation of the terms
equitable and reasonable, is not convincing. If the two phrases are given their plain
meaning, it is far from apparent that they should differ in any way. Thus, under this
approach, treatment is fair when it is “free from bias, fraud or injustice; equitable,
legitimate [...[; and, by the same token, equitable treatment is that which “is
characterized by equity or fairness, [...] fair , just , reasonable.”*

The standard of “fair and equitable treatment” has been interpreted broadly by
Tribunals and, as a result, a difference of interpretation between the terms “fair” and
“reasonable” is insignificant. The Claimant did not show any evidence which could
demonstrate that, when signing the BIT, the Republic of Lithuania and the Kingdom of
Norway intended to give a different protection to their investors than the protection
granted by the “fair and equitable” standard.

Thus the Arbitral Tribunal intends to identically interpret the notion “equitable and
reasonable” and the standard “fair and equitable.”

The Claimant raises three issues that shall now be examined:
- Did Lithuania engage in unfair and discriminatory treatment?
- Did Lithuania engage in arbitrary conduct?

- Did Lithuania frustrate Parkerings’ legitimate expectations?

8.1.2 Was the Treatment “unfair and discriminatory’?

280.

281.

8.1.2.1 The position of the parties

The Claimant alleges that Lithuania subjected BP to grossly unfair and discriminatory
treatment. The principle of fair and equitable treatment is violated where a host State’s
conduct is grossly unfair or discriminatory. Discrimination is a significant element in
determining whether the standard of fair and equitable treatment has been breached.

In the present case, the Claimant contends Lithuania subjected BP to the following
unfair and discriminatory measures:

1. the Municipality instructed BP to relinquish the Gedimino MSCP on the
grounds of cultural heritage concerns and public opposition in April 2001, ata

time BP had already carried out important planning and design works.
Further, in breach of the Agreement whereby BP was to be the sole partner of

Stephen Vascianne, in Bishop, Crawford and Reisman, Foreign Investment Dispute, ]7, p. 1015.

60/96

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

the Municipality, the Mayor handed over the project to another contractor,
Pinus, six months later; °2

2. the Mayor chose to sign the JAA relevant to the Pergales site with the
Municipality's newly selected contractor to the detriment of BP and advocated
the validity of his decision in the local court litigation with the Government
Representative; **

3. after VPK lost the clamping and part of the parking income, the Municipality
claimed that BP should have foreseen the clamping prohibition, without,
however, considering it as a force majeure event which should have released
BP of its obligations under Clause 5.1.15 of the Agreement, as confirmed by
the Lithuanian Courts. Further, when clamping resumed, the Municipality was
receiving 40% of the fees whilst VPK was receiving nothing; “

4. the City of Vilnius refused to renegotiate the Agreement unless BP provided
the payment of the amount of Clause 5.1.15 of the Agreement.”®

The Respondent is of the opinion that “[iJn international law, the principle of non-
discrimination encompasses both “most favored nation treatment” (between aliens) and
“national treatment” (between aliens and nationals).”*°

The Respondent argues that any discrimination claim must establish that similar
situations were treated differently by the host State. In other words, the Claimant has
not established a different treatment of Parkerings and Pinus under like
circumstances..””

The facts relating to the MSCP built by Pinus and those relating to Parkerings are
distinct. In particular, the MSCP projected by BP in Gedimino was significantly bigger
than the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius and encroached into the City Old Town. The
location of the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius outside of the Old Town entailed a
different treatment of the two projects by the Cultural Heritage Commission.

The MSCP built by Pinus Proprius had to be sold to the City after construction was
completed. The MSCP built by BP did not have to be sold to the City.

As to the Cooperation Agreement entered into between the Municipality and Pinus
Proprius, it did not involve any transfer of land belonging to the City as opposed to any

See Claimant's Memorial, ] 201.
Idem, 202.
Idem, 1 203.
Idem, 205.
See Respondent's Counter-Memorial, {| 238.
Idem, 1 241.

61/96

287.

288.

289.

290.

291.

potential cooperation agreement with BP which would have required the lease or the
sale of land through a public auction pursuant to the applicable law on land.**

8.1.2.2 Discussion

Various tribunals have held that a discriminatory conduct is a violation of the standard
of the fair and equitable treatment. In CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The
Argentine Republic, the Tribunal considered that:

any measure that might involve arbitrariness or discrimination is in itself contrary to fair
and equitable treatment. The standard is next related to impairment: the management,

use, or disposal of the
investment must be impaired by the measures adopted.*°

 

In order to determine if there is discrimination in violation of the standard of the fair and
equitable treatment, one has to make a comparison with another investor in a similar
position (like circumstances). For instance, in the case Antoine Goetz et consorts c.
République du Burundi (Award of 10 February 1999), the Tribunal stated that:

[uJne discrimination suppose un traitement différencié appliqué a des personnes se
trouvant dans des situations semblables.”

The Tribunal considers that the conduct of the City of Vilnius could possibly amount to
a contractual breach of the Agreement. It should be noted, however, at the outset of
the present dispute, that a possible breach of an agreement does not necessarily
amount to a violation of a BIT.

As to arguments (3) and (4) (see above {| 280), even if a contractual breach had
occurred, the evidence in the record does not show any comparison made by the
Claimant with another investor which could bring under the BIT the actions mentioned
in those arguments. The Tribunal is not in a position to determine if there had been a
discriminatory measure against the Claimant as no comparison is possible with another
investor. As a result, the arguments (3) and (4) are not evidence of discrimination
within the meaning of Article III of the Treaty.

Concerning the arguments (1) and (2) (see above {[ 280) the violations alleged by the
Claimant and the position of the Respondent are substantially the same as those
discussed under Most-favoured-Nation Treatment (MFN) (see below section 8.3) In
certain situations where an MFN clause has been incorporated within a BIT,
establishing a discrimination under the standard of fair and equitable/reasonable
treatment is not necessary (see below {[f] 366 et seq). Consequently, the Arbitral
Tribunal refers to the discussion of the Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment under section
8.3 below.

Idem, | 247-250.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/08, Award, May 12,
2005; reprinted in 44 ILM 1205 (2005), {] 290; See also Stephen Vascianne, The Fair and Equitable
Treatment Standard in International Investment Law and Practice, Brit. Y.B. Int'l L. 99, 133 (1999).

See Antoine Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi, ICSID Case No. ARB 95/3, Award, February 10,
1999, reprinted in 15 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 457 (2000),] 121.

62/96

292.

However, the Tribunal shall review the question whether the conduct of the
Respondent was arbitrary.

8.1.3 Was the conduct or the Respondent “arbitrary”?

293.

294.

295.

296.

8.1.3.1 Position of the parties

The Claimant alleges that the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania was grossly arbitrary
and opaque in violation of Article Ill of the Treaty. According to the Claimant, it is well
established that fair and equitable treatment inherently precludes arbitrary and
capricious actions against investors. Inconsistency of State action and complete lack
of transparency are a clear showing of arbitrariness. A foreign investor may expect the
host State to act consistently, i.e. without arbitrarily revoking any pre-existing decisions
or permits issued by the State, which were relied upon by the investor to assume its
commitments, as well as to plan and launch its commercial and business activities.

The obligation to afford investments fair and equitable treatment also places the State
under an affirmative obligation not to approve investments on terms that are
inconsistent with Government policies or laws. A State cannot escape its international
responsibility by requiring the investor to be more knowledgeable about its laws and
regulations than its own authorities.

The Claimant submits that Lithuania subjected BP to arbitrariness and lack of
transparency: “' Lithuania failed to disclose to Parkerings information pertaining to the
viability of the hybrid parking fee concept prior to the execution of the Agreement.
Although the Municipality of Vilnius was in possession of a legal opinion (“the Sorainen
Memo”) questioning the conformity of the parking fee with the Lithuanian law, it did not
inform BP before the signing of the Agreement. The Municipality of the City of Vilnius
failed to warn BP about the imminent changes to the applicable law.”

Examples of arbitrariness on the part of the Republic of Lithuania include:

° The Municipality of the City of Vilnius arbitrarily refused to acknowledge the
existence of a force majeure event and insisted on full payment of Article
5.1.15 of the Agreement.**

° The Municipality and various public entities adopted a “blatantly
contradictory and ambiguous position in connection with the Parking
Plan.“

° The Municipality changed its opinion several times concerning the first
MSCP site.

See Claimant's Memorial, p. 66 ef seq. and Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 60 et seq.
See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 61

Idem, p. 62.

See Claimant's Memorial, ] 210.

63/96

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

° The Municipality arbitrarily refused to issue the necessary design conditions
and to enter into the necessary land-use agreement.

° The Municipality accused BP of failure to perform its construction
obligation, refused to negotiate in good faith and then terminated unlawfully
the Agreement.*°

The Respondent states that the Sorainen Memo was disclosed to BP before the
signing of the Agreement. The Respondent alleges that it made it clear that the
measures set out in the Agreement were untested and could be subject to legal
challenges.** For the Respondent, the State is not responsible for the consequence of
“unwise business decisions or for the lack of diligence of the investor.”*”

The Respondent underlines that BP was granted a force majeure claim by the
Lithuanian Courts.

The Respondent is of the opinion that the conduct alleged by the Claimant does not
give rise to a claim under the Treaty and that the conduct alleged is “nothing more than
allegation of contract breach.”*®

8.1.3.2 Discussion
a) The Sorainen Memo

It is not disputed by the parties that arbitrariness is incompatible with the standard of
fair and equitable treatment.

Based on the facts as discussed by the Parties, the Tribunal finds that a memo (“the
Sorainen Memo”) concerning the Law on Fees and Charges was effectively in
possession of the City of Vilnius prior to the execution of the Agreement on 30
December 1999.% Indeed, the memorandum is dated 28 December 1999 and the
Respondent does not allege that it received the document after 30 December 1999.
Mr. Robertas Staskevicius confirmed that “[...] it was before City Council. It was on 28"
of December. When we’ve got this -- [Sorainen memo] it was immediate discussion of
that because it was quite serious issue.”

The record does not convincingly show that any information contained in the Sorainen
Memo and, a fortiori, a copy of the memorandum, was given to the Claimant by the City
of Vilnius before the conclusion of the Agreement. Accordingly, the Tribunal assumes

See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p.81.
See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 68.

Idem, p. 72.

See Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, p. 17.

Idem, p. 11 et seq.

See CE 11;

See Robertas Staskevicius, Tr. 1307:17-21.

64/96

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

that Mr. Tamulis did not receive a copy of this memorandum and that the Claimant was
unaware of its existence (up to April 2000).

In substance, the Sorainen Memo contains a brief (5 pages) legal opinion regarding the
draft of the Agreement between the Municipality of Vilnius and the Consortium. In its
most relevant part, the Memorandum reads as follows:

we would take the views that the legal acts of the Republic of Lithuania and contractual
deeds and obligations, indicated in the Agreements of the Municipality and the
Consortium, do not create sufficient and clear legal ground for the Consortium to have
right to collect a portion of the fee for vehicle parking time for on-street parking places
designated by the Municipality Council, which is derived from the entire fee, established
in Article 5.1.3, less local charges approved by the Municipality Council.

The information contained in the Sorainen Memo is characterized as the opinion of a
law firm regarding the Agreement. The document does not provide any information
which was not, at the time of its drafting, accessible to the public or at least to any other
qualified law firm. The Claimant could have also obtained an opinion from another law
firm.

It is not disputed that the Claimant did, in fact, receive a legal opinion dated 29
December 1999 from another law firm, namely the Lawin Firm. The opinion concluded
that:

“Following your request, we would like to comment the legal situation relating to collection
of payment for car parking in places designated by the Municipality (streets and squares).
The Agreement between Vilnius City Municipality and the Consortium establishes that
such payment will consist of local charges and the portion of payment falling on the
Consortium.

The portion of payment falling on the Consortium is to be legally qualified as payment for
services, which will be rendered by the Consortium to car drivers. The scope of this
service is the development of parking system in the city and its administering. Car parking
in pay place is to be qualified as a behaviour of a driver expressing his/her will to use the
service rendered by the Consortium and to pay for it according the rate set by the
Consortium.”

Mr. Tamulis testified convincingly that such opinion was only a “small piece of an
exhibit from the legal opinion which we had from Lawin regarding the whole thing
around the hybrid parking fee.” ** In the view of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Claimant,
when it requested such opinion, was without doubt aware that the business
environment, and especially various provisions of the Agreement, were not certain. In
fact, it would have been foolish for a foreign investor in Lithuania to believe, at that
time, that it would be proceeding on stable legal ground, as considerable changes in
the Lithuanian political regime and economy were undergoing.

Another matter is whether, in itself, failing to disclose a legal opinion (such as the

Sorainen Memo) to the counter-party before entering into an Agreement has

See Claimant's Memorial, {| 45.
See Exhibit R 40.
See Jonas Tamulis Stmt, Tr. 514-515.

65/96

308.

309.

310.

311.

312.

55

56

international consequences for a State party. Such a conduct is often considered as a
breach of good faith or a “culpa in contrahendo”. However, such a conduct, while
objectionable, does not, in itself, amount to a breach of international law. It would take
unusual circumstances to decide otherwise; in particular, the Claimant has been unable
to show that the Sorainen Firm (or the Municipality of Vilnius) was in possession of
information unavailable to the public, especially to other legal experts.

In MTD v. Republic of Chile, the Tribunal noted that:

[the State is not] responsible for the consequences of unwise business decisions or for
the lack of diligence of the investor. Its responsibility is limited to the consequences of its
own action to the extent they breached the obligation to treat the Claimants fairly and
equitably.”*

The Tribunal concludes that the City of Vilnius did not act arbitrarily when it failed to
disclose the Sorainen Memo and its content to BP. Whatever the effect of the non-
production of the Sorainen Memo on the Claimant's contractual rights is not a matter
for this Tribunal.

b) The Force majeure

As already stated, breaching the Agreement will not automatically result in a violation of
the Respondent's international law obligations under the BIT. In the present instance,
the Tribunal concludes that the force majeure (see {| 295) claim and any breaches of
the Agreement do not reach the status of a BIT breach.

In fact this issue has been reviewed by the Lithuanian Courts. On 29 June 2005, a
Lithuanian court ruled on the problem of force majeure:

“[hJaving evaluated the arguments presented by the parties, the court decides
that the grounds do exist to recognize that non-performance of the
D ’s CO igations as a conseq of lost income from
unblocking road wheels was conditioned by Force majeure events, i.e.
Government Resolution no 1056, therefore there are ground to release
Defendants [BP] from fulfilment of obligations related to such part of

income”.*®

 

 

The Lithuanian Court of Appeals confirmed this decision and held that:

“[...] upon adoption of Government Resolution No 1056, Defendants [BP]
could not perform the obligation under Clause 5.1.1 of the Agreement. [...]
Thus Defendants did not fulfil part of the monetary obligation under the
Agreement for objective reasons and the court of first instance had sufficient
grounds to release them from the part of the obligation the performance of

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Award, May
25, 2004, available at http://www.asil.org/ilib/ MTDvChile.pdf, {] 167.
See Exhibit C 234.

66/96

313.

314.

315.

316.

which was directly related with the collection of the unclamping fee and its
transfer to Plaintiff.”°’

Two layers of Lithuanian Courts confirmed that the City of Vilnius acted wrongfully
when it refused to recognise the existence of a force majeure situation. On that point,
the Courts ruled in favour of BP. The fact that the Lithuanian Courts denied some of
BP’s claims is not relevant in the present proceedings; indeed subject to denial of
justice, which is not at issue here, an erroneous judgment (if there should be one) shall
not in itself run against international law, including the Treaty. On that matter, the
Respondent did not act arbitrarily in contradiction with the provisions of the Treaty.

c) The termination of the Agreement

The Claimant alleges that the City of Vilnius (see {| 295) did not act in good faith during
the contractual relationship, refused to renegotiate the Agreement in good faith, and
finally, decided unilaterally to terminate the Agreement.

Fair and equitable treatment is denied when the investor is treated in such an unjust or
arbitrary manner that the treatment is unacceptable from an international law point of
view. °° Indeed, many tribunals have stated that not every breach of an agreement or
of domestic law amounts to a violation of a treaty. For instance, in the Saluka v.
Poland case, the Tribunal stated:

The Treaty cannot be interpreted so as to penalise each and every breach by the
Government of the rules or regulations to which it is subject and for which the investor
may normally seek redress before the courts of the host State. [...] something more than
simple illegality or lack of authority under the domestic law of a State is necessary to
render an act or measure inconsistent with the customary international law requirements.
(91 442-443).°°

Under certain limited circumstances, a substantial breach of a contract could constitute
a violation of a treaty. So far, case law has offered very few illustrations of such a
situation. In most cases, a preliminary determination by a competent court as to
whether the contract was breached under municipal law is necessary”. This
preliminary determination is even more necessary if the parties to the contract have
agreed on a specific forum for all disputes arising out of the contract. For the
avoidance of doubt, the requirement is not dependent upon the parties to the contract
being the same as the parties to the arbitration.

See Exhibit C 235.

See S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, NAFTA UNCITRAL Arbitration, First Partial Award,
November 13, 2000, available online at http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/, p. 65.

See UNCITRAL Arbitration, Partial Award, March 17, 2006; See also Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, July 14, 2006, available online at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/pdf/ARBO112_Azurix-Award-en.pdf

See for instance, Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No ARB/O0/9, Award, September 16,
2003, supra note16, p. 91 and Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, April 30, 2004, reprinted in 43 ILM 967 (2004), {J 114-115.

67/96

317.

318.

319.

320.

However, if the contracting-party is denied access to domestic courts, and thus denied
opportunity to obtain redress of the injury and to complain about those contractual
breaches, then an arbitral tribunal is in position, on the basis of the BIT, to decide
whether this lack of remedies had consequences on the investment and thus whether a
violation of international law occurred. In other words, as a general rule, a tribunal
whose jurisdiction is based solely on a BIT will decide over the “treatment” that the
alleged breach of contract has received in the domestic context, rather than over the
existence of a breach as such.

In the case at hand, there is no doubt that BP had access to the Lithuanian Courts. In
fact, neither BP nor the Claimant has challenged the alleged violation of the
Agreement, with the exception of force majeure case, before the Lithuanian Courts as
provided by the Agreement*(see above {| 310). T he experts confirmed that the
Lithuanian Courts are independent” and that levels of corruption had declined
substantially.©.

Mr. Bjorn Havnes declared that “/tlo be honest with you, | don’t think it would stand a
chance in the Lithuanian courts.” However, again, this testimony seems to show the
emotion of the witness rather than reflect the actual reliability of the Lithuanian
judiciary. The failure to complain of the violation of the Agreement before the
Lithuanian Court leads to two consequences. First, the Claimant failed to show that the
Municipality of Vilnius terminated the Agreement wrongfully and therefore breached the
Agreement. Second, even supposing that the Agreement has been wrongfully
terminated, the Claimant failed to show that the right of BP to complain of the breach of
the Agreement has been denied by the Republic of Lithuania and thus that its own
investment was actually not accorded, by the Respondent, an equitable and
reasonable treatment in such circumstances.

Given the above circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot reach the conclusion that
Article Ill of the BIT was breached.

8.1.4 Legitimate expectations

8.1.4.1 Position of the parties

The Claimant contends that the Republic of Lithuania has violated its obligation to
accord a fair and equitable treatment by frustrating its legitimate expectations.
The standard of fair and equitable treatment requires the host State to treat
international investments in a way that does not affect the basic expectations that
were taken into account by the foreign investor in making its investment.
Parkerings was therefore entitled to expect that Lithuania maintain a stable and

See CE 13, Article 7.3. of the Agreement.
See Gintautas Barktkus, Tr. 908.

See Expert Report of Carlos Lapuerta, p. 4.
See Bjorn Havnes, Tr. 1072.

68/96

321.

predictable legal and business framework, as well as act transparently in a
consistent manner free from any ambiguity.

The Claimant principally alleges that:

a)

b)

“Lithuania
protect the legal integrity of the Agreement
The Municipality of Vilnius did not inform the Claimant of the existence of the

“Sorainen memo" that questioned the consistency of a hybrid parking fee with the
Lithuanian Laws®.

that it would respect and

Moreover, modification of law had the effect to invalidate several decisive
provisions of the Agreement. The Municipality did not object to the new law “even
though it had contractually undertaken to use its best efforts to ensure that the
Government's laws and decrees furthered the successful development of the
parking system”;

Claimant emphasizes that it “had a legitimate expectation that Lithuania would not
employ its municipal and national instrumentalities to first induce investment by
Parkerings on the false promise of a contractual armor for its investment, and then
deliberately to perforate that legal armor to expose Parkerings to the arbitrariness
of the Municipal authorities®;

“Lithuania
protect the economic ‘integrity of the Agreement’:

Notwithstanding the modification of law, the Municipality continued to require the
full performance of the Agreement by BP and notably the payment of the Clause
5.1.15;

The Municipality failed to deliver to BP the design conditions of MSCP and
changed several times the site of the construction, but pretended that BP had
breached the Agreement;

that it would respect and

The Municipality refused to renegotiate in good faith the Agreement;

The Municipality repudiated unlawfully the Agreement.°”

322. The Claimant alleges that it was “entitled to expect that Lithuania maintain a stable and
predictable legal and business framework,”® and that “Lithuania was required to act in
a consistent manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relation with
Parkerings.”* The Claimant asserts that by frustrating its legitimate expectations, the
Respondent violated Article III of the BIT.

323.

The Respondent alleges that not every regulatory action that creates a business
problem amounts to a treaty violation.” For the Respondent, the Claimant should
prove that “the Government's conduct frustrated the investor's investment-backed

See Claimant's Memorial, {| 215.

Idem, 1 216.

Idem, 1.217
Idem, p. 68.

Idem, 1 216.

See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 65.

69/96

324.

325.

326.

327.

328.

expectations that the State created or reinforced through its own acts.”"" The
Respondent alleges that neither the City nor the Government of Lithuania induced
Parkerings to invest by making representations as to the stability of the legal regime
applicable to the Agreement.” On the contrary, Parkerings was aware that the
arrangements set out in the Agreement were untested and could be subject to legal
challenge.”? Parkerings should have known the potential modification of law and the
legal challenges of certain provisions of the Agreement.”

The Respondent noted that the Agreement does not contain a provision stabilizing the
legal regime applicable to the Agreement, but contains a provision exempting the City
from responsibility for actions taken by the Lithuanian Government.”®

Finally, the Respondent argues that the claims consist only of possible breaches of the
Agreement and therefore that the Claimant should have acted before the Lithuanian
Courts.”°

8.1.4.2 Discussion

The Tribunal notes that in this case a difference has to be made between: a) the
obligations of the Republic of Lithuania not to modify the law, and b) the obligations of
the Municipality of Vilnius to inform and protect the Claimant against the potential
economic impact of such modification on the Agreement.

a) Did Lithuania frustrate Parkerings’ legitimate expectation that it would
respect and protect the legal integrity of the Agreement?

In 2000, subsequent to the signing of the Agreement of 29 December 1999, the
Lithuanian Parliament amended several laws which affected the Agreement. The Law
on Local Fees and Charges was modified on 13 June 2000,” the Decree on Clamping
was amended on 5 September 2000” and finally, the Law on Self-Government was
modified on 12 October 2000.”*

The Agreement provided that the Consortium was granted the right to collect the
parking fees and the clamping fees. The parties agree that the modification of the Law
on Local Fees and Charges and the amendment of the Decree on Clamping prevented
the Consortium from receiving an important part of its income.

Ibidem.
See Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, p. 18.
See Respondent Counter-Memorial , p. 68.
Ibidem.

Idem, 991 189-200.

Idem, 991 201-206.

See Exhibit CE 136.

See Exhibit CE 41.

See Exhibit CE 47.

70/96

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

334.

The questions to be resolved are whether Parkerings had any legitimate expectation in
the stability of the legal system and whether its expectation has been frustrated.

In order to determine whether an investor was deprived of its legitimate expectations,
an arbitral tribunal should examine “[...] the basic expectation that were taken into
account by the foreign investor to make investment [...]"°°. In other words, the Fair and
Equitable Treatment standard is violated when the investor is deprived of its legitimate
expectation that the conditions existing at the time of the Agreement would remain
unchanged.

The expectation is legitimate if the investor received an explicit promise or guaranty
from the host-State, or if implicitly, the host-State made assurances or representation
that the investor took into account in making the investment. Finally, in the situation
where the host-State made no assurance or representation, the circumstances
surrounding the conclusion of the agreement are decisive to determine if the
expectation of the investor was legitimate.*’ In order to determine the legitimate
expectation of an investor, it is also necessary to analyse the conduct of the State at
the time of the investment.

It is each State’s undeniable right and privilege to exercise its sovereign legislative
power. A State has the right to enact, modify or cancel a law at its own discretion.
Save for the existence of an agreement, in the form of a stabilisation clause or
otherwise, there is nothing objectionable about the amendment brought to the
regulatory framework existing at the time an investor made its investment. As a matter
of fact, any businessman or investor knows that laws will evolve over time. What is
prohibited however is for a State to act unfairly, unreasonably or inequitably in the
exercise of its legislative power.

In principle, an investor has a right to a certain stability and predictability of the legal
environment of the investment The investor will have a right of protection of its
legitimate expectations provided it exercised due diligence and that its legitimate
expectations were reasonable in light of the circumstances. Consequently, an investor
must anticipate that the circumstances could change, and thus structure its investment
in order to adapt it to the potential changes of legal environment.

In the present case, various modifications of laws occurred in Lithuania. It is not
contested that these amendments had an impact on the investment expectations of the
Claimant, as it was deprived of its right to receive part of its expected income.*?

See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2,
Award, May 29, 2003, reprinted in 19 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 158 (2004), ] 154.

See Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, April 30,
2004, supra note 60. See also, Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, May 29, 2003, supra note 80, ff] 152 ef seq.; CMS Gas Transmission
Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award, May 12, 2005, supra note 39.

See The Republic of Lithuania Counter-Memorial, | 81: « the Lithuanian Government had taken actions
that, with respect to the On-Street parking Concession, prevented (or would eventually prevent) the
concessionaire, VPK, from collecting the fee as provided under the Agreement and from penalizing drivers
who failed to pay the fees provided under the Agreement ».

71/96

335.

336.

337.

338.

b)

339.

340.

Neither is it contested that the Republic of Lithuania gave no specific assurance or
guarantee to Parkerings that no modification of law, with possible incidence on the
investment, would occur. The legitimate expectations of the Claimant that the legal
regime would remain unchanged are not based on or reinforced by a particular
behaviour of the Respondent. In other words, the Republic of Lithuania did not give
any explicit or implicit promise that the legal framework of the Agreement would remain
unchanged.

In 1998, at the time of the Agreement, the political environment in Lithuania was
characteristic of a country in transition from its past being part of the Soviet Union to
candidate for the European Union membership. Thus, legislative changes, far from
being unpredictable, were in fact to be regarded as likely. As any businessman would,
the Claimant was aware of the risk that changes of laws would probably occur after the
conclusion of the Agreement. The circumstances surrounding the decision to invest in
Lithuania were certainly not an indication of stability of the legal environment.
Therefore, in such a situation, no expectation that the laws would remain unchanged
was legitimate.

By deciding to invest notwithstanding this possible instability, the Claimant took the
business risk to be faced with changes of laws possibly or even likely to be detrimental
to its investment. The Claimant could (and with hindsight should) have sought to
protect its legitimate expectations by introducing into the investment agreement a
stabilisation clause or some other provision protecting it against unexpected and
unwelcome changes.

The record does not show that the State acted unfairly, unreasonably or inequitably in
the exercise of its legislative power. The Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the
modifications of laws were made specifically to prejudice its investment.

Consequently, in the case at hand, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Claimant had
any legitimate expectation that the Government of the Republic of Lithuania would not
pass legislation and regulatory measures which could harm its investment. In that
respect, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent did not violate Article Ill of the BIT.

Did Lithuania, by the action and omission of the Municipality, frustrate
Parkerings’ legitimate expectation that it would respect and protect the
economic and legal integrity of the Agreement?

 

The Claimant contends that the City of Vilnius was aware of the existence of the
proposals to amend the Law on Fees and Charges, the Decree on Clamping and the
Law of Self-Government, but never informed the Claimant during the negotiation and
prior to the signing of the Agreement

Concerning the amendment of the Decree on Clamping and the modification of the Law
on Self-Government, the record confirms that Mayor Zuokas was a member of the

72/96

341.

342.

343.

344.

Board of the Association of Local Authorities in Lithuania.®? On 22 October 1999, the
Board of the Association of Local Authorities in Lithuania had to “submit comments and
proposals to the Seimas, Government and any other state authorities on the
improvement of the legal base of local self-government and other laws related to the
operation of the local authorities.”**

Consequently, the City of Vilnius was in possession of information, prior to the
conclusion of the Agreement, concerning possible modifications of the Law on Self-
Government and omitted to advise the Claimant. It is evident that the Respondent, as
mentioned above (see {| 335), had the contractual obligation to act and negotiate in
good faith prior to the conclusion of the Agreement. By failing to do so, it may have
breached the Agreement but that is not a matter for this Tribunal.

However, first, the record does not show that the Respondent deliberately neglected to
advise the Claimant of the possible amendment of the law. Second, as described
above (see {] 335), the political environment was changing at the time of the negotiation
of the Agreement and the Claimant should have known that the legal framework was
unpredictable and could evolve. Third, the fact that the City of Vilnius knew the
intention of the legislator to modify certain laws, does not mean that the City of Vilnius
knew the substance of the modification. Indeed, the record does not show that the City
of Vilnius was in possession of any specific information which indicated that the
Agreement would be affected by a modification of the law. Fourth, the Claimant failed
to demonstrate that any investor or at least a qualified law firm was unable to get the
information about the amendment process. Therefore, the Tribunal sees no reason
why, in the circumstances, the alleged contractual obligation of the Municipality to
inform BP of the future modification of the law is constitutive of a legitimate expectation
for the Claimant.

The Claimant alleges a violation by the Municipality of Vilnius of its obligation to use its
best efforts to ensure that the Government's laws and decrees furthered the successful
development of the parking system. The Claimant alleges that following the different
modifications of laws, it was deprived of various sources of income in violation of the
Agreement. Moreover, the Claimant accuses the Representative of the Municipality
and notably the Mayor of failing to act in good faith to protect and respect the
Agreement and especially the economic interest of the Claimant in the performance of
the Agreement.

It is evident that not every hope amounts to an expectation under international law.
The expectation a party to an agreement may have of the regular fulfilment of the
obligation by the other party is not necessarily an expectation protected by international
law. In other words, contracts involve intrinsic expectations from each party that do not
amount to expectations as understood in international law. Indeed, the party whose
contractual expectations are frustrated should, under specific conditions, seek redress
before a national tribunal. As stated by the Tribunal in Saluka, “[tjhe Treaty cannot be

 

See Exhibit CE 256, p. 3084.
Idem, p. 3077.

73/96

345.

346.

8.2

347.

8.2.

348.

349.

interpreted so as to penalise each and every breach by the Government of the Rules or
regulations to which it is subject and for which the investor may normally seek redress
before the courts of the host State.”**

In the case at hand, the Claimant alleges that the Municipality of Vilnius frustrated its
legitimate expectation in violation of Article Ill of the Treaty (see {J 321 et seq.).
However, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant's expectations are, in substance, of
acontractual nature. The acts and omissions of the Municipality of Vilnius, in particular
any failure to advise or warn the claimant of likely or possible changes to Lithuanian
law, may be breaches of the Agreement but that does not mean they are inconsistent
with the Treaty.

In conclusion, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the Claimant has not been deprived of any
legitimate expectation in violation of Article III of the Treaty.

CLAIMS FOR VIOLATION OF THE OBLIGATION OF PROTECTION (ARTICLE Ill OF THE TREATY)

Pursuant to Article Ill of the BIT the contracting States also agreed to accord protection
to the investor.

Position of the parties

The Claimant alleges that the Respondent failed to protect its investment.®®

(a) When parking meters owned by VPK were destroyed, the Police did not identify
any suspects, did not find any evidence.

(6) Claimant sought the protection of the Prime Minister against the action and
omission of the Municipality but no such protection was given. Claimant alleged
that “the Government Representative failed to disclose that the Municipality was
treating BP unfairly and engaging in discrimination by refusing to enter into a
Cooperation Agreement”.

(c) Claimant reproaches the Government Representative for its passiveness when the
Municipality refused to sign a Cooperation Agreement with BP and then repudiated
the Agreement.

The Claimant argues that the Republic of Lithuania, in order to comply with its
obligation, “must show that it took all measure of precaution to protect Parkerings’
investment and met the standard of due diligence. [...] Lithuania’s duty of protection
extends to guarding against the action of both non-state actors and organs of
government. [...] a state has a duty to protect aliens and their investment against
unlawful acts committed by some of its citizens. If such acts are committed with the
active assistance of state-organs a breach of International Law occurs. [...] If the wrong
has been committed by a private individual or a state organ, Lithuania is under an
obligation to punish the wrongdoer.”*”

See Saluka Investment BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNICITRAL Case, ] 442.
See Claimant's Memorial, p. 72 et seq. and Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 117.
See Claimant's Memorial, {| 222.

74/96

350.

351.

352.

353.

The Claimant alleges that, by its failure to protect the investment, the Respondent has
breached its obligation under Article III of the Treaty.

The Respondent contends that it granted the Claimant the full protection and security
as provided by the Treaty. Under International Law, the guarantee of protection is
characterized by the standard of due diligence. This standard requires “the state to
take reasonable steps to prevent hostile acts toward investors that it knew or should
have known were about to take place.”®°

In the Respondent's view, “the guarantee of protection and security is not absolute and
does not impose strict liability on the State that grants it.”° “The simple fact that
Claimant is not pleased with the result of a state action does not constitute a basis for a
claim under the protection clause, provided the state exercised due diligence.””

The Respondent alleges that Lithuania reacted reasonably within the parameter of due
diligence of a democratic state to the various complaints lodged by Claimant and BP.**
For the Respondent, the non-intervention of the Government's Representative
concerning the termination of the Agreement and the refusal of the City of Vilnius to
sign a Cooperation Agreement do not amount to a violation of the Treaty. Indeed, the
termination was not wrongful and, therefore, did not merit any legal challenge;
Lithuania had no obligation to challenge an alleged breach of the Agreement if the
contracting party had the right and the opportunity to challenge the breach itself.

8.2.2 Discussion

354.

355.

Article III of the Treaty only mentions the term protection. In a number of decisions,
Tribunals make reference to the standard of “full protection and security.” It is
generally accepted that the variation of language between the formulation “protection”
and “full protection and security’ does not make a significant difference in the level of
protection a host State is to provide. Moreover, in casu, the Parties make
systematically reference to the standard of “full protection and security.”. Therefore, the
Arbitral Tribunal intends to apply the standard of “full protection and security.”

A violation of the standard of full protection and security could arise in case of failure of
the State to prevent the damage, to restore the previous situation or to punish the
author of the injury.“ The injury could be committed either by the host State, or by its
agencies or by an individual.

See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 86.
Idem, 1 228.
See Respondent Counter-Memorial, | 230.
Idem, 1 232.
Idem, 1 235.

See for instance Rubins N., Kinsella S., International Investment, Political Risk and Dispute Resolution,
New-York, 2005.

See Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Award, December 8,
2000, reprinted in 41 ILM 896 (2002), Tf] 84-95.

75/96

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

361.

8.3

362.

The Claimant alleges damages to its materials due to vandalism. However, the
Claimant does not show that such vandalism would have been prevented if the
authorities had acted differently. The Claimant only contends that the police did not
find the authors of this offence. Both parties agree that Lithuanian authorities started
an investigation to find the authors of the vandalism.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the record does not show in which way the process of
investigation amounted to a violation of the Treaty. In Tecmed, the Tribunal underlined
that “the guarantee of full protection and security is not absolute and does not impose
strict liability upon the State that grants it.”®*

The Claimant criticized the alleged failure of the Prime Minister to protect its investment
against the action and omission of the municipality. However, the record does not
show that the Prime Minister did not act in any manner that should be incompatible with
his function and duties. The Claimant failed also to demonstrate a negligence of the
Prime Minister that could amount to a breach of the BIT.

The Claimant also criticized the Respondent for its passivity when the City of Vilnius
breached the Agreement. However, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the investment
Treaty created no duty of due diligence on the part of the Respondent to intervene in
the dispute between the Claimant and the City of Vilnius over the nature of their legal
relationships.

The Respondent's duty under the Treaty was, first, to keep its judicial system available
for the Claimant to bring its contractual claims and, second, that the claims would be
properly examined in accordance with domestic and international law by an impartial
and fair court. There is no evidence - not even an allegation — that the Respondent has
violated this obligation.

The Claimant had the opportunity to raise the violation of the Agreement and to ask for
reparation before the Lithuanian Courts. The Claimant failed to show that it was
prevented to do so. As a result, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Respondent did
not violate its obligation of protection and security under the Article Ill of the BIT.

CLAIMS FOR VIOLATION OF THE OBLIGATION TO ACCORD TREATMENT NO LESS FAVORABLE
THAN THE TREATMENT ACCORDED TO INVESTMENTS BY INVESTORS OF A THIRD STATE
(ARTICLE IV OF THE TREATY)

Article IV of the Treaty provides that
1. [iJnvestments made by investors of one contracting party in the territory of the other
contracting party, as also the returns therefrom, shall be accorded treatment no

less favourable than that accorded to investments made by investors of any third
state.

See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2,
Award, May 29, 2003, supra note 80, {| 177.

76/96

8.3.1 Position of the parties

363. In substance, the Claimant alleges that the Respondent violated Article IV of the Treaty
as follows:

(a)

the City of Vilnius rejected the project of MSCP proposed by BP on the Gedimino
site for cultural heritage concerns, because the project was situated in the Old
Town of the City of Vilnius. However, the Municipality authorized another company
(Pinus Proprius) to build a MSCP on the same site;

the City of Vilnius refused to sign a Joint Activity Agreement (JAA) with BP for the
Gedimino MSCP and for the Pergales MSCP for legal reason, but signed a JAA
with the Company Pinus Proprius;

Once the JAA signed with the Company Pinus Proprius has been declared
unlawful, the City of Vilnius transformed it into a Cooperation Agreement. However,
the City of Vilnius refused to conclude a similar Cooperation Agreement with BP as
a substitute of the JAA.

364. In the Claimant's view, the Companies Pinus Proprius and BP were facing similar
circumstances. The refusal of the City of Vilnius to sign a JAA or a Cooperation
Agreement prevented BP from the construction of any MSCP in Vilnius and thus
deprived it of the opportunity to carry out its investment as it was entitled to do under
the Agreement.

365.

The Respondent alleges that the situation of the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius on the
Gedimino site was clearly different from the project proposed by the Claimant on the
Gedimino site and the Pergales site.”

(a)

The MSCP built by Pinus Proprius on the Gedimino site was smaller than the
MSCP project proposed by the Claimant. The proposed MSCP designed by the
Claimant extended to the Odiminiu Square, which is part of the Old Town area as
defined by the Annex No. 5 of the Agreement, but the one constructed by Pinus
Proprius was not. The Respondent underlines that a construction in the Old Town
needed the approval of the Government's Cultural heritage Commission.

The Joint Activity Agreement could not be signed with BP since the modification of
the Article 9(2) of the Law on Self-Government which prohibited the conclusion of
such agreement with private entities. The Respondent alleges that the Cooperation
Agreement signed with Pinus Proprius was not a JAA. However, the conclusion of
a similar Cooperation Agreement with BP was not possible for various reasons:

. A transfer of land was necessary for the MSCP proposed by BP and not for
the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius, as the latter was already the owner of part
of the land where the MSCP was built. Consequently, a Public Auction was.
necessary for the transfer of state-owned land to BP*’;

. Pinus Proprius had the contractual obligation to transfer its own land to the
State when the building would be achieved. Pinus Proprius also agreed to
sell the MSCP to the City. On the contrary, BP could remain the owner of the
MSCP built on the Gedimino site and on Pergales site and would have the
possibility to lease the state-owned land or to buy it?®.

See Claimant's memorial, p. 74 and Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 99.
See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 90 and Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, p. 5

See Respondent Counter-Memorial, ] 248.
See Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, p. 6.

77/96

366.

367.

368.

369.

101

. The MSCP built by Pinus Proprius was under state-owned land that was not
delineated by a land plot and, therefore, could never be owned or leased by
Pinus Proprius. On the contrary, the project of MSCP on Pergales site
proposed by BP was situated on a state-owned land delineated as a land
plot and therefore required a Public Auction.'°°

Article IV of the Treaty is known as the standard of the “Most-favoured-nation
Treatment’. Most-favoured-nation (MFN) clauses are by essence very similar to
“National Treatment’ clauses. They have similar conditions of application and basically
afford indirect advantages to their beneficiaries, namely a treatment no less favourable
than the one granted to third parties. Tribunals’ analyses of the National Treatment
standard will therefore also be useful to discuss the alleged violation of the MFN
standard.

National treatment and Most-Favoured-Nation treatment are treaty clauses that have
the same substantive effect as the international treatment standard: foreigners should
be afforded treatment no less favourable than the one granted to local citizens. The
international law requirement in fact acts as a minimum requirement as it would be
useless for the States party to a treaty to grant benefits less sweeping than customary
law. In other words, all the requirements, be they national treatment, most favoured-
nation-treatment or non-discrimination at large, will in effect bar discrimination against
foreign national investing in the country concerned. All investors benefiting from a
treaty will benefit of a treatment identical or better than nationals or third countries
persons. There is, thus, no reason discretely to address the issue of non-
discrimination: the two aspects, under most-favoured-nation requirements (Article IV of
the Treaty) on the one hand and under international customary law on the other.

Discrimination is to be ascertained by looking at the circumstances of the individual
cases. Discrimination involves either issues of law, such as legislation affording
different treatments in function of citizenship, or issues of fact where a State unduly
treats differently investors who are in similar circumstances. Whether discrimination is
objectionable does not in the opinion of this Tribunal depend on_ subjective
requirements such as the bad faith or the malicious intent of the State: at least, Article
IV of the Treaty does not include such requirements. However, to violate international
law, discrimination must be unreasonable or lacking proportionality, for instance, it
must be inapposite or excessive to achieve an otherwise legitimate objective of the
State. An objective justification may justify differentiated treatments of similar cases. It
would be necessary, in each case, to evaluate the exact circumstances and the
context.

The essential condition of the violation of a MFN clause is the existence of a different
treatment accorded to another foreign investor in a similar situation." Therefore, a

Idem, pp. 5-6.

See Goetz and others v. Burundi, ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3, Award, February 10, 1999, supra note 40, {|
121.

78/96

370.

371.

372.

373.

102

103

105

comparison is necessary with an investor in like circumstances. The notion of like
circumstances has been broadly analyzed by Tribunals‘.

For example, in Pope and Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, the Tribunal held that:

[i]n evaluating the implication of the legal context, the Tribunal believes that, as a first
step, the treatment accorded a foreign owned investment protected [...] should be
compared with that accorded domestic investment in the same business or economic
sector.’ ~ [...]

Once it is established that a foreign and domestic investor are in the same business or
sector, “ in will iptively violate [the principle] unless
they have a reasonable nexus to rational government policies that (1) do not distinguish,
on their face or de facto, between foreign-owned and domestic companies, and (2) do not
otherwise unduly undermine the investment liberalizing of NAFTA. [...] A formulation
focusing on the like circumstances [...] will require addressing any difference in treatment,
demanding that it be justified by showing that it bears a reasonable relationship to rational
policies not motivated by preference of domestic over foreign-owned investment.'**

 

In order to determine whether Parkerings was in like circumstances with Pinus
Proprius, and thus whether the MFN standard has been violated, the Arbitral Tribunal
considers that three conditions should be met:

(i) Pinus Proprius must be a foreign investor;
(ii) | Pinus Proprius and Parkerings must be in the same economic or business sector;

(iii) The two investors must be treated differently. The difference of treatment must
be due to a measure taken by the State. No policy or purpose behind the said
measure must apply to the investment that justifies the different treatments
accorded. A contrario, a less favourable treatment is acceptable if a State’s
legitimate objective justifies such different treatment in relation to the specificity of
the investment.

With regard to the first condition (i): The parties are not disputing the fact that the
company Pinus Proprius is an investor in Lithuania. As Pinus Proprius is owned by the
Dutch company Litprop Holding BV, it is a foreign investor within the meaning of the
BIT.1°

With regard to the second condition (ii): BP and Pinus Proprius are engaged in similar
activities. Both Pinus Proprius and BP are companies acting in the construction and
management of parking garages. Both are competitors for the same MSCP project in

See for instance: Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, UNICITRAL
Case No. UN 3467, Final Award, July 1, 2004, if 173-176; Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican
States, ICSID Case No. AB(AF)/99/1, Award, December 16, 2002, reprinted in 18 ICSID Rev.—FiLJ 488
(2003), ] 170 et seq; S.D. Myers, Inc v. The Government of Canada, NAFTA UNICITRAL Arbitration,
First Partial Award, November 13, 2000, i] 248-250.

See Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The Government of Canada, NAFTA Case, Award on the merits of phase 2,
April 10, 2001, 78.

Idem, | 78-79.

See Exhibit CE 249.

79/96

374.

375.

376.

377.

378.

379.

380.

107
108

Gedimino. Thus, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that Pinus Proprius and BP are in a similar
economic and business sector.

With regard to the last condition The Claimant alleges that Pinus Proprius has
been treated differently than BP, because, first, Pinus Proprius has been authorised to
construct its MSCP in Gedimino, but BP’s project also situated in Gedimino has been
refused. Second, the Municipality of Vilnius refused to conclude a JAA or a
Cooperation agreement with BP but accepted such a conclusion with Pinus Proprius.

 

However, the situation of the two investors will not be in like circumstances if a
justification of the different treatment is established.

The Arbitral Tribunal will discuss separately the two alleged discriminatory measures,
namely whether the Municipality wrongfully granted Pinus and denied BP an
authorisation to build a MSCP under Gedimino Avenue (see below the situation of the
Gedimino MSCP, section 8.3.2.1); and whether the Municipality wrongfully refused to
enter into a Cooperation Agreement with BP, whilst it had concluded such a
Cooperation Agreement with Pinus (see below The Situation of the Pergales MSCP,
section 8.3.2.2).

8.3.1.1 The situation of the Gedimino MSCP

In order to determine if the two investors were in like circumstances, or if the measure
taken by the Municipality was justified, the Arbitral Tribunal analyses below the
situation of the two investors.

In substance, the Respondent argues that BP’s MSCP project in Gedimino was
fundamentally different from the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius. First, the MSCP project
proposed by the Claimant was clearly bigger than the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius.
Second, the proposed MSCP designed by the Claimant extended to the Odiminiu
Square, which is part of the Old Town area as defined by Annex No. 5 of the
Agreement, but the one constructed by Pinus Proprius did not. Finally, BP’s project
reached the Vilnius’ historic Cathedral Square. The Respondent underlines that a
construction in the Old Town needed the approval of the Government's Cultural
Heritage Commission.

The record confirms that Claimant's proposed project on the Gedimino site and the
MSCP built by Pinus Proprius were almost identically located in the sense that they are
both situated in the Old Town. Indeed, the maps produced by the Respondent'® show
that the Pinus Proprius MSCP is partly superimposed with the MSCP project of BP.

However, the Claimant's project is considerably bigger than the MSCP constructed by
Pinus Proprius”. All the maps clearly show that BP’s MSCP extended under
Gedimino Street as far as the Cathedral Square.” The Claimant's project involved the

See Exhibits RE 97, RE 102-103.
See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 93; Exhibits RE 97 and RE 102-103.
See Exhibits RE 97, RE 102-103.

80/96

381.

382.

383.

384.

110
11
112
113
114
115
116
17
118

119

construction of a garage comprising over 500 parking slots by comparison; the MSCP
constructed by Pinus Proprius consists of only 233 parking slots.'°°

However, notwithstanding the difference of size, both Pinus Proprius MSCP and BP’s
MSCP project in Gedimino show obvious similarities. They are located in the Old Town
district of the City of Vilnius as defined by the Administrative borders.'"° The Old Town
as defined by the Administrative borders is protected territory as defined by the
applicable laws and regulations.’ The Old Town of Vilnius as defined by its
administrative borders is considered to be practically the same as the area defined by
UNESCO."?

The territory of the Old Town as defined by UNESCO is a protected area which
requires the approval of various administrative Commissions in order, notably, to make
any construction." Mr Robertas Staskevicius agreed that “tlhe Department of
Cultural Heritage Protection, their concern was over the administrative region in Vilnius
designated by UNESCO as being the protected administrative region.”"'* And that
“they [the Department of Cultural Heritage Protection] would be concerned about an
activity that took place within that zone [the administrative region in Vilnius designated
by UNESCO].”"®

The Tribunal understands that inside the Old Town as defined by UNESCO is located
the Old Town as defined by Annex 5 of the Agreement.'"® Annex 5 of the Agreement
supplies the contractual definition of the Old Town. Mr. Robertas Staskevicius
confirmed that “the reason why that zone was identified in the contract with the
consortium was to make sure that the consortium focused on solving the traffic and
parking problems in that specific zone.”’ Mr. Robertas Staskevicius confirmed also
that “as far as this department [the Department of Cultural Heritage Protection] within
the Ministry of Culture of the Lithuanian Government was concerned, it didn’t matter
how the parties had defined a part of the Old Town in annex 5 of the Contract.”""® It is
not immediately apparent why Annex 5, clearly a contractual document binding the
Municipality of Vilnius and BP, should be relevant, as argued by the Respondent, in
assessing whether Pinus Proprius was in like circumstances with Parkerings.

Nevertheless, ex abundanti cautela, it appears that after analysis of the maps furnished
by the Respondent,'® neither the MSCP built by Pinus Proprius nor the MSCP

See CE 39, CE 40 and CE 95.

See Exhibits RE 97, RE 102, RE 103; See also Exhibit CE 294.
See Exhibit CE 75 and CE 294 ; See Robert Staskevicius, TR 1350:19.
See Robert Staskevicius, TR 1348:13.

See for instance CE 81, CE 60, CE 69, CE 84.

See Robert Staskevicius, TR 1348:13

See Robert Staskevicius, TR 1348:20.

See Exhibits CE 13, RE 97, RE 102, RE 103.

See Robert Staskevicius, TR 1352:12.

Idem, TR 1350:9.

See Exhibits RE 97, RE 102-103

81/96

385.

386.

387.

388.

120
121
122
123

124

proposed by BP are situated in the Old Town District, as defined by Annex 5 of the
Agreement.’”° The most recent maps furnished by the Respondent established that
BP’s project did not extend into the Annex 5 area™’. Consequently, this argument is not
useful for the Tribunal’s determination.

Another feature does however call the Tribunal attention: the MSCP planned by BP
extends significantly in the Old Town as defined by UNESCO and especially near the
historical site of the Cathedral. The record shows that various administrative
Departments and Commissions in Lithuania were opposed to the MSCP as planned by
BP. On 20 October 2000, the State Monument Protection Commission of the Republic
of Lithuania objected to the parking plan for the following reason:

Projects of such type and scale like the project of the construction of planned
underground garages in the Old Town of Vilnius should be developed concurrently taking
into consideration the possible direct and indirect environmental impact of planned works
and also the impact on cultural properties. In the opinion of the State Monumental
Protection Commission, the planned garages [...] would change the character of the Old
Town of global value; destroy large areas of unexplored cultural layer. Also, the intensity
of traffic and air pollution in the Old Town is likely to increase. The Old Town might
become less attractive in terms of tourism and to the residents and visitor, and this would
be a great loss. [The State Monumental Protection Commission] resolves: to object the
project of construction of the underground garages in the Old Town of Vilnius [...] '”.

On 4 December 2000, the Urban Development Department of the Vilnius Municipality
stated its objection to BP’s MSCP project under Gedimino:

The city’s humanitarian community would psychologically not accept this proposal. The
final conclusions concerning the feasibility of construction of this garage would have to be
supplied by detailed exploratory archaeological works, because this square [Odminiu] is a
supposed site of the defensive installations of Vilnius Castle. In terms of the townscape,
the site of the square is very important in the formation of the area of Cathedral Square.
Clearance of the trees and extension and distortion of the Cathedral area is not
architecturally acceptable. This site also remains the subject of the debate on the
feasibility of construction — for the purpose of better formation of the area of Cathedral
Square and creation of a site of particular public significance. Therefore, it would be
purposeful to design the garage only together with a structure that would occupy the
square, provided that construction of such a structure would be permitted. Currently, such
construction is irrelevant’.

On 22 December 2000, the Vilnius Territorial Division underlined:

the solutions presented in the referred documents directly affect a cultural monument old
city of Vilnius [...]'™4.

Finally, on 12 March 2001, the State Monument Protection Commission of the Republic
of Lithuania stated, concerning the MSCP project filed by BP:

See Exhibits RE 103 and RE 104.

See Exhibits RE 97, RE 99, RE 100, RE 102, RE 103;
Exhibit CE 49

Exhibit CE 60.

Exhibit CE 61.

82/96

389.

390.

391.

392.

393.

394.

125

126

In case construction of underground garages in the old city of Vilnius embarked now, it
can be stated that Lithuania failed to perform obligation undertaken upon signing in
November 1999 of the Convention for the Protection of the Architectural heritage of
Europe and the yp Ci on the PI of the A ical heritage.
All legal acts concerning regulation of territorial planning, land relationship, heritage
protection, environment protection and construction would be infringed [...].

 

Upon installation of garages, a big portion of archaeological heritage of the old city of
Vilnius will be destroyed; use of multiple up-to-date materials and technologies will
damage the authenticity of the old city of Vilnius’.

In a letter to the City Development Committee dated 25 July 2001, Mr. Jonas Tamulis,
member of the board of BP, wrote that

[g]iven the suspension of solution in the Old Town territories (in the boundaries within
which it is inscribed in the UNESCO List of World Heritage) for stage two we do not
propose any sites in this territory. The second step should involve construction of parking
areas in such sites according to the parking plan which should necessarily be
independent form solution regarding the Old Town’”°.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers, as described above (see {| 383), that the difference
based on the alleged encroachment in the Old Town as defined by the Annex 5 of the
Agreement is not relevant.

The difference in size of the two MSCPs also is, in and by itself, not decisive either to
establish that the two investors were not in like circumstances but it may be one of the
factors to take into consideration.

On the other hand, the fact that BP’s MSCP project in Gedimino extended significantly
more into the Old Town as defined by the UNESCO, is decisive. Indeed, the record
shows that the opposition raised against the BP projected MSCP were important and
contributed to the Municipality decision to refuse such a controversial project. The
historical and archaeological preservation and environmental protection could be and in
this case were a justification for the refusal of the project. The potential negative
impact of the BP project in the Old Town was increased by its considerable size and its
proximity with the culturally sensitive area of the Cathedral. Consequently, BP’s MSCP
in Gedimino was not similar with the MSCP constructed by Pinus Proprius.

That being said the Claimant failed to show that Pinus Proprius benefited of a more
favourable treatment regarding the administrative requirements, i.e. that is was exempt
of such requirements or obtained a clearance more easily. It is the Claimant’s burden
of proof to show that the foreign investor has been treated more favourably.

The Tribunal notes that the Pinus Proprius project was also situated in the Old Town as
defined by the UNESCO and should have likely met the same administrative
requirements as BP’s. Indeed, the project had to be approved by, among others, the
State Monument Protection Commission of the Republic of Lithuania, the Urban
Development Department of the Vilnius Municipality and the Vilnius Territorial Division.

Exhibit CE 81.
Exhibit CE 89.

83/96

395.

396.

397.

398.

127
128

129

However, there is no evidence that Pinus Proprius has been treated differently from BP
in the discharge of the administrative requirements. For instance there is no evidence
that Pinus Proprius failed to apply or did not receive the permission, from the State
Monument Protection Commission of the Republic of Lithuania or the Urban
Development Department of the Vilnius Municipality or the Vilnius Territorial Division, to
construct its MSCP in the Old Town.

Moreover, the record does not evidence that Pinus Proprius faced the same objections
and that its project had the same potential impact on the Old Town. On the contrary,
the record shows that the Pinus Project did not extend near the Cathedral area which
may have meant it was less controversial.

Nonetheless, despite similarities in objective and venue, the Tribunal has concluded,
on balance, that the differences of size of Pinus Proprius and BP’s projects, as well as
the significant extension of the latter into the Old Town near the Cathedral area, are
important enough to determine that the two investors were not in like circumstances.
Furthermore, the Municipality of Vilnius was faced with numerous and solid oppositions
from various bodies that relied on archaeological and environmental concerns. In the
record, nothing convincing would show that such concerns were not determinant or
were built up to reject BP’s project. Thus the City of Vilnius did have legitimate
grounds to distinguish between the two projects. Indeed, the refusal by the
Municipality of Vilnius to authorize BP’s project in Gedimino was justified by various
concerns, especially in terms of historical and archaeological preservation and
environmental protection. These concerns are peculiar to the extension of BP’s project
in the Old Town and thus could justify different treatment with Pinus Proprius. In the
absence of convincing evidence that Pinus Proprius benefited from a more favourable
treatment in terms of administrative requirement, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the
Claimant failed to demonstrate a discrimination concerning the Gedimino car park.

Finally, the Tribunal notes that, in April 2001, the Municipality of Vilnius ordered the
Consortium to abandon the Gedimino project and to study the MSCP on the Pergales
site.'*” BP accepted to start the planning for the site of Pergales and also agreed that
the site of Gedimino was uncertain due to its location in the Old Town (see above {|
392). The record is insufficient to show that the Municipality of Vilnius unduly
rejected the Gedimino project of MSCP proposed by BP. On the contrary, the
Gedimino site was only one possibility among several other locations. The refusal of
one site did not deprive BP of the possibility to propose other locations and finally to
construct its ten MSCPs as agreed.”

8.3.1.2 The situation of the Pergales MSCP
As set out above (see {| 363-364) the Claimant alleges, first, that the Municipality
refused to sign a Joint Activity Agreement (JAA) with BP but concluded a JAA with

See Exhibits R 63 and CE 89.
See Exhibits CE 89.
Ibidem

84/96

399.

400.

401.

402.

131
192

133,

Pinus Proprius, and second, that once the JAAs had been declared unlawful under the
Law on Self-Government, the Municipality refused to transform the JAA envisioned by
BP into a Cooperation Agreement as it did with Pinus Proprius.

JAAs are used in Lithuania to embody private-public partnerships for construction, if
the project is situated on state-owned land and if the constructor is neither the owner
nor the lessee of the land."*°

In his statement, Mr. Sigitas Burnickas explained that:

Under Lithuanian law, much of the land available for infrastructure development within the
city of Vilnius was formally owned by the national government, and not the Municipality.
This necessitated a two step process for each car park — first, the Municipality had to
obtain the land from the State; second, the Municipality had to transfer that land to the
consortium member responsible for developing that particular car park.

In accordance with applicable construction regulations the permits for the construction of
car parks could be issued only if the developer had possession of the relevant land plot
by proprietary right, by lease (or sublease), or by right of use. Under the land lease law of
1998, however, the state-owned land plots could only be leased to the consortium
through an auction procedure. [...]

In the consortium’s case, the joint activity agreement would work as follows. First, the
Municipality would obtain the state-owned land plots by right of trust and apply, on its
behalf or on behalf of the consortium member, for the construction permit. Second, the
consortium member would finance and carry out the construction works on the state-
owned land. Because of the joint activity agreement, there was no requirement for a lease
of transfer of any kind during construction. Third, upon completion of construction, each of
the parties received a defined share in the joint property. The division of property was
agreed to in the model joint activity agreement: the consortium member would own the
car park and the Municipality would receive the associated public infrastructure that the
consortium member had constructed. Under the provision of the land lease law, the
consortium member who owned the car park on the state-owned land could lease that
land without having to go through an auction"’’.

In summary, the Tribunal understands that a JAA or Cooperation Agreement is
necessary to start the construction and permits to avoid the public auction as defined
by Article 7 section 1 of the Law on leasing of Land."*? Indeed, pursuant to Article 7
section 1 of the Law on leasing of Land:

State-owned land, save for the case stipulated in paragraph 2 of this article, in the
procedure set by the Government shall be leased in an auction for the person, whose bid
for land lease fee is the highest. [...]'°°

However, Article 7 section 2 of the same law provides that if the prospective lessee
already owns a building on the said land, no public auction is necessary:

In case state-owned land is developed with buildings owned or rented by natural or legal
persons, it shall be leased without an auction in the procedure set by the Government.

See Lithuania TR. 375:24-376:5.
See Burnickas Stmt. | 11.

See Lithuania, Tr. 375:24-376:5.
See Exhibits RE 11.

85/96

403.

404.

405.

406.

In the case at hand, it is not disputed that Pinus Proprius was the owner of a small part
of the land on its MSCP building site.** BP was not the owner of the land on the
MSCP building site and, consequently it needed a JAA in order to construct its MSCP.
This was also the case for Pinus Proprius, at least for the part of the land it did not own.

However, on 12 October 2000, the Amendment of the Law on Self-Government
precluded the public authorities from concluding JAA with a private entity. In
substance, Article 9 Section 2 of the Law on Self-Government provides that “/ffor
general purposes a municipality may conclude joint activity contracts or public
procurement contracts with State institutions and (or) other municipalities.”"* It is
common ground that a municipality is thus authorized to enter into JAAs but exclusively
with State constituent divisions to the exclusion of private entities.

On 24 October 2001, the Vilnius City Council decided to conclude a JAA with the
Company Pinus Proprius.’ However, on 18 December 2001, the Representative of
the Government for Vilnius Region, Mr Gintautas Jakimavicius, suspended the
enforcement of the decision of the Vilnius City Council pursuant to the Law on Local
Self-Government,” and on 18 January 2002, requested the Vilnius District
Administrative Court to revoke the decision of the Vilnius City Council. In substance,
the Representative of the Government for Vilnius Region stated:

a conclusion should be made that the Law does not provide for the right for municipalities
to conclude joint venture agreement with private persons and that Vilnius City Municipality
Council having passed the decision No.417 of 24 October 2001 and by Clause 1 thereof
approved the draft joint venture aargement with Pinus Proprius UAB exceeded the scope
of competence of public authorities

On 27 March 2002, the Vilnius City Council agreed to modify the controversial JAA into
a Cooperation Agreement.'** Thus, the Representative of the Government for the
Vilnius Region, Mr. Gintautas Jakimavicius, wrote to the Vilnius District Administrative
Court:

[t]he Vilnius City Council on March 27, 2002, issued decision No. 530 “on the Approval of
the Cooperation Agreement” whereby item 1 approved the Cooperation Agreement
between the Municipality of the City of Vilnius and the Joint Stock Company “Pinus
Proprius.” By this decision the Vilnius City Council actually changed decision No. 417 of
10/24/01 “On approval of the Partnership Agreement,” i.e. it became out of force. Since
the decision became out of force, the legal issue also disappeared. Consequently, the
case was dismissed."”

See Letter from Counsel for Respondent dated 9 November 2006; Rukstele 1517:6-23.
Exhibit CE 47.

Exhibit CE 95.

Exhibit CE 99.

Exhibit CE 104.

See Exhibit CE 112 and CE 128.

See Exhibit CE 117.

86/96

407.

408.

409.

4

4

412.

141
142
143
144

145

0.

1.

Finally, on 20 August 2002, the Vilnius City Municipality concluded a Cooperation
Agreement with Pinus Proprius."“’ The record shows that the Cooperation Agreement
and the JAA signed between Pinus Proprius and the City of Vilnius are in every respect
similar."

BP's situation evolved differently. Indeed, in March 2002, the Mayor of the Municipality
of Vilnius, Mr. Zuokas, sent to BP a draft Joint Activity Agreement"? and, in April 2002,
BP sent a revised draft of the JAA.“* However, the City of Vilnius never concluded the
JAA with BP for the Construction of the MSCP on Pergales site.'*° It is not contested
that the City of Vilnius also refused to conclude a Cooperation Agreement with BP
similar to the one concluded with Pinus Proprius.

. The Claimant alleges that BP and Pinus Proprius were in like circumstances and that
by refusing to conclude a JAA or a Cooperation Agreement with BP, the Municipality of
Vilnius gave a treatment more favourable to Pinus Proprius.

However, the Tribunal finds that in order to determine whether the claiming investor
and another (most favoured) investor used as benchmark were in like circumstances,
at least two elements were significantly different between the BP and Pinus Proprius
projects and therefore different treatment could be justified.

Before addressing such two differences, the Tribunal wishes to comment on a
significant difficulty the Claimant is facing. Entering into agreements is subject to party
autonomy and no one may be forced to contract. Under conditions changing from one
law to another, parties may conclude framework agreements and define conditions
under which they will have to enter into such agreement. Even when the legislation
recognizes the enforceability of such obligation to contract, party autonomy will still play
its part in the negotiation and conclusion of the agreements. /n casu, the City of Vilnius
is a public entity and thus has to act with the defence of public interests as it main
yardstick. Public interest does, of course, depend on the policy of the administration
running the public entity at any particular time. Thus, it is a difficult endeavour to show
discrimination in a public entity entering into an agreement with a certain person and
refusing to conclude a similar agreement with another party. Apart from factors
applying to individuals or companies (timing, financing, opportunities,...) a public entity
may have legitimate motivation of its own at the time to exercise it discretion to contract
or not to contract.

The two differences which the Tribunal considers relevant are (i) the substantive
differences to the content of the agreements, and (ii) the existence and non-existence
of a signed JAA with Pinus Proprius and BP respectively. These two differences are
reviewed below.

See Exhibit CE 128.

Exhibit CE 95 and CE 128.

See Exhibit CE 110.

See Exhibit CE 113.

See for instance CE 116, CE 126,

87/96

413. With regard to the first difference between the projects: The substance of the
Cooperation Agreement signed with Pinus Proprius was different from the proposed
JAA with BP. Indeed, pursuant to Article 7.2 of the Cooperation Agreement between

the City of Vilnius and Pinus Proprius, the parties

agree on the following principles of apportionment in kind of their joint property, i.e. the
Infrastructure Unit:

(a) title to the Underground Car Park A (including the internal service lines necessary for
the operation of the car park) shall be vested in PINUS PROPRIUS;

(b) title to the remaining part of the Infrastructure (i.e. the service lines, transport

minor house service
lines of the city, etc. ) save the part indicated in paragraph (a) above, shall be vested in
the Municipality."°

 

414. This part of the Pinus Proprius Agreement was similar to the one contained in the BP

draft JAA.

415. However, pursuant to Article 10.4.3. of the same Cooperation Agreement:

416.

A417.

146
147

148,

Should the Municipality receive the Lithuanian Government's consent for purchase from
the sole source of the Underground Car Park A or fulfil other requirements prescribed by
laws as applicable in the event of purchase to this particular transaction, the parties
undertake to enter into a leasing contract with respect to the Underground Car park A
subject to the requisite conditions set forth below:

(i) transfer by PINUS PROPRIUS of the Underground Car Park A into the Municipality's
possession and use on the stipulation that once the price quoted for the Underground Car
Park A has been paid the Underground Car Park A will become the ownership of the
Municipality;

(ii) the period of payment for the Underground Car Park A being 10 years as the of the
date of signing the leasing contract;

(iii) PINUS PROPRIUS giving its consent to transfer by the Municipality against payment
of the Underground Car park A to other third parties to be used for business needs;

(iv) no payient for use of the Underground Car Park A being effected to PINUS
PROPRIUS

In brief, Pinus Proprius had the contractual obligation to sell the MSCP to the

Municipality of Vilnius upon completion of the construction.

On the other hand, pursuant to the form of JAA annexed to the Concession Agreement

between the Municipality of Vilnius and BP:

3.2.1. the multi-storey car park would belong by the right of ownership to the consortium

or the consortium Member only;

3.2.2. the remaining part the Object if Infrastructure (engineering services, transport,
communications, etc.), except those specified in sub-item 3.2.1. of part 3 of this Article,

148

would belong by the right of ownership to the Municipality’

See Exhibit CE 128; see also Rukstele Tr. 1523:2-3.
Exhibit CE 128.

See Exhibit CE 13 and also project of Joint Activity Agreement, Articles 3.3.2.1. and 3.3.2.2., CE 113.

88/96

418.

419.

420.

421.

422.

149

181

Neither the draft JAA annexed to the Concession Agreement, nor the draft JAA
proposed by the Mayor Zuokas on 9 April 2002 contained a provision that obliged BP
to sell the MSCP to the Municipality. Mr. Rukstele explained that:

after BP-Egapris constructed car park, according to the condition of the joint activity
agreements with them, particularly which is different from agreement of cooperation with
Pinus Proprius. They [BP-Egapris] had the right to register even the beginnings of the
construction to separate it from--to make it their own property and to apply for lease to
purchase the land plot on which that construction is built. And this is not the case with
Pinus Proprius”?

[...] there was an obligation on behalf of Pinus Proprius to sell the car park to
municipality. It was not intending to be the owner of that car park to municipality’™ .

The Claimant accepts that “[u]nlike Pinus, BP would lease the land on which it built its
MSCPs. That was possible because of the above cited provision of Article 7(2) of the
Land Lease Law that allows a private company to acquire a lease interest in publicly
owned land if it already owns building on the land — clearly BP’s case.”"*'

In summary, BP’s draft JAA provided that the investor will be the owner of the MSCP
and will lease or buy the publicly-owned land after completion of works. Unlike BP’s
JAA, Pinus Proprius’ Cooperation Agreement provided that the investor will sell its
MSCP to the Municipality (subject to the Lithuanian Government authorizing such a
purchase) and therefore will not lease or buy the publicly-owned land. This dissimilarity
is significant. It may very well be that the economic difference is limited or even non-
existent. The record does not evidence that it is the case. Nevertheless, the legal
situation is different: one investor remains the owner of the investment while the other
must return it to the City. Whatever the compensation paid, the two situations are not
the same.

Both BP and Pinus Proprius needed a JAA in order to construct the car parks. Once
the construction would be completed, both investors would be the owners of the
MSCP. On that matter, they are similar. However, Pinus Proprius would be obliged,
subsequently, to sell its MSCP to the Municipality, if the latter was authorized to buy it.
Therefore, the JAA or the Cooperation Agreement signed with Pinus Proprius was
useful for the construction process but had neither the purpose nor the effect of
avoiding the public auction (Article 7(1) of the Land Lease Law). BP needed a JAA or
a Cooperation Agreement for the construction process, but more fundamentally, to
avoid the public auction. This is a further difference.

In substance, a public auction has several objectives, and especially gives the
assurance to the State that the highest price will be paid for the lease of the publicly-
owned land. Moreover, the public auction guarantees the equality of treatment as all
entities interested have the opportunity to apply for the lease.

See Rukstele Tr. 1527:2-14.
Idem, Tr. 1527:20-24.
Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p.114.

89/96

423.

424.

425.

426.

427.

428.

429.

In the case of Pinus Proprius, the public auction was not necessary because the
investor was not to keep the MSCP and would not need to enter into a lease of the
land. The Municipality would be the owner of the MSCP and the publicly-owned land
would not be leased by another private entity.

On the other hand, BP had a right to own the MSCP and therefore to lease the publicly-
owned land. Consequently, the public auction was an obligation, unless the
Municipality and BP concluded a JAA. In the context of the legal uncertainty of the JAA
and the Cooperation Agreement with regard to the Law on Self-Government, the
Municipality of Vilnius could refuse the conclusion of such Agreement with BP and thus
dispense with the obligation to organize a public auction.

In addition, the Cooperation Agreement concluded with Pinus Proprius afforded full
power of self-determination to the Municipality of Vilnius after the construction of the
MSCP. Indeed, the Municipality - once properly authorized by superior authorities -
could decide, at its sole discretion, to buy the MSCP after completion of works. The
consequences of the conclusion of JAA or Cooperation Agreement were, therefore,
limited to the time of the construction process. The Agreement had no impact in this
regard after the construction.

It was not the case with BP, which was contractually entitled to remain the owner of the
MSCP and therefore had the right to lease the land. It is evident that the
consequences of the conclusion of a Cooperation Agreement with Pinus Proprius were
limited in terms of time and importance, while the conclusion of a JAA or Cooperation
Agreement with BP had wider ranging effects.

BP and Pinus Proprius situations were different enough to justify a different treatment.
Therefore, the Tribunal on balance has concluded that both investors were not in like
circumstances.

With regard to the second difference between the projects: As described above
(see {J 405-407) in October 2001, the City of Vilnius concluded a JAA with Pinus
Proprius. A few months later, the Representative of the Government for the Vilnius
Region challenged the validity of the JAA. Thus, the JAA was withdrawn and a
Cooperation Agreement was concluded in its place. The Cooperation Agreement
concluded in March 2002 was nothing more than a change of title of the existing JAA in
order to avoid the decision of the Vilnius District Administrative Court on the legality of
the JAA. In other words, the Municipality wanted to avoid that its decision to conclude a
JAA be declared in violation of the Law on Self-Government.

In the case of BP, the situation was clearly different; BP never concluded any JAA with
the Municipality of Vilnius. The conclusion of a Cooperation Agreement with BP would
have required the conclusion of a new agreement and not the modification of an
existing, possibly binding and enforceable agreement. It is therefore at least credible
and understandable that the Municipality of Vilnius refused to conclude a new
agreement with BP due to the uncertainty of the legality of JAA or Cooperation
Agreements.

90/96

430.

8.4

431.

8.4.1

432.

433.

434.

435.

182
183

155

Under the circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that Pinus Proprius’ situation
differed from BP’s situation. As a result, the decision of the Municipality of Vilnius to
refuse the conclusion of a JAA or a Cooperation Agreement with BP could be justified
by the difference.

EXPROPRIATION

Article VI of the Treaty provides that:

Investments made by investors of one contracting party in the territory of the other
contracting party cannot be expropriated, nationalized or subjected to other measures
having a similar effect (all such measure hereinafter referred to as “expropriation’) except
when the following conditions are fulfilled:

(I) The expropriation shall be done for public interest and under domestic legal
procedures;
(Il) It shall not be discriminatory;

(Ill) It shall be done only against compensation. [...]
Position of the parties

The Claimant alleges that pursuant to Article VI of the Treaty, the investment cannot be
expropriated, nationalized or subjected to measures having a similar effect except for a
public purpose, in a non-discriminatory manner, upon payment of compensation and in
accordance with domestic laws.

Claimant argues that by repudiating the Agreement, the Republic of Lithuania
destroyed the value of BP and VPK. Moreover, the Claimant contends that the
“Government's litigious, legislative, and administrative interference with the Agreement
deprived BP of the legal security afforded by the Agreemen.t’? By preventing the
execution and demanding full performance of the Agreement at the same time, and
then repudiating the Agreement, the Municipality of Vilnius destroyed BP. Thus, by
taking the asset that was the sole purpose of BP’s existence, Lithuania indirectly
expropriated Parkering’s ownership interest in BP.'? BP became a “company with
assets, but without business.” By failing to provide compensation for this expropriation,
Lithuania breached its obligation under Article VI of the Treaty.’

The Claimant contends that whether Lithuania benefited or not from the expropriation is
irrelevant. On the contrary, whether the investor continues to enjoy the benefit of
ownership is decisive.’

The Respondent alleges that the termination of a contract only amounts to an
expropriation in limited cumulative circumstances. First, the termination must be
wrongful; second, there must be no remedy under the contract for the wrongful

See Claimant's Memorial {] 237.
Idem, 1.238
Idem J] 239 and Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 123.
Idem | 235.

91/96

436.

termination; and third the termination must give rise to a substantial deprivation of the
investor's enjoyment of the property in question. "°°

The Respondent contends that the termination was lawful under the terms of the
Agreement’” and that, in any case, the Claimant never brought a claim before the
contractually agreed forum, i.e. Lithuanian Courts. The Respondent underlines that the
Lithuanian Courts were in position to give a fair and impartial hearing of the Claimant's
case.’ Finally, the Respondent alleges that the Claimant was not deprived of its
property since it still owns and controls BP and because BP and VPK continue to
develop their activities in Lithuania. ‘?

8.4.2 Discussion

437.

438.

439.

440.

441.

The Treaty expressly contemplates de facto expropriation besides the formal or direct
expropriation. De facto expropriation (or indirect expropriation) is not clearly defined in
treaties, but can be understood as the negative effect of government measures on the
investor's property rights, which does not involve a transfer of property but a
deprivation of the enjoyment of the property.

As indicated in Metalclad v. Mexico, the Tribunal stated that

expropriation [...] includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of
property, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of the
host State, but also covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has
the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-
to-be-expected economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit
of the host State."

The parties are not challenging the fact that the expropriation can be direct or indirect
and that, in the case at hand, the expropriation alleged by the Claimant is indirect.
There is no mention of any direct expropriation.

In the present case, the expropriation results, according to the Claimant, of the
wrongful termination of the Agreement between the City of Vilnius and BP.
Undoubtedly, wrongful termination of an agreement amounts to a breach thereof.
Whether contract rights may be expropriated is widely accepted by the case law and
the legal authors. However, under limited circumstances, three cumulative conditions
(which will be addressed below {| 443-456) should be met to elevate a breach of an
agreement to the level of an indirect expropriation within the meaning of the Treaty.

Having said that, an expropriation does not necessarily amount to a violation of the
Treaty. Indeed, pursuant to Article VI of the Treaty, the expropriation is legitimate if

See Respondent Counter-Memorial, p. 81.
Idem, 19] 210-212.

Idem, 1.214.

Idem, 1 218 and If] 220-224

See Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARF (AF)/97/1, Award, August 30,
2000, reprinted in 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 168 (2001),{] 103.

92/96

442.

443.

444.

445.

446.

447.

448.

161

162

done for public interest and under domestic legal procedures; if not discriminatory; and
if done against compensation.

Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal will first determine if an indirect expropriation occurred
(see If] 443-456). If the answer is positive, it will analyse if the expropriation is
legitimate.

First, a breach of an agreement will amount to an expropriation only if the State acted
not only in its capacity of party to the agreement, but also in its capacity of sovereign
authority, that is to say using its sovereign power. The breach should be the result of
this action. A State or its instrumentalities which simply breach an agreement, even
grossly, acting as any other contracting party might have done, possibly wrongfully, is
therefore not expropriating the other party.

The Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Azurix Corp. v. the Argentine Republic which
held that:

contractual breaches by State party or one of its instrumentalities would not normally
constitute expropriation. Whether one or series of such breaches can be considered to be
measures tantamount to expropriation will depend on whether the State or its
instrumentality has breached the contract in the exercise of its sovereign authority, or as
a party to a contract. As already noted, a State or its instrumentalities may perform a
contract badly, but this will not result in a breach of treaty provisions “unless it be proved
that the state or its emanation has gone beyond its role as a mere party to the contract,
and has exercised the specific functions of a sovereign. 161

In the present case, on 27 January 2004, Mr. Artiiras Zuokas, Mayor of the City of
Vilnius, informed the Consortium that the Agreement dated 30 December 1999 was
terminated. The reason invoked was a “material breach on the part of the Consortium
formed by UAB Baltijos Parkingas and UAB Egapris of [...] provisions of the
Agreement.” The record does not show that the State, i.e. the Municipality, acted
differently than another contracting party would have done. In other words, assuming
that the Municipality of the City of Vilnius breached the Agreement, there is no
evidence that it used its sovereign power in that respect.

It is thus unnecessary and irrelevant to ascertain whether the termination breached the
Agreement.

Therefore, the termination of the Agreement by the City of Vilnius cannot be considered
as an expropriation under the BIT due to the fact that the City of Vilnius did not act as a
sovereign authority and did not use that authority to expropriate the rights of BP.

Second, a breach of contract, if there should be one is, in itself, not always sufficient to
amount to an indirect expropriation within the meaning of the BIT. An investor faced
with a breach of an agreement by the State counter-party should, as a general rule,
sue that party in the appropriate forum to remedy the breach. Therefore, as already

See Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, July 14, 2006, supra note 59,
1314.

Exhibit CE 210.

93/96

449.

450.

451.

452.

453.

163

165

167

stated (see J] 316), a preliminary determination of the existence of a contractual breach
under domestic law is, in most cases, a prerequisite.

If the investor is deprived, legally or practically, of the possibility to seek a remedy
before the appropriate domestic court, then the Arbitral Tribunal might decide on the
basis of the BIT if international rights have been violated (see above {| 317). That
would be the case, for instance, if a party is denied the possibility to complain about the
wrongful termination of the agreement before the forum contractually chosen.

For instance, in the Waste Management case, the Tribunal concluded that:*

it is one thing to expropriate a right under a contract and another to fail to comply with the
contract. No ya with ic is not the same
thing as, or equivalent or tantamount to, an expropriation. In the present case, the
Claimant did not lose its contractual rights, which it was free to pursue before the
contractually chosen forum.

In Azinian and others v. the United Mexican States, the Tribunal noted that:

[t]he problem is that Claimants’ fundamental complaint is that they are the victims of a

breach of the Concession Contract. NAFTA does not, however, allow investors to seek

international arbitration for mere contractual breaches. Indeed, NAFTA cannot possibly

be read to create such a regime, which would have elevated a multitude of ordinary
ions with public authorities into potential it ic disputes.

 

The Tribunal added that “the Claimants have raised no complaints against the Mexican
courts; they do not allege a denial of justice.""*

In Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, the Tribunal held that:

an international tribunal may deem that the failure to seek redress from national
authorities disqualifies the international claim, not because there is a requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies but because the very reality of conduct tantamount to
expropriation is doubtful in the absence of a reasonable — not necessarily exhaustive —
effort by the investor to obtain correction."

In the case at hand, BP and possibly the Claimant had the opportunity to bring the case
before the forum contractually chosen, i.e. Lithuanian Courts, in order to complain of
the breach of the Agreement (see above {| 316). The record does not show any
objective reason to question the Lithuanian Courts’ ability to dispose of the case fairly,
competently, impartially and within a reasonable period of time.’ Nevertheless,
neither BP nor the Claimant challenged the termination before the forum contractually
chosen, i.e. the Lithuanian Courts.”

See Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/3, Award, April 30,
2004, supra note60, | 175.

See Robert Azinian and others v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award,
November 1, 1999, reprinted in 14 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 538 (1999),{] 87 and {| 100.

See Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, September 16, 2003, supra
note16, p. 91.

See Gintautas Barktkus, Tr. 908 and Expert Report of Carlos Lapuerta, p. 4.

See Article 7.3 of the Agreement between the Municipality of Vilnius and the Consortium, CE 13.

94/96

454.

455.

456.

457.

458.

459.

460.

461.

462.

463.

It is not the mission of the present Arbitral Tribunal to decide on the alleged breach of
the Agreement, entered into by a company which acted as vehicle of the investment of
the Claimant. In the absence of any objective reason not to bring the case before
national tribunals, it cannot be concluded, on the basis of the facts at hand, that the
Claimant's investment has been indirectly expropriated.

Third, the breach of the Agreement, in casu the termination of the agreement, must
give rise to a substantial decrease of the value of the investment.’

In the case at hand, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that it is not worth analysing the
existence of a decrease of the value of the Claimant's investment as no other
conditions for the existence of an expropriation developed above are met (see above
{1 443-454). Thus it can be concluded that Parkerings has not been expropriated
within the meaning of Article VI of the Treaty. Accordingly, the question whether the
expropriation was legitimate is not relevant and does not need to be discussed here
either.

THE ISSUE OF COSTS

Both parties sought the costs of this arbitration in the event that they were successful.

By letter dated 22 December 2006, Parkerings presented the Tribunal with a statement
of costs and expenses of € 2,655,584.75 which included the sum of € 196,591.42 paid
to ICSID as deposit towards the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal. By letter of
9 May 2007, Parkerings amended its statement of costs and expenses to €
2,655,584.75.

On the same date, the Republic of Lithuania presented the Tribunal with a submission
of costs and expenses of € 1,340,716.10 which included the sum of € 196,591.42 paid
to ICSID as deposit towards the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal.

The parties filed no additional comments on statements of costs.

It is unambiguous from Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules that the Arbitral Tribunal has discretion with regard to costs.

There is no rule in international arbitration that costs must follow the event. Thus, the
question of costs is within the discretion of the Tribunal with regard, on the one hand, to
the outcome of the proceedings and, on the other hand, to other relevant factors.

In the Tribunal’s view, the proceedings were expeditiously and efficiently conducted by
the representatives of both parties.

See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2,
Award, May 29, 2003, supra note 80, | 115; see also Telenor Mobile Communications AS v. Republic of
Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award, September 13, 2006, available online at
www.worldbank.org/icsid, 1] 65 ef seq.

95/96

464. Even if no violation of the BIT or international law occurred, the conduct of the City of
Vilnius was far from being without criticism. In such circumstances, the Arbitral
Tribunal concludes that an equitable result would be that each party bears its own
costs and expenses, and that the costs and expenses of the Tribunal be paid equally
by both parties.

10. THE AWARD

465. Having heard and read all the submissions and evidence in this arbitration, and for the
reasons set out above, the Tribunal unanimously decides that:

a) the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and consider all the claims made by the
Claimant in this case;

b) _ the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania, which is the subject of the claims in this
arbitration, did not involve a violation of the duty of equitable and reasonable
Treatment (Article Ill of the Treaty);

c) the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania as claimed in this arbitration did not
involve a violation of the obligation of protection (Article III of the Treaty);

d) the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania as claimed in his arbitration did not
involve a violation of the obligation to accord treatment no less favorable than the
Treatment accorded to investment by investor of a third State (Article IV of the
Treaty);

e) the conduct of the Republic of Lithuania as claimed in this arbitration did not
involve a violation of the prohibition of expropriation (Article VI of the Treaty);

f) Parkerings’ claims are accordingly dismissed in their entirety;

g) Each party shall bear its own costs and half of the costs and expenses of these
proceedings.

[signature] [signature] [signature]
Dr. Julian Lew Dr. Laurent Lévy The Hon. Marc Lalonde
Arbitrator President Arbitrator

Date: August 13, 2007 Date: August 14, 2007 Date: August 9, 2007

96/96

