 

Neutral Citation Number: [2015] EWHC 3361 (Comm
Case No: CL-2015-000272

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

 

COMMERCIAL COURT
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL
Date: 20/11/2015
Before :
MR JUSTICE BURTON
Between :
(LD Pearl Petroleum Company Limited Claimants
(2) Dana Gas PJSC
(3) Crescent Petroleum Company International
Limited
- and -
The Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq Respondent

Gordon Pollock QC and Zachary Douglas QC (instructed by Freshfields Bruckhaus
Deringer LLP) for the Claimants
Graham Dunning QC and Anton Dudnikov (instructed by Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP) for the Respondent

Hearing dates: 28, 29 and 30 October 2015

Approved Judgment
I direct that pursuant to CPR PD 39A para 6.1 no official shorthand note shall be taken of this
Judgment and that copies of this version as handed down may be treated as authentic.

MR JUSTICE BURTON

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Mr Justice Burton :

1.

The Claimants (whom I shall call Pearl, Dana and Crescent) and the Respondent, the
Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq (“KRG”) are engaged in arbitration
proceedings under the LCIA Rules, commenced in October 2013, in relation to
disputes arising out of a contract (“the Heads of Agreement”) dated 4 April 2007.
This is an application to the Court by the Claimants, for whom Mr Gordon Pollock
QC and Mr Zachary Douglas QC appear, with the permission of the Arbitrators, (Lord
Hoffmann, Lord Collins and Mr John Beechey), under s.42 of the Arbitration Act
1996 (“the 1996 Act”) for an order by the Court enforcing a peremptory order made
against the Respondent by the Arbitrators on 17 October 2014, whereby the
Respondent was ordered to pay to the Claimants the sum of US$100 million. The
Respondent, for whom Graham Dunning QC and Anton Dudnikov appear, resists that
application and cross-applies for a declaration pursuant to CPR Part 11 that it is
immune from the jurisdiction of the court by virtue of the State Immunity Act 1978
(“the SIA”).

The Respondent is a constituent region of the Federal Republic of Iraq, and as such it
is common ground that it is not itself a State, but is a separate entity within the
meaning of s.14 SIA (and no Order in Council has been made giving it immunity as if
it were a State pursuant to s.14(5) SIA). By the Heads of Agreement between the
Respondent (“duly represented by the Minister of Natural Resources and the Prime
Minister of Kurdistan”) and, initially, Dana (which subsequently transferred 50% of
its interest in the Contract to Crescent, following which Dana and Crescent transferred
their interests to Pearl, a Special Purpose Vehicle (“SPV”) owned between them), the
parties agreed to the exploitation by the Claimants of two gas fields known as Khor
Mor and Chemchemal, which are situated in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (“the
KRI”), of which the Respondent is the Government. The term of the contract was not
less than 25 years. By 2008 the Khor Mor field had been developed and was
producing gas and condensate and by 2011 it was also producing LPG.

There were the following material provisions of the Heads of Agreement. The recitals
included the following:

“AL The KRG has entered into a Strategic Alliance
Protocol (“SAP”) dated 4" April 2007 with Dana and
... [Crescent] (. . . the “Companies”) whereby the

Companies will carry out optimization of the
development and utilization of natural gas resources in
the [KRI].

B. The KRG wishes to appoint Dana to carry out certain
works in the field of Khor Mor . . . and in the field of
Chemchemal . . . in the [KRI]._ The work is urgently
required to fulfil energy requirements in the [KRI] and
in particular to provide urgent gas supplies for use at
the power stations under construction at Erbil and
Bazian, and thereby help to relieve the electrical
power shortage affecting all the people of Iraq.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Cc. The KRG has endorsed a federal draft Oil and Gas
Law for Iraq that requires petroleum contracts issued
by federal and regional entities, including by the KRG,
to meet agreed commercial criteria, in addition to
other relevant provisions pursuant to the KRG and the
Constitution of Iraq.

F. The KRG, desirous of rapid and optimal economic
development of the petroleum gas resources of the
[KRI], gas-related industries, and job creation for the
benefit of the people of Iraqand_ the [KRI], has
declared its intention to associate and contract with
Dana... to take the lead inthe — development of the
gas resources of the [KRI], both for domestic gas
utilization as a priority, as well as for export.”

The following clauses are of particular relevance:

“9. The KRG hereby grants Dana the exclusive right
during the term of these HoA [minimum 25 years] . . .
to develop and produce Petroleum within the Khor
Mor Hod Area and the Chemchemal HoA Area.

16. For the purpose of this Article, “Dispute” shall mean
any dispute, controversy or claim (of any and every
kind or type...

If the Dispute cannot be resolved by negotiation within
sixty (60) days after the date of the receipt by each
party to the Dispute of the Notice of Dispute any party
to the Dispute may seek settlement of the dispute by
mediation in accordance with the London Court of
International Arbitration (LCIA) Mediation
Procedure, which Procedure shall be deemed to be
incorporated by reference into this Article, and the
parties to such Dispute shall submit to such mediation
procedure:

(a) If the Dispute is not settled by mediation within
sixty (60) days of the appointment of the
mediator, or such further period as the parties to
the Dispute may otherwise agree in writing, any
party to the Dispute may refer the Dispute to,
and seek final resolution by, arbitration under
the LCIA Rules, which Rules shall be deemed to
be incorporated by reference into this Article.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

(b) Any arbitration shall be conducted by three (3)
arbitrators.

(e) Arbitration shall take place in London, England.
The language to be used in any prior negotiation,
mediation and in the arbitration shall be English.
During the arbitration procedure and until the
arbitral decision, neither entity shall act in a
manner that may affect the rights of the other Party
under these HoA ... The arbitral award may
include an award of specific performance and may
be enforced by any court of competent jurisdiction,
including the Kurdistan Region. Any award shall
be expressed in US Dollars.”

There were (inter alia) the following “Key Commercial Terms” contained in Annexure
2:

“« In the event Dana is unable to export and market the LPG’s
[or] Condensates by any act or omission of government
(including foreign neighbouring governments) and/or for
political reasons beyond the control [of] Dana then the KRG
shall purchase and lift (or arrange for the lifting by the
domestic companies/users) and pay for the liquid petroleum
products at international FOB Med market prices as quoted
by Platts Oilgram Report or similar journals within 30 days
from the month ends. [Identified by the parties as “Bullet
7’).

The KRG waives on its own behalf and that of the KRG any
claim to immunity for itself and assets.”

The history

4.

Disputes arose in about 2009 between the parties relating to the nature and extent of
the Claimants’ rights in relation to the two fields and the prices payable to the
Claimants by the Respondent for condensate and LPG produced at Khor Mor and sold
to the Respondent. The Claimants contended that by September 2013 the Respondent
had underpaid for product produced and lifted in a sum of US$1.12 billion.

In 2013 the Claimants initiated mediation proceedings in accordance with clause 16 of
the Heads of Agreement, and when the Respondent declined to participate in it, the
Claimants commenced arbitration proceedings. The Respondent’s response to the
mediation and arbitration was that instead of continuing to make relatively regular
payments to the Claimants for the product produced and lifted, albeit on the
Claimants’ case substantially short of what was due under the contract, the
Respondent stopped making any payment, whilst continuing to require the Claimants
to deliver up product. The structure of the contract was such that a quantity of gas
which was produced was supplied free for the benefit of the Respondent, so that the

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

only source of revenue from which the Claimants could recover their capital
investment and their annual running costs was the revenue which they received from
their produced condensate and LPG sold and lifted by the KRG, the by-products of
the gas production. The sudden cessation of any payment was ascribed by the
Respondent to the existence of counterclaims dating back in some cases to 2009.

6. On 21 March 2014 the Claimants applied to the Arbitrators for an interim measures
order pursuant to Article 25 of the LCIA Rules, which provided, inter alia, for the
Arbitrators to have the power on the application of any party “(c) to order on a
provisional basis, subject to final determination in an award, any relief which the
Arbitral Tribunal would have power to grant in an award, including a provisional
order for the payment of money or the disposition of property as between any
parties”. The application was that the Respondent be ordered to resume payments for
product lifted, pending the resolution of the parties’ disputes. A major ground of this
application was the serious financial damage which the Claimants alleged would be
suffered by the Claimants, in the case of Dana involving potential bankruptcy, in the
event that the Respondent continued with its refusal to make any payment for product
which it lifted. The Claimants’ case was that by the making of an order for interim
measures the Tribunal should restore the status quo by which the Respondent was
paying for the condensate and LPG which it was lifting. I set out relevant passages
from the Claimants’ application:

“2. The Claimants seek an order to compel the Respondent
... to restore the status quo ante and prevent further
escalation of the dispute during the pendency of the
present arbitration, by resuming payment for on-going
deliveries of condensate and liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) and releasing and/or procuring the release of
funds to the Claimants which were withheld by the
KRG or on the KRG’s instructions following the
Claimants’ commencement of mediation on 24 July
2013.

3. Absent the cash flows from the sale of condensate and
LPG to the Claimants until their abrupt curtailment by
the KRG with effect from July 2013, Dana... which
operates the gas processing facilities at Khor Mor
jointly with Crescent on behalf of Pearl, will face a
cash crisis and is expected to run out of cash by the
fourth quarter of 2014. As a consequence, Dana...
will default on its debt obligations and the company
will be forced into insolvency during the pendency of
the present arbitration, causing irreparable damage to
[Dana’s] . . . stakeholders, including its over 200,000-
strong regional and international shareholder base.

4, The insolvency of Dana... is likely to result in the
KRG’s take-over of operations and the destruction of
the rights under the Contract that are the subject
matter of this dispute.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

8. Prior to the initiation of the mediation on 24 July
2013, the KRG was making regular (albeit deficient)
payments (either directly or through third parties) for
condensate and LPG, which were and continue to be
critical to the Contractor's ability to continue
operating the gas production facilities at Khor Mor
and Dana Gas’s ability to service its home office costs
and debt obligations.

9. In an act of retaliation to the Claimants’
commencement of mediation proceedings on 24 July
2013, the KRG deliberately withheld all contractually-
due payments it had previously been making on a
regular basis for the supply to it of Khor Mor
condensate. Moreover, and in order to ‘turn off’
entirely the tap of the Claimant's revenue streams from
the uninterrupted production that it continues to
provide, the KRG altered the terms upon which it
auctions the right to lift LPG to third parties by
diverting payments away from the Claimants. The
basis for the KRG’s retaliatory action is a set of
contrived counterclaims which, despite allegedly
amounting to nearly US$5 billion and being based on
allegations dating back several years, had never
previously been raised, let alone quantified or used as
a basis for withholding payments to the Claimants.

Ii. In the circumstances, and in the light of recent press
reports regarding the KRG’s intentions to this effect,
the Claimants have good reason to believe that the
KRG’s conduct is part of a concerted strategy to
manufacture excuses for a precipitate and unlawful
termination of the Contract, take-over of operations
and subsequent sale of the valuable exclusive rights
under the Contract to a third party, the latter having
already been attempted by the KRG in the recent past.
The Claimants’ belief has been further reinforced by
the KRG’s constant attempts at obfuscation and delay,
first in resisting expedited formation of the arbitral
tribunal, and then in its lengthy and _ repetitive
objections to having preliminary issues heard and
challenge to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.

12. The KRG’s recent conduct and resulting alteration of
the status quo ante will lead to the collapse of Dana

will aggravate the present dispute and will likely

result in an expropriation of the subject matter of this

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

arbitration long before the Arbitral Tribunal will have
an opportunity to render a final award. To prevent
this, the Claimants require assistance from the Arbitral
Tribunal in the form of the interim measures set out in
Section IV below.

14, In order to address its purported concern all the KRG
needs do is to continue what it has been doing in
recent years, namely make and/or direct payments to
the Contractor for Khor Mor condensate and LPG
lifted by it or on its behalf.

50. Article 25.1 of the LCIA Rules does not set out any
explicit standards for the grant of interim measures.
Nonetheless, in international arbitration practice
arbitral tribunals typically take into account the
following factors when considering a request for
interim measures:

(a) whether the applicant has a prima facie case on
the merits;

(b) whether the application is likely to suffer serious
harm if the measures are not granted;

(c) whether the request is urgent;

(d) whether granting the request would prejudge the
merits of a case; and

(e) the harm the applicant is likely to suffer in the
absence of interim measures as compared with
the harm likely to result to the respondent if the
measures are granted.

56. Thirdly, many international tribunals require the
requesting party to demonstrate urgency, which is
closely related to the requirement of serious or
substantial harm. The requirement of urgency has
been construed sufficiently broadly by tribunals to
justify interim measures designed to avoid the
aggravation of the dispute that is the subject matter of
the arbitration.

[Citations of various international tribunals’ decisions were set
out in footnotes].

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

74, ...Inany event, the fact that Dana. . . is being forced
irretrievably to dispose of core assets in distressed
sales is sufficiently serious to warrant interim
measures of protection from the Arbitral Tribunal.

76. With Dana... unable to fund the Contractor and the
latter having run out of funds required to continue
operating the Khor Mor facilities, the KRG will likely
seek to step in (as it has already threatened to do),
leading to the Claimants effectively losing their rights
under the Contract, the very subject matter of the
dispute.

77. Such a scenario, which is entirely avoidable, would not
only threaten the procedural integrity of these
proceedings but also cause the Claimants irretrievably
to lose the benefit of Article 16(e) of the Contract
which specifically (1) obliges the parties to maintain
the status quo ante during the pendency of an
arbitration by not “actfing] in a manner that may
affect the right of the other Party”; and (2) confers
upon the parties a right to specific performance of the
Contract.”

7. The Respondent joined issue with these contentions in its Response, and at the outset
stated in paragraph 5:

“5, First, the Claimants’ requested interim measures
would fundamentally alter the status quo... The
Claimants’ application proceeds on the premise that
there was an established “payment regime” in which it
was commonly agreed or understood that the
Claimants would continue to receive payments
indefinitely on some undefined basis. In reality,
however there was no such status quo. The KRG has
never accepted or agreed that any of the Claimants
would be entitled to the proceeds of the condensates
and LPGs that the KRG has sold.”

Further:

“109. The Claimants rely on the financial position of Dana
as a basis for interim measures, but, on their own case,
Dana has purportedly novated all of its rights or
obligations under the HoA (and thus has no existing
funding obligations under the HoA). As such, there is
no basis for concluding that Dana’s financial status is

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

even relevant, much less decisive, with regard to the
purported inability of the Claimants to continue
operations.

Ii. ... there is no evidence that Pearl! will run out of funds
required to continue operations in the absence of KRG
payments. The Claimants have adduced very little
evidence on Pearl's financial condition (which, it is
common ground, is the Claimants’ burden to prove).
Absent such evidence, it is impossible to conclude that
the Claimants will be unable to continue operations
under the HoA at Khor Mor.

122... . the Claimants argue that Dana’s “risk of
insolvency” constitutes “truly irreparable harm,” but
this is both unproven and irrelevant. As set out above
the evidence submitted by the Claimants does not
establish that there is a true risk of insolvency. In any
event, insolvency does not prevent the Claimants from
pursuing their claims in arbitration, and therefore
cannot constitute harm “not adequately reparable” by
damages.”

In paragraphs 160 to 173 of its Response the Respondent contended that the ordering
of payments and of a mandatory injunction as an interim measure would prejudicially
alter the status quo, and concluded at paragraph 183 that:

“Accordingly, the Claimants’ Request must be denied because
it would entail pre-judgment of both the Claimants’ claims and
the KRG’s counterclaims.”

In their Reply the Claimants contended as follows:
a Preservation of the dynamic status quo ante

95. First, as indicated in the Claimants’ Request, the KRG
is contractually and legally obliged to maintain the
status quo pending determination of this dispute
pursuant to Article 16(e) of the Contract and Article
50(Second)(4) of the KROGL. Notwithstanding the
Respondent's smokescreen, the undisputed fact
remains that the Respondent was making (or
authorising third parties to make) regular payments to
the Claimants in respect of products delivered over a
five year period, whether under the Contract, or
otherwise.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

96. The Claimants only seek preservation of the
commercially important “dynamic status quo” which
can be achieved simply by the KRG releasing (or
authorising third parties to release) payments for
condensate and LPG it is taking from the Claimants.

97. The fact remains that, even on the KRG’s own case,
nothing has changed factually since July 2013 except
that the Claimants have initiated mediation and then
arbitration proceedings, which have been met by
pressure tactics by the Respondent. There is no
singular fact which justified the sudden change in the
Status quo.

98. Indeed, restoring the dynamic status quo is
commercially imperative in order to ensure the
continuation of operations at Khor Mor and thus the
supply of electricity to the residents of the Kurdistan
Region, continuation of the Claimants’ rights under
the Contract and the continuation of Dana... as a
solvent company. It also means protection of value for
both parties including because it accelerates the
Claimants’ cost recovery and Remuneration Fee
payments and, therefore, the point at which the
Respondent will earn its 90% of the Aggregate
Revenues under the Contract.”

9. Following an oral hearing on 16 May 2014, the Tribunal issued a Ruling on Interim
Measures on 10 July 2014 (“the 10 July Ruling”), whereby the Respondent was
ordered to make payments as from 21 March 2014 at a rate which was designed to
reflect the payments which had been made in the period prior to July 2013, which
amounted to some 70% of the Claimants’ invoices for condensate and LPG. The
Tribunal dealt with the question of the status quo as follows:

“21. The relevance of actions which seek to alter the status
quo to the advantage of a party is underlined by
Article 16(e) of the HoA itself:

“During the arbitration procedure and until the
arbitral decision, neither entity shall act in a
manner which may affect the rights of the other
party under these HoA/Service Agreements”.

42. It appears to us unlikely that there will be a hearing
followed by an award in this arbitration before the
middle of 2015. On the evidence before us, there is an
appreciable risk that Dana will become insolvent or at
any rate suffer unnecessary loss through distressed

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

sales of assets if payments are not resumed before the
award.

45. It is unusual to have an application for provisional
measures in which both sides do not claim to be
seeking to maintain the status quo and this is no
exception. In this case, however, we think that the
status quo was that the KRG had for a lengthy period
been buying the Claimants’ LPPs and paying for them.
There may have been a dispute over the price properly
payable but payments were being made. By stopping
paying, they have altered the status quo, just as
someone who cuts off the supply of electricity and
plunges the house into darkness.

47. The ultimate question for the Tribunal is: which course
of action is more likely to promote justice, in the
broadest sense: to grant the provisional measures or to
refuse them? We think that there is a greater risk of
injustice if the KRG are allowed to continue to receive
the Claimants’ condensates (or their proceeds) and not
pay for them. The KRG claims that the Claimants are
free to export and market their liquid petroleum
products in accordance with the HoA. If the KRG is
able to procure the necessary licences for the
Claimants to be able to do so, well and good. No
further action as to the future is required. But if they
cannot, and continue instead to have them lifted on
their behalf, then we consider that pending a final
resolution of this dispute they should pay for them.

(i) Conclusion

48. The practice of the KRG before July 2013 was, we are
informed by counsel for the Claimants, to pay about
70% of the invoiced prices (i.e. the international FOB
Med prices) of the liquid petroleum products, which
were lifted on their behalf. This is a very rough and
ready figure, which can be recalculated after a full
hearing. In the meanwhile, however, we consider that
the KRG should, as from the date of the Claimants’
application for interim measures (21 March 2014), pay
the Claimants 70% of the international FOB Med
prices of liquid petroleum products lifted by them or
for their account. If at any time the KRG is able to
procure the necessary permits and consents for the

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Claimants to export and market these products
themselves, they may apply to discharge this order.”

On it becoming immediately apparent to the Claimants that the Respondent was not
intending to comply with the 10 July Ruling, on 23 July 2014 they applied to the
Tribunal for a peremptory order, both as regards the payment of an immediate
quantified sum and as regards future continuing payments; the Respondent then
applied to discharge the Ruling.

Application and cross-application were heard at an oral hearing on 4 September 2014.
The Arbitrators delivered a ruling on 17 October 2014 (“the 17 October Ruling”),
dismissing the Respondent’s application to discharge, and ordering, on the Claimants’
application for a peremptory order, that the Respondent pay to the Claimants the sum
of US$100 million within 30 days (in the terms of the order below set out). The
Arbitrators stated (in material part):

“16. At the hearing on 5 September, Mr Partasides (for the
Claimant) asked why the KRG did not simply reinstate
the previous arrangement with PowerTrans, under
which the KRG sold the products through PowerTrans,
but accounted to the Claimants for what was assumed
to be the price received. The KRG had similar
arrangements with other international oil companies
in Kurdistan. The answer of Mr Born, on behalf of the
KRG, must be quoted in full:

“Finally, the claimants asked repeatedly why
doesn’t the KRG do what it does with other
IOCs? This case is the answer for why the KRG
doesn’t do what it does with other 1OCs. It
doesn’t have arbitrations for bitter disputes with
other OCs. It does have such a dispute with the
claimants.”

17. It should make no difference to the KRG whether the
Claimants sell their products to Quaiwan for the lower
price or through PowerTrans at a higher price. In
neither case would the KRG be receiving the proceeds.
The KRG does not deny that it could reinstate the
previous PowerTrans arrangements. But it refuses to
do so simply to disoblige the Claimants.

18. The Tribunal is not in a position to express any view
on the merits of the “bitter disputes” between the
parties. It has however expressed the view in its order
for provisional measures that justice requires that
provisionally and pending a_ full hearing, the
Claimants should not be deprived of the cash flow,
which they had been deriving from their products. The
KRG is in a position to enable them to do so. Instead,
it claims that they are, and always have been, in a

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

position to export their products but for some
irrational and quixotic reason have been unwilling to
do so. The Tribunal is not persuaded that the
Claimants are in practice in a position to export their
products. They do not think that any rational
producer, having been for over a year been in a
position to export their products, would have chosen
instead to apply at this stage for an order for interim
measures.

23. The Tribunal accepts, first, that the preservation of the
status quo requires it to have regard to the position at
the time when the KRG ceased payments and that
going further back into history would not ordinarily be
particularly relevant. It was therefore reasonable to
have regard to the position under the arrangements
with PowerTrans, which were in place from March to
July 2013. Secondly, the Tribunal considers that one
cannot calculate the percentage of invoiced price
which the Claimants were receiving without knowing
the shipments to which those prices related. Invoices
may have been sent during the period in question
which related to earlier shipments. The calculations of
Ernst & Young were not challenged in the earlier
proceedings and the Tribunal therefore does not think
it was misled by Mr Pollock's figure.

24, The KRG submits that recent events in Iraq have
created a political and military crisis in Kurdistan that
has changed the balance of convenience. The territory
is defending itself against attack and finds itself
responsible for the support of large numbers of
refugees. It cannot afford to make payments to the
Claimants. The KRG also claimed that the financial
position of Dana was not as bad as it claimed because
a press release of 10 September showed that it had
been able to borrow $100 million to finance its UAE
gas project. The Claimants replied that this was
borrowing for a particular project and distinct from its
general corporate debt.

 

25. The Tribunal is of course aware of the difficult
circumstances in which the KRG finds itself in the
current situation in the area and has great sympathy
for the plight of its people and those who have taken
refuge it its territory. But it considers that it is in no
position to estimate the significance of these

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

momentous events and that they lie altogether outside
the matters to which a Tribunal can have regard in
considering what is conventionally called the balance
of convenience in an interlocutory application. In
such a case, the Tribunal’s concern is to weigh the
effect of granting or refusing the order on the potential
outcome for the parties if one or the other should be
successful . The purpose of the interlocutory order is
to enable the Tribunal’s final order to do practical
justice between the parties. It does not consider that
the effect upon political events in Kurdistan, which the
Tribunal is completely unable to calculate, can fall
within the matters it can properly take into
consideration.

29. The KRG says that they have not failed to comply.
They have applied for the discharge of the order and
while that application was pending, they were not
obliged to do anything. We do not think that is right.
Any discharge of the order would not have been on the
ground that it should not have been made but on the
ground that the KRG had enabled the Claimants to
export their products and thereby obtain a revenue
stream in substitution for that which had previously
been paid to them by or at the direction of the KRG.
There was no question of the order being discharged
retrospectively. As the Tribunal said in its ruling on
provisional measures: “If the KRG is able to procure
the necessary licences for the Claimants to be able to
do so, well and good. No further action as to the
future is required.”” The KRG has . . . failed altogether
to comply with the order for payment for liftings from
21 March 2014 to the present day. The Tribunal
therefore has jurisdiction under section 41(5) to make
a peremptory order.

30. The Tribunal’s order for interim measures required
payment of 70% of the “the international FOB Med
price of liquid petroleum products” on the basis that
this was the benchmark employed by the parties in the
HoA and should be capable of being employed to
calculate the amounts to be paid. It appears however
from the submissions at the hearing of this application
to discharge that there may be a dispute over what
counts as the “international FOB Med price” of
condensate and LPG. This dispute may at some stage
have to be resolved by the Tribunal but in order to
avoid further delay, the Tribunal will fix a provisional

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

figure for payment which it considers to be the least
which would give effect to its order to date.

31. The Ernst & Young report to which the Tribunal has
referred in paragraph 23 above found that, in respect
of the shipments they were considering, the Claimants
had received 71% of the invoiced price. Whether the
invoiced price had been correctly calculated or not,
that was what they were receiving. That was the status
quo. The evidence exhibited to the Claimants’
application for a peremptory order showed that in the
period 21 March to 27 July 2014 the invoiced price of
condensate and LNG shipped by the Claimants was
US$232,284,453. 70% of this sum is US$162,599, 117.
The Tribunal considers that an immediate payment of
US$100,000,000 should be the subject of a peremptory
order. A possible further peremptory order can be
considered later. The Tribunal therefore makes an
order in the following terms:

“Without prejudice to its order of 10 July 2014,
the Tribunal orders that the Respondent shall
within 30 days of this order pay to the Claimants
US$100 million (to be set off against its liability
under the order of 10 July 2014) and if the said
sum shall be unpaid after 30 days, makes a
peremptory order to the same effect.”

No payment was made within 30 days, and so in accordance with the terms of the 17
October Order the peremptory order took effect. The Claimants sought and obtained,
against opposition from the Respondent, the Tribunal’s permission pursuant to
s.42(2)(b), to make the application now before me to enforce the peremptory order.

There have been developments since December 2014 while the parties have been
resolving (with the assistance of the Court [2015] EWHC 68 (Comm)) defective
service and then re-service, and preparing for, fixing and serving evidence for this
hearing. The Respondent between September 2014 and 7 October 2015 permitted the
Claimants to enter into local contracts for the sales of condensate and LPG, which
thus earned them some income. However there was a Partial Final Award by the
Arbitrators dated 30 June 2015, ruling on issues which they had heard between 20 and
24 April, and which reached conclusions as to certain of the rights of the parties,
resulting in a finding of liability on the Respondent in respect of the claim, but no
monetary award was to be made until after a further hearing, fixed for 21 September
2015, the award from which is awaited, as to whether, as against a sum of
approximately US$1.9 billion in the Claimants’ favour there could be set off the
counterclaims upon which the Respondent relied.

The making of this Partial Final Award on 30 June resulted in a letter from the
Respondent dated 26 July to the Claimants, notifying them that the Respondent would
no longer permit the Claimants to proceed with their arrangements for local sales, and
intended to lift the condensate and LPG itself; and, by letter dated 4 September to the

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Claimants, the Respondent made clear that it did not accept that the Claimants had
any entitlement to payment for the condensates and LPGs which it was to lift, because
of the allegation that the Claimants had caused enormous damage to the Respondent
through its breaches of the Heads of Agreement, such that it was not “obliged to pay
for all petroleum products it lifts”. Meanwhile the Respondent confirmed, by various
letters and public announcements in September 2015, that it was making and
authorising payments to other international oil companies in substantial sums,
because, as per an announcement by the Ministry of Natural Resources dated 7
September 2015, “regular payments will be made to allow the exporting companies to
cover their ongoing expenses and plan for further investment in the oil field”.

15. No sum has been paid to the Claimants by the Respondent pursuant to the Heads of
Agreement, or at all, since 7 October 2015, when the Respondent commenced lifting
of, and receiving payment for, product. By letter dated 28 September 2015 sent to the
Arbitrators, of which Mr Pollock was vigorously critical, the Respondent said that it
would make payment to the Claimants if the Arbitrators agreed not to make an
enforceable final payment award prior to the determination of the Respondent’s
counterclaims:

“The KRG undertakes that, if no enforceable final payment
award is made prior to the determination of its counterclaim, it
will pay the Claimants for liftings of condensates and LPGs
delivered to the KRG an equivalent amount per tonne as it pays
other IOCs in the Kurdistan Region who currently deliver their
petroleum to the KRG. These payments would be provisional
and subject to any final award, but would continue until any
final award is rendered.”

No explanation has been given by the Respondent for this letter to the Arbitrators,
save that in his second witness statement of 12 October Mr Speller of the
Respondent’s solicitors referred to that letter as one by which the Respondent “made
clear that, going forward, it would be willing to treat the Claimants no less
favourably than other [international oil companies]”.

The Issues
16. The issues before me were as follows:
Issue 1 ‘Was the peremptory order properly made within the jurisdiction of the

Arbitrators vested in them by s.41 of the 1996 Act and Article 25 of the LCIA
Rules, and therefore does the Court have jurisdiction to make an order under
s.42 of the 1996 Act? There were two sub-issues:

a) Was it a requirement of the making of a peremptory order that the
Respondent had failed to comply with an order to do something
necessary for the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitration,
and if so was that its purpose?

b) Was the Respondent given the opportunity to show sufficient cause for
non-compliance before the making of the Order?

MR JUSTICE BURTON

Approved Judgment

Issue 2

Issue 3

Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq

Does the Respondent have immunity pursuant to the SIA? It is accepted that
the burden of proof is on the Respondent to establish this. The sub-issues are:

a)

b)

c)

d)

Do the proceedings relate to anything done by the Respondent in the
exercise of sovereign authority (s.14(2) SIA).

If so, was it an exercise of sovereign authority of the State (the
Republic of Iraq) or of the Respondent as a separate entity see
paragraph 2 above. It is common ground that the former is necessary
(BCCI v Price Waterhouse (a firm) [1997] 4 All ER 108 at 112 and
Pocket Kings Ltd v Safenames Ltd [2009] EWHC 2529 (Ch)).

If so, were the circumstances such that a State would have been
immune (s.14(2)(b) SIA)? The issues are whether, as a result of s.9
SIA (“where a State has agreed in writing to submit a dispute which
has arisen, or may arise, to arbitration, a State is not immune as
regards proceedings in the courts of the United Kingdom which relate
to the arbitration”) the Respondent is immune to these proceedings
under s.42; and whether, by virtue of s.14(3) SIA, the Respondent is
entitled to the protection of s.13(2)(a) SIA (“relief shall not be given
against a State by way of injunction”) in respect of the s.42 order:

i) Has the Respondent submitted to the jurisdiction within s.14(3)
by virtue of s.9, such as to retain the benefit of s.13 SIA?

ii) Even if so, do s.42 proceedings fall within s.9 and are they
covered by s.13(2)(a)?

Whether the Respondent has waived its immunity in respect of s.14(2)
and, assuming it is entitled to such immunity, that granted by s.13(2)(a)
by reference to s.13(3) SIA.

Whether in the exercise of the Court’s discretion the order sought should be
made: it is common ground that the Court does not “act as a rubber stamp on
orders made by the tribunal” (Emmott _v Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd
[2009] EWHC 1 (Comm) at paragraph 59 per Teare J).

Issue 1: Section 42 of the 1996 Act

17.

Mr Pollock’s case is that the peremptory order was made by the Arbitrators
straightforwardly upon the basis that the Respondent has failed to comply with the 10
July Interim Measures Order without good or any cause. Mr Dunning submits that a
s.42 order is only appropriate where the order of an arbitrator sought to be enforced
was one which was made for the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitral
proceedings.

Mr Dunning’s starting point is s.39 of the 1996 Act, whereby:

“(1) The parties are free to agree that the tribunal shall have
power to order on a provisional basis any relief which it would
have power to grant in a final award.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

20.

21.

(2) This includes, for instance, making —

(a) a provisional order for the payment of money or the
disposition of property as between the parties...”

As set out in paragraph 6 above, as Mr Dunning accepts, by Article 25 of the LCIA
Rules, to which the parties have agreed, the Arbitrators had power (inter alia) to make
a provisional order for the payment of money. Although the heading of s.39 in the
statute refers to “Power to make provisional awards”, it is not in any doubt that the
words of s.39 itself are what is decisive, and plainly give the Arbitrators the power to
make an order for interim measures, not simply an award.

In the event of non-compliance with an arbitrator’s order an arbitrator can make a
peremptory order pursuant to the terms of s.41(5):

“If without showing sufficient cause a party fails to comply with
any order or directions of the tribunal, the tribunal may make a
peremptory order to the same effect, prescribing such time for
compliance with it as the tribunal considers appropriate ”.

Mr Dunning submits however that this is not a sufficient consideration of the context
of the 1996 Act. He points to the “General duty” of the parties under s. 40:

“(1) The parties shall do all things necessary for the proper
and expeditious conduct of the arbitral proceedings.

(2) this includes —

(a) complying without delay with any determination of the
tribunal as to procedural or evidential matters, or with any
order or directions of the tribunal. . .”

This rubric “necessary for the proper and expeditious conduct’ of the arbitral
proceedings is then expressly repeated in s.41 relating to the “powers of tribunal in
case of party’s default”:

“(1) The parties are free to agree on the powers of the tribunal
in case of a party’s failure to do something necessary for the
proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitration.”

Such powers, Mr Dunning submits, are the only powers for the arbitral tribunal which
the parties are free to agree.

Accordingly in the consequential sub-clauses of s.41 which (by virtue of s.41(2))
apply “unless otherwise agreed by the parties”, powers are given to the tribunal.
Consequently, although Mr Dunning did not expressly so submit, it must inevitably be
that the words in s.41(5), which I have cited in paragraph 19 above, must be construed
as dealing with where “a party fails to comply with any such order or directions of the
tribunal” i.e. an order to do something “necessary for the proper and expeditious
conduct of the arbitration”.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

22.

23.

He refers to the words in Parliament (Hansard 5" series vol 568 cols 761-764 (18
January 1996)) of Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, setting out the intention of the Bill as
being to “curtail the ability of the court to intervene in the arbitral process except
where the assistance of the court is clearly necessary to move the arbitration forward
or where there has been a manifest injustice”. He also refers to the words of the
Chartered Institute of Arbitrator’s Practice Guideline 14, referring to one of the
purposes of the 1996 Act having been to provide that “once there has been an initial
breach of a procedural order without sufficient cause the tribunal may make a
‘peremptory order’ to the same effect”. He refers to s.41(6) of the 1996 Act, which
provides for where a claimant fails to comply with a peremptory order of the Tribunal
to provide security for costs and s.41(7), where the Tribunal may take various other
steps where a party has failed to comply with any other kind of peremptory order.
However it must be noted that such steps are expressly stated to be “without prejudice
to 8.42”.

 

As for the fact that there is an express power in s.39(2) to make a provisional order for
the payment of money, Mr Dunning, when pressed as to what other payment of
money (other than security for costs or interim payment of costs, which are expressly
otherwise dealt with in the 1996 Act) would be on his case “necessary for the proper
and expeditious conduct of the arbitral proceedings”, could not think of any.
Nevertheless such an express proviso was in his submission required. He pointed to
the words of Dyson J in Macob Civil Engineering Limited _v Morrison
Construction Limited [1999] CLC 739, where, in an adjudication covered by Part 2
of the Housing Grants, Construction and Re-Generation Act 1996, the Court was
asked, pursuant to s.42, to enforce an adjudicator’s decision for payment of money
under a construction contract. Dyson J described a s.42 order in such circumstances
as a “mandatory injunction to enforce an adjudicator’s decision” (a description to
which I shall return below) and he says (at paragraph 35) that “it would rarely be
appropriate to grant injunctive relief to enforce an obligation on one contracting
party to pay the other”. He stated (at paragraph 37) that “‘s.42 apart, the usual remedy
for failure to pay in accordance with an adjudicator’s decision will be to issue
proceedings claiming the sum due, followed by an application for summary
judgment.” He continued:

 

“38. it is not at all clear why s.42 of the Arbitration Act 1996
was incorporated into the Scheme [for Construction
Contracts]”.

I understand that this has subsequently been amended out of the Scheme.
He concluded:

It may be that Parliament intended that the court should be
more willing to grant a mandatory injunction in cases where
the adjudicator has made a peremptory order than where he
has not. The court should be slow to grant a mandatory
injunction to enforce a decision requiring the payment of
money by one contracting party to another.

39... Tam not persuaded that I ought to exercise my discretion
in favour of granting an injunction. ”

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

24.

25.

Mr Dunning submits that, adopting the approach of Dyson J, in this case also the
Claimants could and should have followed the course not of applying under s.42, but
by way of s.44 of the 1996 Act or s.37 of the Senior Courts Act 1981 for a mandatory
injunction.

It seems to me clear that Mr Dunning’s submissions go too far:

i) As Mr Pollock pointed out, Dyson J was dealing with a case where the
adjudicator had concluded that a sum was due under the contract which could
have been the subject of an application for summary judgment. That is not the
case here. It is plain that this was not a provisional award, nor an interim
payment. As was emphatically stated by Mr Pollock, the Arbitrators were not,
as Mr Dunning contended, “enforcing a putative substantive obligation on an
interim basis”.

ii) There is no purpose in there having been an application under s.44 or s.37 for a
mandatory injunction, when there had been a straightforward order made by
the Arbitrators, after considering the matter in great depth and hearing detailed
submissions, leading them to make an order by way of interim measures. In
any event, from the point of view of enforcing compliance, a Court order
under s.42 and an injunction under s.44 would have the same effect (and
would lead to identical or similar remedies if not complied with).

iii) Dyson J concluded that he was exercising a discretion not to make a s.42
order, not that he had no jurisdiction to make one.

iv) As is clear from s.41(5), referred to above, it provides for the making of a
peremptory order where there is a failure by a party to comply with “any order
or directions of the tribunal”. Mr Dunning sought to point to s.41(1) as giving
context. But that ignores s.40, upon which he relies for his argument, the
General duty of parties. S.40(1) requires such parties to do “all things
necessary for the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitral proceedings”
but that is then explained in terms in s.40(2), namely that “this includes
complying with... any order... . of the tribunal” [my underlining].

I said above that Mr Dunning seemed to me to go too far. In this case the parties
clothed the Arbitrators with a power to enforce their orders, if necessary by a
peremptory order, and including an order for the payment of money. Although the
proper and expeditious conduct of an arbitration would normally include the parties’
compliance with any order which the tribunal may make, nevertheless it is clear that,
although arbitrators will in fact be making orders which they consider necessary for
the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitral proceedings, not every breach of
every order will lead to a peremptory order — there must clearly be room for de
minimis. I do not however consider that it is a requirement for arbitrators in making
every order to spell out either that the order they are making is so necessary, or, once
the order is made and a party persists in not complying with it, that it is necessary for
the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitration that the party should so comply.
There is neither any need for arbitrators to spell out such words, nor (as so often has
been said) a need for the Court to be astute to construe detailed reasons such as were
here given by the Arbitrators in a context of assuming that experienced arbitrators are
in some way failing to comply with their duty.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

26.

27.

Mr Pollock points out the detailed submissions that were made to the Tribunal prior to
the 10 July Ruling by the Claimants and responded to in terms by the Respondent,
some of which I have set out in paragraphs 6 to 8 above. The Arbitrators were
certainly reminded of American Cyanamid principles, and Lord Hoffmann,
unsurprisingly, referred to the balance of justice. However, it is entirely clear that
they were being asked to make, and were considering, an interim measures order to
preserve the arbitration and the subject matter of the claims. I refer in particular to
paragraphs 12, 76 and 77 of the Claimants’ submissions, set out in paragraph 6 above,
and paragraph 122 of the Respondent’s set out in paragraph 7. The Arbitrators did not
spell out a reference to the “proper and expeditious conduct” of the arbitration, but
they clearly concluded that it was appropriate that the status quo ante, whereby the
Respondent paid for what was lifted, should be restored, and that that was necessary
for Dana in particular to be able to continue with the arbitration and be in a position to
obtain any relief. This was not an order on the basis of an assessment of the eventual
outcome, but of a return to the status quo irrespective of the outcome. It is quite clear
that clause 16(e) of the Heads of Agreement (set out in paragraph 3 above) was at the
very forefront of the Arbitrators’ minds (see for example paragraph 9(21) above).
Their Order was neither intended to nor did prejudge the merits, as Lord Hoffmann
made clear (6 May 2014 Day 1/164), but it was effectively preserving the subject
matter of the arbitration, namely the rights under the 25 year contract which the
parties were disputing. When that order was not complied with, it is even plainer that
a further order was required for the same purpose, and that the order and compliance
with it were required for the “proper and expeditious conduct” of the arbitration.
Lord Hoffmann concluded (21 September 2015 at 101/103) that the Arbitrators had
jurisdiction to make the order, and I similarly conclude that this Court has jurisdiction
to make a s.42 order to enforce it. The Court is not, as Lord Fraser would describe it,
intervening in the arbitral process, but assisting the Arbitrators to enforce compliance
with their orders.

The second ground upon which Mr Dunning challenges the making of a s.42 order is
by reference to the need within s.41(5) for the Respondent to have been given an
opportunity to show sufficient cause in respect of non-compliance. This contention is
put in two ways:

i) First that if the order is now to be interpreted as one which required the
Arbitrators to have been satisfied that the making of such order was for the
proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitral proceedings or that the
Respondent’s failure to comply with it was a failure to do all things necessary
for the proper and expeditious conduct of the arbitration, that was not spelt
out. If the basis for the Arbitrators’ conclusion was that if the order were not
made Dana could be ‘driven from the judgment seat’, the Respondent would,
and it is suggested could, have addressed that point, or at any rate addressed it
differently from the manner in which they made the submissions they did. I
am however entirely satisfied that the parties before the Arbitrators knew what
the issues were, and knew that the Claimants’ case was that if the status quo
ante of payment for the products were not restored there could be catastrophic
effects, including the inability of the Claimants to proceed with the arbitration
and/or the loss of the Claimants’ rights under the 25 year contract.
Opportunity to make representations to the contrary was fully taken up by the
Respondent.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Issue 2

28.

ii)

The second contention is by reference to the precise wording of the 17 October
Ruling at paragraph 30. It is important to appreciate that the previous order of
10 July 2014 had not been complied with, and remained in force, and what the
Arbitrators were attempting to do was to put the Claimants at least in part into
the position they would have been in if the earlier order had been complied
with. Mr Dunning complains that the order that was made effectively turned
into a peremptory order after 30 days, without giving the Respondent any
further opportunity to make submissions. However, it is quite clear that what it
was, however phrased, was a peremptory order that was effectively suspended
for 30 days, to give the Respondent a last opportunity to make payment before
it took effect. All the submissions that could possibly have been expected had
been made, and the position could only be exacerbated if there had still been
no payment (as in fact was the case) after another 30 days. It is quite plain that
the Respondent was given the fullest opportunity to show sufficient cause.

I turn to the question of state immunity, to which the Respondent submits that it is
entitled as a separate entity (see paragraph 2 above). It consequently denies that the
Claimants are entitled to any relief against it and asserts its own entitlement to a
declaration pursuant to CPR Part 11. The relevant sections of the SIA are as follows:

i)

The starting point is s.14:

“(1) The immunities and privileges conferred by this Part of
this Act apply to any foreign or commonwealth State other than
the United Kingdom; and references to a State include
references to—

(a) the sovereign or other head of that State in his public
capacity;

(b) the government of that State; and
(c) any department of that government,

but not to any entity (hereafter referred to as a “separate
entity”) which is distinct from the executive organs of the
government of the State and capable of suing or being sued.

(2) A separate entity is immune from the jurisdiction of the
courts of the United Kingdom if, and only if—

(a) the proceedings relate to anything done by it in the
exercise of sovereign authority; and

(b) the circumstances are such that a State (or, in the case of
proceedings to which section 10 above applies, a State
which is not a party to the Brussels Convention) would have
been so immune.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

(3) If a separate entity (not being a State’s central bank or
other monetary authority) submits to the jurisdiction in respect
of proceedings in the case of which it is entitled to immunity by
virtue of subsection (2) above, subsections (1) to (4) of section
13 above shall apply to it in respect of those proceedings as if
references to a State were references to that entity.

(5) Section 12 above applies to proceedings against the
constituent territories of a federal State; and Her Majesty may
by Order in Council provide for the other provisions of this
Part of this Act to apply to any such constituent territory
specified in the Order as they apply to a State.

(6) Where the provisions of this Part of this Act do not apply to
a constituent territory by virtue of any such Order subsections
(2) and (3) above shall apply to it as if it were a separate
entity.”

ii) Arbitration is provided for by s.9:

“(1) Where a State has agreed in writing to submit a dispute
which has arisen, or may arise, to arbitration, the State is not
immune as respects proceedings in the courts of the United
Kingdom which relate to the arbitration.”

iii) 8.13 provides in material part as follows:
“(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4) below—

(a) relief shall not be given against a State by way of
injunction or order for specific performance or for the
recovery of land or other property; and

(b) the property of a State shall not be subject to any process
for the enforcement of a judgment or arbitration award or,
in an action in rem, for its arrest, detention or sale.

(3) Subsection (2) above does not prevent the giving of any
relief or the issue of any process with the written consent of the
State concerned; and any such consent (which may be
contained in a prior agreement) may be expressed so as to
apply to a limited extent or generally; but a provision merely
submitting to the jurisdiction of the courts is not to be regarded
as a consent for the purposes of this subsection.”

iv) So far as material s.2 provides:
“(1) A State is not immune as respects proceedings in respect of

which it has submitted to the jurisdiction of the courts of the
United Kingdom.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

29.

(2) A State may submit after the dispute giving rise to the
proceedings has arisen or by a prior written agreement; but a
provision in any agreement that it is to be governed by the law
of the United Kingdom is not to be regarded as a submission.”

The first group of questions is as follows:

i) Was the 25 year Heads of Agreement with the Claimants entered into by the
KRG in the exercise of sovereign authority?

ii) Was that sovereign authority its own sovereign authority, or that of Iraq (see
Issue 2(b) in paragraph 16 above).

iii) If so, pursuant s.14(2)(a) do these proceedings relate to anything done by KRG
in the exercise of such sovereign authority?

I shall take the first two of these questions together.

Sovereign Authority

30.

The locus classicus for discussion of this question, fittingly in these days in which
Latin has, by virtue of the Times Latin crossword, seemingly returned to
respectability, is the discussion of the difference between acts ‘jure gestionis’ and acts
‘jure imperii’, which Lord Wilberforce addressed in I Congreso del Partido [1983] 1
AC 244 at 262. He there translated them, in a way which is strangely not quite as
helpful in English as in Latin, as the difference between a sovereign or public act and
a private act, meaning an act of private law character such as a private citizen might
have entered into. Lord Goff returned to what he called Lord Wilberforce’s
“authoritative statement” in Kuwait Airways Corporation v Iraqi Airways Co
[1995] 1 WLR 1147 at 1158D, a case in which a plainly governmental act, being the
expropriation of the Kuwait Airways fleet by the Government of Iraq, was followed
by what were concluded to be commercial acts, namely the commercial running of
those aircraft. Lightman J in In re Banco Nacional De Cuba [2001] 1 WLR 2039
relied upon the analysis by Lord Wilberforce and by Lord Goff, particularly at
paragraph 28, where he concluded on the facts of that case:

“28. On the other hand BNC and BCC entered into what was in
form a private law contract and completed it as such. There is
no evidence that the sale was pursuant to any legislative or
executive direction. In this respect the agreement is in a quite
different position from the rest of the reorganisation which was
effected by legislation. In the language of Lord Wilberforce in
Congreso del Partido [1983] 1 AC 244, 263, everything was
done as between vendor and purchaser: there was no exercise
and no need for exercise of sovereign powers. The private law
character of the transaction is not discoloured by the context in
which the agreement was executed, i.e. the fact that the parties
to it regarded the transfer of the shares to BCC as an obvious
and necessary sequel to the statutory reorganisation. Nor is its
private law character controverted by the purpose or motive
behind the transaction of serving the interests of the state in

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

31.

32.

bringing to fruition the completion of the reorganisation of
banking in the final form which it sought. I therefore hold that
BCC’s entry into the completion of the agreement were
commercial rather than governmental (albeit the parties to the
agreement were both state-owned entities) and that accordingly
BCC enjoys no immunity in respect of the transaction in
question.”

In Koo Golden East vy Bank of Nova Scotia [2008] QB 733 Sir Anthony Clarke MR
concluded at paragraphs 40-42 that the Central Bank of Mongolia was a separate
entity within the meaning of the SIA and concluded that it entered into the contract
with the claimant in the exercise of sovereign authority because “the purpose of the
transactions included the refining of the gold and the placing of a quantity of refined
gold on the unallocated account at the bank . . . for the purposes of increasing
Mongolia’s currency reserves”. Mr Pollock criticises this judgment because neither
del Partido or Kuwait Airways, nor indeed Banco Nacional De Cuba were, it
seems, cited.

Mr Dunning refers inter alia to the Recitals to the Heads of Agreement, including (A),
(B), (C) and (F) set out in paragraph 3 above, and above all to paragraph 9 also there
set out. Mr Hamlan, the Minister of Finance of the KRI has produced a witness
statement, which explains the constitutional background:

“9. The Kurdistan Region is governed by the Presidency of the
Kurdistan Region and the KRG. The capital city of the
Kurdistan Region, and the seat of the KRG, is Erbil. The KRG
was formed in 1992 by the Kurdistan National Assembly (later
the Kurdistan Parliament), the first democratically-elected
parliament in Kurdistan (and in Iraq). The KRG exercises
executive power according to the Kurdistan Region’s laws, as
enacted by the Kurdistan Parliament, and the Iraqi Federal
Constitution. The Council of Ministers performs the KRG’s
executive functions. The Council is composed of the Prime
Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, and 22 further cabinet
Ministers. The current government, led by Prime Minister
Nechirvan Barzani, took office in June 2014.

10. The Iraqi Federal Constitution was negotiated in 2005. The
Iraqi people ratified it by referendum on 15 October 2005 and
it entered into force in 2006.

11. Iraq is a federal state. The Iraqi Federal Constitution
describes a federal, de-centralized system of government.
Sovereignty is shared between the federal government of Iraq,
the KRG (which is recognised in Article 117 of the Iraqi
Federal Constitution) and the various provinces or
“governorates” of Iraq. . .

12. The Kurdistan Region and the KRG have a special status
under the Iraqi Federal Constitution. Article 117, First of the
Iraqi Federal Constitution provides:

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

“This Constitution, upon coming into force, shall recognize
the region of Kurdistan, along with its existing authorities,

as a federal region.”...
13. Although the Iraqi Federal Constitution contemplates the
creation of further regions as components of the federation,
only the Kurdistan Region is recognised in the Iraqi Federal

Constitution as a federal region exercising sovereign powers
conferred under the Iraqi Federal Constitution.

14. The KRG is the lawful, democratically-elected government
of the Kurdistan Region. It acts on behalf of the Kurdistan
Region and has sovereign powers derived from and conferred
by the Constitution. Article 121 First and Fifth of the Iraqi
Federal Constitution provide:

“The regional powers shall have the right to exercise
executive, legislative, and judicial powers in accordance
with this Constitution, except for those authorities stipulated
in the exclusive authorities of the federal government.” ...

“The regional government shall be responsible for all the
administrative requirements of the region, particularly the
establishment and organization of the internal security
forces for the region such as police, security forces, and
guards of the region.”.. .

15. Further, Article 121, Second, states:

“In case of a contradiction between regional and national
legislation in respect to a matter outside the exclusive
authorities of the federal government, the regional power
shall have the right to amend the application of the national
legislation within that region.” . . .”

33. The other relevant Articles of the Constitution, not there expressly referred to, would
appear to be as follows:

“Article 111:

Oil and gas are owned by all the people of Iraq in all the
regions and governorates.

Article 112:

First: The federal government, with the producing
governorates and regional governments, shall undertake the
management of oil and gas extracted from present fields,
provided that it distributes its revenues in a fair manner in
proportion to the population distribution in all parts of the
country, specifying an allotment for a specified period for the

 

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

damaged regions which were unjustly deprived of them by the
former regime, and the regions that were damaged afterwards
in a way that ensures balanced development in different areas
of the country, and this shall be regulated by a law.

Second: The federal government, with the producing regional
and governorate governments, shall together formulate the
necessary strategic policies to develop the oil and gas wealth in
a way that achieves the highest benefit to the Iraqi people using
the most advanced techniques of the market principles and
encouraging investment.

Article 115:

All powers not stipulated in the exclusive powers of the federal
government belong to the authorities of the regions and
governorates that are not organized in a region. With regard to
other powers shared between the federal government and the
regional government, priority shall be given to the law of the
regions and governorates not organized in a region in case of
dispute.”

34. It is common ground that there has been a dispute between the Federal Government of
Iraq (“FGI”) and the KRG as to who is entitled to control of Kurdistan’s oil and gas
resources. Reza Mohtashami, of the Claimants’ solicitors, described this in part, in
his second witness statement:

“23. It is public knowledge that since the coming into force in
May 2006 of current Iraq Constitution (approved by national
referendum in 2005) there have been important disagreements
between the FGI and the KRG as to the control of Iraq’s oil
and gas resources and how the revenues derived therefrom are
to be shared. In summary, the FGI and the KRG disagree on
many issues including: (a) the jurisdiction and power of the
KRG to award petroleum contracts; (b) the scope of
cooperation between the FGI and the KRG in relation to the
management of petroleum fields; and (c) the jurisdiction and
power of the KRG to export petroleum produced in the
Kurdistan Region. The dispute between the FGI and the KRG
is pending before the Federal Supreme Court of Iraq and has
been raised in several other legal fora in response to the
KRG’s attempts since 2014 to undertake petroleum exports
independently of the FGI.

24... the FGI does not recognise the petroleum contracts
granted by the KRG and considers the Federal Ministry of Oil
and its subsidiary agency and marketing arm, the State Oil
Marketing Organisation (SOMO), as the sole entity empowered
to export petroleum produced anywhere in Iraq.”

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

35.

The Claimants have exhibited a letter sent to Crescent by the Iraqi Federal Minister of
Oil dated 17 December 2007 asserting that all contracts recently signed with the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of KRG without authorisation and
approval of the Government of Iraq were “in violation of the prevailing Iraqi law”.

In the context of the dispute between the FGI and the KRG as to who was entitled to
the oil fields, an opinion was produced by Professor James Crawford, giving his
advice, which was in fact relied upon, as I understand it, by both parties before the
Arbitrators. His advice includes the following paragraph:

“19. Article 112, First, regulates oil and gas “extracted from
present fields”. It gives the federal government management
powers in relation to that oil and gas, subject to three
important qualifications. First, the management is to be
undertaken “with the producing governorates and regional
governments”, which I take to mean jointly and in cooperation
with those governorates or governments or at least with their
approval. Secondly, the joint management appears to be
limited to oil and gas after it has been extracted, on which
basis the management of the extraction and production process
itself falls outside the federal joint management power. Joint
federal power in respect of such oil and gas will be limited,
presumably, to processing, transportation and export. Thirdly,
revenues from present fields must be distributed in a fair
manner, as stipulated in the Article.

20. On its ordinary interpretation, the term “present fields”
means fields already under production. This is indicated by the
word “extracted” and by the reference to “producing”
governorates. The clear inference is that Article 112, First,
covers oil and gas extracted from fields presently in
production. By contrast, areas merely being explored, e.g. by
seismic survey, are not “present fields”; indeed they are not
fields at all but large tracts of territory, most or all of which
will never produce any hydrocarbons. On this basis, fields not
producing, developed or even discovered - and the oil and gas
yet to be extracted from them - fall outside Article 112, First.
They fall under the Constitution to be managed by the relevant
regional government alone.

21. The time for determining whether a field is “present” or
otherwise is the date of the entry into force of the Constitution
(viz, 2006). I am instructed that at that date there were no
producing fields in the present territory of the Kurdistan
Region, i.e. no “present fields” in the sense indicated above. It
follows that the provision for joint management under Article
112, First, has no application. On the other hand there are oil
and gas contracts with the KRG entered into prior to the
coming into force of the Constitution and providing for future
exploration, appraisal and, potentially, production. Under
Article 141 all such contracts, entered into by Kurdistan since

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

36.

1992, are considered valid in accordance with their terms (save
and to the extent that they contradict some express provision of
the Constitution).”

His Executive Summary includes the following:

“(1) Article 112 of the Constitution of Iraq gives only a
qualified right to the Federal Government to
“undertake the management of oil and gas extracted
from present fields”. This right is to be exercised
“with the producing governorates and_ regional
governments”, and is subject to a condition of fair
distribution of revenue on a basis regulated by law. As
to non-producing and future fields, there is under
Article 112, Second, no federal right to manage,
although regional management of such fields has to
respect strategic policies to be formulated by the
federal government “with” the KRG.

(3) The KRG is itself bound by Article 111: it is not open to
it unilaterally and permanently to take over
management of present (i.e. producing) fields in the
absence of any arrangements for revenue sharing. As to
fields other than present fields, the federal government
has no unilateral rights under Article 112, Second, and
in the absence of agreed strategic policies, the KRG is
entitled to proceed in the exercise of its own
constitutional authority and in compliance with its own
constitutional duties.”

Ireach the following conclusions. The Heads of Agreement relate to the grant for not
less than 25 years of the right to operate the gas fields. It is not simply a contract for
the sale of gas by a government to a commercial party, but the assignment of rights
granted to the KRG under the Constitution to a third party. Mr Pollock submitted that
the contract was simply “designed to ask us, and commercial operators, to carry out
drilling, which is entirely a commercial operation, to build pipelines, a commercial
operation, to get the gas up and to treat it, a commercial operation”. I note however
that in Svenska Petroleum Exploration AB v The Government of the Republic of
Lithuania [2007] QB 886, upon which both parties rely, Moore-Bick LJ, delivering
the judgment of the Court considered, at paragraph 133, that although the first
instance Judge (Gloster J) had pointed out that the agreement contained many of the
hallmarks of a commercial transaction, “the fact that it relates to the exploitation of
oil reserves within the territory of the state suggests that it involves an exercise by the
state of its sovereign authority in relation to its natural resources and so falls outside
the realm of activities which a private person might enter into.” Certainly, as Mr
Dunning points out, and as is apparent from the Constitution, the ownership and
management of oil and gas is plainly vested in “the people of Iraq” and the respective
Governments, this is not simply a contract for sale, but a vesting of long-term rights,
and the parties themselves thought it necessary to include in the Heads of Agreement

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

37.

38.

the waiver of immunity clause set out in paragraph 3 above. I am persuaded on
balance that KRG entered into this agreement in the exercise of sovereign authority.

However it is quite clear that this was an exercise of the sovereign authority of the
KRG itself, not of Iraq. Professor Crawford’s advice creates a powerful case that it
was only the “present fields”, i.e. the fields already producing at the date of the entry
into force of the Constitution in 2006 (which applies to neither of these two fields),
which vested in the FGI, and that the KRG has consequently at all times been acting
in its own right. They would say so, and, because the FGI alleges that the KRG has
had no right to do what they have done, the FGI would also assert that what was done
was not done by way of exercise of the sovereign authority of Iraq. Consequently, as
both parties before me accept that this is a necessary requirement (see paragraph 16
(Issue 2(b)) referred to above), the Respondent, as a separate entity, does not have the
protection of s.14(2) of the SIA.

Tf I had reached a contrary conclusion in this regard, then I would have needed to
have considered whether, within s.14(2), these proceedings relate to anything done by
KRG in the exercise of sovereign authority. Mr Pollock refers to NML Capital Ltd v
Republic of Argentina [2011] 2 AC 495. This was a case in which the cause of
action relied upon in a fresh proceeding in the English Court was an action on a
foreign judgment, being a final judgment in New York, which itself arose out of a
commercial transaction. The Supreme Court decided by a majority that proceedings
“relating to a commercial transaction”, within the meaning of s.3 of the SIA, did not
extend to proceedings for the enforcement of a foreign judgment which itself related
to a commercial transaction, and that the English proceedings for the enforcement of
the judgment obtained by the claimant in New York related to that judgment, and not
to the debt obligations upon which the New York proceedings were based. The
careful logic of the majority is clear from the speech of Lord Mance at paragraphs 85-
86. It is plain that he addressed the difference between a cause of action on a foreign
judgment, which normally precludes reinvestigation of the facts and law thereby
decided, and a claim on a cause of action, which does involve establishing the facts
constituting the cause of action; and that the underlying cause of action had merged in
the foreign judgment. I am satisfied however that none of that careful logic applies to
this case, which is an application to enforce a peremptory order of Arbitrators who are
in the process of resolving the dispute relating to the rights of the parties under the
Heads of Agreement. Had I concluded that the Heads of Agreement fell within the
protection of the SIA, I would have had no difficulty in concluding that the
application before me now relates to it.

If there was state immunity, has it in any event been lost by virtue of s.9 SIA?

 

39.

S.9 SIA:

i) The first question is whether the s.42 application is a proceeding in the Courts
of the United Kingdom which relates to the arbitration. Direct assistance can
be drawn from the judgment of Moore-Bick LJ in Svenska Petroleum
referred to above. The question in that case specifically referred to an
application to enforce an award as a judgment:

“117. Arbitration is a consensual procedure and the principle underlying
section 9 is that, if a state has agreed to submit to arbitration, it has

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

ii)

rendered itself amenable to such process as may be necessary to render the
arbitration effective . . . In our view an application . . . for leave to enforce
an award as a judgment is . . . one aspect of its recognition and as such is
the final stage in rendering the arbitral procedure effective. Enforcement
by execution on property belonging to the state is another matter, as section
13 makes clear.”

Mr Dunning refers to ETI Euro Telecom International NV v Republic of
Bolivia [2009] 1 WLR 665, where an application was made pursuant to s.25
of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 for a freezing order in
support of the bringing of an arbitration in New York. The Court of Appeal
upheld the defendant’s immunity because (per Lawrence Collins LJ):

“\.. it is plain that there is nothing in section 9 which overrides the
prohibition in section 13. Proceedings for a freezing order to preserve the
position pending execution of an award are within section 13, and are not
‘proceedings which relate to the arbitration’ for the purposes of section 9.”

It is plain however that, although the Court noted that there might have been,
but was not, an application under s.44 of the 1996 Act, these were proceedings
external to the arbitration. The proceedings in this case however, initiated
with the permission of the Arbitrators and pursuant to the 1996 Act and in
order to enforce an order of the Arbitrators, plainly do relate to the
arbitration.

Has the Respondent submitted to the Courts of the United Kingdom? This is
only relevant to a sophisticated argument between the parties with regard to
the effect of s.14(3). If the Respondent has submitted to the jurisdiction, as
provided for by s.14(3), then though a separate entity, it is entitled to the
protection of s.13. Mr Dunning submitted that it has submitted and Mr
Pollock that it has not: he submitted that s.9 does not operate by virtue of any
submission to the jurisdiction, but simply records a loss of immunity, as with
ss. 5, 6, 7 and 8 SIA. If Mr Pollock be right, then s.14(3) does not engage, and
thus, given that by virtue of s.9 SIA the Respondent has lost its immunity, and
it is not a State, and so is thus not automatically entitled to s.13 protection, it
would seem that as a separate entity in such circumstances it would not have
the benefit of s.13. There is no direct authority on this point, and the silent
assumption that s.13 would apply even where s.9 applies in, for example,
Svenska Petroleum can be explained by the fact that the defendant in that
case was a State, not a separate entity. However Mr Dunning draws my
attention to academic authority that consent to submit to arbitration constitutes
a submission to any proceedings brought in the United Kingdom Courts in
relation to such an arbitration (Fox & Webb The Law of State Immunity Bt
Ed) 188 and Dickinson: State Immunity at 4.069). It seems to me clear that
it cannot have been intended to exclude a separate entity agreeing to
arbitration from the protection of s.13, and I have no doubt that s.14(3) should
be so construed.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

$.13(2) SIA
40.

Al.

The next question is whether, if I had found that the Respondent was entitled to state
immunity but for its submission within the meaning of s.9, but was entitled to the
protection of s.13, it could have claimed such protection. It is common ground that
the present case does not relate in any way to s.13(2)(b): this is not an application to
enforce an award. The question is whether, when s.13(2)(a) provides that “relief shall
not be given against a State [or, on the assumptions found above, a separate entity] by
way of injunction”, this application for an order of the Court under s.42 is for an
injunction. It is obviously common ground that if there had been application under
s.44 of the 1996 Act, that would have been for an injunction:

i)

ii)

Mr Dunning relies on the words of Dyson J in Macob, which I have set out in
paragraph 23 above. Dyson J described a s.42 order as a mandatory injunction
in paragraph 35 and in paragraph 38 (3 times), and in paragraph 36, although
he contrasted a s.42 order with an injunction granted pursuant to s.37 of the
Supreme (now Senior) Courts Act 1981, he again described a s.42 order as a
“mandatory injunction to enforce a payment obligation”. He plainly
deprecated the use of such an order in the field of building contracts
adjudication, not least in carrying with it the potential for contempt
proceedings and, as I have said in paragraph 23 above, I understand that a s.42
order is no longer available within the Scheme for Construction Contracts. It
is not clear whether there was any argument before him based upon any
distinction between a s.42 order and a mandatory injunction. None appears in
the course of his judgment: all that is said in paragraph 33 is that “there was
some limited discussion as to whether, s.42 apart, the appropriate procedure
was by way of writ and an application for summary judgment, or by way of a
claim for a mandatory injunction’, so that it at least looks as though in the
course of argument a s.42 order was not being equated with a mandatory
injunction. However such was the decision of a Judge who was then in charge
of the new Technology and Construction Court, albeit a first instance Judge.

Mr Pollock however relies upon the decision of the Court of Appeal, Soleh
Boneh International Limited vy Government of the Republic of Uganda
[1993] 2 Lloyd’s Law Rep 208 CA, in which Staughton LJ gave the judgment,
with which Neill and Roach LJJ agreed. The Ugandan Government
complained that an order requiring them to provide security of US$5 million,
in return for obtaining an adjournment of enforcement proceedings, was an
injunction, and relied upon s.13(2)(a). Its Counsel had pointed out that a copy
of the order was endorsed with a penal notice, directed at the High
Commissioner of Uganda in the United Kingdom personally. Staughton LJ
accepted at 213 the Defendant’s contrary “robust” submission that the order
was “plainly not an injunction”. He concluded that “in the context of
§.13(2)(a). . . I would not hold that a simple order for the payment of money
from no specified source is an injunction”. In case he was wrong, he varied
the order, but his conclusion was in my judgment a binding finding of the
Court of Appeal, and one directly applicable to this case.

I conclude that an application for a s.42 order is not an application for an injunction,
such that s13(2)(a) would not have applied.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

Waiver

42.

The third question relates to waiver. If there was statutory immunity and if s.13(2)(a)
would otherwise apply, contrary to my findings in those regards, has the Respondent
waived immunity by reference to the clause set out in paragraph 3 above? I repeat it
here:

“The KRG waives on its own behalf and that of the KRG any
claim to immunity for itself and assets”

It seems clear that the second reference to KRG must be a reference to KRI. These
words, though concise, are robust. It is common ground that a waiver must be
construed strictly and sensibly, and, as is stated in s.14(3) a written consent “may be
expressed so as to apply to a limited extent or generally”. There is no issue between
the parties that this waiver of immunity clause removes from the Respondent any
adjudicative immunity, as it was referred to in the course of the hearing, nor was any
issue raised at this hearing (though KRG reserved its position), because of the
reference to assets, as to any immunity against execution. But what Mr Dunning
submits is that it does not waive the immunity against injunctive relief (if that is,
contrary to my conclusions above, what s.42 constitutes) or indeed against the other
forms of relief specified in s.13(2), specific performance and recovery of land or other
property. Therefore the question for me is whether the wording of the waiver in this
case would exclude immunity against what one might call ‘s./3(2)(a) relief,
including relief by way of injunction:

i) Mr Pollock refers to the decision of Saville J in A Company Ltd vy Republic
of X [1990] 2 Lloyds Law Rep 520. In that case there was a waiver to the
effect: “The Ministry of Finance hereby waives whatever defence it may have
of sovereign immunity for itself or its property (present or subsequently
acquired)”. A Mareva injunction was sought against the defendant, which
claimed sovereign immunity. Saville J concluded that the waiver “does
amount to the agreement and consent of the State that its property can be
made the subject of a Mareva injunction” (at 523). Mr Pollock submits that
this is directly persuasive. Mr Dunning points out: (i) that Saville J may have
been affected by the fact that, as he specifically stated at 523, the contract of
which this waiver formed part was “undoubtedly a commercial bargain
between the parties”: (ii) that a Mareva injunction does have an obvious
impact upon a defendant’s property, such that it could be said to fall expressly
within the wording: (iii) that Saville J said (also at 523) “it is not, of course,
necessary to decide whether clause 6 does amount to consent to other forms of
injunction”.

ii) Mr Pollock refers to Sabah Shipyard (Pakistan) v Pakistan [2002] EWCA
Civ 1643. The waiver clause there provided that the defendant “waives any
right of immunity which it or any of its assets... now has or may in the future
have in any jurisdiction ... and... consents generally in respect of the
enforcement of any judgment against it . . . to the giving of any relief or the
issue of any process in connection with such proceedings (including without
limitation, the making, enforcement or execution against or in respect of any
of its assets)”. In that case the Court of Appeal upheld an anti-suit injunction
“to maintain the status quo pending judgment” (paragraph 23). Again this was

 

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

43.

a clause contained in what Waller LJ described as “an ordinary commercial
transaction”; it is plain however that the Court concluded that, albeit not
specifically mentioned in the relatively long list of examples, there was waiver
of immunity in respect of an anti-suit injunction. Mr Dunning refers however
to Arab Banking Court v International Tin Council [1986] Int LR 1 where
the Defendant was found to be immune from a Mareva injunction. There was
there a very general clause submitting to the jurisdiction of the English Courts,
and Article 6(1)(a) of the International Tin Council (Immunities and
Privileges) Order of 1972 provided that the Council was immune from suit and
legal process except to the extent that “it shall have expressly waived its
ty in a particular case”. By reference to the then wording of Dicey &
Morris, The Conflict of Laws (10 Ed) Vol 1 p. 176 to the effect that “waiver
of immunity from jurisdiction in civil or administrative proceedings does not
imply waiver of immunity in respect of execution of the judgment, for which a
separate waiver is required’, Steyn J concluded that what he called the
“narrower construction” of the jurisdiction clause should be accepted.

 

There is no reported authority which suggests that which Mr Dunning was effectively
submitting, namely what one might describe as ‘trifurcation’ of the question of
immunity, by way of construing a waiver clause to see whether it covers what is now
suggested to be three different matters, adjudication, s./3(2)(a) relief and execution.
He referred to the passages in Fox & Webb and Dickinson, to which I have made
reference above, and they all address the same point as was made by Steyn J by
reference to the then edition of Dicey & Morris, namely a careful distinction
between immunity from suit and immunity against execution. Plainly on any sensible
construction of the waiver clause in the present case, it will be sufficient for that
purpose. However Mr Dunning refers to the latest edition of Dicey, Morris &
Collins: The Conflict of Laws (15" ed) at 345, which reads as follows:

“The immunity from injunctive relief and execution is distinct
from immunity from suit, and applies even if one of the
jurisdictional exceptions applies. Thus, even though a State is
not immune as respects proceedings relating to a commercial
transaction, the State cannot be enjoined from breach of the
contract. But the immunity from injunctive relief and execution
is subject to two important exceptions. First, such relief may
be given or process may be issued with the written consent
(which may be contained in a prior agreement) of the State
[Footnote reference is made to the Tin Council case and to
Sabah where “waiver of immunity in a contractual submission
to the English jurisdiction was held to extend to an anti-suit
injunction restraining proceedings in Pakistan” ]. It has been
held that a waiver of immunity in relation to property will
allow a freezing injunction to be made against a foreign State,
but that a contractual waiver of immunity from execution will
not be regarded as extending to diplomatic premises.” [There
is a footnote reference to Saville J’s judgment in A Company,
with a note that on the latter (but not the former) point there
was criticism by FA Mann in 1991 107 LQR 362].

 

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

44.

Issue 3

4S.

46.

47.

48.

I do not conclude that it is necessary for a waiver to spell out consent in respect of
s.13(2)(a) relief, which, although this is not addressed by Dicey extends, as set out in
paragraph 42 above, considerably wider, beyond simply injunctive relief, to other
kinds of ‘suit’. I conclude that if the Respondent had been otherwise entitled to state
immunity (which I have, as set out above, concluded it is not) the clause here in
question would have been sufficient to amount to a waiver of immunity from suit,
including an injunction, if I had not reached the conclusion I did in paragraph 41
above.

I turn finally to the question of my discretion, which both parties accept I have (see
Issue 3 at paragraph 16 above), as to whether to make the order. Mr Dunning
emphasises the view of Dyson J in Macob that a s.42 order for the payment of money
should be rare — certainly in the field of building construction. Mr Pollock does not
suggest that such an order should be frequent, but underlines that the particular facts
of this case, and what he submits to be the egregious nature of the failure by the
Respondent to comply with the orders of the Arbitrators in an ongoing arbitration,
makes this exceptional.

 

Both counsel referred to the words of Teare J in Emmott, where he gives examples,
at paragraph 62, of matters which the Court may consider, when exercising its
discretion as to whether to enforce the Arbitrators’ order:

i) Mr Pollock submits that the Court should be supportive of the Arbitrators and
not frustrate their intention. Mr Dunning, mindful of his arguments which I
have addressed in Issue 1 above, submits that this should only be where the
Arbitrators have acted for the purpose of the proper and expeditious conduct
of the arbitration. As appears above, I am in any event satisfied that that was
indeed the purpose of the Arbitrators.

ii) Both sides accept that, subject to the question of change of circumstances, the
court should not re-visit the argument before the Arbitrators provided that, as I
am satisfied that they did here, the Arbitrators have addressed the correct
questions. Mr Pollock submits that reconsideration should only arise where
there has been an error of law or a serious irregularity by the Arbitrators i.e.
something analogous to where the Court could intervene by reference to ss.67
or 68 of the 1996 Act. That does not seem to me to put the point in any
different way.

iii) Tam entitled to consider any material change of circumstances.

I accept that other matters can be considered by the Court, such as have been
canvassed before me (iv) the issue of sovereign immunity — now dealt with, (v)
questions of the utility of any order, (vi) if appropriate, Act of State, (vii) comity.

I can deal shortly with (i) and (ii). I see no ground to interfere with or revisit the very
carefully expressed reasoning of the Arbitrators and see no sign of any error or
irregularity: I have already concluded that they addressed the correct questions.

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

49. With regard to (iii), and (vi), which I include here because it was not live before the
Arbitrators:

i)

ii)

iii)

It is suggested that there has been a change of circumstance by virtue of the
fact that the Respondent’s counterclaims have been considered to be
sufficiently arguable to be the subject of debate at the 21 September hearing
as to whether they amount to or constitute a set-off. It is clear however that,
not least because the Arbitrators had previously concluded that the
counterclaims were sufficiently arguable not to be disposed of summarily,
there has been no material change in the approach of the Arbitrators in
accordance with their conclusions in the 10 July Ruling and the 17 October
Ruling. The question which the Arbitrators resolved was the restoration of the
status quo, irrespective of the defence of set-off, i.e. the requirement that the
previous arrangement of the Respondent paying for what was lifted should be
restored.

Mr Dunning submits that, on the evidence before me, there has been a change
of circumstance in relation to the circumstances of the Claimants. I am
satisfied, however, that the evidence before me does not show any
improvement in the financial position of Dana (or of the SPV, Pearl). Indeed
it seems clear that such financial position is more precarious because since the
17 October Ruling, as appears in paragraphs 14 and 15 above, the Respondent
has shut off the source of payment to the Claimants which it had temporarily
permitted.

Mr Dunning also relies on the position of the Respondent. The Respondent,
which appears to continue to be deprived of resources from the FGI, has a
continuing, and, no doubt, increasing, responsibility for arming the Peshmerga,
its military arm, and coping with an increasing flood of refugees, quite apart
from a budget deficit. Mr Dunning refers to paragraph 25 of the 17 October
Ruling (set out in paragraph 11 above) in which the Arbitrators, while
sympathising with the plight of the KRG, considered that they were “in no
position to estimate the significance of these momentous events”, and that they
lay outside the matters to which the Tribunal could conventionally have
regard. The issue is whether, then or now, there are financial circumstances,
possibly deteriorating such circumstances, which either the Arbitrators should
have taken, or I should now take, into account. Mr Dunning places reliance on
an Order dated 24 August 2015 by the Prime Minister of Kurdistan, which
recorded a determination by the Council of Ministers that, in the light of the
“strong and competing demands on the Kurdistan Region’s financial resources
and the limitations on the financial resources available to the KRG”, the
absence of a budgetary law for the two years of 2014 and 2015, the volatile
national security situation and the continued budgetary dispute between the
KRG and the FGI, “there are no funds available to allocate” to payment of the
peremptory Order, and that “funds could not be paid to the above named
companies without prejudicing the urgent demands on the KRG’s financial
resources and priorities’. This, Mr Dunning submits, is a change of
circumstance, equivalent to a subsequent Act of State, such as is referred to by
Lord Hope in Kuwait Airways Corporation v Iraqi Airways Co (Nos 4 and
5) [2002] 2 AC 883 at 1108, being a “legislative or other governmental act .. .

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

50.

51.

52.

of a recognised foreign state or government within the limits of its own
territory [which] the English Courts will not adjudicate upon, or call into
question”. 1 agree however with Mr Pollock that he is not inviting me to take
either of those courses. The Respondent’s Council of Ministers has concluded
that there “are no funds available to allocate to the Payment”. The Arbitrators
however plainly took notice, as do I, that in fact, had it so chosen, the
Respondent could have secured payment to the Claimants without actually
laying out any money themselves (see paragraphs 16 and 17 of the 17 October
Ruling, set out in paragraph 11 above). The fact remains that, as set out in
paragraph 14 above, since the 17 October Ruling and indeed since the Order
by the Prime Minister of 24 August 2015, the Respondent has made and
authorised very substantial payments to other international oil producers, but
not to the Claimants. It is also noteworthy that the Respondent plainly was in
a position to pay substantial monies to the Claimants in September 2015 when,
as set out in paragraph 15 above, stating that it was only prepared to make
payments if the Arbitrators agreed to the unorthodox step there proposed.
There is no basis for any case, whether by way of change of circumstances or
otherwise, for my taking a different view about the balance of justice in
relation to the Respondent than was taken by the Arbitrators.

As to (v) utility, the Respondent says that it is apparent that the purpose of the
Claimants is to seek to issue contempt proceedings, based upon a failure to comply
with a s.42 order, if I make it, and that that would not lead anywhere because there
will be no remedy available upon a committal for such contempt, and/or the
individual, Dr. Hawrami, who it is suggested may be amenable to the jurisdiction of
this Court, would be entitled to diplomatic immunity. In the absence of any likely
available remedy on a contempt application, Mr Dunning submits that this is simply
illegitimate pressure by the Claimants.

Mr Pollock however submits as follows:

i) Now is not the time to speculate as to what remedy may be available on a
contempt application, if such becomes necessary.

ii) No assumption should be made at this stage that the Respondent will in fact
fail to comply with an order of the Commercial Court as done in relation to the
orders of Arbitrators.

iii) This is the only way to enforce the Arbitrators’ orders, which will otherwise
remain uncomplied with.

iv) He submits that it is more than likely that a public declaration by this Court of
failure to comply and of non-payment will be of effect upon the Respondent,
given its role and profile internationally.

Finally (vii) comity. Mr Dunning points to the fact that the Respondent is a friendly
nation and an ally of this country, of whom, for good reason, laudatory things have
been said by the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee. Comity is not
usually used in this context: it is more usually applied in a situation in which the
Court is pleased to pay deferential regard to the decisions of the Courts of other
countries. It seems to me that this Court must do justice between the parties, and if a

MR JUSTICE BURTON Pearl Petroleum and The Kurdistan Reg Gov Of Iraq
Approved Judgment

foreign State, or a foreign corporation, is friendly to this country, but is adjudicated by
this Court to owe money or to have failed to comply with the order of an arbitrator or
a Court, and not to have immunity, the political status of that defendant cannot stand
in the way of justice.

Conclusion
53. For the reasons I have set out, the Respondent does not have state immunity in respect

of the order sought, and I have jurisdiction to make that order, and in the exercise of
my discretion I do so.

