Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 6 of 89

LONDON COURT OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION
ARBITRATION NO. 132527

BETWEEN:

PEARL PETROLEUM COMPANY LIMITED
DANA GAS PJSC
CRESCENT PETROLEUM COMPANY INTERNATIONAL LIMITED
Claimants

and

THE KURDISTAN REGIONAL GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ

spon. ‘ounterclaimant

THIRD PARTIAL FINAL AWARD

Tribunal:

Lord Hoffmann (Presiding Arbitrator)
Lord Collins of Mapesbury
Mr John Beechey

wo January 2017

Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 7 of 89

INDEX

PART ONE: INTRODUCTORY

A. Summary of the Proceedings
B. The Tribunal, the Parties and their Lawyers
C. Procedural History

PART TWO; PEARL'S CLAIMS

mama moo D>

. The Delayed Development Claim
The Earn-out Payments Claim
Losses Suffered by Dana

. Claims under the SAP

The Pewand Invoices

Liquids Lifted Since 30 June 2015
Excess Gas

. Interest

PART THREE: THE KRG’S COUNTERCLAIMS

o

Breach of Warranty
Misrepresentation
Delay in Completion of the LPG Plant
1 Construction of the LPG Plant: A Brief History
Il The Extent of Pearl’s Obligations
(a) The KRG’s position
(b) The Claimants’ position
(c) Opinion of the Tribunal

TIL Pearl’s Performance
(a) The Expert Witnesses
(b) Specific Complaints

(i) Planning

a

ll
26
29
29
33
35
37
40

41

45
45
53
54
55
57

59

59

62

62

et

 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 8 of 89

 

(ii) Project Management Team 64

(iii) Supervision 65

(iv) Procurement 66

(v) The Alternate Work Programme 67

IV Conclusion 67

D. Design and Operational Defects 67

(a) Residue gas 67

(b) Condensate and LPG 69

(c) Improvements 70

(d) The residue gas compressors 71

(e) Coalescer filters 72

() Depropaniser 72

(g) Other matters 72

(h) Conclusion 73

E. Appraisal Work and Seismic Data 73

F. Audit Request 75

G. Delayed Development Claim 78

H. Conclusion on the KRG’s Counterclaims 8
PART FOUR: DECLARATORY RELIEF 78
PART FIVE: COSTS 81

PART SIX: DISPOSITION 82

 

 

Pearl

PEP

Petroleum Liquids
Pewand

PwC

PUK

ROS

SAP

ABBREVIATIONS

Crescent Petroleum Company International Limited
Dana Gas PJSC

Engineering Procurement and Construction
Emst & Young

Full Development Plan

Gas City Limited

Heads of Agreement of 4 April 2007

Kurdish Democratic Party

Kurdish Regional Government of Iraq

Kurdish Region of Iraq

Liquid Petroleum Gas

Nokan, Kar and Zozick joint venture.

Pearl Petroleum Company Limited

Project Execution Plan

LPG and condensate

Pewand Petroleum Transportation and Food Inc
Price WaterhouseCooper

Patriotic Union of Kurdistan

Required on site

Strategic Alliance Protocol of 4 April 2007

 

PART ONE: INTRODUCTORY

A. Summary of the Proceedings

This arbitration arises principally out of a contract called Heads of Agreement (“HoA”)
dated 4 April 2007 and made between the second claimant Dana Gas PJSC (“Dana”) and
the respondent, the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq (“the KRG”). On 17 October
2007 Dana assigned 50% of its interest in the HoA to the third claimant Crescent
Petroleum Company International Limited (“Crescent”) and on 5 February 2009 Dana
and Crescent assigned their respective interests to the first claimant Pearl Petroleum
Company Limited (“Pearl”). For convenience, the Tribunal will use the name “Pearl” to
refer to whichever of the claimants had an interest in the HoA at the relevant time. Also
on 4 April 2007 Dana and Crescent entered into a separate agreement with the KRG
called the Strategic Alliance Protocol (“SAP”) for the development of the gas industry in

Kurdistan.

The arbitration was commenced by the claimants on 21 October 2013. In its original
Statement of Case dated 1 August 2014 Pearl made substantial claims for (a) damages for
breaches of the HoA (b) the price of condensate and LPG (“petroleum liquids”) and gas
sold to the KRG under contracts made pursuant to the HoA (c) damages for non-
acceptance of petroleum liquids sold under such contracts (d) damages for refusal to
perform the SAP.

In its Defence and Counterclaim dated 12 December 2014 the KRG denied liability for

Pearl’s claims and counterclaimed for substantial damages for breaches of the HoA.

On 17 February 2015, the Tribunal ordered that 13 specified issues arising out of the

pleadings be tried as preliminary issues. A hearing for this purpose took place on 20 to

 

05/12/17 Page 11 of 89

 

24 April 2015. On 30 June 2015, the Tribunal issued a First Partial Award in which it

j made 10 declarations as to the rights of the parties on the issues in question.

; 5. On 6 August 2015 Pearl applied for a Partial Final Award ordering the KRG to pay it for

; petroleum liquids sold and delivered or not accepted pursuant to contracts of sale. After a
hearing on 21 September 2015 the Tribunal issued a Second Partial Final Award dated 27
November 2015 ordering the KRG to pay Pearl US$1,963,370,320.

6. On 9 August 2016, the Tribunal held a case management conference at which it gave

e directions for a further hearing on all questions of the liability of the KRG under the
claims advanced by Pearl and the liability of Pearl under the counterclaims advanced by

the KRG, leaving only the quantification of any successful damages claims to a further

hearing.

B. The Tribunal, the Parties and their Lawyers

7 The Tribunal, the parties and their lawyers remain as stated in paragraphs 1 — 7 of the
First Partial Award save that —

(a) At the hearing in September 2016, Pearl was represented by Constantine Partasides QC
of Three Crowns plc, Reza Mohtashami of Freshfields Bruckhaus Derringer LLP and
Daniel Hubbard of | Essex Court, London EC4Y 9AR and the KRG was represented by
Graham Dunning QC and Edmund King of Essex Court Chambers, 24 Lincoln’s Inn
Fields, London WC2A 3EG,

(b) The contact details of Mr John Beechey CBE are now jb@beecheyarbitration.com and
Oriel Cottage, Long Common, Shamley Green, Surrey GUS 0TG.

G Procedural History

The procedural history of the arbitration up to the Second Partial Final Award will be

found in the First and Second Partial Final Awards,

After the Second Partial Award, the KRG applied to the Tribunal on 3 December 2015 to
discharge its order for interim measures of 10 July 2014 (ordering the KRG to make part
payment for petroleum liquids of which it had taken delivery) on the grounds that it had
been superseded by the Second Partial Final Award. On 11 December 2015 Pearl wrote
to oppose the application and on 14 December 2015 the KRG replied. After a hearing on
8 January 2016 the Tribunal issued a ruling on 15 January 2016 by which it dismissed the

application.

On 8 February 2016 Pearl served a revised Statement of Case. On the same date the KRG

served a Statement of Amended Counterclaim.

On 15 March 2016 Pearl served an amended Statement of Defence to Counterclaim. On
the same date the KRG served a Defence to the Revised Statement of Case and a request

for further and better particulars of the Revised Statement of Case.

On 21 March 2016, the parties exchanged requests for the production of documents in the
form of Redfern schedules.

20.

On 31 March 2016, the parties exchanged responses to each other’s requests for the

production of documents.

On 8 April 2016, the KRG submitted the expert report of John Lancester in support of its

application for document disclosure.

On 11 April 2016, the parties exchanged replies to each other’s responses to the requests
for production of documents. On the same date the KRG submitted the expert report of

John Emory in support of its application for document disclosure.

On 19 April 2016, the Tribunal ruled upon the disputed applications for disclosure,
On 21 April 2016 Pearl wrote refusing the further and better particulars requested by the

KRG on 15 March 2016.

On 29 April 2016, the KRG renewed its application for further and better particulars to

the Tribunal and applied for further documentary disclosure,

On 6 May 2016 Pearl wrote to oppose the application for further and better particulars

and offering limited further disclosure.

By a ruling on 18 May 2016 the Tribunal dismissed the application for further and better

particulars and ruled upon the application for disclosure.

 

 

‘i Page 14 of 89

21.
22.
23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

On 2 June 2016 Pearl served the fifth witness statement of Mr Hamid Jafar and the sixth
witness statement of Mohammad Makkawi. On the same date the KRG served the
seventh witness statement of Ashti Hawrami, the fourth witness statement of Ahmed

Mufti and the witness statements of Bradford Camp, Faris Naoom and Diyar Yahya.

On 7 June 2016 Pearl served the third witness statement of Thomas Watts.

On 8 June 2016 Pearl served the second expert report of A. Pedro van Meurs.

On 22 June 2016 Pearl served the expert reports of Richard Boulton, Charles Freeny,
Giacomo Luciani, Mike Wood and Rene Thomson. On the same date the KRG served
the second expert report of John Emory and the second expert report of Gervase

McGregor and the expert reports of Philip Daniel and Herbinder Mudan.

On 30 June 2016, the KRG served the fourth expert report of Mark Cronshaw.

On 29 July 2016 Pearl served the sixth witness statement of Hamid Jafar, the seventh
witness statement of Mohammad Makkawi and the witness statement of Amed Kebali.
On the same date the KRG served the second witness statements of Bradford Camp, Faris

Naoom and Diyar Yahya.

On 4 August 2016, the KRG served an amended Statement of Amended Counterclaim
and the third expert report of Gervase McGregor, the fifth expert report of Mark
Cronshaw, the second expert report of John Emory, the second expert report of John

7

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 15 of 89

Lancester and the expert report of William Hobbs. On the same date Pearl served the
third expert report of A. Pedro van Meurs, the second expert report of Charles Freeny and

the second expert report of Giacomo Luciani,

On 31August 2016 the parties each served skeleton arguments upon each other and the

Tribunal.

The hearing took place at the International Dispute Resolution Centre, 70 Fleet Street,
London EC4Y 1EU on 5 to 9 and 12 to 16 September 2016, Opening statements were
made by each of the parties and the following witnesses and experts were cross-

examined:

(a) Called by Pearl: Mr Jafar, Dr Allman-Ward, Mr Makkawi, Mr Watts and Dr
Kebaili (witnesses of fact) and Mr Freeny, Dr van Meurs, Professor Luciani and Mr

Boulton (experts)

(b) Called by the KRG: Mr Diyar Yahya and Mr Faris Naoom (both by video-link
from Erbil, Kurdistan), Dr Hawrami and Mr Mufti (witnesses of fact) and Dr Lancester,
Mr Emory, Mr Moritz, Mr McPherson, Mr Tomkins, Mr Daniel, Mr McGregor and Dr
Cronshaw (experts).

At the end of the hearing the Tribunal gave directions for the service of post-hearing

submissions and submissions on costs.

On 21 October 2016 the parties each served on each other and the Tribunal their post-hearing

submissions and submissions on costs.

34,

35.

36.

eter Ne we A OT

On 25 October 2016, the KRG made further submissions on costs, inviting the Tribunal to

make no order until the last stage of the arbitration had been completed.

On 26 October 2016 the KRG requested the Tribunal to invite oral closing submissions and
on 28 October 2016 Pearl opposed this application. The Tribunal had stated at the case
management conference on 9 August 2016 that it would not invite oral closing submissions
unless, after having read the written closing submissions, it considered that they were
necessary for the purpose of enabling the Tribunal to dispose fairly of the reference. In the

event, the Tribunal did not think they were necessary.

On 4 November 2016 Pearl served a reply to the KRG’s submissions on costs.
PART TWO: PEARL’S CLAIMS
A. The Delayed Development Claim

Pearl’s delayed development claim is stated as follows in its Revised Statement of Case:

16. The Parties agreed in the Contract that, following the initial
development and production of Petroleum within the Khor Mor HoA
Area, and appraisal of the reserves and development potential of
Chemchemal, there would be “full-scale development” of both fields, in
accordance with good petroleum industry practice. The Claimants were
granted the right to perform every activity connected with that full-scale
development in order to maximise their exploitation of both fields during
their contractual term.

17. The Claimants began to produce Petroleum at Khor Mor, and to supply
gas to the HoA Areas, in October 2008. They had commenced appraisal of
the resources at Chemchemal in October 2007 by acquiring seismic data
on both fields. As explained in the SoC, in May 2009, pursuant to and

11

 

 

37.

 

simultaneously with an illegitimate demand by the MNR for a share of the
proceeds of Dana’s and Crescent’s sale of a minority equity stake in Pearl
to each of OMV and MOL, Dr Hawrami (on behalf of the KRG) began to
dispute the Claimants’ rights under the Contract on grounds that were
baseless and legally incoherent. Dr Hawrami ordered the stoppage of
ongoing appraisal drilling activities at the HoA Areas (at gunpoint in the
case of Chemchemal) and since that time, has prevented all further
appraisal and development of the HoA Areas. The capriciousness of the
MNR’s approach is apparent from a later meeting between Dr Hawrami
and Mr Makkawi in July 2013:

“{U]nless MEM dropped his insistence on such [payment]
guarantee, AH [Dr Hawrami] would make sure that Pearl and its
operators could not implement any expansion project. AH would
[continue to] prevent them from any further development and Pearl
would stagnate as per the status quo, producing only 320MMscfd,
which the MNR refuses to pay for, despite what the HoA may say.
AH continued that he was fine with such scenario and happy for the
gas to stay in the ground for future generations.”

18. As a result of this forced stoppage, since May 2009 the Claimants
have indeed “stagnate[d]” as ordered by Dr Hawrami. They have
wrongfully been deprived of their full Contract rights and prevented from
carrying out the full-scale development of the HoA Areas, their activities
being instead confined to the initial production of gas for the IPPs to the
benefit of the KRG and associated quantities of condensate and LPG (for
which, as the Tribunal has found, they have not been paid in accordance
with their contractual entitlements).

The principal issue which the Tribunal is asked to decide in relation to the delayed
development claim is whether the KRG was in breach of the HoA in the respects alleged

in these paragraphs.

The first question is whether these alleged acts, which may be summarized as a forced
stoppage of appraisal of the Khor Mor and Chemchemal Areas, were in breach of the
terms of the HoA. As formulated in their post hearing brief, the Claimants’ case is that
clause 9 of the HoA granted them the right to “develop and produce” Petroleum within
the two HoA Areas in accordance with a full development program (“FDP”) agreed
under clause 7, That means, they say, that the KRG had an obligation not unreasonably

to reject a proposal for a FDP. They do not complain that the KRG has done so. They

 

41

accept that no such program has been put forward. As they have been unable to complete

the appraisals, they have not yet got to that stage. The allegation is rather that having
granted them rights which can be exercised only after completing appraisals, the KRG
was under a duty to co-operate with them or at any rate not unreasonably to obstruct them

in carrying out the necessary preliminary work,

The Tribunal has already expressed in paragraph 115 of the First Partial Award its
opinion that the KRG was under an obligation not unreasonably to refuse consent to an
appropriate FDP in accordance with industry practice. That opinion was however
unnecessary for the purposes of deciding the issue before it and the Tribunal considers

that it remains open to reconsideration.

The KRG’s expert witnesses on petroleum industry practice, Mr William Hobbs and Mr
Philip Daniel, said that in the absence of express provision, no duty not unreasonably to

withhold consent could be implied. Mr Hobbs said:'

“Based on my experience, express and specific approval from the state is
required and development cannot proceed without such approval.
Moreover, I am not aware of any requirement in international petroleum
industry practice that a state cannot unreasonably withhold its consent
unless this is expressly not allowed in the agreement or agreements or the
legislative framework”

Likewise, Mr Daniel said:”

“(T]he Claimants contend that the KRG could not unreasonably withhold

its approval for any FDP. In my view, formed from my experience of

international petroleum industry and regulatory practice, this standard
' ©4/39/19, paragraph 77.

* 4/36/10, paragraph 39.

SP Case LTFCV-OUSSAPM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 19 of 89

applies only when expressly provided in law or contract. I am not aware of
any instance where a contractor has been permitted to or sought to proceed
with an FDP without the express and affirmative approval of the
government.”

42. On the other hand, the Claimants’ expert Dr A. Pedro H. van Meurs? said:

“The fact that a development plan needs to be approved, does not mean
that it can be rejected for no reason. Indeed, 1 am not aware of any
upstream petroleum contract or concession in which the disapproval of a
development plan is at the ‘discretion’ of the government.”

43. There may be less between the witnesses than appears, because while it is hard to accept
that in theory a government could reject a FDP proposed by a concessionary like Pearl on
arbitrary and irrational grounds, there must be many areas in which the demands of a
government charged with the exploitation of its country’s natural resources cannot easily
be rejected as unreasonable, In such matters, it would be realistic to say that the
government has, as Mr Daniel puts it, a discretion. However, there are cases in which
rejection would plainly be unreasonable (for example, if based on a misunderstanding of

the applicant’s rights).

44, ft is unnecessary for the Tribunal to decide whether such a term should be implied from
petroleum industry practice because the Tribunal considers that the express words used in
clause 7 mean that approval cannot be unreasonably withheld. Indeed, the absence of
such words would substantially detract from the grant of exclusive rights in clause 9. The
Tribunal therefore adheres to the opinion expressed in paragraph 115 of the First Partial
Award.

3 €3/6/7 paragraph 22.

 

48.

test One ant Docinentt=4—Fited-05/12/17 Page 20 of 89

The Tribunal was also invited to decide whether it had concluded in paragraph 115 of the
First Partial Final Award that the KRG could not unreasonably withhold approval of a
“Further Services Plan”. As it has already said, the Tribunal expressed a view (which it
has now confirmed) but did not decide anything in paragraph 115. It certainly did not
decide anything about a Further Services Plan, which appears to be a concept used solely
in the accounting provisions of Annexure 6A to the HoA to distinguish, for the purposes
of calculating petroleum costs, between costs incurred under the existing Services Plan
and costs which might be incurred under work authorized later. The Tribunal’s remarks

were made in relation to an FDP.

The next stage of the argument is that Pearl claims, by reference to the HoA and in
particular Recital G, that the “Initial Development and Production of Petroleum” within
the Khor Mor HoA Area, an appraisal of its additional deep oil reserves potential and an
appraisal of the reserves and development potential of the Chemchemal HoA area were
contemplated by the parties as preliminaries to “full scale development in accordance

with good petroleum industry practice”.

Such appraisals were, according to the expert evidence, a necessary preliminary to an
EDP. No full development could be planned with inadequate knowledge of what was
there. The Claimants say in paragraph 17 of their Revised Statement of Case that they
had begun the appraisal process in both HoA areas by acquiring some seismic data.
However, following the outbreak of “controversy” over the assignment to Pearl and the
sale of shares to OMV and MOL, the KRG has prevented them from carrying out any
further appraisal and they have been confined to supplying gas, condensates and LNG

from the existing wells at Khor Mor.

Mr Watts was cross-examined about Pearl’s failure to submit a proposal for a FDP:*

* Transcript Day 3, p. 146,

 

 

49.

50.

51.

52.

 

“Q. The claimants never made a proposal to the KRG for full field
development. They never put forward a full field development plan to the
KRG, did they?

A. No, because we never completed the appraisal. Why should I submit a
field development plan that was half-baked.”

The KRG’s experts were agreed that a full field development plan must be preceded by a
thorough appraisal of the resources of the relevant area.’ This is something known to

everyone in the industry.

The Tribunal therefore accepts that Pearl’s exclusive right to develop and produce
Petroleum in accordance with a reasonably agreed FDP was, in practice and to the
knowledge of both parties, dependent upon Pearl being able to make appraisals of the

resources of the two HoA areas.

It follows that, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the KRG was under an obligation not
unreasonably to obstruct such appraisals. It is clear law that if the exercise of a party’s
rights under a contract is dependent upon a condition, the other party is under a duty not
to prevent the fulfilment of that condition. In some cases, there is even a duty to co-
operate in ensuring that the condition is fulfilled, but for present purposes it is sufficient

to say that there is clearly a duty not unreasonably to obstruct.®

The Tribunal therefore considers that, as a matter of law, the allegations made in
paragraphs 16-18 of the Revised Statement of Case would constitute breaches of the HoA
which would delay Pearl’s exercise of its exclusive right to full development of the HoA

Areas.

5 Hobbs, Table 3.1.1 item 2, Daniel paragraphs 25-27 (“determining commercial viability...can take a
number of years”) Mr Hobbs criticises the Claimants for not having undertaken more research into the
market for gas. However, it seems to the Tribunal reasonable not to investigate the market in depth until
one knows what one has to sell.

° See the well-known case of Mackay v Dick (1881) 6 App. Cas. 251.

54,

55.

Page 22 of 89

The next question is whether these allegations have been made out. The Claimants’ case
that the KRG unreasonably obstructed their appraisals is based principally upon the
actions of Dr Hawrami, the Minister of Natural Resources, after the outbreak of the
controversy in May 2009. On 18 May 2009 Dr Hawrami wrote a letter Pearl saying that
he was very alarmed by the announcement of the deal with OMV and MOL. He went

on:”

“We have always stated that the HoA does not entitle the contractors to
develop Chemchemal field, nor to extract oil or gas outside the license
boundaries of the Khor Mor licence area. On the Chemchemal field, the
contractors have no development rights except obligations to shoot
seismic and drill 2 appraisal wells for the KRG, and the costs to be
recovered under the Khor Mor revenue,

It is clear in you press release that your deal with OMV and MOL has
been concluded under false assumptions by taken for granted such
development rights. What is more alarming is that you have sold these
right, which you are not entitled to, and this we cannot accept.

Therefore, you are hereby instructed to stop, with immediate effect, all
your drilling activities in the Chemchemal field and temporarily plug the
well until the HoA is fully reviewed and the dispute is resolved.”

It appears that the order to stop drilling at Chemchemal was enforced by armed security
police.*

The letter advances no reason for the stoppage other than the KRG’s view that Dana had
no rights outside the provision of the Services in Annexures 3 and 5. However, the
Tribunal has found in its First Partial Award that the HoA, by clause 9, did grant Dana
the right to develop the Khor Mor and Chemchemal fields.

’DII3/

*DI/IS/

 

56.

57.

38.

59.

 

On 15 July 2009, the KRG wrote a letter to Dana and Crescent which included the

following direction:?

“Dana and Crescent is prohibited under the HoA from undertaking any
work in the two areas except as has been approved by the Ministry of
Natural Resources, With the continuing delay in the Article 140 process
and in light of the purpose of the HoA the Ministry at Natural Resources
has not, cannot and is not authorised by the Council to approve any work
plan except and to the extent required to provide a source of gas for
processing and transportation in amounts nominated by the power plants.
There has been no formal agreement on any work plan, Any work that has
been undertaken or may be authorised in the future by the Ministry of
Natural Resources on the Chemchemal Area has been undertaken and
should only continue to be for the sole purpose of supplementing possible
gas supply shortfalls from the Khor Mor area (as delineated in the HoA) to
satisfy the needs of the power plants.”

The prohibitions in this letter were never withdrawn. Dr Hawrami said in evidence that
he would have been willing to discuss a deal with Dana but that the letter would be

withdrawn only as part of such a deal.

There was some discussion in the submissions over whether the letter and associated
conduct (such as the forcible stopping of drilling at Chemchemal) evinced an intention
not under any circumstances to agree to a FDP and was an anticipatory breach of the
obligation not unreasonably to withhold approval. The Claimants say that the terms of
the letters were stark and clear and the KRG say that it was always open to discussion

with a view to the parties entering into a suitable FDP.
We do not think it is necessary to decide whether the KRG’s conduct was an anticipatory

breach of the HoA. The effect of an anticipatory breach, if sufficiently serious, is to

enable the other party to accept the repudiation and sue for damages at once without

° D123

Page 24 of 89

 

waiting for an actual breach to occur: Hochster v De la Tour'®. However, if the other
party does not accept the repudiation but decides to keep the contract alive, the Tribunal
considers that the only question is whether there was an actual breach. In this case, the
Claimants have not purported to accept a repudiation. It follows that the Tribunal must
decide whether the HoA created an obligation on the part of the KRG not to obstruct the
appraisal of the two areas in respect of which Dana had been granted exclusive rights,
whether the KRG was in breach of that obligation and if so, what loss the breach has

caused to the Claimants.

60. The first question is whether or not Pearl was prevented from appraising the two HoA
Areas as contemplated by Recital G. The letters of 18 May and 15 July 2009 are in clear
and peremptory terms and Dr Hawrami agreed in evidence that Pearl would be obliged to

take them seriously:

“Q, Did you think, Dr Hawrami, that the recipients of this letter,
coming from the prime minister and yourself as Minister of Natural
Resources, could ignore it?

A, No, actually sir, this letter and other letters we send, they are
strong letters, We accept that.”"!

61. The KRG, in its closing submissions, accepts that the effect was to stop appraisal work at
Chemchemal but says that it went on at Khor Mor. ? The position at Khor Mor when the
controversy broke out was that the KRG had approved the location of three wells KM-9,
10 and 11.'? On 19 January 2009, the KM-9 well was ceremonially spudded, i.e. the
drilling rig penetrated the well surface, in the presence of a representative of the Ministry

of Natural Resources.'* On 16 June 2009 KM-9 was completed at a cost of US$23.1

"© (1852) 2 El & BI 678.

"| Transcript Day 5, p. 173.

"2 Closing submissions, paragraph 295.

'° Minutes of meeting 5 November 2008, item 4 (D1/697/4)

'§ Photograph at D1/749

 

   
 

63.

05/12/17 Page 25 of 89

million."® The rig was then moved to KM-10. On 21 July 2009 the KRG instructed Pearl
to stop drilling, shut down the rig and move to KM-11, where the site was not yet ready,'6
In giving the instructions to stop drilling, Mr Tahir of the KRG referred to the KRG’s
letter of 15 July 2009.'’ On 17 September 2009 Mr Watts wrote to Mr Nazhat of the
MNR, protesting against the stoppage as “contrary to the agreed drilling programs,
unreasonable and without any proper legal or contractual justification.” There does not
appear to have been a reply to this letter. Mr Watts said that Pearl kept the rigs on
standby for a considerable time in the hope that the controversy would be resolved but
they were released in the following year. “No further drilling (as per the agreed appraisal

drilling programmes) was conducted at Khor Mor or Chemchemal.”*"*

Pearl did obtain some further data from drilling for other purposes. In late 2010 Dr
Hawrami gave permission for some further drilling at the existing production well KM-4
to understand the gas/water contact depth. This was to prevent water ingress from
affecting the gas being produced for the power stations. In the process, Pearl obtained
some additional seismic data, The KRG relies upon this episode as showing that
appraisal work was not obstructed. The Tribunal does not accept that this incidental
access to data was such as to satisfy the obligation upon the KRG not to prevent
appraisal, It is a telling and unchallenged fact that Pearl retained a drilling rig for some
months after the stoppage at KM-10 in the hope that it would be allowed to proceed with
the agreed drilling program but eventually gave up.

The KRG also relies"? upon the minutes of a board meeting of Pearl in September 2009”
(part of the material stolen from of Mr Makkawi”') in which Mr Badr Jafar is recorded as

having —

‘83 Wauts paragraph 34 (C1/22/18).
'© E-mails at C-710 (D1/710)

"” See paragraph 56 above.

"8 3 Watts paragraph 37 (C1/22/19); Transcript Day 3, pp. 144-146,

!° Skeleton Argument paragraph 499 (B/61/244)

20

 

64.

65.

66.

“clarified that as per the HoA, we have an obligation to present [the
Further Services Plan work program and budgets] to the KRG for their
comments and suggestions...”

The Tribunal cannot see the relevance of this remark. It was true, but takes the matter no

further.

The Tribunal considers it clearly established that since 2009, the KRG has prevented the
Claimants from conducting appraisals of the hydrocarbon resources in the HoA Areas
such as to enable them to present for approval a meaningful proposal for a full field

development program.

The next question is whether, in terms of the KRG’s obligations under the HoA, such
conduct was justifiable. As appears from Dr Hawrami’s letter of 18 May 2009, the
reasons given for the stoppage were that (a) Dana and Crescent had acted unlawfully in
assigning the benefit of the HoA to Pearl and selling shares in Pearl to OMV and MOL
and (b) that the HoA conferred upon Dana no rights except to provide and be rewarded
for the services specified in Appendices 3 and 5. The letter of 15 July 2009 (which Mr
Tahir cited as a reason for ordering Dana to stop drilling at KM-10) gave a number of
further reasons why the HoA was altogether invalid. But the Tribunal has found in its
First Partial Award that the HoA was valid and binding and that it conferred upon Dana
the exclusive right to develop and produce Petroleum in the two HoA areas, There is
nothing in the HoA to prohibit the shareholders in Dana, Crescent or any Affiliated or
Associated Company to which the benefit of the HoA has been lawfully assigned from
selling their shares in that company. Accordingly, the Tribunal need say no more about

the grounds of justification given at the time when the stoppage was ordered.

 

2° Exhibit at D2/532/4

* See the First Partial Award, paragraphs 58-60

21

 

Further grounds have been supplied later. First, Dr Hawrami in his seventh witness

statement on 2 June 2016 said the Claimants had been ordered “temporarily” to stop
drilling because “they had not been properly authorized to drill the well”. The Tribunal
considers this to be a recent invention, First, nothing was said about it at the time.
Secondly, in his third witness statement made on 7 June 2016, Mr Watts produced the
minutes of a meeting on 18 February 2009 between Pearl and the KRG, at which the
latter was represented by Mr Tahir and Mr Nazhat, when “the KRG agreed that the
locations of Wells CH-3 and CH-4 were acceptable and that the company could proceed
with drilling CH-3 well pursuant to Company’s drilling programme.” These minutes
were signed by Mr Tahir on behalf of the KRG. Dr Hawrami made an eighth witness
statement on 29 July 2016 but made only the vague and general assertion that “the
Claimants did not obtain all required approvals from other Ministries and governmental
authorities or from me, as Minister of Natural Resources, to proceed with drilling well
CH-3”.4 He did not attempt to explain the consent given on 18 February 2009. Thirdly,
Mr Watts was cross-examined on his witness statement and it was not suggested to him

that there was any consent which he had omitted to obtain.

Secondly, Dr Hawrami produced an entirely new justification, never before mentioned,
during his oral evidence in chief at the recent hearing. He explained that the Sulaymania
sub-region in which Chemchemal was situated was dominated by a political party, the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (“PUK”), Erbil and the area around it was dominated by the
Kurdistan Democratic Party (“KDP”).24 When Pearl suggested a Production Sharing
Contract for Chemchemal*> the PUK members of the Kurdistan government were
opposed. So Dr Hawrami persuaded the PUK that “nothing will happen without PUK
generally be happy.””° To keep them happy, he envisaged that a “local entity” should

22-7 Hawrami paragraph 30 (2/7/8).

* § Hawrami paragraph 56 (C2/8/14).
** Transcript Day 3, p. 108

?5 See First Partial Award paragraph 72,

*6 Transcript Day 3, p. 108

22

 

have an interest in Chemchemal field, This would happen under the proposed FDP. In the

meanwhile, he —

“put two of my key guys, who are very close to the PUK...as committee
members to liase and sort out the rough edges on the land
compensation...access rights, things like that.”

But, he said, he hadn’t yet prepared his colleagues for the start of the drilling. He was “in

this process” when -

“two significant things happened in the space of 15, 16 17 May which
undermined the entire project, actually endangered the project into
possible explosive thing, conflict and undermined the government
structure entirely.”

The first thing was that Mr Jafar had gone to Sulaymania and “organized and arranged a
powerful PUK member, to start the drilling of the well.” Mr Jafar had indeed done so,
Mr Nazhat of the Ministry of Natural Resources, who cut the tape to start the drilling of
CH-3 at Chemchemal,”* was one of the “key guys...close to the PUK” whom Dr
Hawrami had put on the liaison committee.” He is a “highly experienced and well-
respected geologist” who had been the Director General of Exploration for Iraq national
oil company.*” According to Dr Hawrami, however, he was the wrong kind of PUK guy.
“Within the PUK there are factions” and Mr Nazhat’s presence made “others perceive
that.,.the interests that they have promised .,.may go to a private party rather than to the

whole government,”*!

27 Transcript Day 5, p. 116.
28 See paragraph 39 above.
® Transcript Day 5, p. 126.
393 Watts, footnote 37.

*' Transcript Day 5, p. 117

23

| 70.

Wh,

72.

73.

 

———— ==
Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed OS/12/17° Page

When he was asked in cross-examination why he had never mentioned any of this before,
Dr Hawrami said that he “didn’t actually try to get into the politics in my witness

>? He also drew attention to a passage in his letter of 18 May 2009** in which

statements
he accused Mr Jafar of lobbying “other ministers and senior politicians” to get unfair
influence. Whatever may have been the truth of this allegation (and the Tribunal has
never been invited to investigate it) it can have had nothing to do with the spudding
ceremony which so exercised Dr Hawrami. Mr Nazhat was not a minister or senior
politician and it difficult to see why having the courtesy to invite the senior KRG
technical representative on the liaison committee to cut the tape should be regarded as

illicit lobbying.

The Tribunal considers that Dr Hawrami’s claim that Pearl had created political

34

instability in Kurdistan (“it could have been a civil war”**) is not only irrelevant to the

rights of the parties under the HoA but another recent invention.

The other significant thing that Dr Hawrami says happened in mid-May was the sale of
shares to MOL and OMV. The Tribunal has already stated that this transaction was
entirely within the rights of Dana, Crescent and Pearl under the HoA and will say no

more about it.

Thirdly, there is some suggestion that the KRG was entitled to stop further appraisals
because the Claimants had not disclosed the seismic data it had so far obtained. This
reason was not mentioned at the time and it is not altogether clear to the Tribunal whether
it is relied upon, (There is a separate counterclaim for damages by the KRG for failure to
disclose seismic data, which will be considered at a later stage, but that is a different
matter.) All that need be said is that the KRG, although perfectly entitled to disclosure of

seismic data, never asked for it before May 2009 and never suggested then or later that if

® Transcript Day 5, p. 152.
* DI/I3/1

* Transcript Day 5, p. 147.

24

 

75.

it was disclosed, the Claimants could proceed with the drilling programme, The Tribunal

therefore rejects the suggestion that it may justify preventing appraisals.

 

Fourthly, Dr Hawrami says that the letters of May and July 2009 were not intended to
repudiate the HoA but to persuade Pearl that it was necessary for the parties to have
further discussions about the way forward, including accommodating the demands of the
PUK. It is clear, however, that if Dr Hawrami was to be open to discussions, they were
to be on his terms, of which a key element was to negotiate afresh without regard to the

HoA, He made this clear in cross-examination:

“A. Twas open to discuss developments,

Q. Under the HoA?

A. Any time, looking at plans, but implementing them we have to find
a solution about this $12 billion investment, for example. That cannot be
managed under the HoA framework.”

Q. Your discussion with the claimants after [the July 2009 letter] were
about renegotiating the HoA itself; yes?

A. Renegotiating the contents, moving it as required by the HoA itself
onto the platform it should have been on years before.*®

Q. ...If you are presented with a development plan which optimizes
production in a way which is consistent with international petroleum
industry practice, do you agree that under the existing HoA you have an
obligation to approve it?

A. Under the existing HoA terms? No sir.”°”

In summary, the Tribunal considers that the refusal of the KRG to allow the Claimants to
continue appraisals was, first, because of a mistaken view that Dana and Crescent was not
entitled to assign the benefit of the HoA to their joint subsidiary Pearl or to sell shares in

Pearl without cutting the KRG in on the deal and secondly, to put pressure on the

Claimants to negotiate better terms for the KRG in a FDP than it could legitimately have

** Transcript Day 5, p. 169.
* Transcript Day 5, p.175

” Transcript Day 5, p. 190.

25

71.

78.

79.

80.

claimed under the terms of the HoA. Neither of these was a proper justification for its

actions, which the Tribunal considers was a breach of its obligations under the HoA.

The question of what loss these breaches of contract have caused the Claimants will have

to be decided at the next stage of the arbitration.

B. The Earn-out Payments Claim®

The consideration for the sale of shares in Pearl by Dana and Crescent to OMV and MOL
was a lump sum together with further payments contingent upon further reserves of gas
being proved and quantities of gas being produced. Such arrangements are common in

the industry and the contingent consideration is called an “earn-out” payment.

Dana and Crescent claim that the KRG’s wrongful refusal to allow Pearl to appraise the
gas reserves at Khor Mor and Chemchemal and then to develop those reserves has caused
them the loss of some US$3.3 billion in earn-out payments which would otherwise have
become due. The question for the Tribunal at this stage is whether as a matter of law this

loss is recoverable.

Dana and Crescent assigned their rights under the HoA to Pearl on 5 February 2009. The
breaches of the HoA upon which Dana and Crescent rely all occurred after they had
ceased to be parties. The KRG owed them no contractual duties, But they submit that
Pearl is entitled to recover their losses under the exceptional rule based on the decision of

the House of Lords in The Albazero.”

In The Albazero the plaintiff had shipped a cargo of oil pursuant to a time charter. Due to

a breach of the charter by the owner, the cargo was lost at sea. However, the charterer had

*8 Revised Statement of Case paragraphs 74-82.

391977] AC 774

26

 

 

81.

82.

83,

 

issued a bill of lading under which, by the time of the loss, the property in the oil had

already passed to a purchaser. So the breach of the charter had caused no loss to property
of the charterer and the purchaser was not a party to the charter. Lord Diplock said that
there was an exception to the rule that the party to the contract of carriage could recover

only for his own loss, which he formulated as follows:

“(Jn a commercial contract concerning goods where it is in the
contemplation of the parties that the proprietary interests in the goods may
be transferred from one owner to another after the contract has been
entered into and before the breach which causes loss or damage to the
goods, an original party to the contract, if such be the intention of them
both, is to be treated in law as having entered into the contract for the
benefit of all persons who have or may acquire an interest in the goods
before they are lost or damaged, and is entitled to recover by way of
damages for breach of contract the actual loss sustained by those for
whose benefit the contract is entered into.”

On the facts of The Albazero, however, the exception did not apply because it was

contemplated by the parties that the purchaser would have his own remedy under the bill

of lading.

The exception noted by Lord Diplock was applied by the House of Lords in Linden
Gardens Trust Ltd v Lenesta Sludge Disposals Lid", A property company contracted
with a builder for the construction of a development on land in Hammersmith. Before the
building had been erected it transferred the property in question to an associated company
(“Investments”), There were defects in the construction and the question was whether the
property company could claim substantial damages when, at the time of the breach, it no
longer had an interest in the property. The House decided that it fell within the general

principle of the Albazero exception.

The Tribunal considers that, stated at its broadest, the A/bazero exception applies when a

party has entered into a contract concerning property (e.g. goods to be carried, buildings

 Atp. 847.

4111994] 1 AC 85

27

 

84.

85.

86.

to be erected) which is either owned or may be transferred to someone else. The

contracting party may then recover substantial damages for a breach of contract which
causes loss relating to that property even though he had no interest in the property at the
time of the breach. Otherwise there would be no remedy for the loss caused by the

breach. It would fall into what has been aptly called a black hole.

The present case, however, is quite different. Pearl does have a remedy for loss caused by
delayed development. And Dana and Crescent are not in the position of parties on whose
behalf the HoA was made or who have acquired the property to which it related, If the
shareholders in Dana or Crescent had sold their shares on similar terms, they would
plainly not have had a claim against Dana for losses caused by breaches of the HoA.
Only the companies themselves would have been able to bring such a claim, This is not
because the claim by the shareholders is for “reflective loss”. The loss does not reflect a
diminution the value of the company’s assets. It is a different kind of loss. But it arises
out of a transaction to which the KRG was not a party and for which the KRG has

assumed no responsibility.

Why should it be any different because the claim is by the shareholders in Pearl, the
assignee of Dana and Crescent. It still arises out of a transaction to which the KRG was
not a party, The assignment of the HoA to Pearl is quite irrelevant to the claim by
Crescent and Dana for loss of the earn-out payments. Their claim would have been
exactly the same if Pearl had been the original contracting party, with Dana and Crescent
each owning 50% of the shares. It could not then have been argued that the KRG’s
liabilities could be increased by the arrangements which the shareholders in Pearl made

for the sale of their shares.

The Tribunal therefore considers that the claim for earn-out payments must fail.

28

 

88.

89.

 

Cc. Losses Suffered by Dana

Pearl alleges that in consequence of the KRG’s failure to pay for condensate and LPG,
one of its shareholders, namely Dana, was starved of the cash which would otherwise
have flowed through by way of dividends or loan repayments. As a result, it had to take
retrenching measures which caused it losses. Pearl claims that under the Albazero

principle it should be entitled to recover these losses on behalf of Dana.

The Tribunal considers that this claim must fail for the same reason as the earn-out claim,
namely that it is a claim for loss suffered by a third party which does not fall within the
Albazero principle. The KRG, in entering into the HoA with Dana and Crescent, assumed
obligations to those companies but not to their shareholders. When the benefit of the
contract was assigned to Pearl, the KRG became liable to Pearl but not to Pearl’s
shareholders, One may ask whether it could credibly have been asserted that MOL or
OMV could have made a claim for losses suffered as a result of not receiving cash as
creditors of or shareholders in Pearl. But Dana was in the same position. It is true that
Dana and Crescent were not, by virtue of the assignment without any novation, released
from their obligations under the HoA. But they ceased to have any enforceable rights
under the HoA. Such rights are being enforceable by Pearl, which can sue only for loss

caused to itself.

D. Claims under the SAP

The SAP® was an agreement concluded on the same date as the HoA between Dana and
Crescent (“the Companies”) of the one part and the KRG of the other. It provided in
clause 2 (entitled “Purpose”) for the parties to —

“pz

29

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 35 of 89

“, undertake a joint review of the natural gas energy sector to prepare a
comprehensive natural gas subsector development plan that will guide and
promote the development of KRI’s natural gas infrastructure for the
future.”

90. Clause 3 provided for a review which would investigate, among other things, the
investment requirements for the development of the natural gas energy sector and clause

4 for the formulation of a development plan. Clause 5 then provided:

“On the basis of the review and investor plan referred to in Clauses 3 and
4 above, the Parties shall develop and implement the concept of a private
sector-driven petrochemical/downstream complex, “Kurdistan Gas City”
to be located in an optimal location within the Kurdistan Region, utilizing
gas as it becomes developed and available from future development of gas
fields in and into the KRI.”

91. Finally, clause 6 provided:

“In consideration of the Companies undertaking activities under the SAP,
the Companies shall be entitled to reimbursement of all costs and expenses -
funded by the Companies under the SAP, the terms of which shall be

separately agreed...”

92. | The KRG terminated the SAP in one of its letters of 24 May 2009." It did, however,

invite a claim for reimbursement of costs under clause 6:

“In accordance with section 6 of the SAP, if you wish to agree on terms to
pay reimbursable costs and expenses funded by the Companies under the
SAP, please provide to the Minister of Natural Resources, within 30 days
hereof, a statement, receipts and other supporting documentation, and an
accounting of such reimbursable costs and expenses funded by the
Companies.” .

93. Pearl at first alleged that the termination was wrongful. The KRG answered that it had no
further obligations under the SAP. It was not obliged actually to build Kurdistan Gas

* D120

30

 

 

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 36 of 89

94.

95.

96.

City. Dana and Crescent now say that the point is moot because they confine their claim
to reimbursement under clause 6. There is a complication about this because Pearl’s
quantum expert Mr Boulton, in estimating Pearl's losses from delayed development, has
surveyed the potential market for the gas it could have produced and included a scenario
in which Gas City had become a reality. The KRG invites the Tribunal to declare that the
KRG had no obligation to build Kurdistan Gas City and that Mr Boulton’s scenario

therefore lacks reality.

The Tribunal does not think it should make such a declaration because the fact that the
KRG was not obliged to build Kurdistan Gas City does not mean that it would not have
been built, whether in co-operation with Dana and Crescent or someone else. The terms
of the SAP are only one matter to be taken into account in deciding whether this

prediction is realistic or not.

That leaves the claim for reimbursement. Dana and Crescent formed a joint subsidiary
(Gas Cities Limited or “GCL”) to carry out the SAP work. Its accounts, audited by
PricewaterhouseCoopers (“PwC”), show expenditure of US$1,263,000. PwC has also
verified direct expenditure by Crescent of US$391,000.*5 The total claim is for
US$1,654,000.

To this claim the KRG raises three technical and unmeritorious objections. First, clause 6
says that the terms of reimbursement “shall be separately agreed”. The KRG says that it
has not agreed the terms and therefore does not have to pay anything. The Tribunal has
no hesitation in rejecting that proposition. The clause provided that reimbursement of
costs was the consideration for the Companies’ services under the SAP, as the KRG itself

recognized in its letter of termination: The terms to which clause 6 referred were simply

“2/343

“ B2/344

: i 37 0f89

97.

98.

99.

those relating to the method of making claims and payment. As it is accepted that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute concerning the SAP, the Tribunal can decide

these matters.

Secondly, the KRG says that Dana and Crescent cannot claim for the US$1,263,000 spent
by GCL, which was not a party to the SAP. The unreality of this objection is shown by
the fact that by far the largest part of this expenditure consisted of recharges to GCL of
expenditure by its shareholders, Dana and Crescent. In any case, it does not matter where
the money spent in discharge of Dana and Crescent’s obligations under the SAP came
from. That is a matter between them and whoever provided the money. So far as the
KRG is concerned, it is money spent to carry out the obligations assumed by Dana and

Crescent.

Thirdly, the PwC audits were for the entire financial year ending 31 December 2009 and
do not have a cut-off date at 24 May, when the KRG terminated the contract. Therefore,
says the KRG, they might include money spent when there was no longer any obligation
to do so. The Crescent accounts for 2009 show that US$71,000 was spent, as against
US$214,000 in 2007 and US$106,000 in 2008. That does not suggest substantial

expenditure after the date of termination. The GCL figures are not broken down by year.

Considering the inherent improbability that Dana and Crescent (or GCL) went on
incurring expense on the SAP after the outbreak of the controversy and the limit to the
detail in which these matters can be investigated by the Tribunal, it accepts the audited

figures and will order payment of US$1,654,000.

32

 

100.

101.

102.

17 Page 38 of 89

E. The Pewand Invoices

The obligation the KRG under BP [7] of Annexure 2 to the HoA, in the event that (as the
Tribunal has found) Pearl was unable to export and market the LPG and condensate, was
to “purchase and lift (or arrange for the lifting by domestic companies/users) and pay for”
the LPG and condensate. The KRG nominated Pewand Petrol Transporting and Food Inc
(“Pewand”) to lift the petroleum liquids*® but would not pay them for doing so. Faced
with the possibility that Pewand would not lift the liquids without being paid, Pearl
decided it pay them on the KRG’s behalf. On 15 November 2009 Mr Watts wrote to Dr

Hawrami:*7

“[W]e are aware of the meeting held on 12 November 2009 with Pewand,
the trucking contractor engaged on behalf of the KRG in September 2008,
concerning its outstanding invoices committed to be paid not later than 15
November. We understand that the KRG is now unable to settle these
invoices direct and we are accordingly arranging to pay Pewand on behalf
of the KRG forthwith. This is being done on the basis that KRG will
reimburse us in due course.”
Dr Hawrami made no answer and Pearl continued to pay Pewand’s invoices. It alleges

that these payments amount to US$17,378,904.10 and claims repayment by the KRG.

There is no dispute that the KRG was obliged to arrange for lifting at its own expense.
That is plain on the face of the HoA and is not denied. Nor is it denied that it did not pay
Pewand and that Pearl did so instead. Pearl did so because it was concerned that Pewand
might be reluctant to do the lifting for nothing, which seems to be Tribunal an entirely

reasonable apprehension,

 

* DI/89

* pi/13/2

33

 

103.

104.

105.

 

In those circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it would be a defective system of law
which did not allow Pearl to recover its expenditure. Various legal theories have been put
forward to explain this result, but the one which seems to the Tribunal most appropriate is
that the payments are recoverable as damages for breach of the KRG’s failure to pay
Pewand to lift the liquids. It was reasonable for Pearl to apprehend that, unless paid,
Pewand would not lift and that this could cause the plant to have to shut down. It was
reasonable for Pearl to take steps to mitigate the loss it would otherwise have suffered by
paying Pewand’s charges, especially as this was done after giving notice to the KRG that
it would be seeking to reclaim the payments and not receiving any objection. As Lord
MacMillan said in Banco de Portugal v Waterlow & Sons Ltd

“Where the sufferer from a breach of contract finds himself in

consequence of that breach placed in a position of embarrassment the

measures which he may be driven to adopt in order to extricate himself

ought not to be weighed in nice scales at the instance of the party whose
breach of contract has caused the difficulty.”

It is agreed between the quantum experts (Mr Boulton and Mr McGregor) that Pearl has
submitted invoices to the KRG for Pewand payments in the sums of US$5,151,850 from
Pearl itself and US$12,227,054 from Dana. The KRG objects that Pearl cannot recover
the loss suffered by Dana, but the Tribunal considers that as assignee of all the rights of

Dana and Pearl under the HoA, Pearl must be the party entitled to make the claim.

The KRG’s quantum expert Mr McGregor gave evidence that there was insufficient proof
that Pearl had actually paid all the sums invoiced to the KRG as payments to Pewand.
On 14 September 2016 the quantum experts submitted a joint report” in which they said
they were giving further consideration to the supporting evidence on payment. The

Tribunal will therefore defer quantification of this sum to the next hearing.

*§ [1932] AC 452, 507.

* K/68

34

 

106.

107.

108.

109.

05/12/17 Page 40 of 89

 

FE Liquids Lifted Since 30 June 2015

The Second Partial Final Award was in respect of petroleum liquids sold and delivered to
the KRG or which the KRG had refused to buy up to 30 June 2015. Pearl now makes a
claim for liquids lifted from that date until 31 March 2016.

The quantum experts (Mr Boulton and Mr McGregor) agree that the sums invoiced at
international prices in accordance with the First Partial Final Award for this period
totaled US$151,095,282, It is also agreed that the KRG paid Pearl US$30,000,000
during this period. So Mr Boulton quantifies the claim at $US121,095,282.°

The KRG objects that Pearl has failed to prove that during the period in question it was
unable to export within the meaning of BP [7]. The Tribunal considers that there is
nothing in this point. The Tribunal considered the evidence in detail for the purposes of
the First Partial Final Award and concluded that Pearl was unable to export. There was

no evidence from the KRG to suggest that anything had changed.

The invoices were audited by Ernst & Young (E&Y”). Their report stated that they had
been provided with all the invoices, loading tickets, contracts for direct local sales, bank
accounts and underlying accounting records. E&Y adopted a sampling method in
accordance with ISA 530 but did not state what proportion they sampled. They also
adopted a materiality test in accordance with ISA 320 but did not state their level of
materiality. Mr Boulton explained why he regarded this as a sufficient audit but Mr
McGregor was not satisfied. On the point the Tribunal accepts the opinion of Mr

Boulton.

°K 68/4-5.

35

 

110.

il.

41 of 89

There is however a more difficult point arising out of a Second Memorandum of
Agreement dated 14 March 2016, According to Mr Makkawi, from September 2015 the
KRG stopped Pearl from selling condensate and LPG in the local market. It lifted the
products but did not pay for them.*! This went on until February 2016. Pearl, starved of
cash, negotiated an agreement under which, in return for being allowed to sell in the local
market, it waived its right to charge the KRG international prices.” The relevant part of
the agreement read as follows:

“Currently, Dana Gas PJSC, Crescent Petroleum Company International,

and Pearl Petroleum (the "Companies") are directly selling and receiving

payments for condensate and LPG. We agree, in respect of all condensate
and LPG produced from Khor Mor since 1February2016, that:

1. For the purposes of this agreement, the price the Companies receive
for the LPG and condensate produced at Khor Mor will be deemed to
be the international FOB Med market prices without netback, and the
Companies will not invoice for the delta between the actual price
realised for the LPG and condensate and the international FOB Med
market price for those products.

”

Pearl was allowed to sell LPG locally from 1 February 2016 and has not invoiced the
KRG for any sales since that date. But it says that in fact it was not allowed to sell
condensate until 3 March 2016, Until then, the condensate was lifted on behalf of the
KRG but not paid for.> Mr Mufti, the Ministry of Natural Resources head of audit,
confirmed in cross-examination that on 29 February 2016, Qaiwan (a transporter) “were

still lifting condensate on the KRG’s instructions”.*

*' Transcript Day 3, pp. 47-48
* D1/601
%3 Makkkawi at Transcript Day 3, p. 48.

* Transcript Day 6, pp.5-6

 

 

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 42 of 89

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

The amount invoiced by Pearl for condensate for the period from 1 February 2016 to 3

March 2016 was US$11,633,590.

The KRG submits that as the Second Memorandum of Agreement was operative from 1
February 2016, Pearl must be deemed to have sold directly into the local market from that
date. It therefore cannot invoice the KRG under BP [7] of the MoA. The Tribunal does
not accept this. Pearl agreed not to charge the KRG the delta between the international
price and the actual price realized. This cannot apply to a case in which the KRG simply

took the condensate and Pearl realized no price at all.

The Tribunal will therefore order payment of US$121,095,282 for the period from 30
June 2015 to 31 March 1016.

G. Excess Gas

The HoA provides for the sale by Pearl of what it calls “Excess Gas”:°°

“Dana shall be entitled to take title and market any " Excess Gas" on an
optimised arms-length commercial basis, with first priority being given to
local industries, and then (if available in sufficient quantities) for export.
"Excess Gas" shall mean any gas in excess of the specification gas
required to be supplied by Dana to the IPP, on behalf of the KRG, free of
charge...”

In its First Partial Final Award, the Tribunal said that “excess gas” meant gas in excess of
such as was “produced by the plant at Khor Mor constructed in accordance with the

Initial Services Plan”.

BP [3].

 

117.

118.

119,

 

Pearl says that the Initial Services Plan, as updated, provided for the installation of two

LPG trains. These were capable of producing a maximum of 291,600 MMBtu/d.
Because the construction of the LPG plant was delayed, Pearl installed an EPF. This was

ded to be a temporary stop-gap . The i ion was that when the LPG trains
were commissioned, it would be removed. Its permanent use was not part of the Initial
Services Plan. But the KRG has instructed Pearl to run the EPF in parallel with the LPG
plant, thereby producing about 330,000 MMBtu/d for the power stations. Pearl says that
the additional gas provided by the EPF is Excess Gas and the KRG must pay for it.

The reasoning of the Tribunal in its First Partial Final Award is set out in paragraphs 188
and 189:

“188. The drafting of the HoA could have been clearer but we think that
the KRG is right. Dana was to receive repayment of all its expenses in
providing the services in Annexure 3 and a remuneration fee, but the KRG
in return was entitled to the gas that Khor Mor produced. As we noted in
connection with issue (a), the KRG accepts that it would not be entitled to
demand that Dana make further investments at Khor Mor (or anywhere
else) to enlarge its gas producing capacity. That would be a Further
Services Plan requiring the consent of both parties, But the KRG is in our
opinion entitled to whatever gas the Initial Services Plan can produce.

189, The parties clearly considered what the position would be if the
power stations were unable to use all the gas. They provided that in such a
case, Dana should be able to sell the gas to third parties or, if unable to
sell, to re-inject or flare it. But they do not appear to have contemplated
the possibility of a sale to the KRG itself. There are no provisions for
determining the price at which such sales would take place. On the
contrary, Dana's obligation was to market the gas on an “arm’s length
commercial basis" and Annexure 6A says the sales involving the KRG are
not to be regarded as at arm’s length.”

The Tribunal considers that it was never contemplated by the parties that the KRG would
be buying Khor Mor gas from Pearl under the terms of the HoA. That is demonstrated by
the provision that Pearl was to sell excess gas at arm’s length prices but that sales to the

KRG were not to count as being at arm’s length. The concept of excess gas in the HoA

38

121.

122.

123.

 

was, in the opinion of the Tribunal, intended to mean gas from Khor Mor as constructed

and operated pursuant to Annexure 3 to the HoA but which the KRG for some reason
could not or did not want to use. On the other hand, if the parties agreed to an
enlargement of the facilities beyond the requirements of Annexure 3, they could also
agree on arrangements as to what, if anything, the KRG would pay for the additional gas

thereby made available,

Annexure 6A (Accounting Procedure) defines “Initial Services Plan” as “the scope of the
Services set out in Annexure 3 and Annexure 5 as updated and including appraisal,
drilling, well rehabilitation, Operation Activities and the purchase and installation of two
LPG trains and other processing facilities...” A “Further Services Plan” is an “approved

plan or plans other than the Initial Services Plan”.

It must be borne in mind that the main purpose of the provisions of Annexure 6A is to
control the expenditure which Pearl can charge as petroleum costs. Expenditure under the
Initial Services Plan is authorized and chargeable but a Further Services Plan would

require KRG approval under clause 2,1 of the Annexure,

The definition of the Initial Services Plan as the Services “set out in Annexure 3...as
updated” reflects the view that the Initial Services Plan would in practice from time to
time undergo agreed modifications without the formality of Pearl presenting a Further
Services Plan. The addition of the EPF would have been such a modification, whether it
was to be on a temporary or permanent basis, and Pearl would have been entitled to

charge the costs as petroleum costs.

The Tribunal therefore considers whatever gas plant has been constructed and put into
operation at Khor Mor without there having been any revision of the terms must be

treated as having been part of the Initial Services Plan. If Pearl considered that running

39

 

124.

125.

126.

127.

 

the EPF in parallel with the LPG plant was outside its obligations under Annexure 3 it

was open to it to say so and, if necessary, have the dispute resolved. But the Tribunal
considers that Pearl was not entitled to agree to run the EPF and unilaterally charge the
KRG for the gas.

The claim for excess gas therefore fails,

H. Interest

Pearl is entitled to interest on the sums owing in respect of condensate and LPG sold or
agreed to be sold to the KRG and the sums paid in respect of the Pewand invoices. Clause
1.6.2 of the HoA provides:

“All sums due by one Party to the other under the HoA shall, for each day
such sums are overdue, bear interest compounded monthly at LIBOR plus
two percent (2%) or actual interest cost incurred by the affected Party,
whichever is the greater.”

There is no evidence of the actual interest cost incurred by Pearl and the Tribunal
therefore considers that interest should be payable at LIBOR plus 2%, compounded as
directed by clause 1.6.2. It is submitted by Dana that it (but not Crescent) incurred an
actual interest cost of 9%, that being the rate payable under the sukkuk by which it
financed its interest in the project. The Tribunal considers, however, that Dana was not
for this purpose an “affected Party”. The LPG and condensate was sold by Pearl and the

Pewand invoices were paid by Pearl. It was Pearl alone which was the affected Party.

The SAP has no provision about interest but the Tribunal considers that in the exercise of
its jurisdiction under rule 26(4) of the LCIA Rules it should award Dana and Crescent
simple interest at LIBOR plus 2% on the sums payable by way of reimbursement of

expenses.

40

128.

129.

130.

131.

ase I:T/-cv- = ument 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 46 of 89

In each case, interest will run until the order is complied with,

The question of interest on sums which may be recovered by Pearl under its delayed

development claim is deferred until that claim has been quantified.

PART THREE: THE KRG’S COUNTERCLAIMS

A. Breach of Warranty

In its Statement of Amended Counterclaim dated 8 February 2016 the KRG introduced a
claim for breach of a warranty as to the availability of an LPG plant alleged to have been
given by Pearl in the HoA.** This allegation was elaborated in the KRG’s skeleton
argument of 31 August 2016°” but makes no appearance in its post-hearing submissions
of 21 October 2016. This may be because the skeleton argument said that the KRG did
not allege that the breach of warranty had caused it any loss, It asked only for a
declaration which it said would be relevant to determining what would have been a
reasonable time within which to have the LPG plant ready. It is not clear to the Tribunal
whether this means that the warranty point as such has been abandoned, but it will

nevertheless deal with the issues raised in the earlier documents.

The warranty is alleged to have been contained in sections 5 and 6 of Annexure 3 to the

HoA. The purpose of the Annexure was to set out the services which Dana was required

°° Statement of Amended Counterclaim, paragraphs 20-24.

*” Paragraphs 94-126.

41

 

132,

133.

134,

135.

Page 47 of 89

to supply pursuant to clause 7 of the HoA (“Dana shall implement the initial Works
Program... of the Khor Mor Gas Utilisation Plan set out in Annnexure 3... 3...”).
Paragraph 5, which dealt with the LPG plant, said:

“A 150 MMscfd liquids recovery expander plant (after appropriate
modifications) that is currently being built by a US manufacturer has
recently become available and will be ready for shipment from the US in
July 2007... This plant will require some modifications (larger
depropaniser and debutaniser columns) to handle the higher liquid loads
but such columns can be constructed readily at the US suppliers newly
opened facilities in the UAE. Consequently, the LPG plant could be
installed and ready for operation by the end of 2007.”

Paragraph 6 included the following statement:

“The timetable for such a project is typically 18 to 20 months; the key
long lead item is the LPG plant. However, because the LPG plant is
available from the US in July 2007 the timetable may be reduced to circa 9
months...”

The KRG says that the statements that an LPG plant “has recently become available and
will be ready for shipment from the US in July 2007” and “the LPG plant is available

from the US in July 2007” were contractual promises that this was or would be the case.

Whether these words were contractual promises or simply statements of belief is a matter
of construction. Would a reasonable person aware of the background to the HoA have
thought that Pearl was promising that the facts were true or only that it honestly believed
them to be true? Putting the same thing in a different way, was Pearl offering a guarantee
that the plant would be available in July 2007, or at any rate was in such a state that it
could be available in July 2007?

The Tribunal considers that no such guarantee was being given. First, the claim that

Pearl warranted the availability of the LPG reflects the evidence of Dr Hawrami that

Pearl only obtained the contract by promising early delivery of an LPG plant. If that were

42

 

136.

137.

138.

 

the case, the inclusion of a warranty would have some plausibility. But the Tribunal, in

its First Partial Award, rejected Dr Hawrami’s evidence. It said:**

“In summary, we find that contrary to Dr Hawrami's present recollection,
the ability of Dana to provide an LPG plant in short order played little or
no part in the background against which the HoA was negotiated. The
important factor was the urgency with which the KRG required gas to be
delivered to the IPPs. The LPG plant was a last-minute addition to the
Khor Mor plan.”

Secondly, the description of the proposed services in Annexure 3 is not the most obvious
place in which to find an important warranty. One would expect it to be among the terms

of the contract. Indeed, clause 3 of the HoA itself says:

“Dana has an LPG plant under construction which is scheduled for
completion in July 2007 (ex- works US) and is willing to divert said LPG
plant (which is destined for another project) for use in the Khor Mor Gas
Utilisation Plan.”

This is where one would expect to find a warranty. But the clause is not expressed as a

warranty and the KRG does not rely upon it.

Thirdly, the Tribunal has already found that Pearl did not commit itself to a fixed
timetable for the construction of the plant. “There were hopes and aspirations but no
promises.”** It would be odd, to say the least, for Pearl to have given a guarantee that the

LPG plant was available for shipment but no promise as to when it would be installed.

** At paragraph 86.

* First Partial Award, paragraph 195.

43

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 49 of 89

" B, —_Misrepresentation

139, In the alternative, the KRG claims that the statements about the availability of the LPG
plant were, even if not promises, misrepresentations of fact which induced the KRG to
enter into the HoA. Were it not for the representations that an LPG plant could be
quickly installed, Dr Hawrami would have contracted with another supplier.

140. ‘The Tribunal will deal first with the question of reliance. The KRG says that Dr
Hawrami was not cross-examined as to his reliance on the representations.” But the
Tribunal does not think it necessary to go aver this ground again, Dr Hawrami’s assertion
to this effect has already been rejected by the Tribunal in the passage from the First

== Partial Award cited above."’ He was no doubt pleased when Mr Watts told him that an
LPG plant was available but the Tribunal docs not consider that it had any effect upon the
decision of the KRG to enter into the HoA. What mattered was that Dana was willing,
“on a fast track basis", to fund and arrange the erection of a plant and pipeline to supply
gas to the power stations.

141, The Tribunal also does not accept that, but for the representation that an LPG plant was
available for shipment in July 2007, the KRG would have employed Mass Jordan to build
the plant. Mass Jordan had been contractors to build the power stations. If the KRG had
thought of them has suitable candidates for funding and building the gas plant as well, it
would have done so at a much earlier stage. Instead it approached Mr Jafar.

142. In any case, the Tribunal considers that the only representation made by Dana was that it
had been informed by Exterran that an LPG plant would be available for shipment from

® KRG’s Closing Submissions, paragraph 48.

®" At paragraph 86 of the Firsé Final Award.

e 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 50 of 89

143.

the US in about July 2007.% This representation was wue. The claim for
misrepresentation therefore fails.

C. Delay in Completion of the LPG Plunt

The main thrust of the KRG’s counterclaim is an allegation that Dana was in various
respects in breach of the express or implied terms of the HoA. Of these, the main
complaint is that it took an unreasonably long time to complete the installation of the
LPG plant.

C Construction of the LPG Plant: A Brief History

As recounted in the first Partial Final Award, the proposal to incorporate an LPG in the
scheme was first made by Mr Waits to Dr Hawrami on 12 March 2007. The HoA dated 4
April 2007 noted that the plant would require modifications “to handle the higher liquid
foads” at Khor Mor but said that these could be constructed at Exterran’s plant in the
UAE and that the LPG plant “could be installed and ready for operation by the end of
2007".

During 2007 various unexpected events caused some delays. The removal of mines, the
discovery that the Khor Mor gas was sour and contained mercury (both requiring
modifications of the LPG plant) the additional of a second LPG train and problems over
1 Watts paragraph 14.

® Letter Exterran to Dana of 21 March 2007 (D1/449/1).

“Paragraph 83.

   

@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 51 of 89

security with local officials set back the early stages of the project by some weeks, A
} two-week procurement freeze imposed by the KRG in May 2007 caused a six-week delay
in delivery of steel pipes because it was a time of heavy demand and Dana lost its place
in the queue. However, when delivering its first detailed monthly report to the KRG in
August 2007, Dana felt able to forecast that the pipeline would be ready for first gas at
| the end of February 2008,

146. The main source of delay began to emerge a month later, when the September 2007
report noted that there had been slow progress in the construction of the security camp for
the workers who were going do the civil work for the LPG plant."* The camp was being
built by an affiliate of Nokan, one of the local companies which Dana had engaged as

op sub-contractor. This was a matter of political necessity. Nokan, together with Kar and
Zonik, was a company affiliated to the PUK, the dominant political party in the
Sulemaniya Province of the Kurdistan Region. The three companies had formed a joint
venture (“NKZ”)® to bid for the available sub-contracts, The KRG made it clear to Dana
that if they wanted 10 work in the Sulemaniya Province, they would have to employ
NKz."

147. In December 2007, the construction of the site camp was still causing problems. On 10
December 2007 Mr Tom Fuller, the project director on site, reported to Mr Watts:

“The buildings are made from thin corrugated metal with thin doors. No
water, heating, etc. apparent in the housing units. These units made with
small footings, which are set on small concrete pedestals. No actual
consiection to foundation. First big wind - blown over. This facility won't
last through the construction period, much less be a long-term camp for
the operating and maintenance.’

© Dissan
tm Claimants’ internal minutes, sometimes referred to.as “KZN”
°°) Watts paragraphs 201-6; e-mail D1/467.

* D1674

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 52 of 89

148. The report at the end of December 2007 said that delays in the civil works caused by the
delay in constructing the security and accommodation camp had caused the first gas
target to slip to May 2008, There had also been an alarming crisis over delivery of the
pipes by the Chinese suppliers:®”

“The manufacture of the remaining line pipe at PCK in China suffered a
setback in early December due to non-arrival of the plates, which was
followed by PCK stating that production would be deferred for several
months due to other priority orders from Chinese national companies.
Following intervention of Company's senior management (2 week was
spent in China with PCK’s top management), the order was finally
brought back on track...”

149. This incident had produced a furious e-mail from Mr Jafar to the board colleague through
whom the Chinese order was placed, as a result of which the latter went to China to sort
the matter out.”” This document, obtained from Mr Makkawi's stolen lap top, has been

heavily relied upon by the KRG as demonstrating Dana’s recognition of its shortcomings
and potential liability.

150, At the end of January 2008 Dana contracted with NKZ for the construction of the LPG
plant.”’ However, the monthly report at the end of March 2008 recorded that there was
little chance of its being available by the time the power stations and the pipeline were
ready:”

“The current slow rate of construction progress by the Contractor (NKZ
group) for both the pipeline and the LPG plant is of major concem. With

respect to the LPG plant, it is now evident, given the delays and late
completion of the civil works, the slow mobilization of cranes and skilled
manpower resources and the late deliveries of bulk materials (all within
‘Contractor's supply) that the Contractor will not have the LPG plant ready

* Diisos/4
® 2/324. See cross-examination of Mr Jafar, Transcript 21 April 2015, pp. 164-167.
™ pwd

= pi

47

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 53 of 89

till after the summer and there is little scope to accelerate that programme.
Accordingly, an early production facility has been sourced that will be on
the site before the summer...The actual progress as of end March °08, is
75%, only 1% progress since last month and given the poor performance
of the construction company to date, the first-gas target date can no longer
be predicted with any confidence...

151. In June 2008 Mr Fuller gave a bleak description of the way NKZ were performing:”

1. No Manager/ Coordinator for KZN at site. Shortage has been addressed
with Kar several times.
2. No Site Org Chart nor Project Org Chart. Has been requested and
promised several times.
3. No QC procedures at site, Have been requested and promised several

times,
4. Absence of Manager/ Coordinator leads to these problems - - Lack or
absence of planning - No communication on personnel mob/

assignments/ absences - Poor communication on equipment and materials
movements. - Poor communication of urgent maicrials/ equipment for
welder testing. As result, Crescent directly sourced materials, - Slow to
finalise urgent procurement items for EPF - piping, instr., elect, tools,
consumables.

Major change in direction required immediately.”

152. Mr Fuller’s proposal for 2 “major change in direction” was “all project management and
direction by Crescent”. On 29 July 2008 Mr Watts sent NKZ a formal “Notice of
Inadequate Performance”, listing the matters mentioned by Mr Fuller. His proposal was
discussed but not immediately taken up.

153. ‘The quality of welding on the pipeline gave particular cause for concern. On 9 July 2008
Dana sent a formal notification to NKZ instructing them to terminate all local welders

™ Dies

ise 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 54 of 89

and replace them with skilled welders.” Dana then arranged to bring a team of 40 skilled
Vietnamese welders to supplement the workmen available to NKZ.”*

154. At the end of August 2008, as the time for first gas approached, tempers began to fray.
On 25 August 2008 Mr Jafar wrote to Dr Hawrami asking for “KRG assistance to exert
all influence possible on NKZ to perform”, Dr Hawrami’s immediate reply was
unhelpfal:”

“Essentially, we feel that the ultimate responsibility rests with Dana Gas
and Crescent (the Contractor) and we cannot get involved more than what
we have done with sub-contractors who have not been appointed by us.”

155, On 26 August 2008 Mr Makkawi notified Mr Jafar that completion of the pipeline was
unlikely before the end of September and that the Ministry of Natural Resources was
threatening a meeting with Dana to take a “serious decision”, Mr Jafar was alarmed and
replied:””

“this is terrible, absolutely terrible. Extremely disconcerting and worrying,
and (despite contractor failings) begs the obvious question and
responsibility; why have we (the Companies, DG/CP) so incredibly and
consistently fooled ourselves and the KRG?... [HJow come we (the
Companies) have so consistently and regularly misjudged and
progressively misrepresented the completion schedule???”
156. Om J September 2008 Mr Jafar wrote a long letter to Dr Hawrami, saying that Dana was
not responsible for the failures of NKZ but that everyone, including the KRG, should
concentrate on getting the job done rather than blaming each other. Dr Hawrami

* D228.
7? 4 Watts paragraph 44,
* DUS

7 Du403

49

Ty
Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 55 of 89

158.

answered that the position of the KRG was that Dana was the party responsible. He went

‘on to say:

“[ am not driving this, but I am caught (quite rightly and deservedly) in the
middle of it. I am responsible for bring[ing] Dana Ges to Kurdistan, I
fought hard for it. The strong belief and argument I had at the time was
that Dana Gas could do the project in the fraction of the time, because of
your plant availability, hence the required gas could be delivered to the
power plants by January 2008, and that others would take a year or two
more to do the job, Unfortunately, the January 2008 deadline has long
gone, and we are now talking about January 2009 for the initial
completion and probably well beyond, hence my original trump card (the
timing card) has completely lost its credibility.

This passage, which the Tribunal considers to be truthful, is revealing of two points.
First, it shows Dr Hawrami’s perception of his position as a technocrat Minister in the
minefield of Kurdistan tribal politics. It accords with Mr Watts’s evidence that Dr
Hawrami asked for the most optimistic indicative timetable to be included in the HoA
because of “tensions with the Ministry of Electricity” which was putting forward an
equally optimistic timetable for the construction of the power stations,”? Secondly, the
reference to “because of your plant availability” suggests that although the Tribunal did
not (and does not) accept his evidence that Dana sold him the project on the basis of
having a readymade LPG plant,” it was the basis on which Dr Hawrami himself had, in
fact, sold it to his Cabinet colleagues.

In September 2008, it was decided to construct a liquid pipeline to Chemchemal for the
storage there of condensate and LPG. This required appropriate changes to the pipes of
the LPG plant at Khor Mor,

™pus
| Waus paragraph (5; 3 Wass paragraph 343,
First Partial Final Award paragraph 86.

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 56 of 89

159. Dana followed up its Notice of Inadequate Performance of 29 July 2008 by arranging
meeting with the NKZ management in Sharjah, noted in its (now weekly) report for 6
September 2008:5!

“The progress by KZN, the Contractor on the main plant is extremely poor
even allowing for unforeseen obstacles, The Contractor has been formally
served notice for deficient performance under the contract, Meetings with
KZN top management have been arranged for 14th and 15th September in
Sharjah to try and put a recovery plan in place, The intention is to form a
joint team under Company's direct control (as used for the EPF) utilising
‘only Contractor's personnel thet have demonstrated their capability.
Failure to agree this approach will mean the construction contract will
have to be terminated and Company will have to adopt alternate direct
implementation methods.”

160. First gas was provided to the power stations on 5 October 2008.

161, The Sharjah meeting resulted in 2 Revised Construction Plan which was sent to the KRG
on 20 October 2008 in which Dana and NKZ formed a joint management team. Dana
took over entire responsibility for instrumentation and electrical works while NKZ
retained responsibility for civil, mechanical and piping works. The new plan forecast the
commissioning of the first LPG plant in March 2009, but added;*”

“The new schedule is intentionally very aggressive, and assumes all
resources will be available on or before the time they are needed. As such,
it serves to keep focus on the construction work at-hand, as it does not
include continuity and slippage. That being said, it is common that me
projects have schedule slippage due to unforeseen circu

resource and material availability... Furthermore several ee
bulk deliveries from KZN have sill not arived at site, and the delivery
dates are not yet confirmed. The reasons for the delays in these bulk

“pivi27

= DUET

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 57 of 89

deliveries are not yet fully understood, but KZN advise that it is mostly
due to the competition for resources on a worldwide basis resulting in
much longer deliveries than anticipated... The consequences of the late
delivery of these bulk materials on the project schedule have not yet been
quantified, and so this uncertainty may affect the completion date.”

162. Joint management tured out not to be a success. Dana continued to complain of
inefficiencies by NKZ in the areas for which they were responsible and Mr Naoom, of
Kar, said that Dana treated joint management as a “pretext” to use Kar “solely as a
manpower provided rather than as an autonomous subcontractor”."? At the end of March
2009, NKZ's contract was terminated by mutual consent. As it was a lump sum contract,
this may not have caused NKZ much loss."*

163. Dana was now left to finish the construction of the two trains of the LPG plant by itself.
This required additional resources and a new form of organisation. Mr Peter Baron, a
consultant employed by NRG-Global, was commissioned to prepare a Recovery Plan to
address the new situation, Mr Baron delivered his plan on $ April 2009,

164. The progress report for May 2009 recorded that productivity was improving:**

“From the cessation of the Kar JV construction contract in mid-March °09
through to the end of April, only 2% progress was made. The efforts
expended at that time were directed at resourcing equipment, materials
and tools to replace those services previously provided by the construction
contractor, Time was also spent on organising materials and setting up
‘onsite stores and workshops, to increase productivity as the workforce
increases, By late April progress began to pick up and at the start of May
weekly progress had reached 1.5% per week and by the last week of May
it had reached 2%. Overall progress in the 4 reporting weeks in May was
thus isa Such progress is far better than what was being achieved with the

JV construction contract. Indeed, in excess of twice the productivity is

® 1 Naoom, paragraph 21,

™ The contract price was US$17 million and on 7 March 2009, with the contract 60% complete, Kar
claimed to have spent US$24 million.

“pua7a3

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 58 of 89

being achieved with only 60% of the manpower. If the target progress of
2% per week can be maintained, then mechanical completion of Plant 1
should be achieved at the end of September 2009."

165. In May 2009, however, there commenced the “controversy” which has been described
earlier in this award. The KRG denied the Claimants’ development rights and put them
on a drip feed of underpayments for condensate which the Claimants regarded as
inadequate to fund the increasing cost of the installations. The workforce was reduced
and bills went unpaid, In addition, examination of the work which had been done under
the NKZ regime showed that a good deal of it had to be undone and redone. The result
was that the construction of the two LPG trains progressed very slowly. The second train
‘was finally commissioned in April 2011.

Il The Extent of Dana’s Obligations

166. In its First Partial Award, the Tribunal said “there was an obligation to do the work
within a reasonable time in all the circumstances."’ The HoA did not expressly say so.
It was a matter of implication. As the Tribunal found, Dana had not committed itself to
any specific timetable. But the question of what would be a reasonable time depends very
much upon what Dana had undertaken to do. What obligations would a reasonable
person, reading the HoA and knowing both the specific factual background and the
practices of the oil and gas industry, have considered that Dana was undertaking? What
risks was it agreeing to bear?

167. The battle lines of the parties on these questions were drawn up in the summer of 2008*”
and have not changed, The KRG’s position is that Dana was responsible for the work of
its sub-contractors. If competent contractors could have completed the work within «
given time, that is a reasonable time. If the sub-contractors fell short of this standard, they
™ Paragraph 195, -

” See paragraphs 154-157 above.

1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 59 of 89

169.

170.

should have been better trained or supervised. Dana, on the other hand, says that the KRG
knew that Dana was not a specialist EPC (engineering, procurement and construction)
contractor and would have to rely on sub-contractors, Furthermore, the KRG recognised
that Dana would have little or no choice in engaging subcontractors for the work within
Kurdistan.

Since then, the views of each side have been supported by expert evidence. The
Claimants’ experts, Dr van Meurs and Mr Freeny, say that supplying first gas to the
power plants in October 2008 was a signal achievement and that in the circumstances as
they existed in Kurdistan there was no unreasonable delay by Claimants in the
construction of the LPG plant. The KRG's expert, Dr Lancaster, on the other hand, says
that the Claimants’ “approach to and performance on the project was entirely inadequate”
and that the LPG plant should have been commissioned and functioning by November
2008 instead of the spring of 2011.

The disagreement between the experts is almost entirely attributable to the different
views they have taken about the meaning of the HoA. This of course a question of
construction, to be decided as a matter of law by the Tribunal. But the language of the
HoA must be construed against the background known at the time to the parties and this
will include practices of the oil and gas industry which will not necessarily be known to
the Tribunal. ‘The evidence of experts as to what they consider someone with knowledge
of the industry would have understood the HoA to mean is therefore admissible.”

(@) The KRG’s position

The KRG says its position is based on the plain language of the contract. ‘The Key

Commercial Terms in Annexure 2 of the HoA included a provision that —

 Eixpert evidence of what a “person skilled in the art” would have understood a claim in a patent to mean
is frequently admitted.

172.

173.

117-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 60 of 89

“Dana shall provide all managerial services, supervision, labour, materials
and equipment for the performance of the Services, and to procure all
finds necessary to carry out and complete the Construction Services.”

In addition, recital E stated:

“Dana, being a natural gas resource company does not normally enter into
service-type agreements, but being suitably qualified and desirous of
developing a strategic partnership with the KRG for development of gas
resources, is willing to co-operate with the KRG by entering into these
HoA. ...” (Emphasis supplied)

The KRG therefore submits that the HoA should be construed to mean that Dana
accepted the responsibilities of an EPC contractor who had undertaken to ensure that
whatever subcontractors he might employ completed their work within the required time.
That was what was understood to be the responsibility of an EPC contractor engaged to
build a plant for an upstream oil and gas company. It was ultimately responsible for any
failure on the part of the subcontractors and has therefore to undertake whatever
planning, supervision and supply of equipment and materials is required to prevent this
from happening.

The KRG’s expert, Dr Lancaster, explained in his opening presentation the basis of his
approach:

“On any complex oil and gas project of the nature of this project, it's
essential to have single project management control from an entity that has
both contractual and practical control over all of the phases of the project
being engineering, procurement and construction, as well as over the
numerous subcontracting parties. (T]he claimants were really in chat
unique position, in my opinion, that they were able fo exert both the
contractual and practical control over all of the subcontractors and over all
of the phases of the work.”

'° Transcript Day 6, pp. 39-40.

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 61 of 89

 

(0) The Claimants’ position

174, ‘The Claimants dispute the KRG’s construction of the contract. The contractual provision
that Dana would “provide all managerial services, supervision, labour, materials and
equipment for the performance of the Services” obviously did not mean that Dana would
do all these things in-house. It meant that Dana would procure them to be done by
engaging subcontractors. This obligation Dana discharged. But the provision is neutral as
to the degree of control and supervision which Dana was required to exercise. As for the
statement in recital E that Dana was “suitably qualified” for “developing a strategic

-— partnership with the KRG for development of gas resources”, that was true. It is put at a

very high level and could not have been taken to mean that Dana had experience of
hands-on plant construction. Everyone knew it did not.

175, The HoA is, say the Claimants, altogether different from an EPC contract. The
responsibility of the main contractor for any delays or poor work by subcontractors
makes sense when the contract specifies a time within which the work must be completed
and when the contractor is receiving stage payments for its work. But the HoA
deliberately omitted any commitment to a completion date and it would be wrong to try
to smuggle one in by treating the indicative timetable as a “reasonable time” subject only
to delays outside the control of Dana or its sub-contractors.

176. Both parties referred to the principle stated by Judge Seymour QC in Astea (UK) Lid v
Time Group Lid” for deciding whether a reasonable time has been exceeded. This
requires -

* [2003] EWHC 725,

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 62 of 89

“.@ broad consideration, with the benefit of hindsight, and viewed from
the time as at which one party contends that a reasonable time for
performance has been exceeded, of what would, in all the circumstances
which are by then known to have happened, have been a reasonable time
for performance. That broad consideration is likely to include taking into
account any estimate given by the performing party of how long it would
take him to perform; whether that estimate has been exceeded and, if so, in
what circumstances; whether the party for whose benefit the relevant

| obligation was to be performed needed to participate in the performance,
actively, in the sense of collaborating in what was needed to be done, or
passively, in the sense of being in a position to receive performance, or not
at all; whether it was necessary for third parties to collaborate with the
performing party in order to enable it to perform; and what exactly was the
cause, or were the causes of the delay to performance. This list is not
intended to be exhaustive.”

177. The Claimants say that the application of these principles requires one to consider what
the parties contemplated as being Dana’s obligations and what actually happened on the
ground. The KRG knew, and indeed it was public knowledge, that Dana and Crescent
are upstream oil and gas investors. They are not EPC contractors. For the purpose of
their oil and gas projects, they have a team of project directors who can exercise high
Jevel supervision over what the building contractors are doing. Mr Watts, who was
Projects Director on the Khor Mor project, had joined Crescent in 1989, But they have no
experience of the detailed ground-level control which an EPC contractor would exercise
over his sub-contractors.

 

178. The background to the HoA was that no intemational EPC company was willing to take
on the job. The Claimants therefore undertook to co-ordinate the necessary sub-
contractors but cannot have been expected to exercise detailed supervision. In the event
the slow progress forced them to exercise closer contro! and eventually to dismiss the
principal sub-contractor and step into its shoes, but that was not something they were
contractually obliged to do. They had no choice in their appointment of sub-contractors,
who were nominated by the KRG on the basis of their political connections. It cannot
therefore be reasonable to hold the Claimants responsible for the subcontractors’ poor

ise 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 63 of 89

work. Afer the passage relied upon by the KRG, recital E goes on to say that “current
legal and political circumstances in Iraq may render engagement of subcontractors for the
performance of the Services problematic.” This was a recognition of facts on the ground
which the Claimants say demonstrate that the HoA could not reasonably be construed as
making them responsible for the shortcomings of such subcontractors as they were able
to engage.

(6) Opinion of the Tribunal

179, ‘The Tribunal considers that the Claimants’ construction of the HoA is correct. The HoA
required Dana to devise a general plan for the procurement of plant such as the LPG and
engagement of the necessary subcontractors, to co-ordinate their activities and exercise a
high-level supervision over what they were doing, Mr Watts reflected what both parties
knew to be the realities of the situation when he said of NKZ, the main contractor
nominated on political grounds by the KRG, which was building the LPG plant:”'

“We do not ‘plan and utilize’ the manpower of a third-party construction contractor. We
had little or no control over NKZ's manpower. All we could do was insist that NKZ
perform their contractual obligations, pressure them if they didn’t perform and ultimately
terminate them when, despite our best efforts, they tured out to be hopeless...”

180. ‘The question of what was a reasonable time for completion must therefore be answered

 

by ion of all the ci including the of the
subcontractors and the limited ability and obligation of Dana to exercise control over
them.

181, It is clear from the background and the references to the work being done on « “fast track
basis” that the absolute priority was to get the gas out of the ground and into the power

° 4 Watts paragraph 108.

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 64 of 89

stations as soon as possible. It was for this reason that work on the LPG plant was more
or less suspended to give priority to the EPF. Gas had been Found at Khor Mor but very
little was known about its quantity or quality. As Dr van Meurs said in his oral

‘evidence:

,..{T]he facts and circumstances of this field were very very poor if you
look at the information available in Annexure 3 and Annexure 5, There
was no information to make anything like we talked about in the field
development plan. There was almost no information and consequently the
so-called work plans that were added were I think ideas of what the parties
wanted to do.”

182. Dr van Meurs said that an international oil and gas company will normally expect to take
some time in evaluating the resources of the field (between | to 3 years) and preparing a
development plan, Instead, these stages were omitted:”*

“Making major investment commitments without a proper appraisal
program was a very high risk undertaking and was done in in order to
provide the power plants as soon as possible with natural gas... This
| strategy tumed out to be very successfull for the two Parties since first
commercial ges was established in October 2008, which is in about 18
months after the Effective Date, This is a far shorter time frame than even
a short international time line, which would have been 54 months.”

183. It must also be bome in mind that Dana had its own commercial interest in being able to
produce condensate and then LPG as soon as possible. Only by the sale of these products
would it be able to recoup its considerable expenditure. It was therefore in its own
interest, when it became apparent that the subcontractors building the LPG plant lacked
the necessary competence and organizational skills, to undertake more and more of the
planning and supervision themselves, But this does not mean that it had a duty to the
KRG to do these things. One cannot infer from what it did at a later stage that, as a

” Transeript Day 8, p. 70.
© 1 Van Meurs, paragraphs 99-100,

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 65 of 89

matter of contractual obligation, it ought to have been done earlier or better. ‘The
Tribunal considers that the heavy reliance placed by the KRG on such matters as Mr
Peter Baron’s recovery plan is based upon this fallacy.

™ Pearl's Performance

(a) The expert witnesses

‘The KRG’s expert, Dr Lancaster, is a consultant who specialises in analyses of the causes
of delay and whether contractors are entitled to extensions of time. These questions will
ordinarily arise in the context of a contract which specifies a time within which the work
must be completed, subject to the possibility of extensions on grounds such as events
outside the control of the contractor. In the present case, the contract specified no time for
completion. Dr Lancaster, as appeared in cross-examination, took instead the indicative
dates in Annexure 3” and treated them as contractually binding, subject to Dana being
able to show grounds for extension:°*

“A. [have used the schedule that was developed by the claimants in
May 2007, that was presented to the respondents early in June 2007, and I
view this as the claimants’ baseline schedule, which I believe is
fundamental document stating the intention as far as execution and
planning of the project.

Q. So you have taken the end point from the indicative time-line,
which is also in the baseline schedule?
A. Horhm.

“These had been attached to the Project Execution Plan ("PEP") produced by Dana in the month after the
HoA was signed. Dr Lancaster's view was that although the timeline in the HoA. was merely indicative, its
repetition in the PEP suggested that Dana had by then decided that it was achievable: / Lancaster.
paragraphs 183-186; Transcript Day 6, pp. 115-116.

© Transeript Day 6, pp. 116-117

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 66 of 89

Q. And you asked yourself where there are specific events that justify
extensions of time from that?
A. Yes, again, as | said, from the baseline schedule.

Q. You have effectively approached the analysis of delay as you
would if there were a fixed timeline in our contract and a mechanism for
extensions of time, yes?

AL ‘That is largely correct...”

 

185, The Tribunal considers that as a matter of law it was wrong of Dr Lancaster to treat Pearl
as if it had undertaken to complete the work within the time lines stated in the HoA or the
first PEP, neither of which was contractually binding. The question of what was a
reasonable time fo complete a given project is an objective question, requiring all the

ciret

 

nstances to be taken into account, An indicative timeline is a relevant item of
evidence as a prediction but it may tum out to have considerably underestimated what
would be a reasonable time to complete the work. As mentioned above, Mr Jafar had
occasion to criticise his team for producing over-optimistic forecasts. That does not
mean that such forecasts must be deemed to have been a reasonable time. Pearl may
simply have got them wrong. In such a case, it does not have to show that circumstances
out of its control made it take longer. Its only obligation is to complete the work within
what in all the circumstances was actually a reasonable time, taking into account what the
contract required it to do.*

186. ‘The second defect in Dr Lancaster's evidence was that he treated Dana as responsible for

the shortcomings of its subcontractors. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal does not
consider that this correctly reflected Dana’s obligations under the HoA.

187. The result is that the Tribunal found Dr Lancaster's evidence of little assistance, ‘That is
not to question his expertise in assessing contractual delays. But he applied it to the
wrong contract.

% See Shawton Engineering Ltd v DGP International Lud [2005] EWCA Civ 1359, Exhibit RLM-259.

61

dese 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 67 of 89

188. The Claimants’ first expert, Mr Freeny, was a project engineer from Texas whose
experience lay in the design, construction and management of oil and gas facilities,
including projects in the Middle East. He noted that Dana had originally hoped that
Exterran would build the LPG plant but declined for security reasons, He had never
heard of NKZ:””

“an operator/investor in the position of the Claimants would typically
expect to rely upon experienced international EPC contractors to design,
procure, and build facilities — especially in a remote region such as Khor
Mor that lacks an experienced base of technicians. | understand that the
Claimants tried repeatedly, for all aspects of the work, to engage qualified
contractors, To have succeeded in implementing the project without
reliance upon international EPC contractors is remarkable, in my view.”

 

189, Both Mr Freeny and the Claimants’ second expert, Dr van Meurs, a well-known authority
on the oil and gas industry, made “bench marking” comparisons with the times taken to
construct other LPG plants in Iraq and elsewhere.“ This was largely because such
projects are usually preceded by substantial periods of evaluation and planning which
Dana was obliged to omit in order to deliver gas to the power stations as soon as they
were ready to receive it. This objective was substantially achieved, but the construction
of the LPG tured out to be more difficult for the reasons already discussed.

(b) Specific Complaints

(@ Planning

190. Dr Lancaster was very critical of the planning for the project. He said it was the most
poorly planned project he had ever experienced. That may well be true. But the question
is whether the Dana was contractually responsible for this poverty. Dr Lancaster said
"1 Freeny paragraph 114,

° | Freeny paragraphs 129-130, 2 Van Mewrs paragraph 101.

62

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 68 of 89

that, in addition to a regularly updated PEP, he expected Duna to have a control
schedule:”?

“Typically, the project manager, with the support of a planning team, will
develop a master schedule which sets out every activity that needs to be
completed in order to complete the entire project. The key interfaces
‘between the contractor and the subcontractors must be clearly detailed in
this schedule to ensure all the works are coordinated. Once this has been
completed, the subcontractors develop more detailed schedules together
with the project manager, who is responsible for refining the

| subcontractors’ project schedules and subsequently integrating them to
produce a Control Schedule. The Control Schedule in tum is used to

control the works and to ensure that the work of one subcontractor
supports rather than delays the work of the other subcontractors.”

—~ 191, Dr Lancaster said that Dana had particularly fallen short in relation to the construction of
the LPG plant:'

“In contrast to the thousands of activities in the Control Schedules of the
other oil and gas projects I have been involved in, the Claimants’ project
schedule from May 2007 contains only 156 activities. Whilst I have seen
an example of « slightly more detailed schedule created by the Claimants
(with approximately 400 activities), 1 have seen no evidence that the
Claimants were holding a more detailed integrated Control Schedule ~ of
the type I have described above — that would provide a sound management
basis and that could be utilised to monitor the levels of progress and
productivity.

 

For example, the Claimants’ schedule identified as one single activity
“LPG Plant Installation” with a duration of one-hundred-and-twenty days.
‘This activity actually comprises many hundreds of activities. Each of
those hundreds of activities needs to be individually planned and
coordinated as part of the schedule. Without a plan, the individual
activities will not be completed efficiently: the contractor will have no
way to ensure that the right people and equipment for the activity are on
site at the right time.”

"1 Lancaster $9

“1 Lancaster 69,7)

CaSe 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 69 of 89

192, Mr Watts, the Dana Project Manager, was cross-examined about why he had not prepared
aplan of the kind described by Dr Lancaster:

“Q. The proper plan that should have been drawn up should have
planned, right from the outset, exactly how the LPG plant was going to be
transported, constructed, installed and commissioned?

A. Well there was a high-level plan that was prepared and that plan
would be based upon the information provided at that time that was
known, from Hanover, the time known for the shipping times, the time
known for the manufacture of the pipe, the time known for the wells and it
was based upon a timeline that Hanover had given based upon their
experience of a local contractor and it was based upon a set of
assumptions of one LPG plant set out in the HoA."*!

 

o .»[¥]ou didn’t have a level 2 [detailed plan] covering the whole of
> the construction, installation and commissioning of the LPG plant at any
time, did you?

A, Yes, what happened was that we were expecting the contractor, the
construction contractor, to provide & detailed schedule on that. And as it
transpired, we hired our own site planner to assist him on that,..""*

193, In the opinion of the Tribunal, Dana was acting within its contractual responsibilities
under the HoA in expecting the detailed plan to be provided by the site contractor. So far
as it went further in providing the contractor with a planner, it was no doubt acting in its
own commercial interest but was not contractually obliged to do so, Even the provision
of such assistance to the contractor required a degree of co-operation which does not
always appear to have been forthcoming. Mr Watts said:'

A... _ (The site planner provided for the contractor] was Mark Minna
originally, who arrived in February 2008, He became very frustrated with
the lack of co-operation by NKZ, he left, he was also concemed for his
safety, He was replaced by Yandri Jamdak and those detailed plans were
worked out on site under Tom Fuller...”

' Transcript Day 3, p.182

‘© Transcript Day 3, p.194

"® Transcript Day 3, p. 194,

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 70 of 89

(ii) Project Management Team

194, Dr Lancaster's opinion was that Dana’s project management team was inadequate and the
KRG says that this is supported by the report of Mr Peter Baron, which recommended
that it be strengthened. The Tribunal considers, however, that Dr Lancaster’s opinion was
given on the assumption that Dana had the duties of an EPC contractor. Mr Baron’s
report was directed to Dana's decision to take greater control over the work of NKZ and
eventually to replace them. The Tribunal does not consider that the project management
team put in place by Dana fell short of its contractual responsibilities.

(iii) Supervision

195. Dr Lancaster’s views on supervision show clearly how he was assuming the contract to
‘be something other than it actually was. He was asked in cross-examination:'*

“Q....[W]hat clauses or mechanisms/procedures, would you expect to see
in the contract to be used as a means in the future of controlling the
performance of the installation subcontractor?

A. There [are] normally numerous procedures that are tied into the
contract and normally the way I'm used to working is that the contractor
would develop his own PEP and a suite of procedures. The procedures
would deal with each of the different disciplines of project management,
such as project controls and quality control and then typically what you do
is you either write your procedures in a way that they can be passed to the
subcontractor, or otherwise you make a second set of those procedures,
which specifically mirror your own procedures as instructions to the
subcontractor, and I would have expected to have seen that that was all
tied into the contract.

Q. Have you seen evidence of that being done by ~

A. No, both in the PEP and in the contract it's only very high level.”
' Transcript Day 6, pp, 203-4

65

e@ 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 71 of 89

196. The terms of the subcontract with NKZ were no secret, They had been approved by the
KRG. So was the PEP. They imposed the duty of detailed supervision of the workforce
upon the sub-contractor and contemplated only high-level supervision by Dana because
that was what the parties intended. But Dr Lancaster has proceeded on the assumption
that the parties had agreed to the way he “was used to working”.

197. Mr Faris Naoom, the head electrical engineer at Kar, also considers in retrospect that
‘Dana should have exercised detailed day to day supervision over the work.'°S ‘The
answer to NKZ’s admittedly lamentable performance in welding was, he says, that Dana
should have had a “quality control team” to—

“review... the welding jobs done every day to ensure that adequate
welding procedures are being followed. If they are not, the quality control
team provides specific instructions to the welders to resolve any welding
procedure deficiencies ...,The Claimants did not have an adequate quality
control team in place across the different sub-systems of the LPG plant.
They had one welding supervisor, but no quality control engineers or
managers on site,"

198. ‘This again appears to the Tribunal to be based upon a misapprehension about the terms of
the subcontract under which NKZ had been engaged. This provided:"*”

“[NKZ] shall provide dedicated and experienced construction
management team to plan, schedule and supervise efforts to comply with
the project's requirements”

“[NKZ] shall provide all labour, general equipment, special equipment,
materials, resources, accommodation, sustenance, —_ supervision,
management, finances, H & S requirements, technical expertise, quality
"1 Naoom paragraphs 26-27.
' | Naoom, paragraphs 26-27.

' palaay

ase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 72 of 89

200.

201.

control, environmental management, survey, security, land management
liaison, and approvals processes necessary to carry out the scope of work

contract and complete the Work on or before the Contract
Completion Date.”

‘The Tribunal does not consider that Dana failed in performing any contractual duties of
supervision.

() Procurement

Mr Makkawi was cross-examined at some length about the importance of planning for
procurement and linking the plan for construction with a schedule of when items will be
required on site (“ROS dates”), Dr Lancaster regarded Dana as responsible for creating
such a schedule, When asked why Dana did not have one, Mr Makkawi said that Dana
was the owner, not the contractor." It was acquiring the long lead items (such as the
LPG plant from Exterran) and was concerned about the planning for when they would be
required but otherwise the ROS dates for bulk materials were a matter for NKZ. The
‘Tribunal considers that Mr Makkawi’s position was correct.

(¥) The Alternate Work Programme

‘The KRG complain that Dana was not entitled to reduce manpower in response to the
KRG?s denial of its rights and reduction in payments.'” But the question is whether the
construction was completed in a reasonable time in all the circumstances and the fact that
Dana’s rights were denied and its cash flow reduced were facts, part of the relevant
circumstances, The Tribunal considers that the KRG is not in a position to complain of
Dana’s reaction.

IV Conclusion

Transcript Day3, p.97

Respondent's Closing Submissions paragraph 172.

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 73 of 89

”

| 202. The Tribunal considers that the KRG’s counterclaim based on delay in completion of the
project has not been made out.

|
| D. Design and Operational Defects
(a) Residue gas
203. ‘The KRG alleges that the plant has been producing less residue gas, LPG and condensate

than it should have done and that this reflects defects in its design and operation for
which Dana is contractually liable. The KRG's expert, Mr Emory, had calculated the

a quantity of these products which he thought the plant should have been able to produce

and arrived at higher figures than the actual production. This, says the KRG, is a “tell-
tale sign that something is badly wrong with the plant”.""° The KRG does not identify
what was wrong, It says that the Claimants are in a position to provide an explanation for
the shortfall and have not done so. The Claimants on the other hand say that they have a
financial interest in operating the plant at maximum capacity. [f it can be operated to
produce more, they would like to know how,

204, Mr Emory at first said that the plant should have been able to produce 350 million scf/d.
‘This was on the assumption that it ran with 5 compressors. The Claimants’ practice,
however, was to run the plant with 4 compressors and have one in reserve. That reduced
the output to 330 million sefld. Mr Emory regarded this as conservative but accepted that

it was reasonable.'"' This average daily quantity which the plant ordinarily produced

Respondent's Closing Submissions paragraph 186.

"2 Emory paragraph 35, Transcript Day 6, p. 231.

68

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 74 of 89
|

# ‘was about 325 million scf/d.""" The Claimants’ expert, Mr Freeny, did not think this
indicated there was something wrong:'?

i “Mr. Emory's data shows the actual production values indicating an
average of 325 MMScfD being produced by the combined facilities.
Many engineers, including myself, would conclude, based upon three
years of data, consistently indicating a maximum residue gas production
from the combined facilities averaging 325 MMScf/D that the maximum,
production was, in fact, this quantity. If they had “calculated” a different

{ quantity, the presumption is that the calculated value, rather than the
actual value, is incorrect.”

205. The argument then resolved itself into whether, when looking at average figures, the
330 million scffd notional capacity should be discounted by an “availability factor” to

ss allow for stoppages, planned or unplanned maintenance and so forth. The conventional

gure in the industry is 5%. In his first report, Mr Emory said:'"*

“Assuming no gas supply or product off take interruptions, residue gas
production should be at or near plant capacity with 95+% annual
availability.”

206. In his Iater reports and oral evidence, however, Mr Emory said that no availability factor
should be applied, apparently on the ground that the operator could compensate for
stoppages, maintenance and so on by running the plant at higher than 330 million sef/d
for some of the time.

207, The Tribunal considers that this would make nonsense of the concept of an availability
factor. It must be obvious that one could to a greater or lesser extent make up lost ground
by running the plant harder and if this were the answer, no one would use an availability
factor at all. Mr Emory's solution might be relevant to the plant meeting some short-term
target but makes no sense in relation to year by year capacity.

"See graph in exhibit SWE 1 (F1/1)
"2 Freeny 189

"1 Emory paragraph 40.

69

Clse 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 75 of 89

9

208. The Tribunal therefore rejects the submission that there was @ significant shortfall in
residue gas production which indicated that there was something badly wrong with the
plant.

(b) Condensate and LPG

209. Mr Emory says that the design basis of the plant indicated that it would produce a great
deal more condensate and LPG than it has actually been doing: Again, the KRG submits
that this must be due to some major but unspecified defect in the way in which the
Claimants have been operating the plant. Mr Freeny, however, points out that the design
basis, calculated before the plant was built and without information about the gas which it
would process, made certain assumptions about the content of the feedstock. The fact that
the plant produces less condensate per million scf than indicated by the design basis
shows only that the actual feedstock differs from the design basis assumptions:!!*

“Condensate is simply “light oil” and, unlike propane and butane, cannot be reinjected
into the residue gas. Put simply, what comes out of the reservoir via the well must go
through to the storage tank. Condensate is too “heavy” (chemically) to be put into the
LPG or into the residue gas. There are 15,000 B/D (as opposed to 26,000 B/D) of
condensate being produced for the simple reason that that is all there is in the reservoir
gas being fed to the combined facilities; you simply cannot produce what is not there to
begin with. in my opinion, Mr. Emory’s estimates of potential LPG production are
similarly flawed and for the same reason.”

210. The Tribunal does not consider that the KRG was able to produce an answer to these
observations, Of course, in running the LPG plant in tandem with the EPF (which
produces no LPG) the Claimants would have been able to vary the feedstock fed to each

‘| Freeny paragraph 192.

wm

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 76 of 89

¥ and thereby produce more or less LPGs, but the Tribunal considers this to have been a
commerciel decision rather than indicating any fault in the operation of the plant.

(c) Improvements

211. Mr Emory also gave evidence that the plant could be modified at a cost of some USS22
million to process more gas and produce more condensate and LPGs. The Tribunal
considers this to be irrelevant to the KRG's claim for damages. The Claimants had no
obligation to spend any money on modifications which they had not agreed as part of the
Services Plan.

(d) The residue gas compressors

212, The KRG say that the plant's gas compressors were not fit for purpose. They were
designed for a maximum ambient temperature of 42°C, Summer temperatures at Khor
Mor are sometimes higher. During the summer of 2011 one or other of the compressors
occasionally tripped on account of overheating. In the following year Dana installed
cooling pads which dealt with the problem,

213. Mr Watts says that Dana ordered standard off-the-shelf compressors fiom Exterran
because they could be delivered more quickly and were cheaper. It had agreed to a fast
track construction and did not want to delay matters by ordering bespoke compressors. A
maximum ambient temperature of 42°C is a standard specification in the Middle East,
although there are places where temperatures go higher.''® Mr Freeny agrees that this was
a reasonable decision.

"63 Watts paragraphs 306-307.

 

1
Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 77 of 89

9 214,

‘The Tribunal considers that this issue has received more attention than it deserves. It is
not at all clear that the tripping of the compressors had any effect on the gas flow to the
power stations. It was Dana’s practice to use four compressors and have one in reserve.
Mr Freeny said that if one compressor tripped the spare would take over. There would be
no loss of pressure in the pipeline.''” Mr Emory said he would require more operational
data to say whether this was true or not, The Tribunal has no evidence of complaints
from the power stations about loss of pressure in hot weather.

215. The Tribunal considers that the installation of the original compressors was a reasonable
commercial decision which was not a breach of Dana’s contractual obligations to the

=~ KRG.

(e) Coalescer filters

216. ‘These ar used to remove lube oil which has entered the gas stream from the
compressors, Those originally purchased did not filter all the oil because they were
designed for a higher pressure than the power stations required. This appears to have
been result of inadequate communication between Dana and the Ministry of Electricity at
the design stage: another consequence of the fast track construction, They are due to be
replaced when an opportunity to shut down the plant becomes available. There is no
evidence that such lube oil as got into the gas stream has caused any damage or loss. The
Tribunal does not consider that more need be said about the filters.

@ Depropaniser

217, _ A depropaniser separates propane from butane in the LPG mix and enables it to be sold in
whatever proportions the buyers require. As noted in the first Partial Final Award,'"* the

'"" 2 Freeny 224,

'™ Paragraph 169

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 78 of 89

propane/butane ratio (by weight) of the LPG from Khor Mor in its natural state is on
average 60-40, Dana has not installed a depropaniser and the KRG says that it ought to
have done so, Although @ depropaniser ig mentioned in the HoA as something which
Exterran had (subject to modifications) on offer, the Tribunal does not consider that Dana
| undertook any contractual obligation to install one. It could have no effect on the supply
of gas to the power station but only on the saleability of the LPG. As there is no evidence
that the Claimants could have sold their LPG at higher prices if the propane and butane
were in different proportions, the Tribunal considers that doing without a depropaniser

‘was a reasonable commercial decision.
(g) Other matters

218. There are also various peripheral complaints conceming matters such as the amount of
condensate storage installed at Khor Mor and the validity of the plant performance test
conducted in 2015. The Tribunal has considered these but does not find that they
evidence any breaches of the HoA.

(h) Conclusion

219. ‘The Tribunal finds that the KRG has not established any defects in the design or
operation of the plant which constituted a breach of the terms of the HoA.

E. Appraisal Work and Seismic Data

220, Article 32 (first) of the Kurdistan Region Oi} and Gas Law provides that the Region
“shall have title” to all data and information, “whether raw, processed, interpreted or
analysed, regarding Petroleum in the Region”, In September 2009 Dr Hawrami sent Mr
Jafir an e-mail asking for the seismic data which Dana had obtained from its appraisal

t= 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 79 of 89
° work at Khor Mor and Chemchemal.''? On 13 November 2009 Dr Hawrami wrote @
| letter repeating the request.!°
221, On 26" November 2009 Mr Watts sent Dr Hawrami a disc containing seismic data for
Khor Mor and Chemchemal and a “Summary Report on Seismic Data Interpretation and
Mapping” for Khor Mor.!?" On 16 December 2009 he sent a similar report on
Chemchemal.

222. There does not appear to have been any further request for seismic data until the
commencement of this arbitration.” There had been nothing previously to indicate that

7 the KRG was not satisfied with the information provided. The main complaint now is
that Dana sent only the interpretation of the data and did not supply the raw and
intermediate data from which it was derived. Dana’s Chief Geophysist Dr Kaibili
explained that raw data by itself is useless, It must be processed to remove noise and
then interpreted. This is a lengthy and costly process.' It would be most unusual, he
said, for a host government to commission its own interpretation of the raw or
intermediate data,

223. The KRG’s expert, Mr Moritz, explained why a host government needed seismic data:'"*

“* paaso

Dail

* 2249

""KRG's Statement of Defence and Counterclaim 12 December 2014, paragraphs 572 and 573
™ Kaibili, paragraph 11.

™ ca/s3/10.

7
Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 80 of 89

@ “Having complete information about the extent and distribution of its
petroleum reserves and resources is crucial to a government's ability to
evaluate proposals for further development and negotiate the scope and

| terms of any further development.”

224. That seems entirely reasonable, Equally, it is possible that for some reason a government
may wish to reinterpret the raw data, In such a case, the goverament would be entitled to
ask for it, However, the present situation is that the parties have not reached the stage at
which the Claimants are in a position to make proposals for further development pursuant
to their exclusive rights in Khor Mor and Chemchemal. And the main reason for this, as
the Tribunal has found in section A of Part Two above, is that the KRG has, in breach of
its obligations under the HoA, obstructed the attempts of the Claimants to carry out the
appraisals (including obtaining more seismic data) which would enable them to make
such proposils, This no doubt is the reason why the KRG made no further requests for
seismic data after 2009.

225. The Tribunal therefore considers that the KRG has not demonstrated that it has suffered
any loss from not having obtained more seismic data than the Claimants have already
provided and that it would be premature for the Tribunal to make any order requiring the
Claimants to provide such data.

F.  Andit Request

226. Clause 1.5 of Annexure 6A to the HoA provides:

“1.5.1. The KRG shall have the right: (2) to audit the Accounts with
respect to each Calendar Year within a period of two (2) Calendar Years
following the end of such Calendar Year ("Audit Period"); and (b) to
retain an auditor of international standing familiar with international
petroleum industry accounting practice to undertake or assist the KRG to
undertake the said audit.

1.5.2 For purposes of auditing, the KRG, acting reasonably and in

accordance with prudent international petroleum industry practice, may
examine and verify, at reasonable times upon reasonable prior written

5

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 81 of 89

227.

228.

notice: to the CONTRACTOR, all charges and credits relating to the
Services, such as books of account, accounting entries, material records
and inventories, vouchers, payrolls, invoices and any other documents,
correspondence and records including electronic records reasonably
considered necessary by the KRG to audit and verify the charges and
credits, values and treatments.”

On 24 May 2009, the KRG wrote to Dana making a peremptory request for an audit.
This request was part of a group of letters sent by the KRG to mark its displeasure at the
sale of minority interests in Pearl to MOL and OMV."5 On 1 August 2009 the KRG
wrote to say that it would shortly be giving instructions about the audit”® and on 10
August 2009 Dana wrote to say that it would co-operate.'”” Nearly two years then passed
without anything happening, On 14 May 2011 Dr Hawrami sent an e-mail to tell Dana
that it was allocating it US$35 million of the “si/fa" payments" received from the
Federal Government, The e-mail went on:!??

“[TJhis payment should be treated as a cash advance from the KRG to
Dana....until your actual entitlements have been agreed by KRG appointed
independent international auditors.”

The audit to agree or determine the “actual entitlements” to sifa payments appears to

have been a requirement of the Federal Government, as Dr Hawrami explained in an ¢-

mail a month later:'®°

“Please be advised that we have recently received a written notification
from the federal Ministry of Finance stating that there will be no further
"5 Transeript Day 5, p. 159 (Dr Hawrami),
 Di/90
"7 There had been a “without prejudice” meeting at which it was reported that the KRG agreed to treat its
24 May letters as “ineffective” (see e-mail from Jeremy Carver, C-134) but the Tribunal does not regard
this as significant.
*% For an explanation of the silfa payments, see the first Partial Final Award, paragraph 135.
"Daal

p2rag4

el
Gase 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 82 of 89

% cash advances to the KRG with respect to any oil exports made from the
end of March onwards until all the cost statements related to the
companies contributing to the oil export have been prepared and
independently verified (audited). This unfortunate new and unexpected
development is contrary to the clear agreement previously reached with
Baghdad. It was understood that the payments will continue during the
audit process and then all the cash advances will be reconciled with each
of the project audit findings and outcomes when the audits are completed.”

229. It appears therefore that the audit to which this correspondence refers had nothing to do
with the audit under the HoA which had been requested two years earlier.

230. The next mention of an audit was in a letter from Dr Hawrami to Dana dated 6” August
2014, requesting compliance with the audit request of 24 May 2009. The KRG now

-—/» seeks an order that the Claimants permit an audit to take place.

231, The Tribunal considers that the request of 24 May 2009 must be considered as abandoned
and that it cannot be revived after the limitation period in clause 15.1.1 has expired. The
purpose of the limitation period, like most limitation periods, is to protect Dana against
having to find explanations for transactions which took place years go, when evidence
may have been lost or the persons involved not available. It would be contrary to the
purpose of this provision if the KRG were able to make a request without taking any
action upon it for five years and then claim to be able to demand the audit. The Tribunal
considers that unless a request for an audit is followed by steps to conduct that audit
within a reasonable time thereafter, it must be treated as having been abandoned. Five
years is well in excess of a reasonable time,

 

232. In 2014 KRG made a further request for an audit in respect of the years 2012 and 2013.
‘This was conducted by Deloittes and completed in 2015. Dana disputes most of the
“audit exceptions” raised by Deloittes and these have not been agreed. For such a case,
the HoA provides:

7

7
Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 83 of 89

q “1.5.6...1f thereafter there still exists a disagreement between the KRG
and the CONTRACTOR, the Dispute will be settled in accordance with
Paragraphs 1.5.7. (Emphasis supplied).

1.5.7, Any Dispute between the Parties under this Paragraph 1.5 that
cannot be settled amicably within sixty (60) days of the KRG's final notice
under Paragraph 1.5.6 may be submitted to an independent expert at the
request of either the KRG or the CONTRACTOR. In this specific
instance, the decision of the expert shall not necessarily be final and any
Party may decide to submit the matter to arbitration in accordance with the
HoA.”

233. Dana proposes to submit the matter to an independent expert, The KRG says that the
procedure of an expert is merely optional and invites the Tribunal to rule upon the

7! exceptions; ‘The Tribunal considens that either party has the right to refer the dispute to

an independent expert and that the Tribunal cannot pre-empt this right. If the KRG is
dissatisfied with the decision of the expert, it can refer the matter to arbitration.

G. Delayed Development Claim

234, During the period 2008 to 2012 negotiations (mostly without prejudice) took place
between the parties with a view to settling the dispute, The KRG says in paragraphs 383
to 405 of the Statement of Amended Counterclaim that by insisting on unreasonable
terms in the course of these negotiations, the Claimants were in breach of their obligation
to negotiate a reasonable development plan in accordance with industry standards.

235, Although there was a statutory model PSC contract in Kurdistan, there is no evidence that
any definite offer was made to the Claimants and the Tribunal has found that although the
KRG was willing to negotiate, it would do so only on the basis that negotiations started
from scratch without regard to Dana’s development rights under the HoA. Indeed, until
the first Partial Award, the existence of such rights was consistently denied. The Tribunal
therefore considers it impossible to say that the Claimants were in breach of their

78

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 84 of 89

236,

237,

238.

239.

obligation to enter into reasonable negotiations. ‘The claims in paragraphs 383 to 405
therefore fail,

H. Conclusion on the KRG's Counterclaims

The Tribunal considers that none of the heads of the KRG’s counterclaim has been
established and therefore dismisses it in its entirety.

PART FOUR; DECLARATORY RELIEF

In paragraph 113 of its Revised Statement of Claim, as amended by Appendix 3 to its
skeleton argument, Pearl invites the Tribunal to make 18 declarations. The Tribunal will
consider cach of these, but in general it considers that it would be unwise, in the absence
of some dispute over the meaning of the contract, simply to restate in other words what is
already stated in the HoA. Whether to make a declaration is a matter for the discretion of
the Tribunal.

(@) A declaration that the “term of the Contract" is 35 years.

BP[33] of Annexure 2 provided that —

“The term of these HOA or any successor agreement(s) thereto shall be for
a duration to be agreed between the Parties but in any event shall not be
less than the maximum duration of gas supply to any IPP or the duration
of RRC’s normally applicable to this type of agreement, whichever is
greater”.

In addition, paragraph 4.2 of Annexure 6A says that the term of the HoA shall be “not
less than 25 years”.

7

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 85 of 89

240.

2al.

242.

243.

‘These provisions seem clear enough. How much longer than 25 years the contract will
last depends upon what may in future be agreed between the parties or determined by
arbitration. The Tribunal sees no advantage in making a declarstion now.

(6) Declarations as to Pearl's rights in respect of the Initial Services Plan and

Further Services Plans.'"'

‘The first declaration sought is (aa):

“(aa) ‘That full field development of the HoA Areas can take place
pursuant to one or more PSPs, and that no other contractual instrument
(such as a PSC, RSC or any other agreement) is required.”

The Tribunal refiuses to make this declaration because it thinks it is wrong. An FSP is
concerned merely with additional work by way of extension to the work authorized by
the ISP. Whether the KRG has an obligation not unreasonably to refuse approval of an
FSP is not something which the Tribunal has considered because there has been no
‘occasion to do so, A FSP, as contemplated by Annexure 6A, is not the same thing as an
FDP. Nor can a FDP be achieved by an incremental series of ESPs. They are different
concepts.

The Tribunal has already found that the KRG may not unreasonably refuse a proposal for
an FDP in respect of the HoA Areas in which Pearl has exclusive rights. Furthermore,
the Tribunal has found that the KRG is not entitled to obstruct Pearl from doing whatever
is necessary by way of appraisal to enable it to make a proposal for an FDP in accordance
with general practice in the oil and gas industry.

! Revised Statement of Claim, paragraph 113 Band C,

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 86 of 89

‘ 244, ‘The Tribunal does not consider that it should make any of the other declarations sought in
respect of Service Plans because they do not relate to any concrete controversy or arise
‘out of a dispute over the meaning of the contract.

245. ‘The Tribunal concludes that none of the declarations requested in this section (b) appears
to relate to any dispute over the meaning of the contract.
(c) Declaration as to delayed development.'”

246. The Tribunal has dealt with this question and will make a suitable declaration in the

ay disposition.

(@) Declarations as to title, sales and export rights and aggregate revenues.'"*

247. The declarations do not appear to arise out of any dispute over the meaning of the
contract.

() Excess gas

248. This claim has failed.

O Guarantee
249, The declaration requested docs not arise out of any dispute about the meaning of the

contract.

'® Section DD in Appendix 3 to Pearl's Skeleton Argument.

Section D and E,

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 87 of 89

PART FIVE: COSTS

250. Pear! has made an application for an interim award of costs in respect of the proceedings
up to the issue of the Second Partial Final Award (and its Memorandum of Correction) on
27 November 2015. The KRG opposes the application in principle, on the ground that the
‘Tribunal cannot at this stage determine the “relative success and failure” of the parties, to
which the Tribunal should have regard under rule 28.4 of the LCIA Rules and also on the
ground that it would be more efficient to have a single order for costs,

251. It is agreed between the parties that if the Tribunal should decide that it was appropriate

/ to make an interim award of costs, the quantification of the costs should be adjourned and
—_ form the subject of a separate award, It is also not disputed that the Tribunal has a
discretion as to whether to make such an award or not.

252, The Tribunal considers that it would fair for an interim order to be made, It does not
envisage great difficulty in deciding the relative success and failure of the parties in
relation to the First and Second Partial Final Awards and the related interlocutory
proceedings. As for efficiency, the Tribunal considers that any saving of costs in having a
single costs order at the end of the proceedings is outweighed by the requirement of
fairness to Pearl, which has expended considerable sums on costs over the long course
which this arbitration has taken, Now that all that remains is to quantify Pearl’s delayed
development claim, it appears to the Tribunal an appropriate moment to make an interim
costs award.

253. The Tribunal therefore rules that it will make an interim costs order in an amount to be
determined in a further award after receiving the submissions of the parties.

,

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 88 of 89

PART SIX: DISPOSITION

254. We, Leonard, Lord Hoffinann, Lawrence, Lord Collins of Mapesbury and Jolin Beechey,
having read and heard the evidence and the parties written and oral submissions made to
us, and having carefully considered the same and for the reasons stated above, make our
‘Third Partial Final Award as follows:

(a) We declare that the KRG has in breach of its obligations under the HoA wrongfully
prevented the Claimants from carrying out appraisals and such other activities as are
necessary to enable Pearl to put forward a proposal for a FDP in respect of the HoA areas

Ay in which it has exclusive rights and bas thereby delayed the Claimants’ opportunity to

develop those Areas;

(b) We reserve to ourselves the determination of the amount payable by the KRG to the
Claimants by way of damages for the aforesaid breaches of the HoA;

(©) We declare that the KRG is not entitled under the HoA to reject a proposal from Pearl for
a FDP otherwise than on reasonable grounds in accordance with good petroleum industry
practice.

(d) We order the KRG to pay to the Claimants $US$121,095,282 in respect of condensate
and LPG lifted by or on behalf of the KRG between 30 June 2015 and 31 March 2016,
together with interest from the dates on which payment for such liquids was due until
compliance with this order at the rate of LIBOR plus two percent compounded monthly.

(e) We declare that the KRG is liable to refund to the Claimants the payments which it made
to Pewand Petrol Transporting and Food Inc (“Pewand”) for lifting condensate and LPG
on behalf of the KRG together with interest from the dates on such payments were made
until compliance with this order at the rate of LIBOR plus two percent compounded
monthly.

Case 1:17-cv-00894-APM Document 1-4 Filed 05/12/17 Page 89 of 89

(f) We reserve to ourselves the determination of the sum payable in respect of the aforesaid
payments to Pewand;

(a) We reserve to ourselves the determination of the Claimants’ application for an interim
order for costs.

(h) All other claims by the Claimants are dismissed.

6) All the counterclaims by the KRG are dismissed.
Place of arbitration: London, United Kingdom
january 2017

Signed:

Lord Hoffmann Victtncnnn
'

/ Lord Collins of Mapesbury ,
Ore 2
Mr John Beeshey CBE hac %

