INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Perenco Ecuador Limited
v.
Republic of Ecuador

(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6)
Annulment Proceeding

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Members of the Committee
Professor Eduardo Zuleta, President of the ad hoc Committee
Professor Rolf Knieper, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Professor Ménica Pinto, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Veronica Lavista

 

February 21, 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Perenco Ecuador Limited:

Mr. Jonathan Parr
Ms. Josselyn Bricefio de Luise
Perenco Ecuador Limited
Lyford Manor
Lyford Cay
Western Road
Nassau, Bahamas

and
Mr. Mark W. Friedman
Ms. Ina C. Popova
Ms. Laura Sinisterra
Ms. Sarah Lee
Ms. Moeun Cha
Debevoise & Plimpton
919 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
United States of America

Representing the Republic of Ecuador:

Dr. ffiigo Salvador Crespo
Dr. Claudia Salgado Levy
Dr. M?* Nazaret Ramos
Dr. Diana Moya
Procuraduria General del Estado
Av. Amazonas N39-123 y Arizaga
Quito, Ecuador
and
Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero
Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa
Ms. Audrey Caminades
Ms. Gabriela Gonzalez Girdldez
Ms. Raphaelle Legru
Dechert (Paris) LLP
32, rue de Monceau
75008, Paris
France
and
Professor Pierre Mayer
20, rue des Pyramides
75001, Paris
France

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE PARTIES 4
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 4
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 7
A. Claimant’s Position 7
B. Respondent’s Position 10
THE COMMITTEE’S CONSIDERATIONS 13
A. Applicable legal standard regarding the stay of enforcement of an ICSID Award...... 14
B. Analysis of the specific circumstances in the present Case ...........cccscccsesesseseeteseeteeeenes 26
Costs 30
DECISION 31

 

THE PARTIES

The Claimant is Perenco Ecuador Limited (the “Claimant” or “Perenco”). The
Respondent or Applicant is the Republic of Ecuador (the “Respondent,” the “Applicant”
or “Ecuador’”). The representatives of the Claimant and the Respondent are detailed at

page 2.

Claimant and Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties”.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On October 2, 2019, Ecuador presented an Application for Annulment (the “Application
for Annulment”) of the Award dated September 27, 2019, issued in ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/6 between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of Ecuador (the “Award”).
Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, Respondent requested the ICSID
Secretary-General to notify the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award until the ad
hoc Committee rules on such request, and that the stay be maintained until a decision on

the Application for Annulment is rendered by the Committee.!

By letter dated October 4, 2019, the Acting ICSID Secretary-General registered the
Application for Annulment and notified the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award,

in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On November 8, 2019, Perenco submitted its Opposition to Ecuador’s Request to Continue
the Provisional Stay of Enforcement, dated November 7, 2019 (“Claimant’s Opposition
to the Stay”), accompanied by Annex A (Decisions on Stays of Enforcement since

November 2014).

In its Opposition to the Stay, the Claimant requested that the Committee lift the provisional
stay of enforcement of the Award pending its decision on the Application for Annulment,
or in the alternative, that the ad hoc Committee order Ecuador to provide, within 30 days

of its decision on the issue of the stay, a deposit for the net amount of the Award, including

' Respondent’s Application for Annulment, October 2, 2019, ff 250-252.

accrued interest, into an escrow account; or an unconditional and irrevocable bank

guarantee or letter of credit for the net amount of the Award, including accrued interest.”

7. On November 18, 2019, the ad hoc Committee was constituted in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rules 6, 52(2), and 53. Its Members are: Professor Eduardo Zuleta (President),
a national of Colombia; Professor Rolf Knieper, a national of Germany; and Professor
Monica Pinto, a national of Argentina (the “Committee”). Ms. Veronica Lavista, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as the Secretary of the Committee.

8. In separate communications dated November 19, 2019 and November 21, 2019,
Respondent and Claimant respectively presented their comments regarding the schedule of

submissions on the issue of the stay.

9. By letter dated November 25, 2019, the Committee fixed the schedule of written
submissions regarding the issue of the stay. The timetable was set as follows: on or before
December 6, 2019 Ecuador would file its reply to Perenco’s opposition to the request for
continuation of the stay; on or before December 18, 2019 Perenco would file its rejoinder
on the request for continuation of the stay; and an oral hearing on the continuation of the
stay would take place in Washington, D.C., which would be conducted together with the
First Session of the annulment proceeding. In the same letter, the Committee decided to

maintain the stay of enforcement until it issued its decision on the continuation of the stay.

10. The Parties presented their written submissions in accordance with the schedule set by the
Committee. The oral hearing on the continuation of the stay took place on January 13, 2020

in Washington, D.C. The following persons were present at the hearing

Committee:
Professor Eduardo Zuleta President
Professor Rolf Knieper Member
Professor Ménica Pinto Member
ICSID Secretariat:

? Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, §] 40; Claimant’s Rejoinder to Ecuador’s Request to Continue the Provisional
Stay of Enforcement, December 18, 2019 (“Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay”), 107.

Ms. Veronica Lavista
For Perenco Ecuador Limited:

Counsel

Mr. Mark W. Friedman
Ms. Ina C. Popova

Ms. Laura Sinisterra
Mr. Gregory A. Senn

 

Parties
Mr. Jonathan Parr
Ms. Josselyn Bricefio de Luise

Hearing Consultant
Mr. James Haase

For the Republic of Ecuador:

Counsel

Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero

Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa
Ms. Gabriela Gonzalez Girdldez
Ms. Ruxandra Esanu

Mr. Amir Farhadi

 

Parties
Dr. fiiigo Salvador Crespo

 

Dr. Claudia Salgado Levy

Court Reporter:
Ms. Dawn Larson
Interpreters:
Ms. Silvia Colla

Ms. Estela Zaffaroni
Mr. Charles Roberts

Secretary of the Committee

Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton

Perenco Group General Counsel
Perenco Latin America Legal Advisor

Immersion Legal

Dechert (Paris) LLP
Dechert (Paris) LLP
Dechert (Paris) LLP
Dechert (Paris) LLP
Dechert (Paris) LLP

Procurador General del Estado de la
Reptiblica del Ecuador

Directora Nacional de Asuntos
Internacionales — Procuraduria General
del Estado de la Repiiblica del Ecuador

Worldwide Reporting, LLP

11. On January 16, 2020, the Committee issued its Procedural Order No. 1, recording the
Parties’ agreements on procedural matters and the decisions of the Committee on the

disputed issues.

12. The Committee has considered all the submissions and arguments put forward by the
Parties. The fact that certain arguments, documents, or legal authorities are not mentioned

in the following sections does not mean that the Committee has not considered them.

Til. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. Claimant’s Position

13. Claimant requests that the Committee lift the stay of enforcement of the Award or, in the
alternative, that it order Respondent to post a financial security as a condition for the

continued stay of enforcement of the Award.

14. Claimant argues that a stay of enforcement is an exception to the binding and final nature
of ICSID awards and thus Ecuador has the burden to justify the continuation of the stay.*
The wording of Articles 52(5) and 53(1) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules confirms the exceptional nature of a stay of enforcement. Accordingly,
the applicant in ICSID annulment proceedings has neither a right nor a presumption in
favour of continuation of the provisional stay.* Recent practice of annulment committees

confirms this interpretation of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules.

15. In view of the exceptional nature of a stay of enforcement, the burden of proving that the
circumstances require continuation is high. Ecuador must demonstrate that the
circumstances at issue must be beyond the inherent or normal effects of an adverse ICSID
award.° Namely, when the respondent State is ravaged by war, is suffering an acute foreign

exchange crisis, or when there is a risk of non-recoupment of the amounts paid to claimant

3 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, 4; Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, §§ 16, 19-21.
+ Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, 5-7.

5 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, J 8.

© Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, § 10; Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, J 42.

individuals or corporations controlled by a single individual in case of annulment. In sum,

circumstances requiring a stay must be severe.”

Claimant argues that Ecuador has failed to show sufficiently severe circumstances
requiring the continuation of a stay in the case at hand.* Respondent contends that two
specific circumstances justify the stay: (i) Ecuador’s budgetary priorities and situation of
social unrest; and (ii) the alleged risk of non-recoupment of the amounts paid under the
Award if the Application for Annulment were to succeed. However, none of these

circumstances are sufficiently severe to justify the stay.”

As to the first circumstance, Claimant alleges that “budgetary reallocation” is an ordinary
effect of having to comply with an ICSID award, not a circumstance requiring a stay.!°
Claimant also rebuts on two grounds Ecuador’s contention that payment of the Award
would “most likely ignite similar mass protests and strikes”: first, because the Award has
nothing to do with the civil unrest caused by Ecuador’s Government decision to cut fuel

subsidies;! and second, because social protests and discontent cannot constitute carte

blanche to disregard international obligations. !*

As to the alleged risk of non-recoupment, Claimant states that there is no particular
heightened risk of non-recoupment in the present case because Claimant is part of the larger
oil multinational Perenco S.A., which makes this case completely different from cases
involving individual natural persons with unclear assets.'? Nonetheless, Perenco
undertakes to return any sums collected from Ecuador if the Committee upholds the
Application for Annulment,'4 and, if necessary, to procure a parent company guarantee

from Perenco S.A.'>

7 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, 9; Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 1 46.

8 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 50.
° Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, | 49.
10 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 51.
1! Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, {][ 59-61.
2 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, | 62.
3 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, | 69.
4 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, | 67.
15 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, { 70.

20.

21.

22.

On the other hand, Claimant notes that Ecuador’s alleged “compliance” with ICSID
decisions is misplaced. Post-award negotiations and settlements, including cuts in the
amount awarded, do not correspond to the ordinary meaning of “comply with the terms of
the Award” under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention.'® Ecuador’s track record of
non-compliance with ICSID decisions weighs heavily against the stay. Except for one
award of US$5.6 million, Ecuador has not paid promptly and in full any major adverse
award.!? Moreover, in the Perenco and Burlington cases, Ecuador did not comply with the

tribunals’ orders of provisional measures.'*

In the alternative, Claimant argues that even if severe circumstances requiring a stay were
to exist, the stay should be conditioned upon the posting of a security. Claimant contends
that, pursuant to Articles 44 and 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and Rules 19 and 53 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the power to condition a stay is inherent in the Committee’s
power to decide questions of procedure and protect the integrity of the proceedings.!?

The same understanding has been endorsed by several ICSID ad hoc committees.”°

In the case at hand, security is necessary because of the serious risk of Ecuador’s
non-compliance,”! and because an unconditioned stay would cause overriding prejudice to
Perenco considering the relatively low rate of post-award interest on the amounts awarded
to Perenco.?? Furthermore, Respondent has not provided evidence that it would be

extremely burdensome for it to provide a bank guarantee.”

In sum, Claimant requests that the Committee deny Ecuador’s request for a continuation
of the stay of enforcement of the Award, or in the alternative, that it order the stay to be
conditioned on Ecuador providing, within 30 days of the Committee’s decision,
(i) a deposit for the net amount of the Award, including accrued interest, into an escrow

account with a reputable international bank based outside of Ecuador, pledged in favour of

 

'6 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, §] 5; Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, {| 18, 77-79.
‘7 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, §{] 23, 24; Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, { 79.
18 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, {{ 81.

° Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, {| 88.

20 Claimant’ s Rejoinder on the Stay, § 92.

21 Claimant’ s Rejoinder on the Stay, {ff 95, 96.

2 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 101.

23 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 102.

23.

24.

25.

Perenco and under the sole control of an international escrow agent and direction of the
Committee; or (ii) an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee or letter of credit for
the net amount of the Award, including accrued interest, from a reputable international
bank based outside of Ecuador, pledged in favour of Perenco and to be released on the

order of the Committee.

Respondent’s Position

Respondent requests that the Committee maintain the stay of enforcement of the Award
and deny Perenco’s request to condition such stay on the posting of a security for the net

amount of the Award.

Ecuador argues that the stay must be continued unless Perenco demonstrates that Ecuador’s
annulment and stay applications are dilatory, frivolous or abusive.‘ Perenco contends that
Ecuador’s Application for Annulment was presented for the sole purpose of obtaining a
stay, delaying payment, forcing Perenco to settle in exchange for a discount, and hiding
assets pending the annulment proceedings. Yet, this assertion is untenable and false.?> Once
Ecuador identified serious flaws on the Award and Decisions preceding the Award, it
decided to present the Application for Annulment together with the request to stay

enforcement of the Award.

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Committee has full discretion to decide on the stay of enforcement of the
Award.’ In order to exercise its discretion, the Committee shall take into consideration all
factual elements that were proven by the Parties.”* Respondent further contends that if there
is any sort of presumption concerning the enforcement, it would be in favor of maintaining
the stay of the enforcement of the Award, as an element inherent in the right of an award

29

debtor to seek annulment.”” Moreover, contrary to Claimant’s position, nothing in the

> Ecuador’s Reply to Perenco’s Opposition to the Request to Continue the Provisional Stay of Enforcement, dated
December 6, 2019 (“Respondent’s Reply on the Stay”), p. 4.

°5 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 41.

26 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 50.

27 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 17.

°8 Tr. Hearing on Stay of Enforcement, 24:12-17.

2 Tr. Hearing on Stay of Enforcement, 25:16-20.

26.

27.

ICSID Convention or the ICSID Arbitration Rules conditions the stay to extraordinary
circumstances such as being “ravaged by war” or ““‘suffering an acute foreign exchange
crisis’ as Perenco posits.”*? Conversely, ICSID ad hoc committees have tended to grant the

stay of enforcement “absent unusual circumstances.”?!

Although the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not provide for
specific circumstances to be satisfied for continuing the stay, Ecuador contends that even
if required, these circumstances are met in the present case. To decide on the continuation
of the stay of enforcement, ad hoc committees have assessed: (i) whether lifting the stay
causes particularly adverse economic consequences to the award debtor; (ii) whether
continuing the stay has particularly adverse economic consequences to the award creditor,
including the risk that the applicant fails to comply with the award if not annulled; and (iii)
the risk of non-recovery of the sums paid under the award if the stay were lifted and the

award were subsequently annulled.**

As regards the first circumstance, Ecuador states that lifting the stay would cause
significant and unavoidable economic and social hardship for Ecuador.** In early 2019,
Ecuador faced a difficult situation and was forced to seek the support of the IMF through
the Extended Fund Facility.** As a result, Ecuador has undertaken structural reforms and
is undergoing serious budgetary restrictions which would lead it to the path of growth and
sustainable development and facilitate the capacity to reimburse debt contracted under
previous regimes. Furthermore, massive and violent protests broke out in Ecuador after the
elimination of fuel subsidies (which were withdrawn afterwards). The increased violence
led the government to declare the state of emergency and to impose curfews and transit
restrictions.» It is estimated that the 10-day strike caused losses close to US$2,000

million.*°

30 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, {ff 36, 65.

+! Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 32 (emphasis omitted).
* Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, 475.

33 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, {| 104.

* Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 91.

+5 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 92.

*© Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 95.

28.

29.

30.

31.

In the present context of civil unrest in Ecuador, the consequences of immediate
enforcement of US$411 million are beyond the ordinary consequences of budgetary
reallocation and would cause significant and unavoidable economic and social hardship for
Ecuador. This risk of further social unrest and the ensuing economic impact are of

sufficient gravity to justify the continuation of the stay.*’

As regards the second circumstance, Perenco would not be prejudiced if the stay of
enforcement is continued. Ecuador states that it has an exemplary record of compliance
with awards, which it intends to maintain. In relation to the decision on provisional
measures by the tribunal in the original arbitration, under the ICSID system, these amount
to recommendations only.** Ecuador has complied voluntarily with all the awards issued
against it since 2004 and it has never faced an enforcement procedure, and argues that
settlement is also a form of voluntary compliance.*? Therefore, Claimant’s assertion that
there is an incremental risk of non-payment in the future if the stay of enforcement is
maintained, is erroneous.*” Moreover, it is irrelevant whether Ecuador denounced the
ICSID Convention to the effects of Ecuador’s compliance with the Award. Pursuant to
Article 72 of the ICSID Convention, Ecuador’s obligation to comply with the Award is

still binding on Ecuador.

Yet, even if the continuation of the stay could cause Perenco harm, the delay in the

t.4! Ecuador refutes

enforcement will be properly and fully remedied by post-award interes!
Claimant’s position that the interest granted in the Award would be insufficient, and in any

event, it is not up to the Committee to improve on the terms of the Award.*?

As regards the third circumstance, Respondent states that it would suffer immediate and
irreversible harm if the stay is lifted because it would be unable to recover any amounts
paid to Perenco once the Award is annulled.*? Ecuador notes that Perenco is a mere shell

company based in the Bahamas, devoid of any assets to be attached in any recoupment

57 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 104.
38 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 164.
3° Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, 4] 127-131.
49 Tr, Hearing Stay of Enforcement, pp. 39-42.
4! Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 166.
* Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, { 169.
43 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 110-120.

32.

33.

IV.

34.

action.** Claimant is a dormant entity, whose sole purpose and value is enforcing the
Award. It is highly likely therefore that if Ecuador pays the Award, those funds will be

transferred to other entities and Perenco will be liquidated.*° Were Respondent to pay now,

 

once the Award is annulled, it would be nearly impossible or very difficult for Ecuador to

recover any of the sums paid to Perenco.*°

With respect to Claimant’s request that the continuation of the stay should be conditioned
upon the posting of a financial security, Ecuador contends that the Committee has no power
to grant such request because Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention does not provide for
this possibility and the Committee cannot imply this power from the silence of the
Convention,*’ nor does it have the power to recommend provisional measures.** In the
alternative, Ecuador argues that ordering the posting of a security amounts to penalizing
the applicant for annulment because it places the award creditor in a better position than it
would have been in, should the application not have been presented.*? Furthermore,
escrowing the funds would cause Ecuador the same immediate hardship as lifting the stay,
as it would result in over US$411 million being frozen, and thus made unavailable for

Ecuador’s development efforts.

Based on the foregoing, Ecuador states that the circumstances presented before the
Committee demonstrate that, on balance, continuing the stay would be less harmful to the
award creditor than to the award debtor and therefore the stay of enforcement of the Award

should be maintained.

THE COMMITTEE’S CONSIDERATIONS

In order to determine whether to continue the stay of enforcement of the Award, and

considering the specific facts of this case, the Committee will address: (i) the applicable

“4 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 118.

45 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, #§ 119, 120.

46 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 10, 110-120.
47 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, §§ 180, 181.

48 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 183-196.

4° Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, fi] 203, 205.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

legal standard regarding the stay of enforcement of an ICSID Award; and (ii) the

application of such standard in the present case.

Applicable legal standard regarding the stay of enforcement of an ICSID Award

The first point facing the Committee is what the standard of review is to determine whether
the stay of enforcement of the Award shall be continued.*° To address this question, the

Committee must refer to the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Pursuant to Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, “[e]ither party may request annulment
of the award by an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General [...].” In turn,
Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that “the party applying for [...]
annulment of an award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or all of the
award to which the application relates.” The party requesting the stay, “shall specify the

circumstances that require the stay.”>!

According to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, “[i]f an application for the [...]
annulment of an award contains a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-
General shall, together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the provisional
stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is constituted it shall, if either
party requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay should be continued; unless it

decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be terminated.”

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, “[t]he Committee may, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If
the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement

shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.”*?

In the light of the aforementioned provisions in the ICSID Convention and ICSID

Arbitration Rules and following the General Rule of Interpretation incorporated in Article

5° Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, p. 4.
5! Rule 54(4), ICSID Arbitration Rules.
32 Article 52(5), ICSID Convention.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the Committee concludes that a party
to an award issued in an ICSID investment arbitration under the ICSID Convention has
both the right to apply for annulment and the right to request the continuation of the stay.
However, there is neither a right to the stay of enforcement, nor a presumption in favour or

against the stay.

First, the Committee notes that the stay of enforcement of an ICSID award may be
requested by the applicant together with its application for annulment.*? The applicant may
decide not to request the stay at the time of the application. Absent this request, the
Secretary-General of ICSID could not grant the provisional stay of the award. In addition,
absent a request in the application, ad hoc committees would only have the authority to
decide on a stay if either party so requests after the ad hoc committee is constituted.
Accordingly, the presentation of an application for annulment does not entail the automatic

stay of enforcement of an ICSID award.

Second, pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, “[a]s soon as the Tribunal
or Committee is constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on whether
such stay should be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically
be terminated.” The word “automatically” refers to the termination of the stay, not to the
continuation thereof. Therefore, there has to be a request by either party for the Tribunal to
tule on the stay. Absent such request, the stay granted by the Secretary-General of ICSID

shall automatically terminate.

Third, according to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, “the Committee may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application,

enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.”°>

The Committee notes that the ordinary meaning of the word “may” expresses a possibility

and the ordinary meaning of the expression “if it considers” indicates discretionally to take

53 Article 52(5), ICSID Convention; Rule 54(1) and (2), ICSID Arbitration Rules.
54 Rule 54 (1), ICSID Arbitration Rules.
55 Article 52(5), ICSID Convention.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

something into account when making a judgment. Thus, it is optional — not mandatory —
for the committee to stay the enforcement of the Award if the circumstances so require.

The crux of the matter is therefore whether there are circumstances requiring the stay.

Ecuador contends that the fact that Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides that
the continuation of the stay should be granted where the circumstances require it, “does
not subject the granting of a stay to a high threshold test or a showing of extraordinary

circumstances such as being ‘ravaged by war’ or ‘suffering an acute foreign exchange
56

 

, as Perenco posits.

The Committee sides with Applicant that Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention does not
demand “extraordinary circumstances” for the stay to be granted. However, the Committee
disagrees with Ecuador in that said provision — or other provisions in the ICSID Convention
or the ICSID Arbitration Rules —-demand that the stay should be granted “absent unusual
circumstances.” The Committee notes that the word “circumstances” incorporated in
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention or in Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules is
not preceded by any qualifying adjective. The Committee therefore has wide discretion to
weigh the circumstances presented by the Applicant to determine if these circumstances

require the stay of enforcement of the Award.

In sum, neither the Convention nor the Arbitration Rules support Ecuador’s argument that
the stay must be continued unless Perenco demonstrates that Ecuador’s annulment and stay
applications are dilatory or abusive, nor do they support Perenco’s assertion that Ecuador
carries the burden of proof in a technical sense beyond specification that the circumstances

require a continuation of the stay.

As to the practice of ad hoc committees in deciding on a continuation of a stay of

enforcement, the Committee observes that it is far from uniform.

It is true that, traditionally, the majority of committees has exercised its discretion by
granting a stay. As documented by the ICSID Secretariat for a period running until April

15, 2016, 36 decisions out of 41 ruled in favour of a stay, of which 22 were conditioned

5 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, $f] 35, 36.

49.

50.

upon the issuance of some sort of security (13 decisions) or written undertakings (9
decisions), with 14 decisions granting the stay unconditionally. In 11 out of the 22
conditioned decisions, the stay was later terminated because the condition had not been
satisfied.*’ Even if in recent years some committees have taken a more restrictive approach

in the exercise of their discretion, the predominant view remains unchanged.

However, statistics by themselves are not sufficient to draw a conclusion on the matter
given that the circumstances of each case are different. Moreover, the Committee does not
discern a jurisprudence constante with respect to an interpretation of Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. As a consequence, both
Parties can correctly rely on decisions that support their opposing positions. That “may be
explained by [the] lack of guidance in the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and
the Arbitration Rules and the particular circumstances of each request.”** In fact, the texts
confer discretion to committees to stay the enforcement and the “criteria for the exercise

of this discretion are the circumstances that may require the stay of enforcement.”*?

Yet, several issues are treated controversially by different ad hoc committees. Article 52(5)
of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not qualify the
circumstances or set criteria that committees should apply to assess their relevance and
relative weight, nor do they specify whether the discretion encompasses the appraisal of
different circumstances or can only be exercised once circumstances are identified that
require a stay, nor is the relation between the application for annulment and the application
for the continuation of the stay fully clarified. Certainly, the application for the stay
depends on the application for annulment, and the Convention states clearly “that a stay is
[a] distinct step from an annulment application itself.”®° However, this does not clarify
whether the quality and seriousness of the annulment application reflects on to the stay

application.

57 ICSID Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the ICSID Administrative Council, May 5, 2016, 1 58,
CAA-028.

88 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant’s
Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 7, 2012, 441, AALA-0026.

°° C,H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2" edition 2009, Art. 52, 4594, AALA-0022.

© Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, 4 13.

S51. A number of committees have referred to “[t]he prevailing practice in prior annulment
cases [that] has been to grant the stay of enforcement. Although this practice does not create
a presumption for continuation, and a committee is entitled to deviate from it, ‘if it

considers that the circumstances so require’, the Committee finds that in this case there is

no reason to deviate from the standard practice.””*!

52. In this perspective, the ad hoc committee in Pey Casado v. Chile determined:

Turning first to the Republic's Request that the stay of enforcement of the Award
should be continued pending its decision on the Application, the Committee notes
that, although Article 52(5) of the Convention uses the verb “may”, thereby
conveying an element of discretion to the Committee, a review of the many decisions
by ad hoc annulment committees since the MINE decision in 1988 leads the
Committee to the conclusion that, absent unusual circumstances, the granting of a
stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the annulment proceedings has now
become almost automatic.

In the present case, the Committee is satisfied that the Republic has discharged its
burden of proving that there are no unusual circumstances and that all the factors
which the Republic has referred to support the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award pending the Committee's decision and it so rules.

53. In CMS v. Argentina, the ad hoc committee ruled that “[a]s a general matter a respondent
State seeking annulment should be entitled to a stay provided it gives reasonable assurances
that the award, if not annulled, will be complied with.” It further ruled that the written
undertaking by the Procurador del Tesoro expressing the irrevocable commitment to fulfil
the pecuniary obligations was a sufficient element of all the circumstances to allow a

continuation of the stay.

©! Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 30, 2013, {1 50,
AALA-0010.

© Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision
on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 5, 2010, {9 25, 26, AALA-0006.
In a Decision of March 15, 2018, the second ad hoc committee accepted the first committee’s argument, although
based only on reasons of “procedural fairness and equality”. See Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation
v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Request for the Stay of the Enforcement of the
Award, March 15, 2018, 71, AALA-0004.

3 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on the Argentine
Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 1, 2006, {{f[ 38, 50, AALA-0025.

18

54. Other ad hoc committees insisted more on an explicit reference to Article 52(5) of the

ICSID Convention, which led the committee in O/ v. Venezuela

to a fundamental conclusion, set forth at the outset, that the continuation of the stay
of enforcement in the ICSID system is far from automatic. ICSID Convention Article
52(5) provides that the stay shall continue if an ad hoc committee considers that “the
circumstances so require.” Said article does not use other less categorical verbs, such
as “recommend,” “deserve,” “justify” or similar words, but resorts to the imperative
verb “require.” And the expression “if it considers” leaves wide discretion to an ad
hoc committee to evaluate, case by case, if those circumstances are present or not, in
order to continue a stay of enforcement, notwithstanding the binding and final nature
of the awards.

After having considered the following circumstances as part of its discretional exercise: the
tisk of non-compliance, the risk of non-recovery, the quality of the annulment application,
the possibility of irreparable harm, and the obligation to pay interest as compensation for

the time-value of money, the committee ruled to lift the stay.

55. In Standard Chartered v. Tanzania, the ad hoc committee had an approach on the standard

similar to OJ v. Venezuela. It reasoned:

The use of the phrase: “if it [the committee] considers that the circumstances so
require,” rather than the formulation “so permit,” indicates the necessity for the
committee to positively establish circumstances prone to justify the requested stay
on enforcement. The use of the word “may” indicates that it is a matter within the
discretion of the committee whether or not to stay enforcement of the award pending
its decision on an application for annulment. [...]

In consideration of the previous, it is the view of the Committee that it is empowered
to exercise its discretion as to whether or not to continue the stay on the enforcement
of the Award pending its decision on the Application.

In exercising its discretion by continuing the stay, the committee referred to the legitimacy

of the annulment application:

TANESCO has exercised its right to apply for annulment contemplated under the
ICSID Convention, and as such it has a legitimate right to request that the stay is
continued, until the final decision is rendered by the Committee. There is no reason

© OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25, Decision on Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, April 4, 2016, 1 89, CAA-027.

® Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 12, 2017,
4450, 52, CAA-030.

56.

57.

to consider that in this particular case the institution of the annulment proceedings

was purely dilatory in nature.
In turn, the OJ v. Venezuela committee referred to Libananco v. Turkey, where the ad hoc
committee argued:

The exercise of the discretion of the Committee depends on the circumstances

surrounding the Stay Request and, therefore, the granting of a stay of enforcement

or its continuation should in no way be regarded as automatic. The Committee is

aware that some ad hoc annulment committees have considered that, “absent unusual

circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the

annulment proceedings has now become almost automatic.” However, this does not

follow from the ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules, and the Committee

considers that its decision should be based on an assessment of all relevant

circumstances.°”
The committee accepted the respondent’s argument that the claimant bore no risk of
compliance in case of an annulment in light of the respondent’s record of fulfilment of its
international obligations, that, conversely, the claimant itself was bankrupt exposing a high
tisk of recovery in case of the maintenance of the award, and it rejected the argument of
other committees that the delay in enforcement is compensated by the accrued post-award
interest. After this exercise of weighing and weighting, it stated that “[t]o conclude, on
balance, the Committee is of the view that Applicant’s interest in a continued stay of
enforcement pending the outcome of the annulment proceeding should be given more
weight than Respondent’s interest in immediate enforcement,”* and decided to continue

the stay.

A similar pattern, albeit with a different result, appears in Karkey v. Pakistan. The ad hoc
committee concluded that the facts and considerations asserted by the applicant — the effect
of immediate payment on the budget, the risk of recovery in case of a successful annulment,
the merits of the annulment application, and a written undertaking which only reiterated

the respondent’s obligations under the ICSID Convention — were not “sufficient proof that

© Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 12, 2017, 1 61,
CAA-030.

© Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant's Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 7, 2012, | 43, AALA-0026.

8 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant's Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 7, 2012, 4 50-52, 54, AALA-0026.

20

circumstances exist in the present case which require a continuation of the stay, as
mandated by Rule 54(4).”°° Once having so concluded, “the Committee consider[ed] that
it can use its discretion to continue the stay subject to conditions which the Parties might
find feasible and a preferable solution,” such as a bank guarantee, a capitalized escrow
account or a written undertaking providing sufficient assurance of compliance.”
Thus, unavoidably, the condition became an integrated criterion, consideration and part of
the “circumstances”, which were weighed in the exercise of the committee’s discretion. In
this perspective, the committee held that its decision “would provide Karkey security in
the case that the Award is upheld. On the other hand, it would ensure that Pakistan would
not be exposed to enforcement attempts during this proceeding and could recoup any

amounts if the Award is annulled.”7!

58. In the two ICSID proceedings that opposed Tenaris & Talta and Venezuela, both ad hoc
committees pursued the approach of balancing the different interests as articulated in the

alleged circumstances.

59. In Tenaris I, the ad hoc committee found that “[g]iven the variety of situations and
circumstances alleged by the various parties, it always depends on how they are appreciated
by the Committee.””? In the exercise of its discretion, the committee considered and
weighted the relevant circumstances such as the possible damages resulting from the stay
proceedings, the risk of recovery, the record of compliance with international obligations,
and the impact of enforcement on the parties, and came to the conclusion that the stay was

to be lifted.”* It decided that a letter of comfort presented by the Attorney General was not

® Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/1, Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, February 22, 2018, 126, CAA-035.

% Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/1, Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, February 22, 2018, ff 131, 132, CAA-035.

” Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/1, Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 22 February 2018, | 131, CAA-035.

 Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID
Case No. ARB/I1/26, Decision on the Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 24, 2017,
77, CAA-029. Similar conclusions were drawn by the ad hoc committee in Valores Mundiales, 8.L. and Consorcio
Andino, S.L. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/I1, Decision on the Request for
Continuation of the Stay of E of the Award, 6, 2018, CAA-039.

3 Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID
Case No. ARB/I1/26, Decision on the Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 24, 2017,
4 84, CAA-029.

 

 

21

sufficient to alleviate the doubts on the sincerity to fulfil the obligations, “not because there

is doubt about his word but there is doubt about its effectiveness within the constitutional

framework of the country.””

60. In Tenaris II, the ad hoc committee came to identical conclusions,’”> despite a different
emphasis on the applicable legal standards. After having found on the “intimate link
between an application for annulment and a request for stay” despite the distinct steps to

be followed,” the committee argued:

The terms of Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention must be interpreted in the
context of the annulment mechanism. The Committee has no doubt that the provision
does not intend to empower ad hoc committees to reject the request for a stay when
the applicant pursues its legitimate right to have the award examined for fundamental
institutional and procedural propriety in good faith and absent dilatory intentions.
Therefore, the Committee subscribes to the mainstream jurisdiction of committees
that exercise their discretion and grant stays when annulment of an award has been
requested in good faith and neither with the abusive intention to escape the obligation
to abide by its terms nor as a demonstration of its refusal to accept the obligation
under the ICSID Convention to comply with the award. The Committee does not
share the view that a context-free interpretation of the ordinary meaning of the term
“require” in Article 54(5) [sic] of the ICSID Convention, should lead to a restriction
of this general practice.”

6l. A different approach was followed in Burlington v. Ecuador. The ad hoc committee

introduced the method of determination by insisting on two steps:

According to Article 52(5), the Committee has to appreciate first whether
circumstances are present that make it necessary to stay enforcement or continue the
provisional stay of enforcement. Once the Committee has concluded that such
circumstances exist, then it may decide in favor or against the continuation of the
stay. The Committee emphasizes the term “may” because even when the required
circumstances are present, a committee may decide against the continuation of the
stay of enforcement. This wide discretion of the Committee in making its decision is

 

4 Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID

 

Case No. ARB/I1/26, Decision on the Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 24, 2017,
490, CAA-029.
5 Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID

Case No. ARB/12/23, Decision on Venezuela’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
February 23, 2018, 4 105, CAA-036.
% Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/23, Decision on Venezuela’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
February 23, 2018, 4 103, CAA-036.
” Tenaris SA & Talta - Trading e ing Sociedade Uni I Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of V la, ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/23, Decision on Venezuela’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
February 23, 2018, J 104, CAA-036.

 

 

22

62.

63.

64.

compounded by the unspecified nature of the circumstances that may lead an

annulment committee to conclude that they require that enforcement be stayed.”8
By this argument, the committee limited its power of exercising discretion doubly.
First, the power of exercising discretion only sets in after circumstances are established
that require a continuation of the stay; second, the discretion can only be exercised in the
sense to deny a stay although circumstances requiring a stay exist. The committee found
that budgetary allocations are inherent in international pecuniary obligations, that the
periodicity of budgetary planning cannot be a relevant circumstance except for extreme
and exceptional situations, “that Ecuador has failed to prove that the termination of the
stay would lead to severe consequences for its ability to conduct its affairs.” Since
budgetary hardship had been the only circumstance asserted by the applicant, and this
assertion had not been proven, “this should be the end of the matter”, and the stay was

lifted without necessitating the exercise of discretion.””

The ad hoc committee in Infrastructure Services v. Spain “consider[ed] that the need to
respect the finality of the award calls for greater restraint in deciding whether a stay of
enforcement should be granted,” and proposed “that the circumstances which should exist
for a stay to be required must, at the very least, rise above those which are common to most

stay applications.”*°

This Committee has carefully studied Articles 52(5), and also 51(4) and 50(2) of the ICSID
Convention, as well as the rich case law. It sees a variety of solutions. Most of the
distinctions are unavoidable and understandable to the extent that they relate to a variety

of factual circumstances. Others are due to divergent legal positions.

This does not exclude that, with respect to a certain number of issues, a wide consensus
exists as a result of the clear provisions of the Convention. This seems to be the case for

the principled views that a continuation of the stay during period of annulment proceedings

8 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, (CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, August 31, 2017, 170, CAA-033 (emphasis in original).

9 Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Stay of Enforcement
of the Award, August 31, 2017, 85, CAA-033.

*° Infrastructure Services and Energiy Termosolar v. Kingdom of Spain, CS1D Case No. ARB/13/31, Decision on the
Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, October 21, 2019, {i 60, 66, CAA-044.

23

65.

66.

8! For a detailed analy:

is not automatic but that the determination on the application for annulment and the
application for a stay are based on distinct criteria, despite the close links between both
applications. Further, the provisions of the Convention exclude a presumption in favour or
against a continued stay of enforcement. Rather, committees have to exercise their
discretion to determine each time whether the stay is warranted in light of the given

circumstances.

Article 52(5) is, together with Articles 50(2) and 51(4), one of the provisions in the ICSID
Convention empowering a tribunal or ad hoc committee to suspend the obligation of
voluntary compliance or enforcement of an award although it has not (yet) lost its binding
force as established under Article 53 of the Convention. The reason is that requests for
interpretation, revision or annulment do not set aside the validity and the finality of an
award as rendered but open such risk and thereby a period of uncertainty as to its final
enforceability. The drafters of the Convention have tried to reconcile such transitional
uncertainty and the highly valued finality. The efforts concentrated on enforcement,
apparently in recognition of the fact that it is difficult to expect that a good faith applicant
for any of the three remedies would voluntarily comply with an award, which it considers
not final. Three alternatives were discussed for the three scenarios: an automatic stay of
enforcement, the granting of discretion to domestic courts to refuse enforcement, and the
granting of discretion to the tribunal/ad hoc committee within the ICSID system to stay the

8!

enforcement.”’ For all three constellations, the latter solution was preferred.

Articles 50, 51 and 52 of the ICSID Convention empower the tribunal/ad hoc committee
which is asked to decide the merits of the request to exercise its discretion and stay the
enforcement of the award. This Committee is convinced, in appreciating the drafting
context and the ordinary meaning of the terms, that the aforementioned articles do not limit
the tribunals’/ad hoc committees’ discretionary power to the question whether to reject an

application for stay of enforcement although the circumstances require one.

 

s cf. C.H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2™ edition 2009, Art. 50,

Ql 42 ss, Art. 51, {if 34 ss., Art. 52, {1 574 ss, AALA-0022.

24

67.

68.

69.

They do also not limit the power by establishing a binding threshold for the question of
what circumstances the tribunal/ad hoc committee may take into consideration. It is
uncontested that the application for annulment and with it the application for a stay of
enforcement is an exceptional remedy. However, there is no indication that the exceptional
character of the application requires that the circumstances requiring the stay must also be
exceptional. The Committee agrees with the Standard Chartered committee in “that
establishing the existence of such circumstances is part of the Committee’s discretionary
power, and that Article 54(4) of the Arbitration Rules require the applicant to specify the

circumstances requiring the stay.”**

Evidently, the exercise of discretion must be based on retraceable rationality and not be
arbitrary. As provided by the ICSID Convention, circumstances requiring a stay are
guiding criteria. There are no pre-defined criteria nor can the possible criteria be examined
in isolation. They are interrelated and may have higher or lower pertinence in light of the
specific factual circumstances of the case. In the practice of ad hoc committees since 1985,
a number of such recurrent criteria have emerged. In his commentary, Schreuer
summarizes them as follows:

- the strength of the case for or against annulment,

- whether the party seeking the stay also furnishes security for the award,

- the risk that there would be problems in recovering payment made in
compliance with the award should it be annulled,

- whether there is a dilatory motive underlying the application for
annulment,

- the prospect of prompt enforcement of the award if it is upheld, including
enforcement that is unimpeded by problems arising from immunity from
execution,

- hardship to either party in the event that the stay is continued, or lifted,

- possible irreparable injury to the award debtor in the case of immediate
enforcement.**

Unsurprisingly, these criteria appear, in one way or the other, also in the present case. The
Committee will not examine them in isolation but in relation to each other, and in

appreciation of their relative strength and weakness. In that perspective, the strength and

® Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 12, 2017, 153,
CAA-030.

8 CH. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2" edition 2009, Art. 52, | 609, AALA-0022.

25

70.

71.

merits of the annulment application are not per se a decisive circumstance in the sense of
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention. However, its seriousness and absence of dilatory
intentions contribute to an understanding of the interests that the applicant pursues and of
its lack of preparedness to comply immediately voluntarily with the award. Further, the
tisks of compliance and of potential recovery have to be weighed. The Committee
considers that, amongst the circumstances to be considered, is the risk of payment or non-
payment of the award after the conclusion of the annulment proceedings. A low risk for
the creditor because the debtor will live up to its obligation to comply with the award if
and to the extent that the annulment application is rejected, would be a circumstance that
militates in favour of a deferred payment and thus a stay of enforcement. In this context,
both the posting of a security or a written undertaking have to be taken into consideration
to measure the risk, as much so as the payment obligation of post-award interest, which
may reduce the inconvenience of a suspended payment. Likewise, a high risk for the debtor
in the recovery of amounts already paid under the award, when and if the award is annulled,
would militate in favour of a stay. Conversely, if there is a high risk of the creditor not to
collect the amounts due under the award if the award is not annulled, or a low risk of the
debtor not to recover paid or enforced amounts under the award if the award is annulled,
those circumstances militate in favour of an immediate enforcement. In this context, proof
of solvency of the creditor and a written undertaking promising prompt reimbursement of
principal and interest have to be taken into consideration. In a certain way, securities and
written undertakings are not ‘conditions’ for the decision on a stay but elements that
influence the analysis of circumstances and assist committees in their rational exercise of

discretion.

In sum, the Committee will exercise its discretion in view of balancing the interests of both

Parties by appreciating the circumstances as specified by them.

Analysis of the specific circumstances in the present case

The Committee must take into consideration all the relevant circumstances to decide

whether the stay is required.

26

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

Whether or not the application for annulment is frivolous or dilatory is not the first
circumstance that the Committee must address, much less the only circumstance that the
Committee must consider. The least that can be expected is that the application is serious

and not a mere attempt to delay payment.

The Committee considers that there are three circumstances that must be analysed
cumulatively in the case at hand: (i) the risk of non-payment of the Award if the Application
for Annulment is rejected; (ii) the risk of non-recovery if the stay is lifted and the Award

is annulled; and (iii) the balance of hardship between the Parties.

As to the first circumstance, the Committee concludes that the evidence provided by
Claimant is not sufficient to conclude that Ecuador will not honour its obligations under
the ICSID Convention to pay the Award should the Committee reject the Application for
Annulment. Nonetheless, based on the evidence on the record, the Committee shares
Claimant’s concern that the absence of a clear commitment on the part of Ecuador to pay
the Award voluntarily, promptly, and in full in case it is not annulled is a circumstance that

the Committee has to consider in its decision.**

As to the second circumstance, the Committee is of the view that Applicant has raised a
valid concern that Perenco is a shell company with no assets to be attached in a recoupment
action and that it may be very difficult for Ecuador to recover any of the sums paid to
Perenco if the Award were to be annulled.*° This circumstance of Claimant being a shell
company is not denied by Claimant. Moreover, Perenco not only offered an undertaking to
return any sums collected from Ecuador if the Committee upholds the Application for

Annulment but offered to provide a parent company letter or guarantee from Perenco S.A.°°

As to the third circumstance, the Committee concludes that, on the one hand, Respondent
has not demonstrated that it will suffer particular harm beyond the inherent or normal
effects of an adverse ICSID award, and has not proven that the budgetary reallocations that

would result if the stay is lifted are different or more onerous than the ones Ecuador would

“Tr. Hearing Stay of Enforcement, 93:1-18.
85 Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, 4 10, 110-120.
*6 Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, {{{ 67, 70.

27

77.

78.

79.

have to make if the stay is maintained, the Award is not annulled, and Ecuador has to pay
after the Committee’s decision. In respect to the social protests alleged by Respondent, the
Committee sides with Claimant in that they were caused by actions or omissions of the
State and there is no link whatsoever between the protests and the case at hand. On the
other hand, Claimant has not demonstrated that it would suffer any prejudice that could not
be compensated by the payment of interests accrued upon the delay. Although Claimant
argues that the interest rate fixed in the Award is relatively low,*” the Committee considers
that due to the nature of annulment proceedings, it is not in the position of second-guessing

the Tribunal’s decision on the applicable rate on post-Award interests accrued.

In sum, the balance of hardship as submitted by the Parties leads the Committee to conclude
that there is a dual risk that the Parties perceive and acknowledge. On the one hand,
Claimant has manifested its concern that to date Ecuador has not committed to voluntarily,
promptly, and in full, pay the Award. Ecuador, acknowledging said risk, has issued a letter
that the Committee considers insufficient as it does not contain a clear and specific
undertaking related to the Award.** On the other hand, Respondent has expressed a concern
as to the fact that Claimant is a shell company and Claimant has acknowledged such risk

and has offered to provide a parent company letter or guarantee from Perenco S.A.

In this context, the Committee considers that securing voluntary compliance by Ecuador if
the stay is maintained and the Award is not annulled, and securing reimbursement by
Perenco if the award is annulled, are elements that have a serious bearing on the

circumstances it must weigh to determine if the stay shall be maintained.

Respondent argues that the Committee has no power to condition the stay of the
enforcement of the Award because the ICSID Convention does not expressly grant ad hoc

committees with this power or with the power to order or recommend provisional

87 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, {| 33.

88 Tr. Hearing Stay of Enforcement, 93:2-9; See Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, § 126, where the Applicant states
that: “Ecuador has an exemplary track record of complying with international arbitral awards and shows predisposition
to comply with its international obligations.” See also, Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, { 139, where the Applicant
quotes the statement made by the Attorney General of Ecuador on September 30, 2019, regarding Ecuador’s
compliance with the Award as follows: “In the end, what Ecuador will have to pay, if we do not succeed in annulling
the award, will be 411 million, so I have summoned the Ministers of [...] Energy and Natural Resources and Economy
and Finance to explore the real possibilities of complying with the award.” (emphasis omitted)

28

80.

measures.®? In this regard, the Committee considers, first, that ad hoc committees have the
authority to order the granting of securities or written undertakings in connection with the
stay of enforcement of an ICSID award. Such authority follows from the inherent powers
of ad hoc committees to conduct the proceedings. To date, no committee has considered
the opposite. Second, that, as already stated by the Committee, securities and written
undertakings, in a certain way, are not ‘conditions’ for the decision on a stay but elements
that influence the analysis of circumstances and assist ad hoc committees in their rational
exercise of discretion. Third and last, that the Committee has the authority and discretion
to determine, under the specific circumstances of the case, whether to order measures such
as the ones requested by Claimant” or to be satisfied with written undertakings such as the
ones referred to in this decision. In any event the Committee remains with the authority to
amend its decision on the stay, of course after hearing the Parties and considering the

specific circumstances at the time.

Thus, the Committee decides to provisionally continue the stay of enforcement of the

Award subject to the following:

a. Respondent is ordered to provide the ad hoc Committee, within 60 days following
this decision, with a letter signed by Ecuador’s Minister of Finance or the official
having full authority to bind Ecuador, committing to pay the Award unconditionally,
voluntarily and in full, within 60 days after the Committee decides on the Application
for Annulment, if the Application for Annulment were not to be upheld in full or in
part, and attesting that such payment shall not be subject to any enforcement

proceedings or to the intervention of Ecuador’s courts.

b. If Ecuador were not to provide the letter under {| 80(a) with a text in form and
substance satisfactory to the Committee within 60 days following the issuance of this
decision, the stay shall be lifted if by such date, or at any time thereafter, Claimant
has provided or provides the Committee with a letter signed by an officer having full

authority to bind Perenco S.A. committing to unconditionally, voluntarily and in full

* Respondent’s Reply on the Stay, ff 179-193.
° Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Stay, § 107.

29

reimburse Ecuador for any payments received under the Award, within 60 days after
the Committee decides on the Application for Annulment, if the Application for
Annulment were to be upheld in full or in part and attesting that such payment shall

not be subject to any enforcement proceedings or court intervention.

Vv. Costs

81. The decision on costs for the phase related to the stay of enforcement of the Award will be

made together with the final decision on the Application for Annulment.

30

VI. DECISION

82. The Committee, based on the above considerations, decides to provisionally continue the

stay of enforcement of the Award subject to the following:

a. Respondent is ordered to provide the ad hoc Committee, within 60 days following
this decision, with a letter signed by Ecuador’s Minister of Finance or the official
having full authority to bind Ecuador, committing to pay the Award
unconditionally, voluntarily and in full, within 60 days after the Committee decides
on the Application for Annulment, if the Application for Annulment were not to be
upheld in full or in part, and attesting that such payment shall not be subject to any

enforcement proceedings or to the intervention of Ecuador’s courts.

b. If Ecuador were not to provide the letter under { 82(a) with a text in form and
substance satisfactory to the Committee within 60 days following the issuance of
this decision, the stay shall be lifted if by such date or at any time thereafter
Claimant has provided or provides the ad hoc Committee with a letter signed by an
officer having full authority to bind Perenco S.A. committing to unconditionally,
voluntarily and in full reimburse Ecuador for any payments received under the
Award, within 60 days after the Committee decides on the Application for
Annulment, if the Application for Annulment were to be upheld in full or in part
and attesting that such payment shall not be subject to any enforcement proceedings

or court intervention.

83. The decision on the allocation of costs arising from the request for a continuation of the

stay is reserved.

84. All other requests are rejected.

31

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Professor Rolf Knieper Professor Ménica Pinto
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: February 21, 2020 Date: February 21, 2020
[Signed]

Professor Eduardo Zuleta
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: February 21, 2020

32

