COUR PERMANENTE D’ARBITRAGE PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION

 

PCA Case No. IR-2009/1

IN THE MATTER OF A CHALLENGE TO BE DECIDED BY THE SECRETARY-
GENERAL OF THE PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION PURSUANT TO AN
AGREEMENT CONCLUDED ON OCTOBER 2, 2008 IN ICSID CASE NO. ARB/08/6

- between -

PERENCO ECUADOR LIMITED

(“Claimant”)

- and -

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR & EMPRESA ESTATAL
PERTOLEOS DEL ECUADOR (“PETROECUADOR’”’)

(“Respondents,” and together with Claimant, the “Parties’’)

 

DECISION ON CHALLENGE TO ARBITRATOR

 

December 8, 2009

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page | of 11

I. INTRODUCTION

1.

This challenge procedure arises out of a pending International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) arbitration between a French company, Perenco
Ecuador Limited (“Perenco” or “Claimant”) and the Republic of Ecuador
(“Ecuador”) and its state-owned oil company, Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(“Petroecuador,” together with Ecuador, “Respondents.”)

Claimant and Respondents (the “Parties”) had, in October 2008, agreed that any
arbitrator challenges in this case would be resolved by the Secretary-General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”), applying the International Bar Association
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”).

In August 2009, Respondents became aware of a published interview given by the
Hon. Charles N. Brower (“Judge Brower”), the arbitrator appointed by Claimant, in
which he made comments about Ecuador and about the pending ICSID proceedings.
Those comments gave rise to Respondents’ request, on September 19, 2009, that Judge
Brower be disqualified.

The relevant question in resolving this challenge under the IBA Guidelines is whether
the interview comments constitute circumstances that, “from a reasonable third person’s
point of view having knowledge of the relevant facts, give rise to justifiable doubts as to
the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.”

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

5.

The below summary is based on the factual background and procedural history as
described by the Parties and Judge Brower to the PCA in this challenge proceeding.

A. The ICSID Arbitration

In September 2002, Perenco and its consortium partner, Burlington Resources Oriente
Limited (“Burlington”), entered into participation contracts with Respondents to
operate certain oil fields in Ecuador’s Amazon region (“Participation Contracts”).
Under the Participation Contracts, the consortium carries out oil exploration and
production activities in return for which it is entitled to a specified share in the
production, known as “participation.” Under the Participation Contracts, Perenco is
entitled to approximately 77% of the production, and Ecuador to about 23%.

Amid rising oil prices in 2006, the Ecuadorean Congress passed Law No. 2006-42
(“Law 42”), which significantly increased the percentage of Ecuador’s participation and
entitlement to the income from oil sales. Perenco considered Law 42 to be a violation
of the 1994 Treaty between France and Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment (“Treaty”). On April 30, 2008, pursuant to the
Treaty, Perenco filed a request for arbitration with ICSID, alleging, among other things,
that Ecuador’s measures had the effect of expropriating Perenco’s investment.
Burlington started a similar arbitration under the US-Ecuador BIT.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 2 of 11

On July 18, 2008, Claimant nominated Judge Brower as arbitrator.

Through a series of three letters, dated September 19, September 30 and October 2, 2008,
the Parties entered into an agreement about constitution of the Tribunal (the
“October 2008 Agreement”), which provided, at paragraph 3, as follows:

Each party shall have the right to challenge an arbitrator within a sixty-
day period from the date on which such party learned of the alleged
cause for the challenge, regardless of whether such date is before or after
the execution of the agreement. The right to request a challenge expires
after the sixty-day period. In case such challenge occurs, the parties
agree that it shall be resolved by the Secretary-General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration at The Hague and that the IBA Guidelines on
Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration shall apply.

Pursuant to the October 2008 Agreement, Respondents appointed Dr. J. Christopher
Thomas QC as arbitrator. On November 5, 2008, ICSID informed the Parties that, in
accordance with the method agreed by the Parties, the Rt. Hon. Lord Bingham of
Cornhill had been appointed as the presiding arbitrator.

At the time of accepting his appointment in October 2008, Judge Brower submitted a
declaration under ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2). A series of follow-up emails ensued in
February and March of 2009, in which Judge Brower acknowledged Ecuador’s desire to
be “reassured as to the independence and impartiality of any arbitrator appointed in this
case” and agreed with Ecuador’s sentiment that transparency and impartiality concerns
are particularly significant in investor-State proceedings. On March 26, 2009, Ecuador
acknowledged that the information provided by Judge Brower was “in accordance with
the IBA Guidelines [and] has allowed the Republic of Ecuador to be fully satisfied that
this matter will be decided by an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal.”

Perenco ceased making payments under Law 42 when it commenced the arbitration.

On February 14, 2009, Ecuador’s President announced that Ecuador would take
coercive measures against Perenco and Burlington because they had failed to make
payments under Law 42. The President announced that the country would “not pay
attention to extra-regional authorities that attempt to tell us what to do nor not to do.”

On February 18, 2009, Respondents advised the Tribunal that it would initiate a
coactiva process against Perenco and Burlington to demand approximately
US$327 million allegedly owing under Law 42. The coactiva notices, issued the next
day, warned that failure to pay would result in Perenco’s assets being seized.

On February 19, 2009, Perenco submitted a request for provisional measures,
requesting the Tribunal to enjoin Respondents from forcibly collecting any of the
Law 42 assessments and to otherwise preserve the status quo between the Parties.
Perenco also sought a temporary restraining order.

PCA 27365

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 3 of 11

On February 24, the Tribunal issued a temporary restraint finding it “necessary to
request the parties to refrain from initiating or continuing any action... including any
attempt to seize any assets of claimant, until it has had an opportunity to further hear
from the parties.”

On February 26, 2009, Ecuador’s counsel informed the Tribunal that it was unable to
comply with the Tribunal’s “request” and gave notice that, “charged with the obligation
of applying its validly enacted laws,” it could not guarantee that steps would not be
taken to forcibly collect the Law 42 debts. The Tribunal stated the following day that it
“regrets the stance adopted by respondent and must necessarily take a serious view of
any failure to comply with its request of February 24, 2009.”

On March 3, 2009, Respondents seized Perenco’s crude production and instructed that
Perenco’s oil be retained in custody. The Tribunal, on March 5, 2009, wrote that it
“wishes to make it clear that its February 24, 2009 request had and continues to have
the same authority as a recommendation, as envisaged in Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention ....” Respondents reserved their rights in respect of this communication
and stated that the Tribunal could not “retrospectively recharacterize its request as a
recommendation under Article 47.” Respondents went ahead with the coactiva actions
and seized Perenco’s oil.

On March 19, 2009, the Tribunal conducted a hearing on the provisional measures
application.

On May 8, 2009, the Tribunal issued a decision recommending provisional measures
restraining Respondents from demanding Perenco pay any amounts owed under
Law 42, from pursuing actions to collect payments from Perenco or from unilaterally
amending the Participation Contracts. The Tribunal explained that its recommendation
imposed an international obligation on Ecuador to comply with the provisional
measures. The tribunal in the Burlington case issued similar provisional measures.

In a letter dated May 15, 2009, Ecuador maintained its view that the Tribunal’s
recommendation of provisional measures was not “binding” as a matter of international
law but noted that “Ecuador intends to carry out the enforcement of Law 42 in such a
way as to avoid any disruption of Perenco’s business.”

Ecuador’s reaction to the provisional measures was widely publicized. On May 15,
2009, Petroecuador held the first of several auctions of the crude oil it had seized from
Claimant.

A hearing on jurisdiction in the ICSID arbitration is scheduled for February 2010.
In the meantime, Perenco has suspended operations and Respondents are now in control

of the oil fields. On May 30, 2009, the President of Ecuador announced that Ecuador
would denounce the ICSID Convention, which it formally did on July 6, 2009.

PCA 27365

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 4 of 11

B. The Challenge to Judge Brower

25. In an article entitled “A World-Class Arbitrator Speaks!” in the August 2009 issue of
The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel, Judge Brower was interviewed about a wide
variety of topics including his current docket of appointments, his opinion on arbitral
tules, recent developments in international arbitration, the current status of the Iran-
United States Claims Tribunal and issues surrounding enforcement of arbitral awards.

26. In an early part of the interview, which is not the subject of the present challenge, the
Editor remarked to Judge Brower that “Ecuador has recently announced that it’s
denouncing its BITs.” Judge Brower responded to this observation as follows:

Brower: It has already given notice to ICSID that it is denouncing that
Convention, so during the six months from the date notice was given,
they may expect a last minute rush of new claims. Either it or Venezuela
has denounced its bilateral investment treaty with The Netherlands.
Ecuador has spoken of the possibility of denouncing its BIT with the
United States, but as far as I know that hasn’t been done. Bolivia is the
other country that has denounced ICSID, but that doesn’t solve its
problem, since bilateral investment treaties usually provide for the
alternative of the UNCITRAL Rules, so they’d have to go around
denouncing all of their bilateral investment treaties, and I think that’s a
much different and bigger step.

27. The following exchange appears two questions later and it does contain the comments
that gave rise to Respondents’ challenge of Judge Brower:

Editor: Tell us what you see as the most pressing issues in
international arbitration.

Brower: There is an issue of acceptance and the willingness to continue
participating in it, as exemplified by what Bolivia has done and what
Ecuador is doing. Ecuador currently is expressly declining to comply
with the orders of two ICSID tribunals with very stiff interim provisional
measures, but they just say they have to enforce their national law and
the orders don’t make any difference. But when recalcitrant host
countries find out that claimants are going to act like those who were
expropriated in Libya, start bringing hot oil litigation and chasing cargos,
doing detective work looking for people who will invoke cross-default
clauses in loan agreements, etc., the politics may change. After a certain
point, no one will invest without having something to rely on.

28. Respondents became aware of the interview on August 20, 2009 from the electronic
Translational Dispute Management News Digest.

29. On September 19, 2009, Respondents timely submitted a Request for Disqualification

of Judge Brower by the PCA Secretary-General, pursuant to the Parties’ October 2008
Agreement.

PCA 27365

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Ill.

=

38.

39.

40.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 5 of 11

In a letter dated September 21, 2009, Claimant expressed its view that the challenge
was meritless and sought expeditious resolution of the challenge by the PCA Secretary-
General.

On October 13, 2009, following a series of communications among ICSID, the PCA,
members of the Tribunal and the Parties, the PCA communicated that I accepted the
responsibility conferred on me by the Parties’ October 2008 Agreement, and invited the
Parties to propose a timetable for submissions of comments in relation to the Request
for Disqualification.

On October 16, 2009, the Parties jointly wrote to the PCA Secretary-General setting out
their proposed timetable for further submissions.

On October 19, 2009, Claimant submitted its Response to Respondents’ Request for
Disqualification.

On October 23, 2009, Judge Brower submitted his Statement in Respect of
Respondents’ Request for Disqualification.

On October 30, 2009, Respondents submitted their Reply in Support of their Request
for Disqualification.

On November 6, 2009, Claimant submitted its Rejoinder to Respondents’ Request for
Disqualification.

The above-listed submissions were accompanied by legal authorities, exhibits from the
ICSID proceedings and documents in the public domain, including media reports.

THE STANDARD UNDER THE IBA GUIDELINES

The IBA Guidelines, published by the International Bar Association in 2004, were
developed by a Working Group of experts and based on an understanding of the best
current international practice firmly rooted in the principles expressed in the General
Standards.

The first General Standard, entitled “General Principle,” provides as follows:

Every arbitrator shall be impartial and independent of the parties at the
time of accepting an appointment to serve and shall remain so during the
entire arbitration proceeding until the final award has been rendered or
the proceeding has otherwise finally terminated.

[emphasis added]

According to the Explanation to General Standard 1, the Working Group was “guided by
the fundamental principle in international arbitration that each arbitrator must be impartial
and independent of the parties at the time he or she accepts an appointment to act as
arbitrator and must remain so during the entire course of the arbitration proceedings.”

PCA 27365

Al.

42.

43.

44.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 6 of 11

The second General Standard, entitled “Conflict of Interest” provides as follows:

(a) An arbitrator shall decline to accept an appointment or, if the
arbitration has already been commenced, refuse to continue to act as
an arbitrator if he or she has any doubts as to his or her ability to be
impartial or independent

(b) The same principle applies if facts or circumstances exist, or have
arisen since the i that, from a ble third person’s
point of view having knowledge of the relevant facts, give rise to

justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence,
unless the parties have accepted the arbitrator in accordance with the

requirements set out in General Standard (4).

(c) Doubts are justifiable if a reasonable person and informed third party
would reach the conclusion that there was a likelihood that the

arbitrator may be influenced by factors other than the merits of the
case as presented by the parties in reaching his or her decision.

LJ
[emphasis added]

Paragraph (b) is concerned with “justifiable doubts” from a “reasonable third person”
perspective. The Explanation to General Standard 2 describes this as “‘an appearance
test” to be applied “objectively.”

A 2004 paper written by members of the Working Group entitled “Background
Information on the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration”
(“Background Information”) explains that the Guidelines start from “the widely
accepted premise that an arbitrator must be independent and impartial, that is, without
bias.” In all of the jurisdictions considered by the Working Group in formulating the
Guidelines, there was agreement “that a challenge to the impartiality and independence
of an arbitrator depends on the appearance of bias and not actual bias.” The
Background Information proceeds to explain that:

Based on the virtual consensus of the national reports and the discussions
of national law, the Working Group decided that the proper standard for a
challenge is an “objective” appearance of bias, so that an arbitrator shall
decline appointment or refuse to continue to act as an arbitrator if facts or
circumstances exist that form a reasonable third person’s point of view
having knowledge of the relevant facts give rise to justifiable doubts as to
the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. If an arbitrator chooses to
accept or continue with an appointment once such bias has been brought
to light, disqualification is appropriate and a challenge to the appointment
should succeed.

Accordingly, a finding that Judge Brower is actually biased against Ecuador or has
actually prejudged the merits of the dispute is not necessary in order for the challenge to
be sustained under the IBA Guidelines. Applying the appearance of bias test, Judge
Brower would be disqualified if “circumstances ... have arisen since the appointment,
that, from a reasonable third person’s point of view having knowledge of the relevant
facts, give rise to justifiable doubts” as to Judge Brower’s impartiality or independence.

PCA 27365

4S.

IV.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 7 of 11

The IBA Guidelines note that “most laws and rules that apply the standard of justifiable
doubts do not further define that standard.” The Working Group regards paragraph (c)
of General Standard 2 as “provid[ing] some context for making this determination” by
explaining that “doubts are justifiable if a reasonable and informed third party would
reach the conclusion that there was a likelihood that the arbitrator may be influenced by
factors other than the merits of the case as presented by the parties in reaching his or her
decision.”

APPLICATION OF THE IBA GUIDELINES TO THE PRESENT CHALLENGE

The question to be resolved is whether, from a reasonable third person’s point of view
having knowledge of the relevant facts, Judge Brower’s comments give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or independence. Stated in another way, could a
reasonable and informed third party conclude that there is a likelihood that Judge
Brower may be influenced by factors other than the merits of the case as presented by
the parties in reaching his decision?

This question is answered with respect to each of the Parties’ arguments below.
A. The appearance of bias

Respondent argues that Judge Brower’s interview gives rise to a strong appearance of
bias. Claimant argues that the interview contained an innocuous summary of publicly
known facts. It is true that a fully informed third party would know that Ecuador has in
fact denounced the ICSID Convention and has in fact taken actions in the Perenco
dispute that do not comply with the provisional measures recommended by the ICSID
Tribunal. However, the combination of the words chosen by Judge Brower and the
context in which he used them have the overall effect of painting an unfavourable view
of Ecuador in such a way as to give a reasonable and informed third party justifiable
doubts as to Judge Brower’s impartiality.

It is reasonable to interpret the sentence beginning “But when recalcitrant host
countries .. .” as a reference to Ecuador. Even though, as Judge Brower points out, the
sentence itself does not contain the word “Ecuador” or any names of the parties to the
ICSID arbitration, its proximity immediately following two sentences about Ecuador,
and in the same answer to the same interview question, makes it reasonable to associate
the term “recalcitrant” with Ecuador. Respondents argue that the word “recalcitrant” is
pejorative in nature. Claimant argues that because the word “recalcitrant” is an accurate
description of Ecuador’s obstinate disobedience, it cannot give rise to justifiable doubts.
Judge Brower notably does not discuss the import of the word “recalcitrant.” The
dictionary source on which he relies for the definition of another word
(www.dictionary.com), defines “recalcitrant” as “1. resisting authority or control; not
obedient or compliant; refractory; 2. hard to deal with, manage or operate” and “marked
by stubborn resistance to and defiance of authority or guidance.” The use of the word
“recalcitrant” has negative connotations beyond the mere recounting of a party’s actions
and would contribute to a reasonable person forming a justifiable doubt, particularly
when taken in combination with the following factors.

  

PCA 27365

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 8 of 11

A reasonable third party would read the juxtaposition of the sentences about Ecuador
with the comments about Libya as likening Ecuador’s current conduct with that of
Libya in the 1970s. Unless the Libya reference is tied to the current Ecuador conduct,
Judge Brower’s remarks about notorious events in the 1970s would make no sense as
part of an answer to the question “what do you see as the most pressing issues in
international arbitration?”

An informed third person could reasonably conclude that Judge Brower’s comments
about Libya in the 1970s, uttered in such close connection to his comments about
Ecuador, evince the appearance of two unfavourable views of Ecuador. First, that
investors today in Ecuador are similar to investors in Libya in the 1970s in the sense
that they have been subject to expropriation. Second, that investors in Ecuador today
are similar to investors in Libya in the 1970s in the sense that they may need to resort to
various measures of enforcing awards against the expropriating state because the State
cannot be trusted to abide by an arbitral award.

Moreover, the comments were given in response to a question about what Judge Brower
believes to be “the most pressing issue” in international arbitration. In this context, a
reasonable third party may consider that Judge Brower views the behavior of Ecuador
as of such gravity as to warrant its characterization as one of the most pressing issues in
international arbitration.

The above interpretation is of course not the only interpretation of Judge Brower’s
comments and it is not in fact what Judge Brower subjectively intended by his
comments, as he explained in his Statement. But it is a reasonable interpretation of
Judge Brower’s comments and, applying the IBA Guidelines, would give rise to
justifiable doubts about his impartiality.

B. The risk of prejudgment

Respondents argue that Judge Brower’s comments show justifiable doubts that he has
prejudged the case in two respects. First, Respondents argue he has prejudged the “live
issue” of whether provisional measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are
legally binding. Second, Respondents argue he has prejudged the ultimate issue to be
determined on the merits of the case, namely whether Ecuador is liable for having
expropriated Perenco’s investment.

As to alleged prejudgment of the issue of the binding nature of the Tribunal’s
provisional measures recommendations, Respondents’ argument fails because it has not
shown that this issue is a “live one.” Rather than prejudging the question, Judge
Brower was merely repeating what the Tribunal has already judged. On May 8, 2009,
months before Judge Brower’s interview, the Tribunal issued its decision on provisional
measures in which it made clear its view that provisional measures were tantamount to
orders and that “Ecuador has an international obligation to comply with what the
tribunal issues as provisional measures.”

PCA 27365

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 9 of 11

There is, however, merit in Respondents’ argument that Judge Brower’s comments
suggest that he has prejudged the question of whether Ecuador’s actions constitute an
expropriation. By invoking the example of “those who were expropriated in Libya”
immediately after a reference to Ecuador’s attitude to investment arbitration generally,
and its conduct in this ICSID case in particular, it is reasonable to infer that Judge
Brower is drawing an analogy between Ecuador and Libya in the famous
nationalizations of oil companies in the 1970s. While Judge Brower explains his belief
that the sentences are unrelated and the Libya example is given as a general hypothesis
only, a reasonable reader would nevertheless view the sentences, in response to the
same question, as related.

Claimant admits that Judge Brower’s Libya comments provide “a trenchant and
illuminating historical analogy” between Libya and the Perenco dispute with Ecuador.
Claimant argues that the analogy is not with respect to liability for expropriation but an
analogy with respect to possible investor reaction. This is an unconvincing distinction
because any such analogy to investor reaction would only make sense if the
hypothetical investors were reacting to a State’s refusal to honour an award for
expropriation. The mention of different types of enforcement actions (hot oil litigation,
chasing cargoes, detective work, invoking loan agreements, etc.) in the context of the
remarks about Ecuador would lead a reasonable third party observer to have justifiable
doubts about Judge Brower’s prejudgment on the question of expropriation and also
Ecuador’s likely conduct in relation to Claimant’s future attempts to enforce any award
for expropriation.

Again, the above does not amount to a finding that Judge Brower has actually prejudged
the issue of expropriation. However, from a reasonable third person’s point of view, the
comments do give rise to an appearance that Judge Brower has prejudged the issue.

C. The mere fact of Judge Brower “going public”

Respondents argue that the very fact that Judge Brower “decided to go public” with his
comments in a published interview, against the background of the escalating dispute
between Perenco and Ecuador, demonstrates a lack of impartiality. Respondents cite
authorities concerning the standards of American judges in support of this argument.

The Background Information to the IBA Guidelines notes that the Working Group
determined that the Guidelines “should reflect best international practice without
reference to particular national practices.”

There is no general or absolute prohibition in the IBA Guidelines against international
arbitrators speaking with the press or making public statements about pending cases.
The IBA Guidelines instead focus on an inquiry into justifiable doubts brought about by
particular “facts or circumstances” in any given challenge. Obviously, if an arbitrator
chooses to discuss a pending case with the press, he or she risks opening up the
possibility of making statements that could give rise to justifiable doubts about his or
her impartiality. But there is no basis in the IBA Guidelines on which to accept
Respondent’s argument that Judge Brower’s decision to give the interview in and of
itself should lead to his disqualification.

PCA 27365

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 10 of 11

D. The experience and reputation of Judge Brower

Claimant argues that Judge Brower’s “experience and standing are relevant when
evaluating his independence and impartiality.” The justifiable doubts test is objective
and applies universally to all arbitrators, irrespective of whether they are chairs, sole
arbitrators or party-appointed arbitrators (see General Standard 5). There is nothing in the
IBA Guidelines that supports a special deference to the subjective positions of arbitrators
based on their level of experience or standing in the international community. Judge
Brower no doubt has extensive experience in international arbitration and is highly
regarded in the field, but this fact is irrelevant in applying the IBA.

Indeed, given Judge Brower’s experience and reputation, it can be assumed that he must
have been aware of the risks his interview could entail as far as raising justifiable
doubts regarding his impartiality or independence.

E. The stage of the proceedings

The Parties agree that the IBA Guidelines express clearly the requirement that an
arbitrator must remain impartial and independent “during the entire course of the
arbitration proceedings.” Respondents nevertheless intimate that because the arbitration
is at a very early stage of proceedings, disqualification would cause minimal disruption.

As Judge Brower points out, the stage of proceedings (which are neither at a very early,
or a very late stage) is “wholly irrelevant” to this challenge.

Applying the IBA Guidelines, I have not taken the stage of proceedings into account in
determining this challenge.

F. Breach of confidentiality

Respondents raise breach of confidentiality as a separate ground for disqualifying Judge
Brower. Although the findings set out above are sufficient to dispose of the challenge, I
briefly address the confidentiality argument given the seriousness of the allegations.

The IBA Guidelines do not provide for breach of confidentiality as a ground for
disqualification of an arbitrator. In any event, having reviewed the documents provided
by both Parties and Judge Brower, it is clear that Judge Brower did not say anything in
the interview that revealed confidential information from the arbitration. Ecuador’s
withdrawal from the ICSID Convention is public knowledge. The fact of Perenco’s
dispute with Ecuador is public knowledge. The provisional measures decisions by the
tribunals in the Perenco and Burlington ICSID arbitrations are publicly available on the
ICSID website and have been the subject of media attention. The Parties’ public
statements and conduct in reaction to the decisions have also been widely covered by
the international media and oil industry press.

PCA 27365

Perenco v. Ecuador
December 8, 2009
Page 11 of 11

V. DECISION

NOW THEREFORE, |, Christiaan M.J. Kroner, Secretary-General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, having considered the comments submitted by the Parties and by
Judge Brower, and having established to my satisfaction my competence to decide this
challenge applying the IBA Guidelines in accordance with the October 2008
Agreement between the Parties,

HEREBY SUSTAIN the challenge against the Hon. Charles N. Brower as arbitrator in
the above-referenced matter for the reason that, from the point of view of a reasonable
third person having knowledge of the relevant facts, the comments made by Judge
Brower in an interview published in the August 2009 edition of The Metropolitan
Corporate Counsel constitute circumstances that give rise to justifiable doubts as to
Judge Brower’s impartiality or independence.

Done at The Hague on December 8, 2009.

    
 

¥

Christiaan M.J. Kro:
Secretary-Gereral, PCA

PCA 27365

