INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceedings between

PERENCO ECUADOR LIMITED

Perenco/Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

Applicant/Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Professor Eduardo Zuleta, President

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, Member
Professor Monica Pinto, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Veronica Lavista

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 28, 2021

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Perenco Ecuador Limited:

Mr. Jonathan Parr

Ms. Josselyn Bricefio de Luise
Perenco Ecuador Limited
Lyford Manor

Lyford Cay

Western Road

Nassau, Bahamas

Mr. Mark W. Friedman
Ms. Ina C. Popova

Ms. Laura Sinisterra

Ms. Sarah Lee

Ms. Moeun Cha

Ms. Janine Godbehere
Debevoise & Plimpton
919 Third Avenue

New York, NY 10022
United States of America

Representing the Republic of Ecuador:

Dr. ffiigo Salvador Crespo

Dra. Claudia Salgado Levy

Ab. M? Nazaret Ramos

Ab. Diana Moya

Procuraduria General del Estado
Av. Amazonas N39-123 y Arizaga
Quito, Ecuador

Professor Eduardo Silva Romero
Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa
Ms. Audrey Caminades

Ms. Gabriela Gonzalez Girdldez
Ms. Raphaelle Legru

Ms. Ruxandra Irina Esanu
Dechert (Paris) LLP

32, rue de Monceau

75008, Paris

France

Professor Pierre Mayer
20, rue des Pyramides
75001, Paris

France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
Ill. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORE ..........ccccsccssesssessessesseeseeseeseesessessssesneeseeseeaees 9
A. ANNULMENT UNDER THE ICSID CONVENTION ..0...0.0.cccscesceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteneeeneeeees 9

(1) The Parties’ Positions 9

a. Applicant’s Position 9

b. Perenco’s Position 10

(2) The Committee’s Analysi 12

B. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS 14

(1) The Parties’ Positions 14

a. Applicant’s Position 14

b. Perenco’s Position 17

(2) The Committee’s Analysi 20

C. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE .......:s:ssseseeeeeeeees 22

(1) The Parties’ Positions 22

a. Applicant’s Position 22

b. Perenco’s Position 24

(2) The Committee’s Analysi 26

D. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS 31

(1) The Parties’ Positions 32

a. Applicant’s Position 32

b. Perenco’s Position 34

(2) The Committee’s Analysi 36

IV. THE SPECIFIC GROUNDS ON ANNULMENT ...........cscsscessessessesseesessessessnssnseneeseeneeseese 38

 

A. GROUNDS RELATED TO THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON JURISDICTION

(1) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the Treaty extends jurisdiction to a
company only indirectly controlled by French nationals..........

 

 

a. The Parties’ Position 39
b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee Al
(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco was controlled by French

nationals 43

a. The Parties’ Position 43

 

b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee 45
(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that it had jurisdiction over Perenco’s claims
that caducidad breached the Block 21 Participation Contract... 48
a. The Parties’ Position 48
b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee 51

 

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON THE MERITS

(1) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s non-compliance with the

 

Provisional Measures amounted to a breach of COMtract ...........csccccsesseeeteseeteseeees 57
a. The Parties’ Position s7
b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee 58

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco was entitled to suspend
operations under the exceptio non adimpleti contractus principle

 

a. The Parties’ Position 60

 

b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0.cccccee ee eeeeeeeeneneneneeeeeeees

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Decree 662 breached the Participation
Contracts and that the enactment of Decree 662 and the ensuing measures
breached Article 4 of the Treaty 0.0.0... ccc ccececeseseesescecseeceseceseenenseeseaseneneceeed 68

a. The Parties’ Position 68

b. The Committee’s Analysis ......0...ccccccce ee eeeeeeeneneneneeeeeees

 

(4) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s declaration of caducidad
breached the Block 21 Participation Contract and expropriated Perenco’s

 

 

contractual right: 77

a. The Parties’ Position 77

b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee 79

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’ S FINDINGS ON DAMAGES .......0.0:cscsseceseseeseeeseeeeeeeeneeneieee 81
(1) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the Parties would have agreed to Law

42 being stabilized at 33% as of October 5, 2008......... cece ee eeeeeeneteneeeeeeeeee 82

a. The Parties’ Position 82

 

b. The Committee’s Analysi:

 
 

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to award value to Perenco’s loss of

 

opportunity to extend the Block 7 Participation Contract ..0...0..c cece 95
a. The Parties’ Position 95
b. The Committee’s Analysis .......0ccccccecee cece eeeeeeeeseeeeeseeceteeeeeneneneeneieee 98

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco would have drilled 23 new
wells on Block 7. 103

iii

a. The Parties’ Position

 

 

b. The Committee’s Analy:

Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to award Perenco damages amounting to
US$448,820,400 107

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes

 

b. The Committee’s Analysis ....

Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to apply a post-award interest rate
equivalent to LIBOR for three-month borrowings plus two percent,
compounded annually, until the date of payment

 

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes

 

b. The Committee’s Analysis .........cccccceceee ees eeeeeeeeneneeeeeeneeeeees

Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully
tax-deductible 125

a. The Parties’ Position ...

 

b. The Committee’s Analy:

 
   

Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco’s decision to suspend

operations did not contribute to its OWN lOSS€S «0.0... cece ee eee ee eeeeeeneneeeeee 128

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes 128

b. The Committee’s Analysis .........cccccc cece ce ceeeeeneeeeseeesceeeeeseeeneneeneacee 129

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’ S FINDINGS ON COUNTERCLAIMS .......c:c:csseseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 129
Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the strict liability regime of the 2008

Constitution does not have retroactive effeCt.........c.cccccccceesteseeteseeteseeteseeeseenes 129

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes 129

b. The Committee’s Analysis .........cccccc cece ce ceeeeeneeeeseeesceeeeeseeeneneeneacee 130

Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco is only liable for the mud pits
it built or used 132

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes

 

b. The Committee’s Analysis ........0..0 cece

Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to allocate liability between Perenco and
other operators of Blocks 7 and 21

 
 

a. The Parties’ Position
b. The Committee’s Analysis .........cccccc cece ce ceeeeeneeeeseeesceeeeeseeeneneeneacee 140

Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to apportion liability for environmental
remediation between Perenco, Petroamazonas, and prior operators.............0065 141

a. The Parties’ Position ...

 
 

b. The Committee’s Analys

V.

VI.

(5) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to treat the amount paid by Burlington to

 

 

 

Ecuador as a down payment on the counterclaims «0.0.0.0... cece 151

a. The Parties’ Position ..........ccccccccccseeeeteseeteseeeseeeseeseseeneseenesesseseeneseensseenes 151

b. The Committee’s Analysis .........cccccc cece ce ceeeeeneeeeseeesceeeeeseeeneneeneacee 153

E. COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSIONS 161
COSTS 162
A. APPLICANT’S COSTS SCHEDULE ......c.cccccccceesessssesesesesescecseseeseeeeeseeseseseseseeteneneneneeeeees 162
B. PERENCO’S CosTS SCHEDULE 163
C. THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION ON COSTS ........cccscscesesees ese eeceeeeeeeneeseseeeeeteteteteeenenenes 163
DECISION 164

 

TABLE OF SELECTED DEFINED TERMS

AAE-[#]
AALA-[#]
Applicant

Application for Annulment

Arbitration Rules

Award

CAA-[#]
CEA-[#]

Committee

Counter-Memorial on Annulment

Decision on the Environmental

Counterclaim

Decision on Jurisdiction

Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability

Ecuador’s exhibit

Ecuador’s legal authority

Republic of Ecuador

Application for Annulment dated October 2, 2019

Arbitration Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings,
in force as of April 10, 2006

Award rendered on September 27, 2019 by the Arbitral Tribunal
composed of H.E. Judge Peter Tomka, President, Mr. Neil
Kaplan, C.B.E., QC, SBS, and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC
in the arbitration proceedings between Perenco Ecuador
Limited and the Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/6

Perenco’s legal authority
Perenco’s exhibit

Ad hoc committee composed of Professor Eduardo Zuleta
Jaramillo, a national of Colombia, as President; Professor Dr.
Rolf Knieper, a national of Germany, and Professor Monica
Pinto, a national of Argentina

Perenco’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment dated July 16,
2020

Interim Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim dated
August 11, 2015, in the arbitration proceedings between
Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of Ecuador, ICSID
Case No. ARB/08/6

Decision on Jurisdiction dated June 30, 2011 in the arbitration
proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and on Liability
dated September 12, 2014 in the arbitration proceedings
between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of Ecuador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

vi

Decision on Reconsideration

Decision on Provisional Measures

First Decision on Counterclaims

Second Decision on Counterclaims

Decisions

Decision on the Stay

Ecuador

Ecuador’s Costs Schedule

Hearing on Annulment

ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Convention

Decision on Ecuador’s Reconsideration Motion dated April 10,
2015, in the arbitration proceedings between Perenco Ecuador
Limited and the Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/6

Decision on Provisional Measures of May 8, 2008, in the
arbitration proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and
the Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

Decision on Perenco’s request for dismissal of the Respondent’s
counterclaims dated August 18, 2017, in the arbitration
proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

Decision on Perenco’s request for dismissal of the Respondent’s
counterclaims dated July 30, 2018, in the arbitration
proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

Tribunal’s decisions incorporated by reference into the Award:
(a) the Decision on Jurisdiction dated June 30, 2011, (b) the
Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and on Liability
dated September 12, 2014, (c) the Decision on Ecuador’s
Reconsideration Motion dated April 10, 2015, (d) the Interim
Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim dated August 11,
2015, and (e) the decisions on Perenco’s two requests for
dismissal of the Respondent’s counterclaims dated August 18,
2017 and July 30, 2018. In the Award, the Tribunal further
referred to the Decision on Provisional Measures of May 8,
2008

Committee’s Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
dated February 21, 2020

Republic of Ecuador
Ecuador’s Costs Schedule submitted on February 19, 2021

Hearing on Annulment held virtually via Zoom and
administered by Sparq on January 12 and 13, 2021

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States dated March 18, 1965

Independent Expert

Memorial on Annulment

Minister’s Letter

Parties

Parties’ Agreement

Perenco

Perenco’s Costs Schedule
Rejoinder on Annulment
Reply on Annulment

Tr. Day [#] ([Speaker(s)]),
[page:line]

Tribunal

Underlying Arbitration

VCLT

Mr. Scott MacDonald, independent expert appointed by the
Tribunal on July 6, 2016

Ecuador’s Memorial on Annulment dated April 16, 2020
Letter submitted by Ecuador signed by Mr. Richard Martinez
Alvarado, Minister of Economy and Finance of the Republic of
Ecuador, dated April 20, 2020

Republic of Ecuador and Perenco Ecuador Limited

Agreement between the Parties during the Underlying
Arbitration regarding the joint expert process, communicated to
the Tribunal on May 31 and June 1, 2016

Perenco Ecuador Limited

Perenco’s Costs Schedule submitted on February 19, 2021
Perenco’s Rejoinder on Annulment dated November 16, 2020

Ecuador’s Reply on Annulment dated September 16, 2020

Transcript of the Hearing on Annulment (as revised by the
Parties on February 1, 2021)

Arbitral Tribunal composed of H.E. Judge Peter Tomka,
President, Mr. Neil Kaplan, C.B.E, QC, SBS, and
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC

Arbitration proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and
the Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done on May 23,
1969

Vili

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns an application for annulment by the Republic of Ecuador (the
“Application for Annulment”) of the award rendered on September 27, 2019 (the
“Award’) by the Arbitral Tribunal composed of H.E. Judge Peter Tomka, President, Mr.
Neil Kaplan, C.B.E., QC, SBS, and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC (the “Tribunal’”) in
the arbitration proceeding between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of Ecuador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6 (the “Underlying Arbitration”).

The Tribunal incorporated by reference into its Award (a) the Decision on Jurisdiction
dated June 30, 2011 (“Decision on Jurisdiction”), (b) the Decision on Remaining Issues
of Jurisdiction and on Liability dated September 12, 2014 (“Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability”), (c) the Decision on Ecuador’s Reconsideration Motion dated April 10, 2015
(“Decision on Reconsideration”), (d) the Interim Decision on the Environmental
Counterclaim dated August 11, 2015 (“Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim’),
and (e) the decisions on Perenco’s two requests for dismissal of the Respondent’s
counterclaims dated August 18, 2017 (“First Decision on Counterclaims”) and July 30,
2018 (“Second Decision on Counterclaims”). Furthermore, in the Award, the Tribunal
referred to the Decision on Provisional Measures of May 8, 2008 (“Decision on
Provisional Measures’) (together, the Decision on Jurisdiction, Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability, Decision on Reconsideration, Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim,
First Decision on Counterclaims, Second Decision on Counterclaims, Decision on
Provisional Measures, the “Decisions’’).

The Applicant is the Republic of Ecuador (the “Applicant” or “Ecuador’).

The party opposing Ecuador’s Application is Perenco Ecuador Limited (“Perenco” or
“Claimant”).

The Applicant and Perenco are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”, and
individually referred to as a “Party.” The Parties’ representatives and their addresses are
listed above on page (i).

Ecuador seeks the annulment of the Award under Article 52(1) (b) (the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers); (d) (there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure), and (e) (the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based) of the
ICSID Convention.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On October 2, 2019, Ecuador presented an Application for Annulment of the Award dated
September 27, 2019 (the “Application for Annulment’), issued in the Underlying
Arbitration. Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, the Applicant requested
the ICSID Secretary-General to notify the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award
until the ad hoc Committee rules on such request, and that the stay be maintained until a
decision on the Application for Annulment is rendered by the Committee.! On that same
day the Application for Annulment was transmitted to Perenco.

By letter dated October 4, 2019, the Acting ICSID Secretary-General registered the
Application for Annulment and notified the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award,
in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On October 15, 2019, the Secretary-General informed the Parties the intention of ICSID to
propose to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council the appointment to the ad
hoc committee of Professor Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo, a national of Colombia, as President,
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, a national of Germany, and Professor Ménica Pinto, a national
of Argentina, as committee members (the “Committee’).

On November 6, 2019, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that the Centre had taken
note of the correspondence of the Parties and Professors Zuleta and Knieper, and that it
would inform the Parties once the appointments had been made. On that same day the
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Professor Eduardo Zuleta,
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper and Professor Ménica Pinto to the ad hoc Committee, and
ICSID proceeded to seek their acceptance of the appointments.

On November 8, 2019, Perenco submitted its Opposition to Ecuador’s Request to Continue
the Provisional Stay of Enforcement, dated November 7, 2019, accompanied by Annex A
(Decisions on Stays of Enforcement since November 2014), as well as Exhibits CEA-001
to CEA-039 and Legal Authorities CAA-001 to CAA-044. In its Opposition to the Stay,
Perenco requested that the Committee lift the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award
pending its decision on the Application for Annulment, or in the alternative, that the ad hoc
Committee order Ecuador to provide, within 30 days of its decision on the issue of the stay,
a deposit for the net amount of the Award, including accrued interest, into an escrow
account; or an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee or letter of credit for the net
amount of the Award, including accrued interest.”

' Respondent's Application for Annulment, October 2, 2019, { 250-252.

2 Claimant’s Opposition to the Stay, { 40; Claimant's Rejoinder to Ecuador's Request to Continue the Provisional Stay of
Enforcement, December 18, 2019, 4 107

On November 18, 2019, the Committee was constituted in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rules 6, 52(2), and 53. Ms. Veronica Lavista, ICSID Legal Counsel, was
designated to serve as the Secretary of the Committee.

In separate communications dated November 19, 2019 and November 21, 2019, Applicant
and Perenco, respectively, presented their comments regarding the schedule of submissions
and the hearing on the issue of the stay.

By letter dated November 25, 2019, the Committee fixed the schedule of written
submissions regarding the issue of the stay. The timetable was set as follows: on or before
December 6, 2019 Ecuador would file its reply to Perenco’s opposition to the request for
continuation of the stay; on or before December 18, 2019 Perenco would file its rejoinder
on the request for continuation of the stay; and an oral hearing on the continuation of the
stay would take place in Washington, D.C., which would be conducted together with the
First Session of the annulment proceeding. In the same letter, the Committee decided to
maintain the stay of enforcement until it issued its decision on the continuation of the stay.

On December 6, 2019, Ecuador filed its Reply to Perenco’s Opposition to the Request to
Continue the Provisional Stay of Enforcement, along with Exhibits AAE-0001 to AAE-
0029 and Legal Authorities AALA-0001 to AALA-0038.

On December 18, 2019, Perenco filed its Rejoinder to Ecuador’s Request to Continue the
Provisional Stay of Enforcement, along with Exhibits CEA-040 to CEA-064 and Legal
Authorities CAA-039, CAA 041, CAA-042, CAA-045 to CAA-054.

The first session and oral hearing on the continuation of the stay took place in person on
January 13, 2020 in Washington, D.C. The following persons were present:

Committee:
Professor Eduardo Zuleta President
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Member
Professor Monica Pinto Member

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Veronica Lavista Secretary of the Committee

For Perenco Ecuador Limited:

Counsel

Mr. Mark W. Friedman Debevoise & Plimpton
Ms. Ina C. Popova Debevoise & Plimpton
Ms. Laura Sinisterra Debevoise & Plimpton

20.

Mr. Gregory A. Senn Debevoise & Plimpton

Parties
Mr. Jonathan Parr Perenco Group General Counsel
Ms. Josselyn Bricefio de Luise Perenco Latin America Legal Advisor

Hearing Consultant
Mr. James Haase Immersion Legal

For the Republic of Ecuador:

 

Counsel

Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero Dechert (Paris) LLP

Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa Dechert (Paris) LLP

Ms. Gabriela Gonzélez Girdldez Dechert (Paris) LLP

Ms. Ruxandra Esanu Dechert (Paris) LLP

Mr. Amir Farhadi Dechert (Paris) LLP

Parties

Dr. fiiigo Salvador Crespo Procurador General del Estado de la
Reptiblica del Ecuador

Dr. Claudia Salgado Levy Directora Nacional de Asuntos

Internacionales — Procuraduria General
del Estado de la Republica del Ecuador

Court Reporter:
Ms. Dawn Larson Worldwide Reporting, LLP
Interpreters:

Ms. Silvia Colla
Ms. Estela Zaffaroni
Mr. Charles Roberts

On January 16, 2020, the Committee issued its Procedural Order No. 1, recording the
Parties’ agreements on procedural matters and the decisions of the Committee on the
disputed issues.

On February 21, 2020, the Committee issued its Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of
the Award (the “Decision on the Stay”) and granted the request for the stay of enforcement
of the Award subject to Ecuador presenting a letter stating that it will voluntarily comply
with the Award in full within 60 days if the application for annulment is rejected.

Paragraph 82(a) of the Decision on the Stay provided that:
4

a. Respondent is ordered to provide the ad hoc Committee, within 60 days
following this decision, with a letter signed by Ecuador’s Minister of
Finance or the official having full authority to bind Ecuador, committing
to pay the Award unconditionally, voluntarily and in full, within 60 days
after the Committee decides on the Application for Annulment, if the
Application for Annulment were not to be upheld in full or in part, and
attesting that such payment shall not be subject to any enforcement
proceedings or to the intervention of Ecuador’s courts.

21. Paragraph 82(b) of the Decision on the Stay further provided that:

b. If Ecuador were not to provide the letter under {| 82(a) with a text in
form and substance satisfactory to the Committee within 60 days
following the issuance of this decision, the stay shall be lifted if by such
date or at any time thereafter Claimant has provided or provides the ad hoc
Committee with a letter signed by an officer having full authority to bind
Perenco S.A. committing to unconditionally, voluntarily and in full
reimburse Ecuador for any payments received under the Award, within 60
days after the Committee decides on the Application for Annulment, if the
Application for Annulment were to be upheld in full or in part and attesting
that such payment shall not be subject to any enforcement proceedings or
court intervention.

22. On April 16, 2020, in accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural Order
No. 1, Ecuador filed its Memorial on Annulment (“Memorial on Annulment’),
accompanied by a Consolidated Index of Exhibits and Legal Authorities, Exhibits
AAE-0031 to AAE-0209, and Legal Authorities AALA-0039 to AALA-0109.

23. On April 20, 2020, Ecuador submitted a letter signed by Mr. Richard Martinez Alvarado,
Minister of Economy and Finance of the Republic of Ecuador (the “Minister’s Letter”),
stating as follow:

To whom it may concern,

In my capacity as Minister of Economy and Finance of the Republic of
Ecuador, in compliance with the Committee’s decision of February 21,
2020 in the arbitration proceeding ICSID No. ARB/08/06 between
Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of Ecuador, in case Ecuador’s
application for annulment were not to be upheld in full or in part, the
Republic of Ecuador commits to pay the Award unconditionally,
voluntarily and in full, within 60 days counted as from the decision of the
Committee on the application. for annulment, without such payment being
subject to enforcement proceedings or to the intervention of Ecuador’s
courts.

Sincerely,

[SIGNATURE]

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Econ. Richard Martinez Alvarado
Minister of Economy and Finance
Republic of Ecuador

On April 21, 2020, the Committee issued its Procedural Order No. 2 deciding that
(i) the text of the Minister’s Letter complied in form and substance with the requirement
of paragraph 82(a) of the Decision on the Stay; and (ii) the order under paragraph 82(a) of
the Decision on the Stay had been complied with by Ecuador, the stay of the award was
maintained. The Committee further stated that it may revisit its decision to maintain the
stay at any time during the proceedings if the circumstances so merit and unless otherwise
indicated by the Committee, any lifting of the stay will require compliance by Perenco with
paragraph 82(b) of the Decision on the Stay.

On July 16, 2020, in accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural Order
No. 1, Perenco filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment (“Counter-Memorial on
Annulment”), accompanied by a Consolidated Index of Exhibits and Legal Authorities,
Exhibits CEA-065 to CEA-146, and Legal Authorities CAA-055 to CAA-092.

On September 16, 2020, in accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural
Order No. 1, Ecuador filed its Reply on Annulment (“Reply on Annulment”),
accompanied by a Consolidated Index of Exhibits and Legal Authorities, Exhibits
AAE-0210 to AAE-0221, and Legal Authorities AALA-0110 to AALA-0126.

In the light of the restrictions on travel and movement resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic, on October 16, 2020, the Committee invited the Parties to submit by October
30, 2020 their views on the possibility to organize the hearing on annulment remotely.

On October 28, 2020, the Parties informed the Committee of their agreement to hold a
2-day hearing remotely via Zoom on January 12 and 13, 2021. The Parties also agreed on
the duration of opening statements and rebuttals, which was submitted to the Committee’s
consideration. The Parties requested that, in order for the hearing to best serve the
Committee’s needs, they would be grateful to receive any questions that the Committee
may have for the Parties in advance.

On November 16, 2020, in accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural
Order No. 1, Perenco filed its Rejoinder on Annulment (“Rejoinder on Annulment’),
accompanied by a Consolidated Index of Exhibits and Legal Authorities, Exhibits
CEA-147 to CEA-163, and Legal Authorities CAA-056 (resubmitted) and CAA-093 to
CAA-107.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

On December 8, 2020, the Committee and the Parties were notified that Ms. Anneliese
Fleckenstein, ICSID Legal Counsel, would serve as Acting Secretary of the ad hoc
Committee during the absence of Ms. Lavista.

On December 21, 2020, the Committee held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the
Parties by videoconference pursuant to Section 16 of Procedural Order No. 1. The
Committee and the Parties discussed logistical questions, procedures and administrative
items in relation to the preparation of the virtual hearing.

On December 21, 2020, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 3 on the organization
of the hearing.

On January 7, 2021, the Committee sent the Parties a list of issues it invited them to address
at the hearing.

The Hearing on Annulment was held virtually on January 12 and 13, 2021 via Zoom and
administered by Sparq (the “Hearing on Annulment”). The following persons were
present at the Hearing on Annulment:

Committee:
Professor Eduardo Zuleta President
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Member
Professor Monica Pinto Member

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein
For Perenco Ecuador Limited:

Counsel

Mr. Mark W. Friedman
Ms. Ina C. Popova

Ms. Laura Sinisterra
Ms. Sarah Lee

Parties
Mr. Jonathan Parr
Ms. Josselyn Bricefio de Luise

 

For the Republic of Ecuador:

Counsel
Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero

 

Secretary of the Committee

Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton
Debevoise & Plimpton

Perenco
Perenco

Dechert

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa Dechert

Ms. Audrey Caminades Dechert
Ms. Gabriela Gonzalez Girdldez Dechert
Mr. Raphaelle Legru Dechert
Ms. Ruxandra Irina Esanu Dechert
Mr. Amir Farhadi Dechert
Parties

Procurador General del Estado de la
Reptiblica del Ecuador

Directora Nacional de Asuntos

Dr. Claudia Salgado Levy Internacionales — Procuraduria General
del Estado de la Reptiblica del Ecuador
Procuraduria General del Estado de la
Reptiblica del Ecuador

Procuraduria General del Estado de la
Reptiblica del Ecuador

Dr. fiiigo Salvador Crespo

Dr. Maria Nazaret Ramos

Dr. Diana Moya

Administrative Assistant to the President of the Committee:

Ms. Maria Camila Rinc6n Zuleta Abogados
Court Reporter:

Mr. David Kasdan Worldwide Reporting, LLP
Zoom Technician / Sparq:

Mr. Mike Young Sparq

On February 1, 2021, the Parties submitted agreed corrections to the Hearing transcripts.
On February 19, 2021, the Parties filed their respective Costs Schedules.

On April 23, 2021, the Committee and the Parties were notified that Ms. Lavista would
resume her functions as Secretary of the ad hoc Committee.

On May 13, 2021, the Committee declared the proceeding closed.

The Committee has carried out its deliberations by video conferences and exchange of
correspondence and, in issuing this decision, it has considered all the written submissions
and oral arguments put forward by the Parties. The fact that certain arguments, documents,
or legal authorities are not mentioned in the following sections does not mean that the
Committee has not considered them.

40.

Il.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

In Section III of the present decision, the Committee addresses the applicable legal
framework to annulment proceedings under the ICSID Convention, including the grounds
raised by Ecuador provided for in Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the ICSID Convention.
In Section IV, the Committee addresses each of the specific grounds raised by the
Applicant. These grounds are classified in matters of jurisdiction, merits, damages, and
counterclaims. In Section V, the Committee addresses the costs of the annulment
proceeding. And, in Section VI, the Committee sets out its decision.

THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

ANNULMENT UNDER THE ICSID CONVENTION
(dd) The Parties’ Positions
a. Applicant’s Position

For the Applicant, Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention should not be interpreted in a
restrictive manner. Article 52(1) already limits the annulment of an award to five specific
grounds. Accordingly, the purview of ad hoc committees should not be restricted further
than what Article 52(1) provides,* or any part thereof if appropriate. Article 52(1) of the
ICSID Convention should be interpreted neither narrowly nor broadly.*

The ICSID Convention must be interpreted in light of its object and purpose, which in the
context of annulment, is to secure the fundamental integrity of the ICSID system. Thus, in
the presence of one of the limited grounds for annulment set forth in Article 52, a
committee should annul the award.° Ecuador states that “without this safeguard some
States parties might not have accepted the ICSID Convention.”°

Ecuador further claims that Perenco mischaracterizes the nature of ICSID annulment.

First, Perenco purports to establish a “high threshold” and a “high bar for annulment in
general” that is absent from the text of the ICSID Convention. For Ecuador, there is no
presumption in favor of the validity of the award in the Convention, nor is it required that
ad hoc committees preserve the finality of ICSID awards favoring validity over annulment.
The committee in Soufraki rejected such presumption. Likewise, the committees in MINE,
Amco II, and Kléckner II rejected any alleged privilege to finality.’ Ecuador claims that

3 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 180-181
+ Application for Annulment, { 25; Memorial on Annulment, {{ 181

5 Memorial on Annulment, {| 182

© Reply on Annulment, | 15.
7 Reply on Annulment, {{f 10-13.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

Perenco encourages the Committee to adopt a “restrictive” interpretation of the grounds
for annulment. Yet, as expressed by the committee in Total, “Article 52 should be
interpreted in accordance with its object and purpose, neither narrowly nor broadly.”* In
any event, for Ecuador it is unclear what legal consequences Perenco seeks to derive from
the high threshold it proposes given that there is no special burden or standard of proof
applicable to ICSID annulment proceedings.”

Second, Perenco appears to suggest that because annulment is not an appeal, the Committee
should reject Ecuador’s arguments that would involve “‘extensive’ or ‘detailed’ analysis” ”
of the Award. However, no such limitation exists in the Convention. The questions
presented to an ad hoc committee require varying degrees of inquiry depending on the
specific circumstances of the case.'! As such, when an award reflects a complex legal and
factual background, a review of that background is required.”

Third, Perenco contends that even if a ground for annulment is established, ad hoc
committees should exercise their discretion to decline annulment. Nonetheless, Perenco
fails to mention that, as expressed by the committee in CEAC v. Montenegro, such
“discretion is by no means unlimited [...].” And, in any event, no ad hoc committee has
ever declined to annul an award after having found one of the grounds provided in Article
52(1) to be engaged. '°

b. Perenco’s Position

Perenco argues that Ecuador mischaracterizes and ignores the explicit terms of Article
52(1) of the ICSID Convention and its context and purpose.

Under Article 52, annulment is an “exhaustive, exceptional and narrowly circumscribed”
derogation from the principle of finality of awards. Thus, the threshold for annulment is
high. Annulment is a remedy reserved for “egregious violations of certain basic
principles,”'* and “for unusual and important cases involving situations that are grossly
illegitimate.” '> The narrow purpose of the annulment remedy is to “prevent flagrant cases

® Reply on Annulment, { 14.

° Reply on Annulment, { 16.

© Reply on Annulment, {ff 17-18.

4 Reply on Annulment, {ff 17-18.

2 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 183.

5 Reply on Annulment, {ff 20-23.

4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {¥[ 65-66.

'5 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 6.

49.

50.

51.

52.

of excess of jurisdiction and injustice.” '© Thus, annulment exists to safeguard the arbitral
process, not to second-guess its substance. !7

Perenco observes that, according to the ICSID Secretariat’s Updated Background Paper on
Annulment, “*‘
against an incorrect decision, and an ad hoc committee cannot substitute the Tribunal’s

‘ad hoc committees are not courts of appeal, annulment is not a remedy

determination on the merits for its own[.]’ Committees must ‘take as their premise the
record before the Tribunal.’ A committee cannot replace an annulled award by ‘its own
decision on the merits,’ nor can annulment be a forum to ‘make new arguments on the
merits that were not made in the original proceedings.’ Otherwise, ‘the annulment
mechanism of Article 52 would slide into an appeal.’”!®

Perenco contends that annulment is not automatic. Even if a tribunal committed an error
contemplated in Article 52(1), an ad hoc committee has the discretion to annul or to
confirm the award. This discretion follows from the language of Article 52(3), which
provides that the Committee “shall have the authority to annul an award or any part thereof
on any grounds set forth in paragraph (1)”—not that the Committee “shall” annul the
award. In exercising this discretion, committees “must take account of all relevant
circumstances, including the gravity of the circumstances which constitute the ground for
annulment and whether they had—or could have had—a material effect upon the outcome
of the case, as well as the importance of the finality of the award and the overall question
of fairness to both Parties.”!?

According to Perenco, several ad hoc committees have recognized that they should not
exercise their discretion to annul an award “if and when annulment is clearly not needed to
remedy procedural injustice and annulment would unwarrantably erode the binding force
and finality of ICSID Awards.”?° As noted by the Vivendi IJ committee, there is an
“overriding principle that all litigation must come to an end unless there are strong reasons
for it to continue.” 7!

Perenco further contends that an annullable error does not necessarily entail annulment of
the entire award. Under Article 52(3), an ad hoc committee has the authority to annul an
award or any part thereof.?*

‘6 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 66.

"7 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 66.

'8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 67.

© Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 70-72; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 3.

2° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 70.

2! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 70.

22 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 71

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

As regards the question of whether or not a presumption of validity exists, Perenco asserts
that it is an irrelevant and unhelpful distinction given that the Convention establishes an
award’s presumed validity because it provides that an ICSID award is “binding on the
parties.” Thus, the Award’s validity is presumed unless and until Ecuador carries its burden
to demonstrate that it should be annulled.”

As described below, Perenco refutes Ecuador’s characterization of the grounds provided
in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, under which it requests the annulment of the
Award.

(2) The Committee’s Analysis

It is undisputed between the Parties that ICSID awards are binding on the disputing parties,
may not be appealed, and are not subject to any remedies except those provided for in the
Convention.**

Under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

Albeit the Claimant states that Article 52 must be restrictively interpreted, the Committee
observes that nothing in the ICSID Convention provides for a restrictive or a broad
interpretation of Article 52 or any other provision applicable to annulment proceedings.
Accordingly, Article 52 and the other relevant rules on annulment, shall be interpreted in
the light of Articles 31 and 32 of the of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the
“VCLT”), which are customary international law.

In light of “the ordinary meaning of the terms of [Article 52 of the ICSID Convention] in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose,” the Committee finds that the
grounds set out in Article 52(1) are exhaustive, and therefore ad hoc committees have no
power to annul an award under any other grounds.

The Committee stresses that finality of awards is one of the cornerstones of the ICSID
system. As an exception to such rule, annulment is a limited remedy designed to safeguard

3 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 8.
24 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, 4 11.

12

60.

61.

62.

63.

the fundamental fairness and integrity of the underlying arbitration.** Consequently, an ad
hoc committee shall not act as an appellate court to review the substance of the Award and
it is not entitled to substitute its views for those of the tribunal because it disagrees with
the substantive outcome of the award. This analysis is confirmed by Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention, which stresses that the “award [...] shall not be subject to any appeal.”

The travaux préparatories of the ICSID Convention—a supplementary means of
interpretation according to Article 32 of the VCLT—further shed light on the scope of
Article 52, confirming the interpretation of said provision under Article 31 of the VCLT.
As noted in the Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council
of ICSID,

[T]he drafting history of the ICSID Convention also demonstrates that
annulment ‘is not a procedure by way of appeal requiring consideration of
the merits of the case, but one that merely calls for an affirmative or
negative ruling based upon one [of the grounds for annulment.]’ It does
not provide a mechanism to appeal alleged misapplication of law or
mistake in fact [...].°°

Following the general principle onus probandi incumbit ei qui agit non qui negat, the
Applicant has the burden of demonstrating that the Award or any part thereof should be
annulled under one or more of the grounds provided in Article 52(1) of the ICSID
Convention.”

The degree of inquiry and analysis that an ad hoc committee must undertake to determine
if one or more of the annulment grounds have been engaged is not merely a superficial or
formal one. Although Perenco claims that no extensive analysis is required, the Committee
finds no reference in the ICSID Convention suggesting that there is a limitation to the
extension or detail of a committee’s analysis, provided, of course, that it remains within
the limits of its powers. To the contrary, by conducting a superficial or narrow review of
an award, a committee may omit critical premises to understand the tribunal’s decision.
Moreover, some premises must be read in context so that their scope and meaning is
properly understood.

The Claimant argues that Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention confers discretion to ad
hoc committees not to annul an award even if a tribunal committed an annullable error. For
Perenco, if annulment is not necessary to preserve the fundamental integrity of the ICSID

°5 Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, CSID Case No. ARB/O8/13, Decision on Annulment, July 10, 2014, { 32 (CAA-
023); Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates, CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on
the Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, June 5, 2007, { 20 (AALA-039).

26 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, | 72.
27 Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20,

Decision on Annulment, August

 

, 2018, | 461 (CAA-083); Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, C.A. v. Bolivarian

Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/5, Decision on Annulment, December 27, 2016, {| 160 (AALA-062).

13

64.

65.

66.

system, an award should not be annulled. The Committee is of the view that while it is true
that Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention states that an ad hoc committee “shall have the
authority” to annul the award or any part thereof [...],” the discretion resulting from such
provision should not be interpreted to defeat the object and purpose of the annulment
remedy—“[the] safeguard against ‘violations of the fundamental principles of law
governing the Tribunal’s proceedings’”**—or to erode the binding force and finality of
awards. To the Committee’s knowledge, even though Article 53 provides discretion to ad
hoc committees, no ad hoc committee has ever found an annullable error under one or more
of the grounds set out in Article 52(1) but has refused to annul the Award or any part thereof
on such grounds.

In sum, as explained in ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment, “(1) the
grounds listed in Article 52(1) are the only grounds on which an award may be annulled;
(2) annulment is an exceptional and narrowly circumscribed remedy and the role of an ad
hoc [c]ommittee is limited; (3) ad hoc [c]ommittees are not courts of appeal, annulment is
not a remedy against an incorrect decision, and an ad hoc [c]ommittee cannot substitute
the Tribunal’s determination on the merits for its own; (4) ad hoc [c]ommittees should
exercise their discretion not to defeat the object and purpose of the remedy or erode the
binding force and finality of awards; (5) Article 52 should be interpreted in accordance
with its object and purpose, neither narrowly nor broadly; and (6) an ad hoc [c]ommittee’s
authority to annul is circumscribed by the Article 52 grounds specified in the application
for annulment, but an ad hoc [c]ommittee has discretion with respect to the extent of an
annulment, i.e., either partial or full.”?°

MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS
(dd) The Parties’ Positions

a. Applicant’s Position

Ecuador states Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention provides for the annulment of an
award when “the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers.” Said ground is engaged if
two requirements are met: that the tribunal exceeded the scope of its powers and the excess
of powers was manifest.*°

As to the excess of powers, the scope of a tribunal’s powers is defined by reference to the
parties’ consent to arbitration, the applicable law, and the issues submitted by the parties
for the tribunal’s decision. A tribunal exceeds its powers when it purports to exercise

28 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, 71.
2° Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, {| 74.
*° Memorial on Annulment, {{ 189.

14

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

jurisdiction that it does not have, fails to apply the applicable law, or makes egregious
errors of fact or weighs the evidence irrationally.*!

First, a tribunal exceeds its powers when it exercises its jurisdiction over a person or entity
which is not an investor over which the tribunal has jurisdiction under the applicable treaty,
or over a subject matter that does not constitute a protected investment within the meaning
of the ICSID Convention or the applicable treaty.**

Second, a tribunal exceeds its powers when it fails to apply the proper applicable law to
the dispute, or when it fails to apply any law at all.*° A distinction must be drawn between
a failure to apply the law and a mere error in its application. “Where the tribunal’s analysis
is a gross misapplication or misinterpretation of the law amounting to effective disregard
or non-application of the law, it constitutes a failure to apply the law,” as recognized by
the ad hoc committees in Sempra, Soufraki, Caratube, and Pey Casado.** A committee’s
review of a tribunal’s application of the law must be objective rather than subjective.*°

Third, a tribunal exceeds its powers when it commits egregious errors of fact or provides
an irrational assessment of the evidence before it.*°

As to the requirement that a tribunal’s excess of power be manifest, ad hoc committees
agree that such requirement “refers to how readily apparent the excess is, rather than to its
gravity.” From the ordinary meaning of the word “manifest”, the excess of power must be
plain, clear, obvious, or evident.*”

Ecuador observes that both Parties agree that Article 52(1)(b) imposes a two-part test
requiring that the Committee determine (i) whether an excess of powers has occurred, and
if so, (ii) whether it was manifest. The Parties also agree that a tribunal manifestly exceeds
its powers whenever it assumes jurisdiction it does not have, or rules ex aequo et bono
without the Parties’ consent.*® Yet, Ecuador contends that Perenco mischaracterizes the
legal standard for manifest excess of power in three ways:

First, Perenco misrepresents the Applicant’s position. Ecuador’s position is not that a
misapplication or misinterpretation of the law is an excess of powers, its position is that
“Tw]here the tribunal’s analysi

 

is a gross misapplication or misinterpretation of the law

© Memorial on Annulment, {ff 191-192
% Memorial on Annulment, {ff 193-194.
3 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 195-196
Memorial on Annulment, { 198

35 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 199-200.
3 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 201-202
7 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 203-204.
38 Reply on Annulment, { 26.

723.

74.

75.

76.

amounting to effective disregard or non-application of the law, it constitutes a failure to
apply the law.”*? The essential inquiry therefore is not just whether the tribunal erred in
the application of the law, but whether that error is “so gross or egregious as substantially
to amount to failure to apply the proper law.”“”

Perenco encourages the application of a “subjective” approach to determine whether the
Tribunal has applied the proper law, i.e. that “so long as ‘the Tribunal correctly identified
the applicable law and endeavoured to apply it,’ it cannot have exceeded its powers.”*!
Ecuador argues that the prevailing approach in ICSID annulment is the “objective” one;
namely that “it is necessary for the Committee to review what the Tribunal actually
analyzed and held, rather than what the Tribunal declared having done,” as expressed by
the committee in /berdrola. Therefore, as observed by the committee in Amco II, “[...] an
ad hoc committee may find that the misapplication, etc. of national law is of such nature
or degree as to constitute objectively (regardless of the Tribunal’s actual or presumed
intentions) its effective nonapplication.” This objective approach has been endorsed also
by the Total committee.”

According to Ecuador, Perenco appears to consider that a minor and innocuous
misapplication of the law is the equivalent of a misapplication that is so egregious as to
render the legal framework unrecognizable to an objective observer. Yet, “the line between
non-application of the proper law and its misapplication may be difficult to draw but it
exists.” To draw such line, the Committee must determine whether the Tribunal “stayed
within the limits of the] applicable law,”*? as expressed by the committee in SAUR.

Although Perenco claims that an excess of powers arises only when the tribunal
“committed a complete failure to apply the correct body of law,” it is widely accepted that
it is “an excess of power for a tribunal to fail to apply the law applicable to the case or to
the particular issue in the case.”

Second, Article 52(1)(b) refers in general to “powers.” It is not restricted to jurisdiction or
failure to apply the law. Therefore, it is possible that a tribunal exceeds its power to assess
the evidence. Ecuador advances that “when a tribunal reaches a conclusion —whether
factual or otherwise- that ‘shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical propriety,’ that
tribunal has exceeded its adjudicatory powers under the Convention.”* As recognized by

% Reply on Annulment, { 28.

“° Reply on Annulment, { 30.

+! Reply on Annulment, { 30, referring to Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 76.
* Reply on Annulment, 4 36-37.

8 Reply on Annulment, 4 38-39.

“ Reply on Annulment, { 40.

45 Reply on Annulment, { 46.

77.

78.

79.

80.

arbitral tribunals and annulment committees, ICSID tribunals enjoy no unfettered
discretion. Any discretion enjoyed by a tribunal is limited by the applicable law.*°

Third, Perenco attempts to add non-existent requirements into the word “manifest.” In the
first place, it tries to discredit the position that determining whether a manifest excess of
powers has occurred may require “extensive argumentation and analysis.” For Perenco,
that is “irreconcilable with the ordinary meaning of the term ‘manifest,’ in light of its object
and purpose.” Yet, the word “manifest” must also be interpreted in the context of investor-
State arbitration, where complex legal and technical issues are discussed.*” Then, Perenco
tries to discredit Ecuador’s position that an excess of powers need not be grave to be
manifest. Nonetheless, the prevailing view among committees is that “‘
how readily apparent the excess is, rather than to its gravity.” This has been also recognized
by Prof. Schreuer. Albeit Perenco claims that an excess of power must be both textually
obvious and substantively serious, as expressed by the committee in Soufraki, Ecuador
remarks that the Soufraki committee was simply underscoring that a “manifest excess of
powers” will not only be obvious, but also inherently serious, given that it implicates a
transgression of the tribunal’s mandate.**

manifest’ refers to

b. Perenco’s Position

Perenco submits that Ecuador is wrong that a “misapplication or misinterpretation of the
law” is an excess of powers. As its name implies, an “excess of powers” arises in the case
of an award ultra, extra, or citra petita: one that goes beyond the scope of the parties’
arbitration agreement by deciding points that had not been submitted for decision or fails
to carry out its mandate by completely disregarding the applicable law and deciding the
dispute on some other basis.*?

As confirmed by the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, mistakes are not an
excess of powers. In fact, the drafters of the ICSID Convention rejected a “serious
misapplication of the law” as a ground for annulment. Accordingly, an excess of powers
arises only when the tribunal committed a “complete failure to apply the correct body of
law.” So long as “the Tribunal correctly identified the applicable law and endeavoured to
apply it,” it cannot have exceeded its powers.”

Perenco notes that Ecuador’s position that “gross” or “egregious” errors of law are
annullable is mistaken. Conceptually, there is no difference between one incorrect
interpretation of the law and another one regardless of the adjectival qualification given.

4 Reply on Annulment, #¥{ 46-47.

47 Reply on Annulment, #¥{ 49-50.

48 Reply on Annulment, 4 51-53.

*° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 74.

5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 75-76.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Both entail a qualification of how the tribunal applied the correct body of law, not whether
it endeavored to apply it. Thus, when the tribunal in fact applies the proper law, but does
so incorrectly—no matter how “gross” or “egregious” that error—there is no excess of
powers. Furthermore, Perenco notes that none of the decisions Ecuador invokes found that
the tribunal committed a gross or egregious error of law warranting annulment.*!

Ecuador is wrong that a tribunal exceeds its powers when it makes egregious errors of fact
or weighs the evidence irrationally. As noted in the annulment decision in Dogan, “it is not
within the ad hoc committee’s remit to re-examine the facts of the case to determine
whether a tribunal erred in appreciating or evaluating the available evidence.” Furthermore,
the decisions referred to by Ecuador do not support its position.*?

As to the qualification of “manifest” set out in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention,
Perenco observes that while Ecuador accepts that “manifest” means that the excess of
powers must be “obvious,” “clear,” or “evident,” it asserts that an excess of powers may be
manifest even if an “extensive argumentation and analysis may be required to prove” it.
Such approach is irreconcilable with the ordinary meaning of the term “manifest,” in light
of its object and purpose. Perenco further objects Ecuador’s contention that “committees
agree” that an excess of powers need not be grave in order to be “manifest.” “[I]t is well
established that an excess of powers must be both ‘textually obvious and substantively
serious’ to qualify as ‘manifest.’”°*

In its Rejoinder on Annulment, Perenco remarks that the specific grounds Ecuador “labels
as ‘manifest excess of power’ are not that the Tribunal exceeded its mandate by, for
example, deciding a dispute not submitted to it, or arrogating to itself some extraordinary
power it did not have. Rather, Ecuador alleges that the Tribunal made legal or factual errors
in the way it decided the issues that were within its mandate to decide.”**

First, Ecuador failed to find a single decision in which an award was annulled for an error
of law, even a gross or egregious one. Ecuador also misquotes the ICSID Background
Paper and the CEAC decision.* Contrary to Ecuador’s claim that the travaux of the ICSID
Convention “stand for the uncontroversial proposition that a simple error of law is not
ground for annulment, whereas failure to apply the applicable law is,”
unequivocally confirm that the drafters rejected the proposition that “serious” or

the travaux

5! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 77-78.

52 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 79-80; Rejoinder on Annulment, {{7.

53 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 81-83.

4 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 11.

55 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 14.

85.

86.

87.

88.

“erroneous” errors of law warrant annulment. As to the CEAC decision, the committee
rejected CEAC’s argument that the tribunal had committed an “egregious mistake.”*°

Ecuador advocates for an “objective” approach to a tribunal’s analysis. However, the
alleged distinction between “objective” and “subjective” review is too facile to be
meaningful, and dangerous in its implications. Because a tribunal’s role is to decide
disputed matters, a tribunal will necessarily decide a dispute with some degree of
subjectivity. Furthermore, Ecuador’s proposed approach would make subjectivity worse.
“For if this Committee examined how the Tribunal ought to have decided legal issues, as
Ecuador suggests it should, it would be substituting its own necessarily subjective
interpretation of the law for the Tribunal’s findings—and doing so without the benefit of
the entire record, oral evidence or detailed argument on the substance of the issues.”*”
Perenco further claims that even the cases Ecuador cites for this subjective/objective
distinction do not support the approach it urges.**

Second, Ecuador has completely failed to address the proposition that alleged errors in
assessing factual evidence cannot comprise a manifest excess of powers because assessing
and weighing evidence lies at the core of a tribunal’s mandate, not outside it. Perenco states
that there is committee consensus on this position.”

Third, in its Reply on Annulment, Ecuador presented the novel argument that committees
should review jurisdictional decisions de novo. This argument contradicts its own position
in the Memorial, i.e., that “a lack of jurisdiction ratione personae will constitute a manifest
excess of powers if the excess of jurisdiction is obvious or evident,” and is wrong. As
explained by Prof. Schreuer, the stability of the system could be threatened “if an ad hoc
committee could simply substitute its view on jurisdiction for that of the tribunal.”® Also,
“Ecuador’s argument that ‘[t]he questions presented to an ad hoc committee will require
varying degree of inquiry depending on the specific ground involved’ is similarly
unavailing.”°!

Fourth, Ecuador’s argument that “extensive argumentation” can be used to show an
obvious error fails to recognize that the drafters of the ICSID Convention made a conscious
decision to limit annullable errors to only those that were “manifest” to alleviate concerns
that, without it, there would be a risk of frustration of awards. Ecuador does not dispute
that the ordinary meaning of “manifest” is “obvious” or “[c]learly revealed to the eye,

5 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 14.

57 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 16.

58 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 18.

5° Rejoinder on Annulment, { 20.
© Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 21-24.
© Rejoinder on Annulment, { 24.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

mind, or judgement.” If a legal point requires extensive argumentation and analysis, then
is not an obvious one.”

Ecuador’s argument that an error need not be serious to be manifest is also unavailing.
Minor or inconsequential errors do not undermine the ICSID system’s integrity so should
not be annullable. Ecuador also ignores committee consensus that a “manifest” excess of
powers is one that is both “textually obvious and substantively serious.” Although Ecuador
states that the Soufraki committee did not take a position on whether ‘manifest’ means
‘serious’ in addition to ‘obvious’, said committee clearly stated that the excess of powers
“should at once be textually obvious and substantively serious.”

Finally, Perenco does not agree with Ecuador that the “manifest” requirement must be
determined only after first assessing whether there has been an excess of powers. The
reverse approach is more efficient and more consistent with the proposition that an excess
of powers must be obvious to satisfy annulment.™

(2) The Committee’s Analysis

Both Parties agree that two requirements must be fulfilled to meet the threshold of Article
52(1)(b): (i) that the tribunal exceeded the scope of its powers and (ii) that such excess of
powers was manifest.®

An excess of powers occurs when, for instance, a tribunal goes beyond the scope of the
Parties’ arbitration agreement, decides points which had not been submitted to it, or fails
to apply the law agreed to by the Parties. In the case at hand, the Parties focus the debate
on the Tribunal’s alleged “excess of jurisdiction” and its alleged failure to apply the proper
law.”

As regards the scope of the arbitration agreement, ad hoc committees have held that there
may be an excess of powers if a tribunal incorrectly concludes that it has jurisdiction when
it lacks thereof, or when the Tribunal exceeds the scope of its jurisdiction. Likewise, a

© Rejoinder on Annulment, { 26.

© Rejoinder on Annulment, { 28.

 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 29.

© Memorial on Annulment, {{ 189.

© Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, { 81.

© In the Introduction to its Memorial on Annulment (J 12), Ecuador manifests that: “the Tribunal also manifestly exceeded its
powers when it made various ultra petita decisions. A telling illustration is the Tribunal’s decision to apply a post-award interest
rate even higher than the risk-free rate claimed by Perenco and its economic expert.” The Committee observes, however, that
Ecuador did not elaborate on why and how an ultra or extra petita decision is an excess of powers.

20

94.

95.

96.

97.

Tribunal’s rejection of jurisdiction when jurisdiction exists also amounts to an excess of
powers. ®

Under the principle of compétence de la compétence, a tribunal is the judge of its own
competence and has the power to determine whether it has jurisdiction under the parties’
arbitration agreement. ICSID annulment proceedings do not avail for a de novo review of
jurisdiction. That would be tantamount to an appeal. As explained by Prof. Schreuer, “the
stability of the system could be threatened if an ad hoc committee could simply substitute
its view on jurisdiction for that of the tribunal.”

As regards the failure to apply the law agreed to by the Parties, the Parties differ on whether
a gross misapplication or misinterpretation of the law amounts to a non-application of the
law. On the one hand, the Applicant advances its case in favor of said position. On the
other hand, the Claimant contends that as long as the Tribunal correctly identified the
applicable law and endeavored to apply it, it cannot have exceeded its powers.”

The Committee considers that under the limited scope of Article 52(1)(b), it cannot annul
an award based on the fact that it has a different understanding of the facts, interpretation
of the law, or appreciation of the evidence from that of the Tribunal.’! By so doing, a
committee would be acting as a court of appeals; it would be reviewing the substance of
the Tribunal’s decision. In this regard, the Legal Committee of the ICSID Convention
confirmed that even a “‘manifestly incorrect application of the law’ is not a ground for
annulment.””? Accordingly, the Committee is of the view that the applicable standard of
review is whether the Tribunal correctly identified and endeavored to apply the law agreed
to by the Parties.’* It is not for an ad hoc committee to determine whether there was a
misapplication or misinterpretation of the law agreed to by the parties or whether such
misapplication or misinterpretation was gross or minor. This would imply an unacceptable
intromission on the merits of the Tribunal’s decision, not permitted by the ICSID
Convention.

The Parties further dispute whether the Committee’s review of the Tribunal’s application
of the law must be “objective” rather than “subjective.” Regardless of the academic debate
between the Parties on the contours of the terms “objective” or “subjective,” the Committee
considers that its duty is to analyze whether in fact the Tribunal properly identified the
body of law as agreed by the Parties and endeavored to apply that law. For such purpose,

8 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, { 87.

© Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention — A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, J 148 (CAA-067).
7 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 75-76.

7 Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1, Award, November 27, 2013, 4175 (CAA-097).

7 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Admi

 

rative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, {| 72.

® Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, { 21.

21

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

the Committee must undertake an assessment of the Award, the Treaty, and the relevant
documents in the Underlying Arbitration.

As to the requirement that a tribunal’s excess of power be manifest, the Applicant contends
that such requirement refers to how apparent the excess is, rather than to its gravity. The
Claimant argues, in turn, that an excess of powers must be both textually obvious and
substantively serious to qualify as manifest. The Committee considers that, in principle,
the word “manifest” is to be interpreted under its ordinary meaning: something that is clear,
patent, or apparent to the eye. However, the analysis does not stop there. In the light of the
object and purpose of the annulment remedy, that is to safeguard the integrity of ICSID
proceedings, the Committee considers that “manifest” also encompasses a substantive
element. Thus, on the one hand, minor or inconsequential errors that do not undermine the
integrity of the ICSID system should not be annullable; on the other hand, and as stated
above, a superficial analysis or reading of the award is not sufficient to determine whether
the excess is manifest.

The Committee further notes that the excess of powers has to be “manifest” for the
members of an ad hoc committee that ought to be constituted by qualified persons with
“[...] competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry, or finance, who may be relied
upon to exercise independent judgment,”’* not to anyone that may read the Award.
Therefore, an ad hoc committee may need to review complex facts and legal issues to
determine whether an error is tantamount to a manifest excess of powers. The extent and
complexity of such review depends on the circumstances of each case.

SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE
(dd) The Parties’ Positions
a. Applicant’s Position

Ecuador refers to Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. It provides for the annulment
of an award when “there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.” Ecuador presents the following analysis:

To analyze whether there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure, a three-prong test applies: (i) the procedural rule must be fundamental, (ii) the
Tribunal must have departed from it, and (iii) the departure must have been serious.

As to the fundamental rules of procedure, the Applicant contends that these are “procedural
tules that are essential to the integrity of the arbitral process.” Such rules form a “set of

7 ICSID Convention, Article 14.

22

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

minimal standards of procedure to be respected as a matter of international law.”’> In its
Background Paper on Annulment, the ICSID Secretariat refers to a set of examples of these
tules identified by ad hoc committees, such as: equal treatment of the Parties, the right to
be heard, an independent and impartial Tribunal, treatment of evidence and burden of
proof, and the deliberations among members of the Tribunal.”°

As to the departure, Ecuador advances that a tribunal departs from a fundamental
procedural rule when, in the exercise of its discretion, it overlooks due process and
procedural fairness. Such departure occurs when, for example, a tribunal awards damages
resulting from a treaty breach despite the parties never pleaded such damages, or when a
tribunal admits new evidence submitted by one party after the closure of the proceedings
without giving the other party an opportunity to rebut it, as recognized by the ad hoc
committees in Pey Casado and Fraport.””

As to the seriousness of the departure, the Applicant claims that “to constitute a serious
departure, the fundamental rule must have been flouted in a significant way that deprived
the rule of its intended effect.” In the same vein, Ecuador notes that ad hoc committees
“have considered that a ‘serious’ departure is one which causes the tribunal to reach a result
substantially different from that which it would have reached had such a rule been
observed.”

Finally, the Applicant argues that a serious departure from a fundamental procedural rule
need not be manifest, nor it has to be outcome determinative for it to be serious. Such
analysis would be a highly speculative exercise for an ad hoc committee to undertake.
“Rather than assessing whether the outcome of the proceeding would have been different,
the ad hoc committee’s task is to determine ‘whether the tribunal’s compliance with a rule
of procedure could potentially have affected the award.’””?

Ecuador further claims that Perenco makes at least three errors in its presentation of the
standard of “serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.”

First, as regards the “right to be heard,” Perenco quotes Prof. Schreuer for the proposition
that a tribunal is not “precluded from adopting legal reasoning that was not put forward by
one of the parties without first seeking the parties’ opinion.” Perenco, however, fails to
mention that this proposition is not without exceptions. As noted by the committee in
TECO, “[o]ne such exception is when a tribunal effectively surprises the parties with an

75 Memorial on Annulment, { 208
7 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 208-213.
7 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 214-215,
78 Memorial on Annulment, { 216.
7° Memorial on Annulment, {{f 217-221

23

108.

109.

110.

111.

issue that neither party has invoked, argued or reasonably could have anticipated during
the proceedings.”*® Therefore, “when a tribunal relies on a concept that is in fact
‘surprising’ and has not ‘been discussed by the parties’ it could infringe the parties’ right
to be heard.”*!

Second, Perenco claims that a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure must
have been “outcome-determinative.” This approach, however, has been rejected by
committees for being highly speculative and impractical. As noted by the committee in Pey
Casado I it is sufficient to ascertain that had the tribunal observed the fundamental
procedural rule, “there is a distinct possibility (a ‘chance’) that it may have made a
difference on a critical issue,” or, as expressed by the committee in TECO, that compliance
with the rule “could potentially have affected the award.”*? This position has also been
recently adopted by the Eiser committee.**

Third, Perenco asserts that “‘a party cannot seek annulment on the grounds of a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure if it failed to promptly raise that alleged
departure before the tribunal.” Perenco, however, neglects to mention a key condition for
the application of this rule: that the “objecting party must know of the conduct of the
tribunal and have a reasonable opportunity to raise its objection.” As expressed by the
committee in Fraport, “[...] a party cannot be treated as having waived an objection to a

course of action of which it was unaware.”*

b. Perenco’s Position

According to Perenco, Ecuador fails to acknowledge key limitations on annulment on the
basis of a “serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” under Article
52(1(d).8°

First, it is uncontroversial that the right to be heard and the right to equal treatment are
fundamental procedural rules. Yet, “the right to be heard entails a reasonable and fair
opportunity to present one’s case, not an absolute and unlimited one.” Tribunals are not
required to give express consideration to every argument advanced by the Parties;
moreover, when they decline to consider an issue that they deemed irrelevant. *°

* Reply on Annulment, { 76.

8! Reply on Annulment, {{ 78.

® Reply on Annulment, { 80.

® Reply on Annulment, { 81.

* Reply on Annulment, { 82.

85 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 94.

8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 95.

24

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

Second, “contrary to Ecuador’s position, the right to be heard does not constrain the
tribunal to adopt wholesale either one party’s arguments or the other’s, without conducting
its own analysis.” Perenco refers to Prof. Schreuer’s observations on this matter to support
its position.*”

Third, a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure must be “serious.” Therefore,
overlooking due process and procedural fairness is not enough to satisfy Article 52(1)(b).
Furthermore, Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal’s position need not be outcome
determinative counters its own admission that in order to qualify as “serious,” “the
departure must have ‘deprived the rule of its intended effect’ and ‘cause[d] the tribunal to
reach a result substantially different from that which it would have reached’ had it observed
the rule.”**

Perenco claims that a party cannot seek annulment on the grounds of a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure if it failed to promptly raise the alleged departure
before the tribunal. It is not enough for a Party to simply state that it is reserving its rights
without actually bringing the alleged procedural defect to the Tribunal’s attention only to
attack the award later in annulment proceedings.*?

In its Rejoinder on Annulment, Perenco asserts that Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal
seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure does not identify a breach of due
process. Instead, seven out of eight of Ecuador’s alleged instances of a serious departure
from a fundamental rule seek to fault the Tribunal for not having engaged in an additional
process that the Tribunal had no obligation to provide and would have paralyzed
proceedings if adopted, namely giving Ecuador advance notice of the Tribunal’s findings.”

Ecuador’s complaints are simply that it disagrees with the Tribunal’s analysis and thinks it
should have had a chance to say so and change the Tribunal’s mind. That amounts, in
essence, to a complaint that the Tribunal did not expressly tell the Parties what its Award
would say before issuing it. But even Ecuador concedes that the Tribunal could adopt its
own reasoning on the points submitted for decision and was not limited to accepting either
one or the other Party’s view. Ecuador therefore resorts to claiming that the Tribunal could
not adopt its own legal reasoning when to do so would “effectively surprise the parties,”*!

Perenco adds that “‘[a]dopting Ecuador’s formulation—that all it has to show is that there
is a ‘distinct possibility’ that the departure affected the outcome of the Award—would

87 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 96.

88 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {97
® Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 98-99.

% Rejoinder on Annulment, { 44.

°! Rejoinder on Annulment, 45.

25

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

mean diluting the express terms of the ICSID Convention that the departure from the
fundamental rule of procedure must be ‘serious.’”!2” “The only reason Ecuador provides
for its disregard of the language of the ICSID Convention—that some committees have
found the ‘outcome-determinative’ test ‘impractical to apply’—cannot justify departing
from the express terms of Article 52(1)(d), more so when many ad hoc committees have
applied that test.” In OJ European Group, for example, the committee refused to find a
serious departure. Even the decisions on which Ecuador relies do not support its case.”

(2) The Committee’s Analysis

The Parties agree that to determine whether there has been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure two requirements must be met: (i) the procedural rule must
be fundamental, and (ii) the departure from the fundamental rule of procedure must be
serious.

In relation to the fundamental character of the procedural rules, the drafters of the ICSID
Convention understood that such rules are principles concerned with the integrity and
fairness of the arbitral process,” not ordinary arbitration rules. Article 52(1)(d) refers to
procedural rules which may constitute “general principles of law”, insofar as these rules
involve international arbitration procedure.°*

Ad hoc committees have identified examples of fundamental procedural rules, including:
(i) the equal treatment of the Parties; (ii) the right to be heard; (iii) an independent and
impartial Tribunal; (iv) the treatment of evidence and burden of proof; and (v) the
deliberations among members of the Tribunal.°°

The Parties discussed at length the scope and contours of the “right to be heard”.

As regards the right to be heard, the Fraport committee noted that said right is the right to
present one’s case, including the right to reply or comment on new evidence, the alteration
of the legal basis of a claim, or the amendment of an original submission. This procedural
rule also includes the right to a fair hearing.”

Similarly, the Wena committee concluded that the “right to be heard” includes the right to
state its claims or its defence and to produce all the arguments and evidence to support its

® Rejoinder on Annulment, { 48.
°3 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, 1 98.

° Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on
Annulment, December 23, 2010, {{[ 186-187 (AALA-079).

° Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, ] 99.

°® Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on
Annulment, December 23, 2010, {i[ 195-199 (AALA-079).

26

position. This “fundamental right has to be ensured on an equal level, in a way that allows
each party to respond adequately to the argument and evidence presented by the other.”°”

124. The Parties focus their discussion on the right to be heard on two main points: (i) whether
tribunals are required to give express consideration to every argument advanced by the
parties;°® and (ii) whether the right to be heard constrains a tribunal to base its analysis on
arguments forwarded by one or the other party.

125. As to the first point, the Committee observes that Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention
states that “[t]he award shall deal with every question submitted to the tribunal, and shall
state the reasons upon which it is based.” This provision does not envisage that the Award
shall address every argument, piece of evidence, or fact presented by the Parties. A
Tribunal is therefore not obliged to give express consideration to every argument or issue
raised by the Parties to guarantee their right to be heard. As concluded by the Azurix
committee, “it is not a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure for a tribunal
to decline to consider an issue that it considers to be irrelevant, merely because one of the
parties considers it to be important.”®? Nonetheless, the Committee considers that a failure
to consider a question or a point raised by a Party that is critical to the Tribunal’s decision
may, in certain cases, amount to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. !°°

126. As to the second point, the Committee observes that a tribunal does not necessarily depart
from the right to be heard by not adopting either of the positions raised by the Parties. A
tribunal may conduct its own analysis based on the documents, evidence, pleadings, and
legal authorities presented by the Parties and reach a conclusion different from the positions
submitted by the Parties. In its Commentary to the ICSID Convention, Prof. Schreuer states
that:

[The right to be heard] principle does not mean that it is the tribunal’s task
to draw the parties’ attention to an aspect of a legal question that they may
have failed to address. Nor is the tribunal precluded from adopting legal

°7 Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Annulment Proceeding, February 5, 2002, 57
(AALA-046); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Decision on Annulment,
March 21, 2007, {| 50 (AALA-076).

°8 The Committee observes that in its assessment on the standards of annulment, Ecuador raises this issue solely with respect to
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. However, in the specific grounds on annulment, Ecuador raises this ¢ also under
Article 52(1)(e). The Committee considers that its analysis of whether tribunals are required to give express consideration to every
argument advanced by the Parties is applicable indistinctly if the issue is raised under Article 52(1)(d) or under Article 52(1)(e).
Thus, it must be understood that the analysis conducted by the Committee as of paragraph 121 is also part of its analysis of the
“failure to state reasons” ground for annulment

” Azurix Corp. v. the Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, {| 244 (CAA-
068)

109 Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on the Application for Partial
Annulment of Continental Casualty Company and the Application for Partial Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 16,
2011, 197 (AALA-089).

 

 

 

27

reasoning that was not put forward by one of the parties without first
seeking the parties’ opinion. '®!

127. A similar position has been adopted by the Kléckner I and Caratube I committees,
concluding that a tribunal does not violate the parties’ right to be heard if they ground their
decision on legal reasoning not specifically argued by the parties, insofar as the tribunal’s
reasoning can be fitted within the legal framework argued during the procedure. !°? In case
that the tribunal prefers to use a distinct legal framework, or to bring attention to other
issues not raised by the parties, the tribunal shall give an opportunity to the parties to
comment on such new legal framework. Likewise, a decision may be considered ultra
petita when a tribunal decides on issues that were not pleaded by the parties.

128. To the Committee’s knowledge, in only two cases an award has been annulled under
Article 52(1)(d) as a result of a breach to the “right to be heard”: Fraport and Amco II.

129. In Fraport, the committee decided to annul the tribunal’s finding that the investment was
not made in accordance with the applicable Philippine law and therefore that it lacked
jurisdiction under the treaty. The committee found (i) that the tribunal’s decision was
largely based on documents submitted by the respondent after the procedure was officially
closed—and not re-opened—,, and (ii) that the parties were not allowed to comment on
such documents. The committee held that the tribunal’s conduct was incompatible with its
fundamental obligation to allow both parties to present their case in relation to the new
material. The tribunal should not have considered the said documents in its deliberations
“without having afforded the parties the opportunity to make submissions on it, and availed
itself of the benefit of those submissions.” !°>

130. In Amco II, the committee annulled the tribunal’s supplemental decision to the award
because the tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure. The
committee concluded that the tribunal neither fixed a time limit for Indonesia’ s
on Amco’s request for a supplementary decision, nor did it give reasons in the

submission

 

supplementary award for not doing so. The committee considered that by so doing, the
tribunal disregarded Rule 49(3) of the Arbitration Rules, providing that “[t]he Tribunal
shall fix a time limit for the parties to file their observations on the request and shall
determine the procedure for its consideration.” The committee concluded that such rule
was fundamental because it provided an opportunity for both parties to present its case

‘1 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention — A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, 317 (CAA-
067).

102 Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment submitted by Kléckner, May 3, 1985, | 91 (AALA-049); Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12, Decision on the Annulment Application of Caratube International Oil Company LLP,
February 21, 2014, 4 92-93 (AALA-059).

3 Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on
Annulment, December 23, 2010, {§{ 230-231 (AALA-079).

28

equally. The committee further determined that the departure from said fundamental rule
was serious because the tribunal simply ignored it without even acknowledging its
existence in the supplementary decision. Accordingly, the committee concluded that
Indonesia was deprived of the benefit of the protection the rule is intended to provide, and
therefore, it annulled the supplementary award. !°

131. Inrelation to the “seriousness” of the departure, the Parties debate on whether the departure
from the fundamental procedural rule must have a material impact on the outcome of the
case to be considered “serious”.

132. For Ecuador, an ad hoc committee’ s task is to determine whether the tribunal’s compliance
with a rule of procedure could potentially have affected the award. To the contrary, Perenco
considers that the departure must have caused the tribunal to reach a result substantially

different from that which it would have reached had it observed the rule. '°

133. The Committee considers that for a departure from a procedural rule to be serious, it must
have deprived the rule of its intended effect.!°° Yet, to conclude that the departure is
serious, the Committee need not determine if the outcome of the decision would have been
different. Such analysis would be highly speculative. Thus, in the Committee’s view, a
breach is serious if the Tribunal’s decision would have been potentially different had the
breach not been committed.!°”

134. A similar position was first adopted by the Pey Casado I committee,'°* and has been
endorsed by, among others, the ad hoc committees in Iberdrola I v. Guatemala,'°? CEAC

104 Amco Asia Corp. and Others v. Republic of Indonesia (““Amco II”), ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment of
Award of June 5, 1990 and of Supplemental Award of October 17, 1990, December 3, 1992, {9] 9.05-9.10 (AALA-074).

5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {97

106 Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision of the Ad hoc
Annulment Committee, December 22, 1989, 5.05 (AALA-048); Daimler Financial Services A.G. v. Republic of Argentina, ICSID
Case No. ARB/05/1, Decision on Annulment, January 7, 2015, 264 (CAA-074).

7 Tberdrola Energia S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala I, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Decision on Annulment, January 13, 2015, 4
104 (AALA-073) (emphasis not included in the original text). Committee’s free translation from Spanish: “el quebrantamiento
grave supone, potencialmente, una decision diferente a la que se habria dictado si la norma procesal infringida hubiese sido
observada.”; CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8, Decision on Annulment, May 1, 2018, {91-93
(AALA-077).

8 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile I, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Republic of Chile, December 18, 2012, 78 (AALA-071).

19 Iberdrola Energia S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala I, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Decision on Annulment, January 13, 2015, {
61 (AALA-073).

29

ve Montenegro,!!° Occidental y. Ecuador,'"' Tulip v. Turkey,'' and TECO vy.

Guatemala.'"3

135. In this regard, the Occidental committee noted—and the Committee shares its view—that:

To require an applicant to prove that the award would have been different
had the rule of procedure been observed, may impose an unrealistically
high burden of proof. Where a complex decision depends on a number of
factors, it is almost impossible to prove with certainty whether the change
of one parameter would have altered the outcome.''

136. Likewise, the Committee is persuaded by the ad hoc committee’s reasoning in CEAC v.
Montenegro that:

Requiring an applicant to show that it would have won the case or that the
result of the case would have been different if the rule of procedure had
been respected is a highly speculative exercise. An annulment committee
cannot determine with any degree of certainty whether any of these results
would have occurred without placing itself in the shoes of a tribunal,
something which it is not within its powers to do. What a committee can
determine however is whether the tribunal’s compliance with a rule of
procedure could potentially have affected the award.'!5

137. Accordingly, the Committee considers that for a departure to be serious it need not be
outcome determinative in the sense that the Applicant has to demonstrate that the
Tribunal’s decision would have been different had the fundamental procedural rule been
observed. The Applicant, however, has the burden to demonstrate that there is a distinct
possibility that the departure may have made a difference on a critical issue of the
Tribunal’s decision.

138. Finally, the Parties dispute whether a Party can seek annulment on the grounds of Article
52(1)(d) if it failed to promptly raise the alleged departure before the Tribunal. Perenco
argues that a simple “reservation of rights” is not enough, as opposition must be express.

410 CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro, \CSID Case No. ARB/14/8, Decision on Annulment, May 1, 2018, 4 91-93 (AALA-
077).

"| Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CS1D Case
No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Annulment, November 2, 2015, | 62 (AALA-061).

'2 Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28, Decision on
Annulment, December 30, 2015, 78 (AALA-083).

"3 TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23, Decision on Annulment, September
5, 2016, 4 85 (AALA-085).

"4 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, YCSID Case
No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Annulment, November 2, 2015, {62 (AALA-061).

45 CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8, Decision on Annulment, May 1, 2018, 4193 (AALA-077).

30

Ecuador contends, in turn, that “[...] a party cannot be treated as having waived an

objection to a course of action of which it was unaware.”!!°

139. The Committee remarks that pursuant to Arbitration Rule 27, if a party is aware of a
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and does not positively oppose such
violation, it waives its right to object it, and thereby to request the annulment on such
basis.!!? However, some violations of procedural rules may become visible only after the
tribunal has rendered the award, and therefore, the concerned party is not estopped from
requesting annulment on that basis. As explained by Prof. Schreuer:

Some violations of procedural principles will be evident to the affected
party in the proceeding before the tribunal. Others may become visible
only after the award has become available. A party that is aware of a
violation of proper procedure must react immediately by stating its
objection and by demanding compliance.!'*

140. In like manner, the ad hoc committee in Fraport concluded that:

[A] party forfeits its right to seek annulment under Article 52(1)(d) if it
has failed promptly to raise its objection to the tribunal’s procedure, upon
becoming aware of it. [...] However, if such a principle is to be invoked
so as to preclude a party from its right to seek annulment for an otherwise
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure by the tribunal, the
objecting party must know of the conduct of the tribunal and have a
reasonable opportunity to raise its objection. This point is, in the view of
the Committee, an elementary one, since a party cannot be treated as
having waived an objection to a course of action of which it was

unaware.!!°

141. Among other committees, the ad hoc committees in Kléckner 1,9 and CDC v.
Seychelles'?' have adopted similar views.

D. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

46 Reply on Annulment, { 82.

47 See Rules 27 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

48 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention ~ A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, | 334 (CAA-
067).

49 Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on
Annulment, December 23, 2010, {{{ 206-207 (AALA-079).

120 Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment submitted by Kléckner, May 3, 1985, {88 (AALA-049).

21 CDC Group ple v. The Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, June 29, 2005, {53 (AALA-081).

31

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

(dd) The Parties’ Positions
a. Applicant’s Position

Ecuador submits that Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention provides for the annulment
of an award in the event that it “has failed to state the reasons on which it is based” and
presents the following arguments:

It is a tribunal’s duty to state the reasons leading to its decision. An award is deemed to
have failed to state the reasons on which it is based when the reasons stated do not allow
the reader to follow the reasoning of the tribunal, that is, when the sequence of arguments
within an award does not put forth “a logical chain of reasoning that is apt to lead to the
conclusion that was reached by the tribunal.” According to the Applicant, there are three
main ways in which an award fails to state the reasons on which is based.

First, an award does not enable the reader to follow a tribunal’s reasoning if it provides no
reasons altogether or if it fails to provide reasons for one particular aspect of the award.!2?

Second, an award does not enable the reader to follow a tribunal’s reasoning if the stated
reasons are so contradictory as to cancel each other out, thereby resulting in no reasoning.
This is so, for instance, “where the basis for a tribunal’s decision on one question is the
existence of fact A, when the basis for its decision on another question is the non-existence
of fact A.”!3

Third, an award does not enable the reader to follow a tribunal’s reasoning if the reasons
that are provided are “frivolous,” that is when they are “manifestly irrelevant and
knowingly so to the tribunal,” or “cannot logically explain the decision they are purportedly
supporting.” Insufficient and inadequate reasons may also be frivolous. !7*

Ecuador contends that Perenco misconstrues the ground on failure to state the reasons on
which the Award is based in five ways:

First, Perenco insists that the reasoning requirement is “a minimum standard” that must be
subject to “strict” review and the “threshold for annulment is high.” Yet, these assertions
have no basis in the text of Article 52(1)(e), and they obscure the provision’s object and
purpose. Ecuador remarks that such “restrictive” approach was rejected by the committee
in Tenaris II by refusing to deprive the provision of its effet utile.'?>

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 228.

123 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 230.

'24 Memorial on Annulment, {| 231

125 Reply on Annulment, {| 58.

32

149.

150.

151.

152.

Second, Perenco states that any assessment of quality of the Award. “shades easily into an
appeal.” Yet, this position ignores that ad hoc committees have established criteria for
objectively determining whether a tribunal’s purported statement of reasons amounts to a
failure to state reasons. For instance, when reasoning is “frivolous”, i.e. “manifestly
irrelevant and knowingly so to the tribunal,” and “so flawed that it amounts to no reasons
at all;” or when reasoning is inadequate, that is to say that it “cannot logically explain the
decision [it is] purportedly supporting.”!7° Perenco quotes the annulment decisions in
Tidewater and Tenaris II out of context; read as a whole, none of these decisions support
its position.'” Accordingly, assessing the quality of a tribunal’s reasoning is required to
ensure that such reasoning is not so flawed that it amounts to no reasons at all.

Third, Perenco claims that the Committee should “seek to understand the motivation of the
Award in the light of the record before the Tribunal,” “prefer an interpretation that confirms
an award’s consistency,” and even “infer or reconstruct implicit reasons for a decision from
the terms of the award and the record before the tribunal.” This is impermissible under
Article 52(1)(e) for at least three reasons: (i) no presumption in favor of the validity of the
Award exists; (ii) the exercise of reconstructing the Award defeats the object and purpose
of Article 52(1)(e); and (iii) there is a tension between the arguments advanced by Perenco:
on the one hand it advocates for a proactive role of the Committee for reconstructing the
reasoning in the Award, and on the other hand, it endorses a hands-off approach to
annulment. '?8

Fourth, Perenco attempts to minimize the extent of the reasoning requirement by stating
that the failure to state reasons must affect an issue necessary to the Tribunal’s decision or
essential to the outcome of the case. Yet, to give a fully reasoned award, a tribunal is
required to answer every “question” put to it. While a tribunal need not deal explicitly with
every detail of every argument advanced by the parties or refer to every authority which
they invoke, it must deal with every relevant argument; in particular, arguments that might
affect the outcome of the case, as well as those in which a Party ‘has a major interest’ in
seeing them resolved.!?°

Finally, Perenco appears to confuse the reasoning requirement with the right to be heard
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d). “Whether or not a failure to address every question
submitted to it is also a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure does not change

26 Reply on Annulment, { 61.
27 Reply on Annulment, {{f 62-63.
28 Reply on Annulment, {{f 67-70.
2° Reply on Annulment, {{ 72.

33

153.

154.

155.

156.

the fact that it is unequivocally a failure to state reasons within the meaning of Article
52(1)(e).”!%°

b. Perenco’s Position

According to Perenco, Ecuador “improperly attempts to turn an award that ‘has failed to
state the reasons on which it is based’ into an award that has stated reasons, but one party
finds them ‘insufficient and inadequate.’”'*!

First, Ecuador acknowledges that Article 52(1)(e) is concerned with the existence of
reasons, rather with the quality of such reasons. This is confirmed by the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention. Ad hoc committees have held that Article 52(1)(e)
is a minimum standard intended to ensure that a reasonable reader may understand the
award, and that the scope of review under Article 52(1)(e) is strict and the threshold for
annulment is high. Two conditions must be fulfilled for an annulment to be warranted under
this ground: “first, the failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a particular point
essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be
necessary to the tribunal’s decision.” '*?

Perenco observes that Ecuador’s objections are not premised on the minimum standard
provided by Article 52(1)(e) “to ensure that a reasonable reader may understand the
award.” “Through its repeated assertions that “frivolous” and “inadequate” reasons are
annullable, Ecuador is trying to force this Committee to second-guess the Tribunal by
reviewing not whether the Tribunal provided reasons, but rather the quality of the reasons
it provided.”'*? There is no dispute that the Tribunal must state reasons, but it need not
meet the high gauntlet Ecuador tries to raise.'*4 Perenco further remarks that Ecuador’s
attacks to the decisions Perenco relies on as regards this matter (Tidewater and Tenaris IT)
are misguided. !*>

Second, Ecuador is wrong that stating reasons that are “insufficient and inadequate”
amount to a failure to state reasons. Ecuador supports its position almost exclusively on
the 35-year-old Kléckner I annulment decision, which has been criticized for improperly
drawing ad hoc committees into a review of the substance of arbitral decisions. Although
Ecuador recognizes that committees must “avoid an approach which would result in the
qualification of a tribunal’s reasoning as deficient, superficial, sub-standard, wrong, bad or
otherwise faulty,” it qualifies the Tribunal’s reasoning as “frivolous,” “arbitrary,” “gross,”

50 Reply on Annulment, {{73.

15! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 84.

132

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 85-87.

153 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 33.

14 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 34.

135 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 36.

34

157.

158.

159.

160.

etc. Conceptually, there is no distinction between assessing whether reasons are “frivolous”
or whether they are “inadequate.” Both are quality assessments. Contrary to Ecuador’s
position, Article 52(1)(e) concerns the “absence” or “essential lack” of any reasons. Such
reasons may be implicit and inferred from the decision.'*° Accordingly, “an award is not
subject to annulment if the Committee can infer implicit reasons for a decision from the
terms of the Award and the record before the Tribunal”.!97

Even if the Committee were to apply Ecuador’s standard of review and assess whether the
Tribunal’s reasoning was “frivolous,” “the few [c]ommittees that have—incorrectly—
endorsed a ‘frivolous’ standard emphasize that the threshold under Article 52(1)(e) is ‘very
high’ and that ‘frivolous’ reasons are not ‘incorrect or unconvincing reasons.” In fact,
“none of the decisions Ecuador cites as endorsing the ‘frivolous’ test annulled the award
because the reasoning was ‘frivolous’ or ‘inadequate.’”!*?

Third, Perenco notes that only “genuinely contradictory” reasons that are “incapable of
standing together on any reasonable reading” give rise to an annullable error. Yet, such
circumstances are extremely rare. Reasoning that reflects conflicting considerations or a
compromise is not genuinely contradictory. Moreover, as recognized by ad hoc
committees, “in reviewing the apparent contradictions, the ad hoc committee should, to the
extent possible and considering each case, prefer an interpretation which confirms an
award’s consistency as opposed to its alleged inner contradictions.” !“°

 

Finally, Ecuador fails to mention that, as recognized by ad hoc committees, the failure to
state reasons must affect an issue “necessary to the tribunal’s decision” or “essential to the
outcome of the case.” Perenco refers to the annulment decision in Venezuela Holdings and
Adem Dogan, which addressed decisions on jurisdiction. '*!

In its Rejoinder on Annulment, Perenco objects Ecuador’s argument “that the Tribunal
must have provided reasons for each and every point the parties disputed”. Perenco claims
that annulment cases have overwhelmingly confirmed that “a tribunal need only provide
reasons for its decisions, and not reasons for its reasons.”!*? In fact, “even the cases on
which Ecuador relies agree with this principle”.'*? Perenco further opposes Ecuador’s
proposition that a tribunal should state its reasons for issues “in which a party ‘has a major

36 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 1 88-90.

157 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 42.

158 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 37.

159 Rejoinder on Annulment, {[ 37.

140 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 91

‘41 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 92.

142

13

Rejoinder on Annulment, { 38.
Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 40.

35

interest’ in seeing resolved,” as it ignores that Article 52(1)(e) requires only that an award
be reasoned, not that an award be satisfactory to all parties. “#4

(2) The Committee’s Analysis

161. It is undisputed between the Parties that a statement of reasons for a judicial or an arbitral
decision is fundamental for adjudication of justice, particularly in ICSID arbitration. “The
purpose of a statement of reasons is to explain to the reader of the award, especially to the
parties, how and why the tribunal reached its decision in the light of the facts and the
applicable law.”!'4> Arbitral tribunals have thereby the duty to identify and let the parties
know the factual and legal premises leading to their decision.'*° Under the ICSID
Convention, the Tribunal’s duty to state reasons for its decision is provided in Article 48(3).
A violation to this requirement is embodied as a ground for annulment under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

162. The drafting history of the ICSID Convention shows that “the tribunal’s obligation to state
reasons is mandatory and not subject to the parties’ disposition.”'4”7 Therefore, an
agreement contrary to the Tribunal’s duty to provide reasons would be invalid and would
not preclude a subsequent application for annulment on this ground.'**

163. |The Committee observes that the core of the dispute between the Parties is whether a failure
to state reasons takes place when there are no reasons at all supporting a tribunal’s
reasoning, or whether “frivolous” or “contradictory” reasons may be tantamount to a failure
to state reasons. The Parties also dispute whether implicit reasons are considered “reasons”
within the scope of Article 52(1)(e).

164. In the first place, the Committee stresses that Article 52(1)(e) does not concern the failure
to state correct or convincing reasons. As correctly noted by the CDC v. Seychelles
committee “the more recent practice among ad hoc Committees is to apply Article 52(1)(e)
in such a manner that the Committee does not intrude into the legal and factual decision-
making of the Tribunal.” '*? It is not on an ad hoc committee to assess the quality, extension,
or correctness of the reasons provided by a tribunal, much less to annul an award on that

‘4 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 41.

445 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention ~ A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, | 363 (CAA-
067).

446 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Application for Annulment, January 28, 2002, 79 (AALA-
046).

“47 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention ~ A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, {f 339-340
(CAA-067)

\48 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention ~ A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, 340 (CAA-
067).

9 CDC Group ple v. The Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, June 29, 2005, {| 70 (AALA-081).

36

basis. If a tribunal provides reasons on how and why it reached its decision, there is no
room for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

165. Furthermore, as recognized in the Amco IJ annulment, “not every gap or ambiguity in a
judgment constitutes a failure to state reasons.” *° “Statements have to be read in context.
The ‘reasons’ for a position or a statement may be found in the developments that
follow.”'5! This observation is of particular relevance in the case at hand given that the
Award is constituted by five Decisions, plus a Decision on Provisional Measures. To
determine whether the Tribunal failed to state the reasons that led to its decisions, the
Committee must read the Award in context.

166. As regards the issue of implicit reasons, the Committee observes that the premises leading
to a decision may be either implicit or explicit. What is paramount is that the Tribunal’s
conclusions follow from a set of premises. Furthermore, as noted by the committee in
Wena:

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the
Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both provisions is to
ensure that the Parties will be able to understand the Tribunal’s reasoning.
This goal does not require that each reason be stated expressly. The
Tribunal’s reasons may be implicit in the considerations and conclusions
contained in the award, provided they can be reasonably inferred from the
terms used in the decision.'*?

167. As regards the issue of “frivolous” reasons, the Committee is of the view that irrelevant or
absurd arguments apparently supporting a conclusion do not amount to reasons. !° The
determination on whether an argument is “frivolous” depends on the circumstances of each
case.

168. As regards the issue of “non-contradictory reasons,” ad hoc committees have considered
that contradictory reasons might result in annulment under Article 52(1)(e).!** Some

150 Amco Asia Corp. and Others v. Republic of Indonesia (“Amco IT’), ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment of
Award of June 5, 1990 and of Supplemental Award of October 17, 1990, December 3, 1992, {| 7.56 (AALA-074).
151 Amco Asia Corp. and Others v. Republic of Indonesia (“Amco It’), ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment of
Award of June 5, 1990 and of Supplemental Award of October 17, 1990, December 3, 1992, | 7.57 (AALA-074),

'52 Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Annulment Proceeding, February 5, 2002, 4 81
(AALA-046).

53 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention ~ A Commentary (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press 2009, 344 (CAA-
067).

154 Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, June 5, 2007, {| 122-126 (AALA-039).

37

committees have concluded that for there to be a “‘failure to state reasons”, the reasons must
99155

be so contradictory that they “cancel each other out.

169. The Committee considers that although contradictory reasons could amount to a failure to
state reasons, such assessment should not be one of coherence of the Tribunal’s reasoning.
That approach could easily derive in an assessment of the quality of the Tribunal’s reasons.
For the Committee, a failure to state reasons may take place when two (or more)
contradictory premises supporting a conclusion cannot stand together and cannot both be
true. Furthermore, such failure must be critical to the Tribunal’s decision. The fact that a
tribunal fails to state reasons on a minor and inconsequential issue is not enough to annul
an award or a part thereof under Article 52(1)(e).

170. In sum, a decision is reasoned when the Tribunal’s conclusions clearly follow from a set
of either express or implicit premises. If there are no reasons supporting a conclusion, or a
conclusion is based on contradictory premises, an award or any part thereof is annullable
under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

IV. THE SPECIFIC GROUNDS ON ANNULMENT

171. Inthe Annulment Application, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Award or parts of it
under twenty-one (21) “specific grounds on annulment”. Ecuador claims that twenty-one
of the Tribunal’s findings in the Award or the Decisions should be annulled under one or
more grounds provided in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.

172. Both in the Memorial on Annulment and the Reply on Annulment, the Applicant raised
twenty (20) specific grounds on annulment; it did not include the specific ground raised in
the Annulment Application titled: “The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it
decided that the notion of environmental harm is defined by reference to permissible
limits.”!*° Likewise, at the Hearing, Ecuador expressly stated that it raised “20 grounds for
annulment.”!*’ Accordingly, the Committee understands that Ecuador declined to pursue
said specific ground and therefore the Committee does not address such ground in the
present decision.

85 Klockner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment submitted by Kléckner, May 3, 1985, | 116 (AALA-049). Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon
Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010, | 82
(AALA-086); Compaiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for Annulment of the Award rendered on August 20, 2007, August 10,
2010, { 65 (CAA-070).

56 Application on Annulment, {ff 195-201.

‘5 Tr, Day 1 January 12, 2021, 16:7.

   
 

38

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

For the purpose of clarity and consistency, the Committee has classified the specific
grounds on matters related to (a) jurisdiction, (b) merits, (c) damages, and (d) counterclaim.

For the sake of efficiency, the Committee classifies Ecuador’s claims on the Tribunal’s
findings that “Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts”, and that “Decree 662 and
ensuing measures breached Article 4 of the Treaty” under the same category. !°*

GROUNDS RELATED TO THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON JURISDICTION

() Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the Treaty extends jurisdiction to a
company only indirectly controlled by French nationals

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador contends that, notwithstanding the text of Article 9(2) of the Treaty, the Tribunal
asserted its jurisdiction on the basis of Article 1(3)(ii) of the Treaty. By so doing, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the reasons on which the Award
is based.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador argues that the Tribunal founded its
jurisdiction on an incorrect and incoherent interpretation of the Treaty’s provisions. The
Tribunal asserted its jurisdiction on the basis of Article 1(3)(ii) of the Treaty, despite
Article 9(2) of the Treaty which requires that the shares of a company incorporated in the
host State be held in majority by a national or a juridical person of the other Contracting
Party. With this finding, the Tribunal failed to abide by its duty to read the Treaty as a
whole and to ensure its effectiveness. Therefore, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers. !°°

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador states that the Tribunal’s reasoning is limited to
ambiguous and unsupported assertions and provides no explanation as to why it discarded
Ecuador’s key argument, i.e., that Perenco’s proposed interpretation of the Treaty results
in a manifest inconsistency of the Treaty “whereby indirectly-controlled foreign companies
benefit from rights under the Treaty pursuant to Article 1(3)(ii), but are unable to invoke
the jurisdiction of the Centre to protect these rights pursuant to Article 9(2)”.'

Ecuador thereby requests the annulment of “the decision that the Treaty extends
jurisdiction to a company only indirectly controlled by French nationals,” “along with the

158 See Section IV.B.3.
5° Memorial on Annulment, {ff 233-235.
16 Memorial on Annulment, { 247

39

179.

180.

181.

182.

entirety of the Award itself, as the entirety of the Award is premised on the Tribunal’s
supposed jurisdiction over Perenco.”!®!

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco contends that Ecuador’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
and failed to state reasons in finding that the Treaty extends jurisdiction to companies
indirectly controlled by French nationals has no merit. The Tribunal had the power to
interpret the Treaty and it provided clear reasons explaining why the unqualified term
“controlled” in Article 1(3) covered both direct and indirect control. !%

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco stresses that Ecuador’s contention that the
Tribunal found its jurisdiction on an “incorrect and incoherent interpretation of the Treaty”
and therefore exceeded its powers, is flawed and concedes that the Tribunal applied, or
endeavored to apply, the applicable body of law, i-e., the Treaty.'© Errors of law are not a
manifest excess of powers, including when it comes to jurisdiction. The contrary would
allow the Committee to consider the Tribunal’s jurisdiction de novo and assume the role
of an appellate body. !*

In any event, the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Treaty was tenable and was correct. The
Tribunal founded its jurisdiction based on the ordinary meaning of the terms in Articles 3
and 1(3) of the Treaty and in light of the Treaty’s object and purpose. It also considered
the Treaty’s travaux préparatoires and the Parties’ submissions.'® “Article 1(3)(ii) in
conjunction with Article 9(2)” does not change the analysis. As found by the Tribunal,
Article 9(2) is “a special rule that, consistent with Article 25(2)(b) in fine of the ICSID
Convention, is intended to extend ICSID jurisdiction to instances where a national of the
State party to the dispute would otherwise have no standing to bring a claim against its own
State.” !° Article 9(2) does not provide for the meaning of the general definitions in Article
1(3). Moreover, Ecuador does not demonstrate how any such excess of powers would be
‘manifest’ .!°7

As to the failure to state reasons, Perenco contends that the Tribunal provided reasons for
rejecting Ecuador’s objection that reading Article 1(3) to encompass indirect control results
in a manifest inconsistency of the Treaty.'°® Even under the Kléckner I standard, it is

161 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 250.

162

163

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 102.

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 103.

164 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 104.
165 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 107-109.

166 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 110.

167

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 111-113.

168 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 114.

40

183.

184.

185.

186.

possible to “discern how and why the Tribunal could reach its decision on this point,” as it
explained: (i) why the ordinary meaning of the unqualified word “controlled” encompasses
indirect control, (ii) why Article 9(2) expands ICSID jurisdiction in the specific factual
setting of a legal entity of the host State seeking to claim against its own State, and (iii)
why it makes more sense to apply the general Article 1 definitions throughout the Treaty
and the specific test of control under Article 9(2) in the specific situation envisaged
therein.'®

Therefore, the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers in finding that the Treaty
extends jurisdiction to companies indirectly controlled by French nationals, nor failed to
state its reasons for doing so.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

The Applicant claims that by deciding that the Treaty extends to a company only indirectly
controlled by French nationals, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to
state the reasons for its decision.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador’s argument is based on the premise that the
Tribunal incorrectly applied the law, not that the Tribunal did not apply the proper law.'”°
As analyzed in Section III.B.2, the Committee considers that to determine whether the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers it must examine whether the Tribunal properly
identified the applicable law and endeavored to apply such law.

It is undisputed between the Parties that the Treaty is the applicable law to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. It is also undisputed that to decide on its jurisdiction, the Tribunal identified
and applied the Treaty. Based on its interpretation of the Treaty, the Tribunal concluded
that:!7!

Having regard to the fact that the text of the applicable provision of the
Treaty refers simply to ‘controlled’, the Tribunal is persuaded by the fact
that the formal transfer of the shares of the late Mr. Hubert Perrodo to his
heirs was an administrative or ministerial act. It is true that it occurred after
the consent to ICSID arbitration was given, but it is also true that it could
have occurred at any time after the heirs became the owners of the estate
under French law, and that occurred at the time of death, namely, 29
December 2006, over 10 months prior to the giving of consent.

Moreover, the evidence of French control is so substantial, so compelling
and un-contradicted that it is the Tribunal’s view that in the circumstances
of this case, it is most consonant with the approach taken by international

6° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 116.
17 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 236-245.
71 Decision on Jurisdiction, {{f 69-73 (AAE-033); Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {{[ 509-530 (AAE-163).

4l

187.

188.

189.

190.

law to give weight to the fact of Bahamian law’s recognition that the heirs
owned the shares as a matter of French law and as a result they had
beneficial ownership of the shares as a matter of Bahamian law prior to
their formal re-registration in the names.!7”

It is not on the Committee to examine whether the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Treaty
was correct or incorrect. That assessment would be equivalent to an appeal and to a de novo
review of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, which is beyond the Committee’s powers under the
ICSID Convention. Thus, the Committee finds no ground to conclude that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador argues that the Tribunal provided no explanation
on why it discarded its key argument on the matter, namely that Article 9(2) of the Treaty
expressly excludes from ICSID jurisdiction entities that are incorporated under the laws of
the Contracting Party and that are not directly owned in majority by national or legal
entities of the other Contracting Party. For Ecuador, when reading Article 1(3) in
conjunction with Article 9(2), the “only plausible interpretation is that Article 1(3) requires
direct ownership, as opposed to indirect interest in the company.”!7> Ecuador further claims
that the Tribunal failed to engage with Ecuador’s proposition that Perenco’s reading of the
Treaty results in a manifest internal inconsistency of the Treaty “whereby indirectly-
controlled foreign companies benefit from rights under the Treaty pursuant to Article
1(3)(ii), but are unable to invoke the jurisdiction of the Centre to protect these rights
pursuant to Article 9(2).”!74

The Committee is not persuaded by Ecuador’s position and finds that the Tribunal
expressly addressed Ecuador’s alleged “key argument” and explained the reasons for
rejecting it.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal upheld Claimant’s characterization of Article
9(2) by concluding that it is “as special rule that, consistent with Article 25(2)(b) in fine of
the ICSID Convention, is intended to extend ICSID jurisdiction to instances where a
national of the State party to the dispute would otherwise have no standing to bring a claim
against its own State.”'7> The Tribunal then rejected Ecuador’s interpretation of the Treaty
by concluding that:

The Tribunal does not agree with the Respondents that the Article 9,
second paragraph, test of control must be read back into and dictate the
meaning of the general definitions of Article 1. While the Respondents
disavowed any intent to extrapolate the rules applicable to Article 25(2)(b)

"72 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {{] 528-529 (AAE-163)
173 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 239-240.

174 Memorial on Annulment, {247

"75 Decision on Jurisdiction, {71 (AAE-033).

42

191.

192.

193.

194.

in fine to the more general definitions contained in Article 1, in the
Tribunal’s view, this is what the objection does. It seems more plausible
to apply the Article 1 definitions throughout the Treaty and, when it comes
to Article 9 and the special situation envisaged there, to apply that article’s
specific test of control to a juridical person that is a national of the host
State that seeks to claim against its own State. The Tribunal sees no
absurdity in this interpretation, nor does it see, to use the Respondents’
words, an “internal inconsistency” in the Treaty resulting from such an
interpretation.

Given Article 9’s purpose, it is reasonable for the Contracting Parties to
require that foreign control be established in a particular way, in this case
choosing to do so by requiring that a majority of the shares of the local
company belong to nationals or a juridical person of a Contracting Party
other than the respondent party. But it does not follow inexorably that the
requirements of Article 9 must dictate the interpretation of Article 1.
Accordingly, the first limb of the Respondents’ objection is dismissed.”'7°

The Committee observes that the Tribunal clearly explained the reasons for its decision to
interpret the Treaty in the sense proposed by the Claimant and to reject Ecuador’s
interpretation of the Treaty. The fact that the Applicant disagrees with the Tribunal’s
reasoning or considers that more reasons should have been given is not a ground to annul
the Award under Article 52(1)(e) (See Section III.D.2).

Consequently, the Committee finds that the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its
powers nor failed to state reasons for its decision that the Treaty extends jurisdiction to a
company only indirectly controlled by French nationals.

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco was controlled by French
nationals

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal seriously departed from fundamental rule of procedure—
its right to equal treatment—by providing Perenco with a further opportunity to attempt to
establish that the Tribunal had jurisdiction ratione personae.'"

Ecuador argues that by the end of the jurisdictional phase, Perenco had not been able to
establish that it was an investor under the Treaty.'”® However, instead of denying
jurisdiction, the Tribunal provided Perenco with a further opportunity to attempt to
establish that the Tribunal had jurisdiction ratione personae even though Perenco had had

1%6 Decision on Jurisdiction, {{f 72-73 (AAE-033)
"77 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 254, 258-259
178 Memorial on Annulment, { 251

43

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

more than three years to do so. '79 What is more, the Tribunal advised Perenco of the issues
it needed to prove and the evidence it needed to adduce in order for the Tribunal to find
jurisdiction.'*° It was only on the basis of the evidence subsequently adduced by Perenco
“that the Tribunal was able to find in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability that the
evidence of French control was so ‘substantial, so compelling and un-contradicted’ that is
compelled the dismissal of Ecuador’s objection to jurisdiction ratione personae.” '*!

Ecuador does not contest that it was given the opportunity to discuss the new arguments
and evidence adduced by Perenco. Instead, it submits that it was manifestly unfair to grant
Perenco an additional opportunity to correct its case—a treatment that was not accorded to
Ecuador. '8?

Accordingly, Ecuador requests the annulment of “the decision that Perenco was controlled
by French nationals [...], along with the entirety of the Award itself, as the entirety of the
Award is premised on the Tribunal’s supposed jurisdiction over Perenco.”!®?

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s claim that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental
tule of procedure by providing “Perenco with a further opportunity to establish that the
Tribunal had jurisdiction ratione personae during the merits phase.”'** As Ecuador
acknowledges, it had “the opportunity to discuss the new arguments and evidence adduced
by Perenco.”!*°

It was within the Tribunal’s powers to call on both Parties to produce additional evidence
and Ecuador admits that it had the opportunity to be heard about that evidence. There are
no rules of procedure in ICSID preventing the Tribunal from ordering Perenco to produce
further evidence of French control and joining jurisdictional issues to the merit.
Conversely, Articles 42(2) and 43 of the ICSID Convention, and Arbitration Rule 19 confer
broad powers to the Tribunal to, at any stage of the proceedings, consider jurisdictional
issues or call upon the parties to produce documents or other evidence. '8°

Perenco counters Ecuador’s proposition that the Tribunal’s conduct was “unfair”. Perenco
provided additional evidence of French control four months prior to Ecuador’s Counter-

179 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 252
180 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 253

181 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 254.

182

183

Memorial on Annulment, {| 258.

Memorial on Annulment, {| 260.

184 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 118.

185

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 118.

186 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 119.

44

200.

201.

202.

Memorial, so as to allow Ecuador sufficient time to address such evidence in its pleading.
Ecuador addressed that additional evidence in its Counter-Memorial on Liability, in its
Rejoinder on Liability, through two expert reports on Bahamian law, and through cross-
examination of Perenco’s witnesses and experts at the hearing. In its Decision on
Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal carefully considered and rejected Ecuador’s
arguments and evidence.'®’ Likewise, in the Decision on Reconsideration, the Tribunal
rejected Ecuador’s complaints by noting, among other, that both Parties were given the
opportunity over two rounds of written pleadings to adduce further factual and expert
evidence and to make submissions. '**

Ecuador conveniently omits that the Tribunal also deferred certain issues and called for
more evidence with respect to Ecuador’s own counterclaim. If requesting additional
information is an annullable error, then the counterclaim phase should never have taken
place and the record should rest on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s counterclaims
failed.'®°

Finally, even if the Committee were to find an annullable error, the Committee cannot
annul the entirety of the Award. The Award is not just premised on the Tribunal’s Treaty
jurisdiction over Perenco. It is also premised on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction pursuant to the
participation contracts for Blocks 7 and 21 (the “Participation Contracts”).!°

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure by according unequal treatment to the Parties by requesting Perenco to present
evidence to demonstrate ‘‘(i) that the shares of what is now called Perenco International
Limited in fact form part of the estate under French law and are being or will be distributed
to the heirs of Mr. Perrodo in accordance with that law; and (ii) the means and instrument(s)
through which the heirs have exercised control over the Claimant.”!! According to the
Applicant, it was manifestly unfair that, after a full jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal
allowed Perenco to correct its jurisdictional case, by indicating specifically the points that
needed to be evidenced further. !°”
opportunity to Ecuador. '9?

‘What is more, the Tribunal did not accord the same

'87 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J] 119, 124.

188 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 125.

189 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 126.

9 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 127
1 Decision on Jurisdiction, | 106 (AAE-033).

192

193

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 255.
Memorial on Annulment, {| 256.

45

203.

204.

205.

206.

207.

In relation to the treatment accorded to the Parties, the Committee will analyze: (i) the
Tribunal’s powers under the ICSID Convention to request evidence from the Parties’ sua
sponte and the Tribunal’s opportunity to do so; (ii) whether the Tribunal accorded Ecuador
an opportunity to comment on the evidence presented by the Claimant in relation to the
indirect control of Mr. Perrodo’s heirs over Perenco; and (iii) whether the Tribunal unfairly
gave Perenco an opportunity that it did not afford Ecuador in similar circumstances.

As to the first issue, the Committee remarks that under Rule 34(2) of the Arbitration Rules,
“Tt]he Tribunal may, if it deems it necessary at any stage of the proceeding: (a) call upon
the parties to produce documents, witnesses and experts [...].” This rule clearly states that
the Tribunal is empowered to request evidence from the Parties sua sponte and that it can
do so “at any stage of the proceeding”, as long as it deems it necessary.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal expressly stated that:

It has not yet arrived at a conclusion on whether the deletion of the words
“directly or indirectly” could have the effect ascribed to it by the
Respondents or whether it is necessary to consult supplementary materials
in order to determine the meaning of Article 1(3)(ii). It has decided that it
requires further evidence and submissions before it determines the
Claimant’s standing to invoke the Treaty.'**

Following that statement, the Tribunal invited both Parties to produce evidence on the
Treaty’s negotiating history in France’s possession. Likewise, the Tribunal requested the
Claimant to produce certain evidence on the alleged indirect control of Mr. Perrodo’s heirs
over the Claimant. !°°

The Committee considers that although the jurisdictional phase had already concluded,
nothing precluded the Tribunal from leaving certain jurisdictional matters to a subsequent
phase in the proceeding and from requesting evidence to the Parties at that point of the
proceeding. That is all the more since the Tribunal had explicitly decided to join certain
jurisdictional issues to the merits. '°° In this perspective, Rule 34(2) expressly provides that
a Tribunal may request evidence to the Parties “at any stage of the proceeding.” The
Committee is of the view that the Tribunal has wide discretion to request to the Parties the
evidence that it considers necessary, and therefore, depending on the circumstances of each
case, it may request evidence to one party or both Parties. As explained by the Tribunal in
its Decision on Reconsideration:

It is not unusual for tribunals to defer consideration of jurisdictional
objections pending a further development of the evidentiary record and

'% Decision on Jurisdiction, {{ 86 (AAE-033).
95 Decision on Jurisdiction, {ff 94, 105-106 (AAE-033).
6 Decision on Jurisdiction, {{ 86 (AAE-033).

46

208.

209.

210.

tribunals commonly join jurisdictional issues to the merits, as indeed the
Tribunal did in the instant case. Thus, the Decision on Jurisdiction did not
signal the end of the jurisdictional phase. Having reflected on the parties’
submissions and the evidence, the Tribunal decided it was appropriate to
provide both parties with a further opportunity to address certain issues in
respect of which the Tribunal was not yet prepared to rule.!°”

As to the second issue, the Committee observes that Ecuador had ample opportunity to
rebut the evidence and arguments submitted by the Claimant following the Tribunal’s
request. In fact, Ecuador acknowledges “that it was given the opportunity to discuss the
new arguments and evidence adduced by Perenco in support of its jurisdictional case.”!°*
As noted by the Tribunal in its Decision on Reconsideration:

Both parties were [...] given the opportunity over two rounds of written
pleadings to adduce further factual and expert evidence and to make
submissions. With respect to questions of Bahamian law, both sides
adduced expert evidence on questions such as the status of shares owned
by an individual who died intestate and the steps required under Bahamian
law to effect the transfer of title to the shares. Both parties also addressed
the Treaty’s negotiating history, with Ecuador urging the Tribunal to pay
particularly close attention to the evolution of the relevant provisions (as
recorded in paragraphs 492 to 499 of the Decision), while Perenco’s main
argument was that the plain meaning of the text prevailed, and further that
the negotiating history was too fragmentary and incomplete to be
reliable.'”

Thirdly, Ecuador’s case is mainly based on the allegation that the Tribunal did not accord
the same opportunity to Ecuador. The Committee observes that the Applicant’s allegation
is made in the abstract; namely, that the Tribunal did not accord to Ecuador the opportunity
to present its case with evidence specifically requested by the Tribunal, as it did with
Perenco. Equal opportunity is not “same number of opportunities.” In any event, for the
sake of discussion, the opportunity that the Tribunal granted to the Claimant as regards
Perenco’s French control is similar to the opportunity granted to Ecuador as regards the
environmental counterclaim, as explained below.

Akin to the Decision on Jurisdiction, in the Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim,
the Tribunal concluded that it was not yet prepared to rule given the significant gaps
between the Parties’ experts and therefore informed the Parties of its intention “to appoint
its own independent environmental expert.”?°? The Tribunal explained that: although it had
“arrived at the point where it narrowed the counterclaim on the principal issues of law and
fact,” “with regard to many of the IEMS/GSI differences, the Tribunal does not feel able

7 Decision on Reconsideration, { 91 (AAE-139).

98 Memorial on Annulment, {258

+9 Decision on Reconsideration, { 92 (AAE-139).

2 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 587 (AAE-106).

47

211.

212.

213.

214.

to prefer one above the other.””°! “Accordingly, the Tribunal has concluded that it must
require an additional phase of fact-finding in order to arrive at a proper and just conclusion.
It is not content to issue a final determination on the extent of Perenco’s liability on the
basis of the current expert reports.”

The Committee remarks that the Tribunal decided to take this choice after acknowledging
that:

The Tribunal well understands that the onus of proof is on a party who
makes an allegation and it could be said that because of the doubt in which
the Tribunal finds itself Ecuador could be said to have failed in tipping the
burden in its favour. However, as the Tribunal is satisfied that there has
been some damage for which it seems likely that Perenco is liable, the
Tribunal is not disposed to dismiss the counterclaim in limine.?°

Based on the foregoing reasons, the Committee concludes that there are no reasons to
believe that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that it had jurisdiction over Perenco’s
claims that caducidad breached the Block 21 Participation Contract

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal’s decision to assert its jurisdiction over Perenco’s claim
that Ecuador breached the Block 21 Participation Contract when it declared caducidad is a
manifest excess of powers, a failure to state reasons, and a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador argues that the dispute regarding the
caducidad declaration was a legal one and therefore fell outside the scope of the arbitration
agreement contained in Annex XVI of the Block 21 Participation Contract, which was
limited to the resolution of technical and/or economic disputes.* The Tribunal not only
found that it was sufficient for there to be “economic consequences,” but also omitted to
apply the requirement set out in the arbitration agreement that the dispute must be one
“arising out of the application of the Participation Contract.” Thus, it is clear that the
Tribunal failed to apply the arbitration agreement between the Parties and therefore, in
asserting its jurisdiction, the Tribunal acted in a manifest excess of powers.

20! Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, 58 1(AAE-106).
22 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, { 586 (AAE-106).
203 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, { 585 (AAE-106).

20 Memorial on Annulment, { 261

48

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

As to the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador states that the Tribunal
denied its right to be heard, considering that the Tribunal upheld jurisdiction over Perenco’s
contractual caducidad claim on the basis of the “economic consequences” test, not
previously advanced or discussed by either of the Parties.?°°

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that, with its holding in the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal contradicted previous findings in its Decision on
Jurisdiction. First, the Tribunal contradicted its holding that it did not have jurisdiction
ratione materiae over Perenco’s allegation that Ecuador violated the Ecuadorian
Constitution—and thereby its obligations under the Participation Contracts—by the
enactment of Law 42 because such allegation concerned “essentially legal matters.”?°°
Second, it contradicted its previous finding that the arbitration agreement is conditional on
two requirements: (i) the dispute being of a technical or economic nature, and (ii) the
dispute arising out of the application of the Block 21 Participation Contract. Ecuador
claims that the contradiction is such that the Tribunal’s reasons cancel each other out,
amounting to a failure to state reasons.

For the above reasons, Ecuador requests the annulment of the decision to assert jurisdiction
over Perenco’s claim that Ecuador breached the Block 21 Participation Contract when it
declared caducidad. “Accordingly, the Tribunal’s ensuing decisions to (i) uphold the claim
of breach of the Block 21 Contract as a result of the declaration of caducidad, and (ii) order
Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar as it includes Perenco’s contract
claims under the Block 21 Participation Contract, should also be annulled.”207

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco counters Ecuador’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, failed
to state reasons, and seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure “by finding
that Ecuador’s declaration of caducidad fell within the scope of the arbitration agreement
in the Block 21 Participation Contract.”?°* Perenco submits the following argumentation:

As to the manifest excess of powers, although Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers by committing “gross errors of law” in finding that caducidad fell
within the Contract’s arbitration agreement, errors of law—even if labelled as “gross”—
are not annullable under the ICSID Convention. Ecuador neither argues that the Tribunal
incorrectly identified the applicable law, i.e., Clause 20.2 and Annex XVI of the Block 21

25 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 280-282.
26 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 274-279.

207

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 283.

208 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 129.

49

220.

221.

222.

Participation Contracts and Ecuadorian law, nor that the Tribunal failed to endeavor to
apply that law.

In any event, the Tribunal’s findings were not erroneous, they were based on the language
of the Participation Contract as interpreted under Ecuadorian law. The Tribunal explained
that Clause 20.2 of Block 21 Participation Contract expressly provided that caducidad
disputes fell within the scope of its arbitration provisions. The Tribunal also explained that
pursuant to Annex XVI, “contractual claims advanced by Perenco that concerned a
‘technical’ or ‘economic’ dispute relating to the Block 21 Participation Contract fell within
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”?'° Having considered these provisions and the Parties’
submissions, the Tribunal determined that the Parties’ dispute, including the declaration of
caducidad, fell within the scope of the Block 21 Participation Contract’s arbitration
agreement because it was an “economic” dispute within the meaning of Annex XVI. In
paragraphs 138, 140, 141, 142, 146, 235, 306, 315 and 316 of the Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability, the Tribunal set out in detail the reasons why it found that the dispute was
“economic.”?!!

As to the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador’s complaint that
the Tribunal violated its right to be heard by determining that caducidad had “economic
consequences” is nonsensical. Ecuador had the opportunity to be heard and exercised it,
but the Tribunal appropriately rejected its arguments as meritless. Ecuador seems to be
objecting that neither party used the precise words “economic consequences” in its
submissions. Yet, both parties made extensive submissions on the impact of caducidad and
the economic consequences of the participation formula, on the economic equilibrium of
the contracts, and on the economic effects of Ecuador’s actions on Perenco’s overall share.
Also, a tribunal is not “precluded from adopting legal reasoning that was not put forward
by one of the parties without first seeking the parties’ opinion.”?!? In any event, even if the
Committee were to upheld Ecuador’s argument, there would be no demonstrable difference
in the outcome of the case given that the Tribunal found that caducidad breached both the
Block 21 Contract and the Treaty.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador is wrong that the Tribunal “contradicted its
previous holding in its Decision on Jurisdiction” and thereby failed to state reasons for why
it had jurisdiction over caducidad. Perenco contends that the Tribunal did state reasons for

209 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 132-133.
21 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 133-134.

211 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 135

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 146.

50

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

its decision and there was no contradiction on its reasoning, much less contradictions
genuinely amounting to a complete failure of reasoning.?'

Ecuador’s first alleged contradiction—that the Tribunal acknowledged that “essentially
legal matters” were excluded from the scope of the arbitration agreement but then failed to
exclude caducidad—ignores the Tribunal’s finding that caducidad was both legal and
economic in nature.?!4

Ecuador’s second alleged contradiction—that the Tribunal disregarded the requirement
that the dispute arise out of the application of the Block 21 Participation Contract—ignores
that the Tribunal interpreted Clause 20.2 of the Contract in conjunction with Annex XVI.
On the one hand, Annex XVI provides that “technical and/or economic disputes arising out
of the application of the Participation Contract” shall be resolved through ICSID
arbitration. On the other hand, Clause 20.2 contains a special rule which “contemplates that
a dispute regarding a declaration of caducity which is related to technical or economic
aspects may be submitted to arbitration.” In the light of these provisions, the Tribunal
explained that “Annex XVI does not single out caducity, placing upon the subject-matter
jurisdiction of the Tribunal the sole limitation that the claim should concern a ‘technical’
or ‘economic’ dispute.”?!> Therefore, there are no contradictions in the Tribunal’s
reasoning.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal failed to state its reasons, manifestly exceeded its
powers, and seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure when it declared
having jurisdiction over Perenco’s claim that Ecuador breached the Block 21 Participation
Contract by declaring caducidad.

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador claims that in deciding that “the
declaration of caducidad has economic consequences and therefore falls within its subject-
matter jurisdiction,”?'© the Tribunal failed to apply the arbitration agreement. Yet, the
Committee is not convinced by Ecuador’s position.

In the first place, the Committee notes that when deciding whether it had jurisdiction over
Perenco’s contractual claim that Ecuador breached the Block 21 Participation Contract by
declaring caducidad, the Tribunal identified the proper law applicable to its jurisdiction,
that is Clause 20.2 and Annex XVI of Block 21 Participation Contract.

213 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{f 139-141.

214 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 141

215

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 144.

216 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 316 (AAE-163).

51

228.

229.

230.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction the Tribunal explained that “[w]hen the Block 21
Participation Contract was executed in 1995, Ecuador was not a Contracting Party to the
ICSID Convention. This explains the language used in Clause 20.2.12 providing for the
arbitration to be governed by different rules depending on whether Ecuador was or was not
a Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention at the moment of the institution of the arbitral
proceedings.”?!7

Annex XVI provides in its relevant parts that:

Once the Convention on the Settlement of Disputes Relating to
Investments, ICSID, has been approved by the National Congress of the
Republic of Ecuador, and, therefore, is fully in force, the Parties agree that
any technical and/or economic dispute arising out of the application of the
Participation Contract for the Exploration and Exploitation of
Hydrocarbons in Block 21 ..., which is the object of the present Contract,
shall be resolved according to the provisions of the aforementioned
Convention, leaving, accordingly, without effect the arbitration procedure
in clause twenty of the Contract.

For the application of the Convention on the Settlement of Disputes
Relating to Investments, ICSID, the following procedural rules shall also
apply:

1. The Parties agree to submit to the INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES any technical
and/or economic dispute relating to this Participation Contract...through

the [system] of arbitration, which for all effects is hereafter referred to as
“THE CENTRE.”

2. The Parties acknowledge that the object of the Participation Contract
implies the making of investments, so that the ICSID Arbitration
procedure is applicable to the Contract.

3. The Parties acknowledge that the Contractor’s right to submit any
technical and/or economic dispute to the CENTRE shall not affect the
Contractor’s ability to receive total or partial compensation from any third
party in relation to any damage or loss of the object in dispute.

Considering that Ecuador was already a Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention when
the Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration on April 30, 2008, the Tribunal concluded
that the Underlying Arbitration is precisely the scenario in which the aforementioned
contractual provision is applicable,”!* and “has to be looked at when determining the
Tribunal’s competence over contractual claims.”?!°

27 Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 127 (AAE-033).

218 Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 128 (AAE-033).
29 Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 130 (AAE-033).

 

52

231. The Tribunal then interpreted Annex XVI as follows:

The Tribunal is of the view that this interpretation based on the opposition
of ‘legal’ versus ‘technical and/or economic’ cannot be accepted as it
would result in depriving Annex XVI of its applicability in general. The
ICSID Convention requires the dispute to be a legal one. [...]

The Parties to the Block 21 Participation Contract agreed, in its Annex
XVI, ‘to submit to the INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES any technical and/or
economic dispute relating to this Participation Contract.’ It is thus the task
of the Tribunal to ascertain whether the contractual claims advanced by
Perenco in this arbitration concern a ‘technical’ or ‘economic’ dispute
relating to the Block 21 Participation Contract. The language ‘and/or’
suggests that the dispute does not need to be of a cumulative nature, i.e.,

220

‘technical and economic’ .™
232. In turn, in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal concluded that:

[...] Clause 20.2 of the Block 21 Contract contemplates that a dispute
regarding a declaration of caducity which is related to technical or
economic aspects may be submitted to arbitration. Annex XVI does not
single out caducity, placing upon the subject-matter jurisdicton [sic.] of
the Tribunal the sole limitation that the claim should concern a ‘technical’
or ‘economic’ dispute.

Having regard to the Tribunal’s findings in its Decision on Jurisdiction,
the Tribunal considers that the declaration of caducidad has economic
consequences and therefore falls within its subject-matter jurisdiction. The
Tribunal accordingly finds that it has jurisdiction to entertain Perenco’s
claim that Ecuador breached the Block 21 Contract when it declared
caducidad.”"

233. In view of the Tribunal’s decision, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal allegedly failed to
apply the proper law for two main reasons. First, because under the arbitration agreement,
jurisdiction ratione materiae is conditioned upon a dispute being of a “technical” or
“economic” nature and, therefore, it is insufficient for a dispute to have mere “economic
consequences” to be covered by the arbitration agreement. And second, because the
Tribunal omitted to apply the requirement that the dispute must be one “arising out of the
application of the Participation Contracts,” given that the caducidad declaration does not
arise out of the application of the Block 21 Participation Contract.?””

20 Decision on Jurisdiction, {¥{ 134-135 (AAE-033)
21 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {ff 315-316 (AAE-163).

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 268.

53

234.

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

The Committee observes that although Ecuador argues that the Tribunal failed to apply the
proper law, the Applicant’s contention is in fact an allegation of misapplication of the
proper law, not a claim of non-application of the proper law.

The Tribunal identified the applicable law—Clause 20.2 and Annex XVI of the Block 21
Participation Contracts—to define its jurisdiction and endeavored to apply such law. The
Committee may or may not agree with the Tribunal’s interpretation that “technical” or
“economic” nature is equivalent to “economic consequences”; however, it is beyond its
competence to adjudge the Tribunal’s interpretation of the arbitration agreement. By so
doing, the Committee would be acting as a court of appeals. Therefore, the Committee
finds no grounds to conclude that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

As regards the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador contends
that by sua sponte espousing and applying the “economic consequences” test, the Tribunal
denied Ecuador the right to address and reject such test. To resolve Ecuador’s contention,
the Committee will examine whether the Tribunal’s finding on the “economic
consequences” fits the legal framework discussed by the Parties, so as to determine whether
the Tribunal had to give an opportunity to the Parties to comment on such conclusion or
not (see Section III.C.2).

The Committee observes that although the Parties did not incorporate in their submissions
the specific words “economic consequences,” the Parties disputed at length the scope of
the terms “technical and/or economic” dispute. This is clearly noted in the Tribunal’s
Decision on Jurisdiction.

On the one hand, Ecuador claimed, inter alia, that:

Under Clause 20.2 of the Contract, entitled ‘technical and/or economic
arbitration,’ only ‘technical matters involving economic aspects,’ or
“economic matters involving technical aspects’ arising out of the Block 21
Participation Contract may be submitted to ICSID arbitration. Annex XVI,
which also addresses arbitration of any ‘technical and/or economic
disputes,’ must be interpreted in light of Clause 20.2.7

On the other hand, Perenco contended, inter alia, that:

Annex XVI of the Block 21 Contract permits arbitration of ‘any [...]
economic dispute related to’ that Contract. [...] The language of Annex
XVI, which covers ‘any’ dispute, that is either technical ‘and/or’
economic, is expansive.” [...]

%3 Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 110 (AAE-033).
24 Decision on Jurisdiction, { 117 (AAE-033).

54

240.

241.

242.

243.

Ecuador is wrong to rely on the narrow language of Clause 20.2 for its
assertion that only ‘technical matters involving economic aspects and vice
versa’ can be arbitrated under the Contract, because this language is not
included in Annex XVI. First, Annex XVI expressly displaced Clause
20.2, by providing after ratification of Convention, technical and/or
economic disputes shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of
the Convention, ‘thus leaving without effect the arbitration procedure set
out in clause twenty of the Contract.’ [...] Second, the Parties intended
that Annex XVI would replace the prior dispute resolution clause in its
entirety. [...] Third, Ecuador is wrong to assert that Clause 20.2 and Annex
XVI are to be read together, such that ‘technical matters involving
economic aspects and vice versa’ language of Clause 20.2 defines the
‘technical and/or economic’ language of Annex XVI. According to
Perenco, ‘Clause 20.2 was self-evidently meant to apply before
congressional approval of the ICSID Convention, while Annex XVI was
meant to apply after congressional approval of the ICSID Convention.’””>

Furthermore, it is undisputed that both Parties presented submissions “on the impact of
caducidad and the economic consequences of the participation formula, on the economic
equilibrium of the contracts, and on the economic effects of Ecuador’s actions on Perenco’s
overall share.”

Thus, the Committee finds that the Tribunal’s conclusion fits within the legal framework
discussed by the Parties regarding the interpretation on the scope and contours of Annex
XVI. The fact that the Tribunal did not adopt the exact same position or terminology
advanced by the Parties does not mean that the Tribunal created a new and unexpected
legal framework that ought to be commented by the Parties. Consequently, the Committee
finds that the Tribunal did not seriously depart from Ecuador’s right to be heard.

As regards the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that by contradicting its previous
findings, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its finding that it had jurisdiction over
Perenco’s contractual claim regarding Ecuador’s breach of Block 21 Participation Contract
by the caducidad declaration.

As regards the first alleged contradiction, Ecuador claims that in the Decision on
Jurisdiction, the Tribunal concluded that “essentially legal matters” were excluded from
the scope of the arbitration agreement; however, in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability, the Tribunal failed to exclude caducidad. Nonetheless, the Committee finds no
contradiction in the Tribunal’s Decisions, much less a contradiction tantamount to a failure
to state reasons that gives rise to annulment as explained in Section III.D.2.

25 Decision on Jurisdiction, {¥{ 118-120 (AAE-033)
226 Counter Memorial on Annulment, { 146.

55

244.

245.

246.

247.

The Committee observes that even though the Tribunal indeed reasoned that “essentially
legal matters” were excluded from the scope of the arbitration agreement, neither in its
Decision on Jurisdiction nor in any other decision, the Tribunal concluded that caducidad
was “essentially a legal matter” so as to clearly contradict its subsequent decision not to
exclude the caducidad declaration from the scope of the arbitration agreement. To the
contrary, as explained above, the Tribunal found that the dispute related to the caducidad
declaration was both legal and economic.

As regards the second alleged contradiction, Ecuador submits that in its Decision on
Jurisdiction, the Tribunal concluded that the arbitration agreement was conditional on “(i)
being of a technical or economic nature, and (ii) arising out of the application of the Block
21 Participation Contract.”??” Yet, in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the
Tribunal concluded that the sole condition for its jurisdiction ratione materiae was that a
claim concerns a “technical” or “economic” dispute. For Ecuador, these contradictory
reasons amount to failure to state reasons.

The Committee is not persuaded by Ecuador’s argument. In its Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability, the Tribunal explained that Clause 20.2 of Block 21 Participation Contract
expressly “states that if a caducity proceeding has been initiated, and the cause is related
to technical or economic aspects, and the parties ‘have differing views’, either party may
submit the matter to arbitration.”?7* Annex XVI provides that “technical and/or economic
disputes arising out of the application of the Participation Contract” shall be resolved
according to the provisions of the ICSID Convention.” Following this conclusion, the
Tribunal then recalled that “[in its Decision on Jurisdiction] the Tribunal found that Annex
XVI had to be considered when determining the scope of its ratione materiae competence
over contractual claims.”?*° The Tribunal then emphasized that Annex XVI did not single
out caducidad from the scope of the arbitration agreement—contrary to Clause 21.3 of the
Block 7 Participation Contract*'—, “placing upon the subject-matter jurisdiction of the
Tribunal the sole limitation that the claim should concern a ‘technical’ or ‘economic’
dispute.”?>>

The Committee stresses that the Tribunal’s decision must be read as whole and in context.
Read in isolation, the last sentence in paragraph 315 might indicate that the Tribunal
disregarded the requirement that the dispute be one “arising out of the application of the
Participation Contract.” Yet, it is enough to read the previous paragraph (para. 314),

227 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 276-278.

28 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {314 (AAE-163).
29 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {314 (AAE-163).
20 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 315 (AAE-163).
31 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {312 (AAE-163).
252 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 315 (AAE-163).

56

248.

249.

250.

251.

quoting Annex XVI, to understand that the Tribunal acknowledges that the dispute must
be technical and/or economical, and be one arising out of the application of the
Participation Contract. Furthermore, the Tribunal did not expressly reject the latter criterion
so as to conclude that there is a clear contradiction between the Tribunal’s decisions.

Therefore, the Committee finds no contradictions in the Tribunal’s reasoning and therefore
it finds no ground to conclude that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its finding on
jurisdiction.

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON THE MERITS

() Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s non-compliance with the
Provisional Measures amounted to a breach of contract

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal failed to state reasons when, in its Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability, it concluded that Ecuador had breached the Participation Contracts by not
complying with the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures.

Pursuant to Clause 22.2.2 of the Participation Contracts, the Parties “agreed that they would
comply not only with a final award (i.e., in Spanish, the ‘laudo’ issued by a tribunal), but
in addition, they would observe and comply with the decisions (i.e., in Spanish, the
‘decisiones’) of the tribunal.””°? Yet, nowhere in its reasoning, did the Tribunal address
Ecuador’s key argument: that the Tribunal’s recommendation in the Decision on
Provisional Measures did not amount to “decisions” for the purposes of Clause 22.2 of the
Participation Contracts. Furthermore, the Tribunal’s decision contradicts its previous
Decision on Provisional Measures, in which it expressly stated that the provisional
measures were “recommendations.”?*4

Based on the above reasons, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to
uphold Perenco’s claim of breach of Contract in respect of Law 42 at 99%, and “the
Tribunal’s ensuing decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar

as it includes Perenco’s breach of Contract claim.”?°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

233 Memorial on Annulment, { 285.
34 Memorial on Annulment, 295.
35 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 299.

s7

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

Perenco contends that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons when finding that Ecuador’s
violations of the Decision on Provisional Measures breached its obligation under the
Participation Contracts to comply with the Tribunal’s decisions.*°

Contrary to Ecuador’s assertion that the Tribunal did not explain how its Decision on
Provisional Measures amounted to a decision covered under Clause 22.2 of the
Participation Contract, the Tribunal did provide reasons for finding that the Decision on
Provisional Measures was a “decision.” In fact, the Tribunal rejected Ecuador’s argument
that “decisions” only included awards. In any event, Ecuador’s complaint does not meet
the high threshold to establish a failure to state reasons.?*’

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s finding that the non-compliance with the Provisional
Measures breached the Participation Contracts directly contradicts its Decision on
Provisional Measures in which it expressly stated that provisional measures were
“recommendations”. Yet, the Tribunal made clear that the decisions of provisional
measures under Article 47(1) of the ICSID Convention are binding. Therefore, there is no
contradiction.?**

Finally, Ecuador’s request to annul the Tribunal’s decision to uphold Perenco’s claim of
breach of Contract in respect of Law 42 at 99% is nonsensical. The Tribunal’s finding that
Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts was not based on Ecuador’ s breach of the
Provisional Measures, but on the Tribunal’s finding “that Decree 662 sought to coerce
Perenco to ‘unilaterally conver[t] the Participation Contracts into de facto service

contracts.””?9

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its finding that Ecuador
breached the Participation Contracts by not complying with the Decision on Provisional
Measures. According to Ecuador, the Tribunal failed to address its key argument, namely
that the Tribunal’s recommendations in the Decision on Provisional Measures did not
amount to decisions (“decisiones”’) under Clause 22.2.2 of the Participation Contracts. The
Applicant further claims that the Tribunal’s finding in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability that the recommendations made in the Decision on Provisional Measures were
binding, contradicts the Decision on Provisional Measures itself.24°

25 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 151

237 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 151, 153-155.

238 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 156-159.

239 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {161

240 Memorial on Annulment, {J 284-299; Reply on Annulment, {if 221-236.

58

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

For the reasons explained below, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did provide reasons
for its decision that Ecuador’s non-compliance with the Decision on Provisional Measures
amounted to a breach of the Participation Contracts.

Between paragraphs 413 and 417 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal
addresses the question on whether Ecuador was contractually obliged to comply with the
Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures. The Tribunal begins its analysis by referring
to Clause 22.2.2 of the Participation Contracts. Then, it refers to the Parties’ positions on
the matter, expressly mentioning Ecuador’s “key argument”, as follows:

Ecuador’s position is that while the parties undertook in the Contracts to
submit to ICSID arbitration specified disputes and to abide by the
Tribunal’s ‘final award’, they did not undertake to, and these obligations
could not inferentially amount to, an undertaking to comply with a
tribunal’s recommendation of provisional measures. It submitted that
clause 22.2.2 was generally worded and, according to principles of
contract interpretation in Ecuadorian law, must be ‘read in accordance
with the other clauses of the Participation Contracts which specifically
refer to these topics’ and which in its view establish ‘only that the Parties
agree to abide by the final award rendered by an ICSID tribunal.’ Where
it was intended to give a tribunal the power to provide for binding and
enforceable provisional measures, the Contracts did so expressly (as was
done elsewhere in the Contracts with respect to the power of a domestic
arbitral tribunal to order provisional measures).”4'

After referring to the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal concluded that:

[A] plain reading of clauses 22.2.2 indicates that the contracting parties
agreed that they would comply not only with a final award (i.e., in Spanish,
the ‘Jaudo’ issued by a tribunal), but in addition, they would observe and
comply with the decisions (i.e., in Spanish, the ‘decisiones’) of the
tribunal. The latter term constitutes a more capacious category of tribunal
decisions of which the final award forms a part. Thus, under the
Participation Contracts, Ecuador was bound to comply with the Decision
on Provisional Measures and its failure to do so constituted a breach of
contract.*”

The Committee observes that the Tribunal not only interpreted Clause 22.2.2, but also
explained that its interpretation was based on the fact that the word “decisions” (decisiones)
is a more “capacious” category of tribunal decisions of which the final award (/audo) is
part.

The Committee cannot conclude that the Tribunal did not analyze and decide Ecuador’s
“key argument” solely because there is no wording in the Decision on Jurisdiction and

24! Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 415 (AAE-163).
#2 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {| 417 (AAE-163).

59

262.

263.

264.

265.

Liability expressly rejecting Ecuador’s position. It is clear in the aforementioned decision
that the Tribunal did not uphold Ecuador’s interpretation of the clause because it considered
that the word “decisions” was a general category of arbitral decisions that encompassed the
final award and other decisions. Likewise, although the Tribunal does not expressly
indicate that the Decision on Provisional Measures is also part of the more general category
of “decisions”, such conclusion follows from the Tribunal’s finding that “Ecuador was
bound to comply with the Decision on Provisional Measures [...].”?4

The Committee finds therefore that the Tribunal did answer the question on whether the
Decision on Provisional Measures was a “decision of the competent [...] arbitrators” under
Clause 22.2.2 of the Participation Contracts. Consequently, the Tribunal satisfied the
requirement set out in Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention that “[t]he award shall deal
with every question submitted to the tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is
based.”

Furthermore, the Committee finds no contradiction between the Tribunal’s Decision on
Provisional Measures and the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability as regards the binding
character of the “recommendations” made by the Tribunal as provisional measures.

In its Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal expressly manifested that “[i]t is now
generally accepted that provisional measures are tantamount to orders, and are binding on
the party on which they are directed [...].”?“ Thereafter, in its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability, the Tribunal concluded that Ecuador was bound to comply with the Decision on
Provisional Measures. Accordingly, there is no contradiction between these decisions
given that in both the Tribunal considered that its “recommendations” under the Decision
on Provisional Measures were binding. The Tribunal’s conclusion should come as no
surprise, as it is widely accepted among ICSID arbitral tribunals and ad hoc committees
that recommendations under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are binding to the Parties.

In conclusion, the Committee finds no ground to annul the Tribunal’s decision that Ecuador
breached the Participation Contracts by not complying with the Decision on Provisional
Measures.

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco was entitled to suspend
operations under the exceptio non adimpleti contractus principle

a. The Parties’ Position

(i) Applicant’s Position

23 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {| 417 (AAE-163).
24 Decision on Provisional Measures, { 74 (CAA-013).

60

266.

267.

268.

269.

270.

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure,
manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state its reasons when it decided sua sponte
on the interpretation of the exceptio non adimpleti contractus theory.

The Applicant refers to the Tribunal’s decision that Ecuador’s non-compliance with the
Decision on Provisional Measures breached the Participation Contracts and that such non-
compliance justified Perenco’s invocation of the exceptio non adimpleti contractus defense
to suspend its operations in the Blocks. The Tribunal concluded erroneously that the
exceptio defense was valid because Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code is worded
in general terms so that it covers administrative contracts.

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal’s decision to apply the exceptio rule must be annulled
in limine, as it is based on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s non-compliance with the
Provisional Measures amounted to a breach of the Participation Contracts. Yet, even if the
Committee were to uphold such finding, the Tribunal in any event (i) committed a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; (ii) manifestly exceeded its powers; and
(iii) failed to state the reasons for deciding sua sponte on the interpretation of the exceptio
non adimpleti contractus theory.**°

As to the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador claims that the
Tribunal violated its right to be heard for two reasons: first, the Tribunal’s interpretation of
Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code was not advanced by either of the Parties; and
second, the Tribunal did not afford either Party the opportunity to comment upon its novel
theory.?47

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador states that the Tribunal’s interpretation of
Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code amounts to at least two gross errors under
Ecuadorian law. First, the Tribunal grossly erred when concluding that the provisions of
the Ecuadorian Civil Code apply with equal force and in all circumstances to private and
administrative law contracts. Second, the Tribunal grossly erred when applying the
exceptio rule, as it failed to recognize that the Ecuadorian Constitution equates
hydrocarbons production with a public service and subjects it to the constitutional principle
of continuity, thereby prohibiting its interruption.”4* When a tribunal’s analysis is a gross
misapplication or misinterpretation of the law amounting to effective disregard or non-
application of the law, it must be deemed a failure to apply the law. In this sense, given

25 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 301-302.
26 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 303-304.
27 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 305-308
28 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 309-313.

61

271.

272.

273.

274.

275.

that the Tribunal “grossly disregarded Ecuadorian constitutional principles and failed to
apply Ecuadorian administrative law,” it exceeded its powers.”

As to the failure to state reasons, the Applicant alleges that the Tribunal’s reasoning on its
decision that Ecuadorian law permits the party not in breach to suspend performance of its
contractual obligations is limited to a two-line sentence in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability. Such reasoning simply declares that Ecuadorian law permits the said
performance suspension without demonstrating where this permission can be found in the
law or without any analysis of the theories advanced by the legal experts.”°°

Accordingly, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold
Perenco’s claim of breach of contract in respect of Law 42 at 99%, insofar as such decision
is in part based on the Tribunal’s finding that the exceptio non adimpleti contractus defense
could be invoked in relation to the Participation Contracts. Likewise, Ecuador requests the
annulment of the Tribunal’s ensuing decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to

Perenco, to the extent that it includes Perenco’s breach of contract claim.?>!

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure, manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state reasons in reaching the
decision that the principle of exceptio non adimpleti contractus in Article 1568 of the
Ecuadorian Civil Code entitled Perenco to suspend operations when Ecuador’s violations
of provisional measures made its operations commercially impossible.?>*

As to the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Perenco remarks that the
Tribunal reached its decision based on the plain language of the applicable provisions of
the Ecuadorian Civil Code, after the Parties and their experts addressed that language in
their submissions, arguments, and even on cross-examination.7°>

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador is also wrong to contend that the Tribunal’s
reliance on the text of the applicable Ecuadorian Civil Code provision was a “gross error
under Ecuadorian law”.?*4 The Tribunal acted within its powers as it endeavored to apply
Ecuadorian law, in particular Article 1568 of the Civil Code. Accordingly, even if
mistaken, the Tribunal’s conclusion that “Article 1568 of the Civil Code is worded in
general terms and does not support the position that it may only be invoked by the public

2 Memorial on Annulment, { 313.
250 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 316-317

25! Memorial on Annulment, {{ 319.

252

Counter Memorial on Annulment, {| 162.

253 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 162-166; Rejoinder on Annulment, J 104-109.
254 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 167

62

276.

277.

278.

contracting entity that is party to the contract” cannot amount to a manifest error as Ecuador
255

asserts.~
Ecuador further complains that the Tribunal failed to recognize that the Ecuadorian
Constitution equates hydrocarbons production with a public service and subjects it to the
constitutional principle of continuity, thereby prohibiting its interruption. However, as the
Tribunal explained in accordance with its mandate, Article 1568 of the Civil Code could
apply to a private party to an administrative contract. Moreover, the Tribunal analyzed and
accepted that ““‘Participation Contracts, are aimed at exploiting a natural resource and target
the provision of financial income to the national treasury’ and are thus unrelated to public
services that are subject to the principle of continuity.”?°° Hence, the Tribunal’s rejection
of Ecuador’s argument was correct, and even if it had been incorrect it could not have
amounted to a manifest excess of power.

As to the failure to state reasons, Perenco states that Ecuador’s mischaracterization of the
Tribunal’s decisions or the alleged brevity of the Tribunal’s reasoning cannot establish any
failure to state reasons, much less a complete failure to do so. The standard for a failure to
state reasons is not whether the reasons given are sufficient, but whether reasons exist at
all. In any event, Ecuador is wrong that the Tribunal’s analysis on Perenco’s right to
suspend its performance under the Participation Contracts is contained in just two
sentences. Ecuador omits to mention that the Tribunal took careful account of the different
theories the Parties and their respective legal experts provided, and then found Perenco’s
permission to suspend operations in the express language of Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian
Civil Code.?*” Furthermore, Ecuador failed to establish why the Tribunal’s finding is
essential to the outcome of the case, as it must in order to establish an annullable error.?>*

Ecuador’s arguments do not justify its requested relief that the Committee annul the
Tribunal’s decision finding that Law 42 at 99% breached the Participation Contracts and
awarding US$448.8 million in damages to Perenco. Ecuador failed to explain how the
Tribunal’s finding regarding the permission to suspend operations affects that Decree 662
breached the Participation Contracts, and how the entirety of the Tribunal’s quantum

determination should be annulled.”°°

255 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 169.

256 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 171

257 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 175

258 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 174.

259 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 176.

63

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

284.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure,
manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state the reasons when deciding that Perenco
was entitled to suspend operations under the exceptio non adimpleti contractus principle.

As regards the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador claims that
the Tribunal breached the Applicant’s right to be heard by upholding a novel interpretation
of Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code that was not advanced by either Party, and
by not affording the Parties the opportunity to comment upon its novel interpretation.

Ecuador’s claim is based on the Tribunal’s decision that:

[T]he [exceptio non adimpleti contractus| defence may be invoked by a
private party to an administrative contract. Article 1568 of the Civil Code
is worded in general terms and does not support the position that it may
only be invoked by the public contracting entity that is party to the
contract.

The Committee observes that contrary to Ecuador’s claim, the Parties had the opportunity
to present their positions on whether the exceptio provided in Article 1568 applied to
administrative contracts.

First, in his Fourth Expert Report?” and at the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Liability,”°! Dr.

Hernan Pérez Loose, Perenco’s legal expert, explained that, in his view, the exceptio non
adimpleti contractus applied to public contracts in Ecuador. For instance, at the Hearing
on Jurisdiction and Liability, following a question from Ecuador on whether the exceptio
is to be applied to public contracts, Dr. Perez Loose answered that “the first source is the
Civil Code, clearly. This is something that you can find in the Civil Code, and as you read
it, the Civil Code provisions doesn’t make any difference between private or administrative
contracts. It just refers to contracts.”

Second, in its Reply to Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on Liability and Counterclaims,
Perenco expressly referred to Dr. Peréz Loose conclusions by noting that

Perenco’s conduct was not illegal under Ecuadorian law. As explained by
Dr. Pérez Loose, Perenco’s suspension was legitimate under the principle
of exceptio non adimpleti contractus, which applies to bilateral contracts
such as the Participation Contracts under Ecuadorian law.”

260 Fourth Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose, August 5, 2011, {§[ 36-57 (CEA-077).

261 Perenco v. Republic of Ecuador, Transcript, Hearing on Jurisdiction and Liability, Day 6, 1507:6-21 (CEA-091).

28 Perenco v. Republic of Ecuador, Transcript, Hearing on Jurisdiction and Liability, Day 6, 1507:6-21 (CEA-091); Rejoinder on
Annulment, { 106.

263 Perenco’s Reply to Counter-Memorial on Liability and Counterclaims, 421 (CEA-081).

64

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

Third, in its Third Expert Report, Dr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade, Ecuador’s legal expert,
addressed the question on whether the exceptio incorporated in Article 1568 of the Civil
Code is applicable to administrative contracts:

The possibility of opposing the exceptio non adimpleti contractus to
administrative contracts is an issue that clearly reflects the difference
between the general law of contracts as regulated by the Civil Code, and
that which applies to contracts entered into by the State and its institutions.

The Civil Code adopts this exceptio in Article 1568, pursuant to which ‘in
bilateral contracts, none of the parties will be in default for non-
performance, insofar as the other party does not perform his or her
obligations, or agrees to perform them in due time and form.’

This rule, of mandatory application in the field of Private Law, loses its
general character and is only applicable in extraordinary circumstances in
the field of Administrative Law, where collective interests have priority.
Again, this is not a specificity of Ecuadorian law, but rather, as in other
matters of Administrative Law, is the application of the leading opinions
of authors, legislation and case law.

Thereafter, Dr. Aguilar referred to French, Spanish and Argentinean doctrine on the
application of the exceptio to public contracts.

It is worth noting that, in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal expressly
referred to (i) Dr. Pérez Loose’s Fourth Expert Report and to his intervention at the Hearing
on Jurisdiction and Liability, and (ii) Dr. Aguilar’s Third Expert Report before concluding
that “Article 1568 of the Civil Code is worded in general terms and does not support the
position that it may only be invoked by the public contracting entity that is party to the
contract.”65
In view of the documents, legal expert reports, pleadings and transcripts available on the
record, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not exceed the legal framework
argued during the Underlying Arbitration when interpreting that the exceptio provided in
Article 1568 may be invoked by a private party to an administrative contract.

Likewise, the Committee finds that each Party had ample opportunity to present its case
and to rebut the other Party’s position regarding the application of the exceptio rule to
administrative contracts.

Consequently, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not depart from Ecuador’s
right to be heard when concluding that the exceptio non adimpleti contractus rule provided

264 Third Expert Report of Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade, November 5, 2011, f[ 80-82 (CEA-078).
265 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 431 (AAE-163).

65

291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

in Article 1568 of the Civil Code was applicable to administrative contracts and thereby
Perenco was entitled to suspend operations under such principle.

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal committed a
gross error when concluding that the exceptio principle set forth in Article 1568 of the Civil
Code applied to administrative contracts. Ecuador further argues that the Tribunal failed to
recognize that interruption of hydrocarbons production is prohibited in Ecuadorian Law
given that it is considered a public service under the Constitution, and thereby, it is subject
to the continuity principle.

The Committee stresses that it cannot act as a court of appeals and judge whether the
Tribunal correctly or incorrectly interpreted or applied the Ecuadorian Law. The
Committee may even disagree with the Tribunal’s interpretation of the law; however, the
fact is that the Tribunal did identify the proper body of law and endeavored to apply it.
This can be observed in the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability between
paragraphs 418 and 435. It is not for the Committee to assess whether the interpretation of
the Tribunal is merely incorrect or “grossly incorrect”. The Committee cannot review the
substance of the case. Therefore, the Commitee concludes that the Tribunal did not
manifestly exceed its powers when deciding that the exceptio rule applied to administrative
contracts and therefore Perenco was entitled to suspend operations under said principle.

As regards the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s reasoning on its
conclusion that Ecuadorian law permits the Party not in breach to suspend performance of
its contractual obligations is limited to a two-line sentence in the Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability.

As a preliminary remark, the Committee notes that Ecuador’s claim is based on the
argument that the Tribunal’s reasoning is insufficient. Yet, as explained in Section III.D.2
above, it is not on the Committee to assess the quality or extension of the reasons provided
by the Tribunal. To determine whether the Tribunal complied with the requirement that the
Award shall state reasons for its decision, the Committee must analyze whether the
Tribunal’s conclusions follow from a set of premises, either implicit or explicit.

Between paragraphs 418 to 425 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability the Tribunal
presented its analysis to resolve the following question: “[c]an Perenco invoke the defence
of exceptio non adempleti contractus for its decision to suspend operations?”

The Tribunal begins its analysis by noting that, having found that Ecuador breached the
Participation Contracts by not complying with the Decision on Provisional Measures, the
question was whether as a matter of Ecuadorian law Perenco was entitled to suspend

66

performance of its contractual obligations. Thereafter, the Tribunal devoted twelve
paragraphs to present the opinions of the Parties’ legal experts.

297. The Committee finds that there are two particular references that are paramount to the
subsequent Tribunal’s conclusion.

298. _ First, the Tribunal referred to Dr. Pérez Loose’s view on the interpretation of Article 1568
of the Civil Code, as follows:

Article 1568 of Ecuador’s Civil Code provides more generally that ‘[i]n
bilateral contracts no party shall be considered to be in default by failing
to comply with the agreed terms, while the other party has not complied
with its obligations or refuses to comply in due manner and time.’ During
cross-examination, Dr. Pérez Loose asserted that in his view Article 1568
must apply to administrative contracts since it makes no distinction in
terms between private and administrative contracts, referring only to the
generally worded ‘contracts.’ He referred to the defence as a ‘transitory’
or ‘transient’ right intended to exert pressure on the other contracting party
to comply with its contractual obligations. In order to invoke this defence,
the invoking party must demonstrate: (i) a reciprocal connection between
the obligation breached and the obligation it purports to breach; (ii) that
the original breach was material in nature (it cannot relate to ancillary,
secondary, or obligations relatively insignificant in the larger context of
the legal relationship between the parties); and (iii) that it was or is ready
to perform its obligations.?”

299. Second, the Tribunal referred to certain views presented by Professor Aguilar, as follows:

Professor Aguilar asserted further that the writers supported his view that
the exceptio can only apply to administrative contracts in circumstances
where the State’s conduct has made it ‘reasonably impossible’ for the
private contracting entity to fulfill its obligations. [...]

Professor Aguilar accepted that his view was derived from the views of
foreign legal theorists, but asserted that this was necessarily the case as
‘[t]here has been no explicit development in Ecuador by authors on the
subject, nor has a concrete case presented itself that resulted in applicable
jurisprudence.’ He rejected Dr. Pérez Loose’s reliance on two judicial
decisions of the First Civil and Commercial Chamber of the Supreme
Court of Justice, stating they demonstrated instead that a claim invoking
the exceptio will not be entertained when the private contractor is itself in
default of its contractual obligations. He similarly asserted that contrary to
Dr. Pérez Loose’s submission, the two opinions of the Attorney-General
in Ecuador demonstrate that the exceptio may be invoked by the private
contracting entity to an administrative contract, there was in one case a
specific contractual provision providing that no fine would be imposed on

266 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 418 (AAE-163).
267 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 421 (AAE-163).

67

300.

301.

302.

303.

the contractor for non-performance if the public contracting entity was in
default, and the other case supports his view that the exceptio did not apply
as the ‘Attorney General argues that a delay in payment by a public
institution does not authorize an extension of the contractual term’ in
favour of the contractor (i.e., permitting non-performance for a time until
payment is received).”*

Based on the foregoing premises, the Tribunal concluded that:

Having considered the parties’ submissions, although it accepts Professor
Aguilar’s view that the law is not well developed in this point in Ecuador,
the Tribunal finds that the defence may be invoked by a private party to
an administrative contract. Article 1568 of the Civil Code is worded in
general terms and does not support the position that it may only be invoked
by the public contracting entity that is party to the contract.”

Accordingly, the Committee observes that, read as a whole and in context, the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Liability provides reasons supporting the Tribunal’s conclusion that
Ecuadorian law permits the Party not in breach to suspend performance of its contractual
obligations. Thus, the Committee finds no ground to annul under Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention.

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Decree 662 breached the Participation
Contracts and that the enactment of Decree 662 and the ensuing measures
breached Article 4 of the Treaty

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the
reasons on which the Award is based, when it decided that the enactment of Decree 662—
increasing to 99% the levy on extraordinary revenue above the reference prices underlying
the Participation Contracts—, breached said Contracts.?”

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador notes that the Tribunal failed to apply
Ecuadorian administrative law when finding that Decree 662 was not a lawful exercise of
the jus variandi power under Ecuadorian law. Ecuador stresses that, under Ecuadorian law,
the jus variandi power is only relevant when the terms of an administrative contract have
been modified. Nonetheless, the jus variandi power had no bearing in the present case, as
the Tribunal itself had found that neither Law 42 nor Decree 662 modified the terms and

268 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {ff 425-426 (AAE-163).
2 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {431 (AAE-163).
2 Memorial on Annulment, { 321

68

304.

305.

306.

307.

conditions of the Participation Contracts.””! Ecuador further claims that the Tribunal
assessed whether Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts pursuant to a mandate
akin to that of an amiable compositeur or ex aequo et bono. Ecuador thereby contends that
the Tribunal’s misapplication of Ecuadorian law is so egregious that it amounts to a non-
application.?”

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador observes that in its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability, the Tribunal held both that Law 42 did not amount to a breach of the Participation
Contracts, and that Decree 662 was “entirely different” and amounted to such a breach.
Ecuador remarks that “where it is not possible to follow a tribunal’s reasoning because the
stated reasons are so contradictory as to cancel each other out, this amounts to a failure to
state reasons. Likewise, ad hoc committees have consistently held that ‘frivolous’ or
arbitrary reasoning amounts to a failure to state reasons warranting annulment. In the
present case, the Tribunal’s reasoning is replete with contradictory findings that cannot be
reconciled. It is also based on arbitrary statements that cannot form the basis of a reasoned
decision.”?

Likewise, Ecuador argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to
state the reasons on which the Award is based when it decided that moving beyond 50% to
99% with the application of Decree 662 breached Article 4 of the Treaty.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal’s holding that
Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts was based on a gross misapplication of
Ecuadorian law. The Tribunal “erroneously invoked, and limited its assessment of the
alleged contractual breach to, the jus variandi power under Ecuadorian law even though
such principle was plainly inapplicable in the circumstances, thereby assessing whether
Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts pursuant to a mandate akin to that of an
amiable compositeur or ex aequo et bono. In so doing, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers.”?”4

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s holding that “the
application of Decree 662 to Perenco as well as the ensuing measures” breached Article 4
of the Treaty is based on contradictory and arbitrary reasoning, which amounts to failure
to state reasons. To support its position, Ecuador advances similar arguments to the ones

7! Memorial on Annulment, { 325.
22 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 327-328.

273

Memorial on Annulment, {341

274 Memorial on Annulment, 347.

69

308.

309.

310.

311.

312.

presented in regard to the finding that Ecuador breached the Participation Contracts by
enacting Decree 662.7”

Accordingly, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s findings that Decree 662
breached the Participation Contracts and that Decree 662 and the ensuing measures
breached Article 4 of the Treaty. Likewise, Ecuador requests the annulment of the
Tribunal’s ensuing decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco.?”°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and
failed to state its reasons when concluding that Decree 662 breached the Participation
Contracts and that Decree 662 and the ensuing measures breached Article 4 of the
Treaty.?7”

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco notes that Ecuador claims that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers because it misapplied Ecuadorian law when finding that
the jus variandi doctrine applied to Decree 662, and that such an error of law cannot
constitute a ground for annulment. The Tribunal did apply the Ecuadorian law. Ecuador’s
argument that the “Tribunal erroneously invoked the jus variandi power under Ecuadorian
law” cannot amount to a manifest excess of power since a mere substantive error cannot
qualify as such manifest excess. Furthermore, Ecuador mischaracterizes the Tribunal’s
reasoning. The Applicant claims that the Tribunal “erroneously invoked the jus variandi
power under Ecuadorian law” “in circumstances where the jus variandi principle is plainly
inapplicable” because Law 42 did not unilaterally amend the Participation Contracts. This
assertion is false because the Tribunal did find that Decree 662 effectively amended the
Participation Contracts.?’8

Ecuador’s proposition that the Tribunal also manifestly exceeded its powers when finding
that Decree 662 and ensuing measures violated the FET standard in Article 4 of the Treaty
is doomed to fail because it is based on the false argument that the Tribunal’s holding on
the contract claim is incorrect. In any event, even if the Tribunal’s finding were incorrect,
the Tribunal endeavored to apply the applicable law—the Treaty—when assessing the
Treaty claim, therefore, it could not have manifestly exceeded its powers.?”

As to the failure to state reasons, Perenco notes that the Tribunal’s holding that Decree 662
breached the Participation Contracts and the Treaty is consistent with its finding that Law

25 Memorial on Annulment, { 375; Reply on Annulment, 4 213-218.

26 Memorial on Annulment, {| 342.

27 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 177.

28 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 180-181; Rejoinder on Annulment, 49 121-129.
29 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 183-184.

70

313.

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

42 at 50% did not similarly violate Ecuador’s obligations. Among other contentions,
Perenco further stresses that Ecuador’s challenge to the Tribunal’s finding that Decree 662
was a coercive act that was fundamentally different from Law 42 at 50% is no basis for
annulment.?*°

Accordingly, Perenco contends that Ecuador failed to establish that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers or failed to state reasons when finding that Decree 662 breached the
Participation Contracts and Decree 662, along with ensuing measures, violated Article 4 of
the Treaty.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the
reasons for deciding that Ecuador’s enactment of Decree 662 breached the Participation
Contracts and that the enactment of Decree 662 and the ensuing measures breached the
Treaty.

The Committee will first address Ecuador’s claim regarding the Tribunal’s finding that
Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal erroneously applied
the jus variandi power under Ecuadorian Law considering that the terms of the
Participation Contracts were not modified and therefore said principle was not applicable.
Also, the Tribunal assessed whether Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts
pursuant to a mandate akin to that of an amiable compositeur.”*!

The Committee notes that Ecuador does not claim that the Tribunal failed to apply
Ecuadorian law but that it misapplied Ecuadorian law. Yet, the Committee’s task is limited
to review whether the Tribunal identified the proper body of law and endeavored to apply
it.

In this regard, the Committee observes that in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability,
the Tribunal expressly identified Ecuadorian law as the applicable body of law:

Both Contracts were negotiated within the broader context of Ecuadorian
law. Clause 22.1 (in both Contracts) stated that the Contract was governed
exclusively by Ecuadorian legislation, and the laws in force at the time of
its execution were understood to be incorporated in it. The ‘Legal
Framework’ then set out a non-exhaustive list of ‘legal standards’
applicable to the Contract (including the Hydrocarbons Law, the Law

28° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 187-192.
28! Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 324-327

71

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

324.

amending the Hydrocarbons Law and various regulations pertaining
thereto, as well as certain other general Ecuadorian laws).”*?

Thereafter, to determine whether Ecuador lawfully exercised its jus variandi power when
enacting Decree 662, the Tribunal applied the jus variandi principle, recognized in
Ecuadorian law, and the four-prong test on jus variandi referred to by Ecuador’s
Constitutional Court in its Decision on Law 42.783

Accordingly, the Committee finds that the Tribunal identified the proper law and
endeavored to apply it. Ecuador disagrees with the Tribunal’s interpretation, but the
Committee cannot not substitute itself for the Tribunal and assess whether it correctly or
incorrectly applied the jus variandi principle when examining the lawfulness of Law 42 at
50%.7*+ Thus, it finds that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers when
concluding that the enactment of Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal’s reasoning is so
contradictory, and that some of the reasons provided are so “arbitrary” and “frivolous” that
the reasoning amounts to a failure to state reasons.

The Committee will begin by addressing the alleged “contradictions” in the Tribunal’s
reasoning. Ecuador refers to four alleged contradictions.

First, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal found, on the one hand, that the Participation
Contracts did not preclude Ecuador from introducing new taxes and that Law 42 was a tax
modification, and on the other hand, it concluded that Law 42 at 99% was a “conceptual
modification of the Participation Contracts.”?85 The Committee, however, finds no
contradiction on the Tribunal’s reasoning.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal clearly indicated that Law 42 at
50% did not breach the Participation Contracts:

(i) Law 42 fell within the taxation modification clauses of both Contracts;
(ii) as the party claiming that the law had an impact on the Contracts’
economy, it was incumbent upon Perenco to pursue negotiations with the
new administration at least until they were shown to be futile; and (iii)
Perenco did not do so, preferring instead to adopt a ‘wait and see’ approach
with the new Correa Administration. In these circumstances, the Tribunal
does not find a breach of clauses 11.12 and 11.7 of the two Contracts.**°

 

 

 

282 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 356 (AAE-163).

283 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {{{ 404-406 (AAE-163).

284 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {ff 404-406 (AAE- 163).

285 Memorial on Annulment, { 331; Reply on Annulment, 9¥ 182-184.
286 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 400 (AAE-163).

72

325.

326.

327.

The Tribunal then analyzed whether Law 42 at 99% was also lawful. The Tribunal,
observed that “[t]he situation in relation to the application of Decree 662 to Perenco is
entirely different because of the magnitude of the ‘extraordinary revenues’ claimed by the
State and the demands made around the time of the decree’s promulgation and thereafter
that Perenco migrate to a service contract.”?*” The Tribunal then applied the four-prong
test analyzed by Ecuador’s Constitutional Court in its Decision on Law 42, finding that
Decree 662 did not comply with limbs (i) and (ii):

The Tribunal is of the view that Law 42 at 99% constituted a breach of
contract. Having regard to limb (i), in the Tribunal’s view, there was no
possible reasonable justification for the State to claim 99% of
‘extraordinary revenues’ above the reference price. While the nature of a
‘deviation of power’ is not precisely defined, the writings of the civil law
theorists cited by Dr. Pérez Loose indicate that it concerns the misuse of
power. In the Tribunal’s view, Decree 662 constituted an act of coercion
when viewed within the context of the parties’ contractual relations and
therefore it can be regarded to be a deviation of power. [...]”

Limb (ii) was also violated. In the Tribunal’s view, as of 4 October 2007,
Perenco’s Contracts were participation contracts in name only; Decree 662
completely modified the Contracts’ objective as it was understood under
Ecuadorian law. It follows that Decree 662 cannot be justified as a lawful
exercise of the jus variandi power under Ecuadorian law.

Finally, the Tribunal concluded that:

[I]n moving beyond 50% up to 99% the Respondent breached the
Participation Contracts. Whatever might have transpired in clause 11
negotiations on the impact of Law 42 at 50% on the Contracts’ economy
(had they occurred), moving from 50% to 99%, in the Tribunal’s view,
was no longer an attempt to claim an equitable distribution of the windfall
revenues generated by an unexpected and significant increase in oil prices,
and could not be justified under the applicable Ecuadorian legal standards
for the exercise of the jus variandi power.”**

The Committee is of the view that there is no contradiction between the Tribunal’s finding
that Ecuador did not breach the Participation Contracts by enacting Law 42 at 50%, and its
finding that Decree 662 did violate the Participation Contracts. For the Tribunal, the former
lawfully fitted within the taxation modification clauses, while the latter constituted an act
of coercion and completely modified the Contracts’ objective. Since the Tribunal drew a
clear distinction between Law 42 at 50% and Law 42 at 99%, no contradiction arises
between the Tribunal’s propositions.

287 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 402 (AAE-163).
288 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, ] 411 (AAE-163).

73

328.

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

Second, Ecuador contends that, in respect of Law 42, the Tribunal found, on the one hand,
that Perenco failed to resort to the taxation modification mechanisms in Clauses 11.12 and
11.7 of the Participation Contracts, and on the other hand, it found that Perenco’s failure
to resort to the aforementioned taxation modification mechanism was irrelevant to
assessing whether or not Decree 662 breached the Participation Contracts.?°°

The Committee finds no contradiction between the Tribunal’s findings given that, as
explained above, the Tribunal clearly distinguished Law 42 at 50% and at 99%. As noted
by the Tribunal in relation to the enactment of Decree 662,

[T]his was no longer a question of the State seeking an adjustment of an
otherwise acceptable contractual relationship which, in its view, had been
disrupted by price increases of an unanticipated magnitude. Rather, Law
42 at 99% unilaterally converted the Participation Contracts into de facto
service contracts while the State developed a new model of such contracts
which it demanded the contractor to sign.?”°

Therefore, for the Tribunal given that Law 42 at 99% was no longer an attempt to claim an
equitable distribution of the windfall revenues and, on the contrary, was an act of coercion,
it would have been futile to pursue a negotiation after the enactment of Decree 662.
Accordingly, the Tribunal considered that to analyze whether Decree 662 breached the
Participation Contracts, it was irrelevant whether Perenco had pursued the taxation
modification process for Law 42 at 50%.7?!

Third, Ecuador argues that the Tribunal found, on the one hand, that Decree 662 did not
impair Perenco’s rights of ownership and control over its investment, and on the other
hand, held that Decree 662 modified the terms of the Participation Contracts.79?

The Committee does not see how the Tribunal’s finding that Decree 662 was not an
impairment to Perenco’s ownership and control over its investment contradicts the
conclusion that Decree 662 modified the terms of the Participation Contracts. The
Committee does not find that both propositions cannot stand together, much less that they
cannot be both true. Therefore, the Committee finds no contradiction amounting to a failure
to state reasons.

Fourth, Ecuador states that the Tribunal concluded that “Decree 662 did not amount to a
‘complete or very substantial deprivation of the [...] rights in the totality of the investment,’

289 Memorial on Annulment, 332; Reply on Annulment, 49 185-187.
2 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, { 409 (AAE-163).

2°! Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {f 402-411 (AAE-163).

22 Memorial on Annulment, { 333; Reply on Annulment, 49 188-189.

74

334.

335.

336.

337.

338.

293

which were derived from the Participation Contracts,”?%° and on the other hand, held that
Decree 662 converted the Participation Contracts into de facto service contracts.?°*

Akin to the preceding reasoning, the Committee does not find that the Tribunal’s
propositions cannot stand together or that both cannot be true. The Committee does not see
any contradiction between both premises, much less a contradiction amounting to a failure
to state reasons.

In sum, the Committee considers that there are no contradictions in the Tribunal’s
reasoning that amount to a failure to state reasons, and thereby rejects Ecuador’s
contentions on the matter.

Now, the Committee will address the Tribunal’s alleged “frivolous” or “arbitrary”
reasoning. Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s statements (i) that Decree 662 “was no longer
an attempt to claim an equitable distribution of the windfall revenues,” and (ii) that “the
invocation by Perenco of the tax modification clauses in the Participation Contracts would
have been futile,”?°° are arbitrary. The Committee observes, however, that Ecuador is
actually contesting the quality and sufficiency of the Tribunal’s reasoning. As explained,
in Section III.D.2 above, the Committee is not competent to assess the quality, consistency
or extension of the Tribunal’s reasoning. The Committee already established that the
Tribunal stated its reasons when concluding that Decree 662 breached the Participation
Contracts; therefore, it finds no failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention.

The Committee will turn to address Ecuador’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers and failed to state its reasons when deciding that Decree 662 and the ensuing
measures breached the Treaty.

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador alleges that the Tribunal “(i)
erroneously invoked, and limited its assessment of the alleged contractual breach to, the
jus variandi power under Ecuadorian law even though such principle was plainly
inapplicable in the circumstances, thereby (ii) assessing whether Decree 662 breached the
Participation Contracts pursuant to a mandate akin to that of an amiable compositeur or ex

aequo et bono.”?""

Memorial on Annulment, { 334.

254 Memorial on Annulment, {| 334; Reply on Annulment, {J 190-191.

295

Memorial on Annulment, { 336.

296 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 339.

297 Memorial on Annulment, 347.

75

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.

The Committee finds that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers when deciding
that Decree 662 breached the Treaty. The Tribunal identified the proper law—the Treaty—
and endeavored to apply such law.

Between paragraphs 556 and 564, the Tribunal analyzed the scope and contours of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment provided in Article 4 of the Treaty. Thereafter, the
Tribunal proceeded to analyze the facts of the case, including the enactment of Decree 662,
in the light of such standard. After conducting its analysis, the Tribunal concluded that “(i)
Law 42’s enactment did not breach Article 4; (ii) moving beyond 50% to 99% with the
application of Decree 662 to Perenco as well as the ensuing measures [...] breached Article
4.”?°8 Accordingly, to assess whether the Tribunal correctly or incorrectly interpreted or
applied Article 4 of the Treaty is not on the Committee. Thus, it concludes that the Tribunal
did not manifestly exceed its powers when finding that Decree 662 and the ensuing
measures breached Article 4 of the Treaty.

As regards the failure to state reasons, Ecuador argues that “the Tribunal’s holding that ‘the
application of Decree 662 to Perenco as well as the ensuing measures’ breached Article 4
of the Treaty is based on contradictory and arbitrary reasoning.”?°°

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s reasoning is based on a contradiction because it
concluded, on the one hand, that Perenco had failed to resort to the tax modification clauses
under the Participation Contracts in respect of Law 42, and, on the other hand, it failed to
apply this finding to its assessment of whether Decree 662 breached the Treaty.*”° For the
same reasons explained in paragraphs 327, 328 and 329 supra, the Committee finds no
contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning, much less a contradiction that amounts to a
failure to state reasons.

Ecuador further argues that the Tribunal’s conclusion that the invocation by Perenco of the
tax modification clauses would have been futile is unsupported and thereby the Tribunal’s
finding that Decree 662 breached the Treaty is arbitrary. The Committee observes,
however, that Ecuador’s claim is one of substance: it is based on the quality of the
Tribunal’s reasoning. The fact that Ecuador does not agree with the Tribunal’s finding does
not mean that the Tribunal did not state the reasons for concluding that invoking the tax
modification clauses would have been futile after Decree 662. In fact, the Tribunal
explained that the enactment of Decree 662 was an act of coercion, not an attempt to claim
an equitable distribution of the windfall revenues, and therefore invoking the tax

28 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 627 (AAE-163).
299 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 350.

3 Memorial on Annulment, { 351

76

344.

345.

346.

347.

modification clauses would have been futile. Thus, the Committee finds that the ground set
out in Article 52(1)(e) is not met.

Based on the foregoing the Committee concludes that the Tribunal neither manifestly
exceeded its powers nor failed to state its reasons when deciding that Decree 662 breached
the Participation Contracts and that the enactment of Decree 662 and the ensuing measures
breached Article 4 of the Treaty.

(4) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Ecuador’s declaration of caducidad
breached the Block 21 Participation Contract and expropriated Perenco’s
contractual rights

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador argues that the Tribunal’s decision that the declaration of caducidad effected an
expropriation and breached the Block 21 Contract constitutes a manifest excess of powers
and a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.*°!

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal’s holding that
Ecuador’s declaration of caducidad breached both the Block 21 Participation Contract and
the Treaty is based on a flagrant misapplication of Ecuadorian law. According to Ecuador,
“it was not for the Tribunal to place itself in the shoes of the Ministry and, with the benefit
of hindsight, hypothesize that, if it had been the Ministry, it could, and would have, waited
before declaring caducidad. Rather, having found that the Ministry (i) was lawfully entitled
to declare caducidad and (ii) acted within the bounds of that discretion, the Tribunal was
neither required nor permitted, under Ecuadorian law, to review the Ministry’s exercise of
its lawful discretion.”* The error committed by the Tribunal in interpreting Ecuadorian
law violates the basic distinction between private and public law. Such grave error amounts
to a non-application of Ecuadorian law.7°?

As to the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador observes that the
Tribunal found that Ecuador’s declaration of caducidad breached both the Treaty and the
Participation Contracts without having heard either Party on this topic and without ever
giving the Parties the opportunity to address the Tribunal on the scope or exercise of the
Ministry’s discretion to declare caducidad under Article 74 of the Hydrocarbons Law. In
so doing, the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.**

3°! Memorial on Annulment, { 358.

302

303

Memorial on Annulment, { 366.

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 368.

35 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 359-363.

77

348.

349.

350.

351.

352.

305

Ecuador requests that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decisions to (i) uphold Perenco’s
claim of breach of the Block 21 Contract as a result of the declaration of caducidad, and
(ii) uphold Perenco’s claim that the declaration of caducidad constituted a breach of Article
6 of the Treaty. Likewise, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s ensuing
decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar as it includes
Perenco’s breach of the Block 21 Contract claim and Perenco’s breach of Article 6 of the
Treaty claim.7°°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco claims that the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers, nor seriously
departed from a fundamental rule of procedure, when it found that Ecuador’s unilateral
termination of Perenco’s contractual rights by declaring caducidad breached the Block 21
Participation Contract and expropriated Perenco in violation of the Treaty.*°°

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco stresses that the Tribunal evidently
endeavored to apply the Ecuadorian Hydrocarbons Law to conclude that Ecuador had the
discretion, but not the obligation, to declare caducidad. Likewise, the Tribunal endeavored
to apply the Treaty when holding that Ecuador had expropriated Perenco’s rights.
Ecuador’s disagreement with the substance of the conclusion is no basis to find an
annullable error.*°7

As to the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Perenco notes that
although Ecuador asserts that it did not have an opportunity to address the Tribunal’s
holding that the Ministry’s power to declare caducidad under Ecuadorian law was
discretionary, the Tribunal’s decision was based on Ecuador’s own interpretation of the
applicable law and both Parties argued this issue throughout the arbitration. Also, Perenco
states that the Tribunal may conduct its own analysis and “is not limited by the arguments
made by the parties when its interpretation, unlikely to be surprising to either party, is
drawn from the terms of the provision which have been discussed by the parties.”*°* Thus,
Ecuador’s claim is factually incorrect and legally insufficient to establish a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.*”

Accordingly, Ecuador failed to establish that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
and seriously violated a fundamental rule of procedure when it found that caducidad

Memorial on Annulment, { 369.

306 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 193.

307 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 195-196; Rejoinder on Annulment, 49 145-151.
308 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 157.

3 Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 152-158.

78

353.

354.

355.

356.

breached the Block 21 Participation Contract and expropriated Perenco’s rights in violation
of Article 4 of the Treaty.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and seriously departed
from a fundamental rule of procedure when finding that that Ecuador’s unilateral
termination of Perenco’s contractual rights by declaring caducidad breached the Block 21
Participation Contract and expropriated Perenco in violation of the Treaty.

As regards the manifest excess of powers, the Committee observes that Ecuador does not
contest that the Tribunal properly identified the applicable law but considers that the
Tribunal misapplied such law. As explained in Section III.B.2 above, a misapplication of
the proper law, regardless of how “erroneous” it could be, is not a basis for annulment
under Article 52(1)(b).

The Committee observes from the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability that the Tribunal
identified the proper law, that is the Hydrocarbons Law and the Treaty, and endeavored to
apply it. In paragraph 706 of said decision, the Tribunal expressly referred to the
Hydrocarbons Law and presents its interpretation thereof:

While it accepts that the State had the right to intervene and operate the
blocks, the Tribunal does not accept that the State was bound to bring the
Claimant’s contracts to an end by means of a caducidad declaration. The
Tribunal notes in this regard that under Chapter IX of the Hydrocarbons
Law, Article 74, the Ministry ‘may declare the caducidad of contracts, if
the contractor’ engages in any of thirteen different types of acts including
suspending operations ‘without cause justifying it, as determined by
PETROECUADOR.”’ The Tribunal attaches particular importance to the
fact that the opening phrase of Article 74 is expressed in permissive rather
than mandatory terms. That is, the Ministry is empowered to declare the
caducity of contracts in any of the specified circumstances, but it is not
obliged to do so.3"”

The Tribunal then explains why, under its interpretation of the Hydrocarbons Law, the
caducidad declaration breached Article 6 of the Treaty and the Block 21 Contract:

The Tribunal accepts Ecuador’s submission that this was not done without
fair warning to the Consortium. The Ministry and Petroecuador wrote to
the Consortium on four occasions requesting it to resume operations and
warned that a failure to do so could lead to the termination of their
Contracts.

But in all the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal considers that the
Ministry should have stayed its hand and awaited the outcome of this

3! Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 706 (AAE-163).

79

357.

358.

359.

arbitration. It was not contrary to Article 6 for Ecuador to have continued
to operate the oilfields in the face of the Claimant’s refusal to return until
the coactiva matter had been addressed to its satisfaction. But the decision
to initiate caducity proceedings and thereby bring Perenco’s contractual
rights to an end during the midst of this arbitration leads the Tribunal to
find a breach of Article 6.[...]

[T]he Ministry had the discretion not to commence caducidad proceedings
and it is the Tribunal’s judgment that this discretion should have been
exercised in favour of not pursuing caducidad while the Parties’ respective
rights and obligations were being determined in this proceeding.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that as of the date of caducidad having
been declared and the Consortium’s interests were finally brought to an
end, the Respondent effected an expropriation of Perenco’s contractual
rights contrary to Article 6 of the Treaty. This is the date of the
expropriation; for the reasons given above, the Tribunal rejects the
creeping expropriation argument advanced by Perenco.

This declaration of caducity was for the same reason equally a breach of
the Block 21 Contract because, having occupied the blocks in order to
safeguard the oilfields, it was unnecessary for the Ministry to then bring
the Contract to an end.*!!

Considering that the Tribunal properly identified the applicable law and endeavored to
apply it, and that what Ecuador really pleads is a disagreement with the interpretation of
the Tribunal, the Committee finds no manifest excess of the powers of the Tribunal.

As regards the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador argues that
the Tribunal breached the Applicant’s right to be heard by holding that the caducidad
declaration breached the Block 21 Participation Contract and the Treaty on the basis of a
proposition that “neither Party had advanced or had the opportunity to comment upon.”?!?
Yet, the Committee considers that the Tribunal did not depart from the Parties’ right to be
heard.

As a starter, the Committee observes that Ecuador does not contest that both Parties had
the opportunity to present their case on the interpretation and application of the
Hydrocarbons Law, particularly on Article 74 thereof. Ecuador’s claim is based on the
allegation that the Tribunal departed from the Parties’ submissions and adopted its own
interpretation of the law. In this regard, the Committee finds that, although the Tribunal’s
interpretation of the Hydrocarbons Law was not expressly advanced by either Party, the
discretion of the Ministry to declare caducidad was referred to by the Legal Expert

3! Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {]] 707-708, 710 (AAE-163).
5!2 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 359.

80

360.

361.

362.

363.

364.

365.

presented by Ecuador, Mr. Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade,*"* the Tribunal did not depart from
the legal framework argued during the arbitration.

The Tribunal’s conclusion was not based on a novel legal framework, it was based on the
interpretation and application of the Hydrocarbons Law, amply debated by the Parties. As
noted in Section III.C.2 above, as long as the Tribunal’s analysis is framed within the legal
framework argued during the arbitration, the Tribunal may conduct its own analysis of the
evidence available in the record and reach a different conclusion if it is not satisfied with
the Parties’ interpretation of the applicable law. Accordingly, the Committee finds that the
Tribunal did not breach Ecuador’s right to be heard when deciding that the declaration of
caducidad breached the Treaty and Block 21 Contract.

In sum, the Committee concludes that by finding that the caducidad declaration breached
both the Treaty and Block 21 Contract, the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its
powers, nor seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON DAMAGES

Before assessing each of the specific grounds advanced by Ecuador on the Tribunal’s
findings on damages, the Committee considers necessary to briefly refer to an issue debated
by the Parties in their written and oral pleadings: the scope and contours of the arbitral
Tribunal’s discretion when calculating damages in an ICSID arbitration.

Ad hoc committees have consistently recognized that tribunals have a considerable measure
of discretion in deciding issues of quantum. *!*

As noted by the Rumeli ad hoc committee:

[T]he tribunal must be satisfied that the claimant has suffered some
damage under the relevant head as a result of the respondent’s breach. But
once it is satisfied of this, the determination of the precise amount of this
damage is a matter for the tribunal’s informed estimation in the light of all
the evidence available to it.*!5

As to the mathematical calculations undertaken by a tribunal, the Rumeli ad hoc committee
further stated that:

35 Fourth Expert Report of Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade, July 26, 2012, { 20 (CEA-084).

344 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Annulment, November 2, 2015, 412, 417 (AALA-061); Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, { 91 (AALA-046),; UAB E ENERGIJA
(LITHUANIA) v. Republic of Latvia, \CISD Case No. ARB/12/33, Decision on Annulment, April 8, 2020 (AALA-110).

35 Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/16 (Annulment), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010, 9] 144-145, and 147 (AALA-086).

81

366.

367.

368.

The Committee well understands the grounds for the Applicant on
Annulment’s objection in this regard. It is highly desirable that tribunals
should minimise to the greatest extent possible the element of estimation
in their quantification of damages and maximise the specifics of the
ratiocination explaining how the ultimate figure was arrived at. But,
nevertheless, the Committee does not consider that the award of damages
is one which it ought to annul, since the Tribunal did not fail to give
reasons for its award of damages. On the contrary, the Tribunal examined
the position as to damages with considerable care and set out the reasons
for its award in terms appropriate to the circumstances of the case and the
evidence available to it.*’°

Likewise, in regard to the allocation of interests, the Vivendi v. Argentina ad hoc committee
stressed that “the allocation of interest, like the evaluation of damages, falls within the
discretionary power of the Tribunal in the light of all relevant circumstances of the case.”?!7

The Committee shares the point of view of the above mentioned ad hoc committees.
Arbitral tribunals have a margin of discretion to estimate the quantification of the damages,
including the allocation of interest. To meet the duty of stating the reasons for its decisions,
an arbitral tribunal need not reveal or explain each mathematical calculation that supports
its conclusions. However, tribunals must show the premises leading to their conclusion.

() Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the Parties would have agreed to
Law 42 being stabilized at 33% as of October 5, 2008

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador notes that in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal dismissed
Perenco’s claims regarding Law 42, but upheld its claims regarding Decree 662. The
Tribunal concluded that Law 42 fell within the scope of the Participation Contracts’ clauses
for the negotiation of an adjustment factor if new taxation measures affected the economy
of the contracts (the “Renegotiation Clauses”). The Tribunal concluded that if Perenco
believed that a modification to the tax system had an impact on the economy of the
Participation Contracts, it should have raised the issue and pursued negotiation with
Ecuador to agree on a correction factor for absorbing that impact—not any general increase
in Perenco’s tax burden.*!* Perenco, however, did not pursue the negotiation process under
the Renegotiation Clauses and therefore the Tribunal found no breach of the Participation

M6 Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/16 (Annulment), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010, { 178 (AALA-086).

7 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3 (formerly
Compania de Aguas del Aconquija, S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic), Decision on Annulment,
August 10, 2010, {256 (AALA-070).

38 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 372-373.

82

369.

370.

371.

372.

Contracts. Further, the Tribunal held that increasing the windfall tax rate to 99% by
enacting Decree 662 constituted a breach of the Participation Contracts as it “was no longer
an attempt to claim an equitable distribution of the windfall revenues generated by an
unexpected and significant increase in oil prices, and could not be justified under the
applicable Ecuadorian legal standards for the exercise of the jus variandi power.”?!?
Likewise, it found that Decree 662 constituted a breach to Article 4 of the Treaty.

In the Award, the Tribunal calculated the quantum of the damages to Perenco resulting
from Decree 662 under the premise that “after Decree 662 entered into effect, Perenco
would have been prompted to trigger negotiations and the Parties would have agreed to
Law 42 being stabilised at 33% starting 5 October 2008, to be applied prospectively, for
both contracts.”*”° In so doing, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, failed to state
the reasons upon which its findings were based, and seriously departed from a fundamental
rule of procedure.*?!

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador claims that in deciding that Law 42’s 50%
rate would have been stabilized at 33%, the Tribunal awarded Perenco damages for what
the Tribunal itself had previously held to be a lawful measure—the enactment of Law 42—
which complied with the Participation Contracts and the Treaty.*? Ecuador further argues
that in concluding that the Parties would have agreed to stabilize Law 42 at 33%—below
Law 42’s 50%—, the Tribunal carried out an irrational assessment of the evidence. The
Tribunal also substituted itself for the Parties and proceeded to divine what the outcome of
their negotiations would have been and acted ex aequo et bono.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that in deciding that the Parties would
have agreed to stabilize Law 42 at 33% as of October 5, 2008, the Tribunal: i) contradicted
its own reasoning in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability in such a way that it failed
to state any reasons, and ii) failed to state the reasons for such finding.*?*

First, the Tribunal’s finding that “the Parties would have agreed to Law 42 being stabilized
at 33% starting 5 October 2008, to be applied prospectively, for both contracts” contradicts
three of the Tribunal’s findings in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability now vested
with res judicata effect:**4 (1) that “no damages can flow for Law 42 dues at 50%;”**> 2)
that it was incumbent upon Perenco to pursue negotiations with Ecuador at least until they

3!9 Memorial on Annulment, 375.
520 Memorial on Annulment, {| 377.

2! Memorial on Annulment, {| 377.

322

Memorial on Annulment, { 379.

3 Memorial on Annulment, 395.
34 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 396.

5 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 397.

83

373.

374.

375.

376.

377.

were shown to be futile and Perenco did not do so;”*?6

and 3) that it refused to substitute
itself to the Parties and divine the outcome of the negotiations, as “it would be wholly
speculative for the Tribunal to try to estimate what the parties would have done[;]”
moreover, when it lacked Perenco’s analysis demonstrating Law 42’s impact on the
Contracts, and the Parties’ determination that the new or modified tax have had an impact
on the economy of the Contracts.*?”

Second, the Tribunal did not explain why it concluded that the Parties would have agreed
to the stabilization of Law 42 at 33%. Also, by deciding that the Parties would have
stabilized the effects of Law 42 at 33%, the Tribunal implicitly decided that Law 42
affected the economy of the Contracts, but it gave no reasons for this finding. Also, the
Tribunal gave no explanation as to why Ecuador would accept a windfall tax rate below
50%,°** considering that in the new contracts they were negotiating, the Parties had agreed
to increase the rate of the windfall tax from 50% to 70% under the Ley de Equidad
Tributaria. Finally, there is nothing in the Award explaining why the 33% stabilized
windfall tax rate would apply starting on October 5, 2008 as opposed to any other date.*”°
As to the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador states that by
concluding “‘sua sponte to adopt a stabilized rate of 33% for the windfall tax enacted by
Law 42, the Tribunal did not afford the Parties an opportunity to comment upon such rate.
In so doing, the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.”*°°

Accordingly, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to order Ecuador
to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar as the calculation of such amount is based on
the application of Law 42 at 33% as of October 5, 2008.

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal’s holding that by deciding that the
Parties would have agreed to stabilize Law 42 at 33%, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers, failed to state the reasons for its decision, and seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure.*?!

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Perenco argues that, in quantifying damages, the
Tribunal clearly had the power to determine what would have occurred in the ‘but for’

26 Memorial on Annulment, { 398.
%27 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 399-404.
¥8 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 405-412.
9 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 413-416
30 Memorial on Annulment, { 413.

33! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 203

84

378.

379.

380.

381.

3x2

world had Ecuador not breached the Treaty and Contracts.*** Even under Ecuador’s diluted
annulment standard, “by determining that the Parties would have agreed to Law 42 at 33%,
the Tribunal simply made a factual finding about what would have occurred, on the balance
of probabilities, if Ecuador had complied with its obligations under the Treaty and
Contracts to ‘absorb the increase [...] in the tax burden.’”*? In so doing, the Tribunal
endeavored to apply international law to fully compensate Perenco.

Perenco further states that the Tribunal did not reopen its previous finding that Perenco did
not sufficiently press its rights under the Contracts’ absorption clauses to offset Law 42 at
50%.**4 Far from re-opening its Liability Decision or granting Perenco “damages for a
lawful measure,” the Tribunal’s findings reflected the fact that Perenco had valuable
absorption rights under the Contracts and that Perenco would have exercised those rights
but for Decree 662.7%

While Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s factual findings are annullable because it carried
out an irrational assessment of the evidence or acted ex aequo et bono,**® Perenco recalls
that while the Tribunal found that Perenco initially did not “test” the clauses, it also found
that the clauses were not adequately pursued such as to be shown to have been futile until
the application of Decree 662 in 2007.

Similarly, the Tribunal did not “rewrite the facts” by allegedly disregarding that the Parties
“had agreed to increase the rate of the windfall tax from 50% (under Law 42) to 70% (under
the Ley de Equidad Tributaria).” For Perenco, this is a misleading comparison because the
70% rate, expressed in an unconsummated agreement, was based on a much higher
reference price of US$42.50/barrel. As Perenco demonstrated with respect to the Block 7
extension damages it sought, “it was roughly equivalent economically (at least under
certain price assumptions) to Law 42 with its original reference price at 37.50%.”>*”
Furthermore, the Tribunal held that this agreement was negotiated under unlawful
conditions of duress.***

Accordingly, the Tribunal’s conclusion that in the ‘but for’ world the Parties would have
offset Law 42 to 33% was a tenable one, and it certainly was not so “egregious” and
“4rrational” that it amounted to a manifest excess of powers.** It is not for the Committee
to second-guess whether the Tribunal correctly ascertained the facts or whether it correctly

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 205; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 160.

333 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 161

34 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 162.

335 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 209.
36 Reply on Annulment, {ff 305-312.

337 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {211

338 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {211

339 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 167.

85

382.

383.

384.

385.

386.

appreciated the evidence, in particular given that a tribunal has an especially wide margin
of discretion in fact-finding when considering damages.

As regards the failure to state reasons, Perenco objects to Ecuador’s contention that the
Tribunal’s findings regarding Law 42 at 33% “directly contradict” and “cancel out” three
of the Tribunal’s prior findings in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability. According to
Perenco, the Tribunal’s reasons would have to be so genuinely contradictory that they
amount to a total absence of reasons, which is an extremely high bar that occurs in
extremely rare cases and cannot be lightly assumed.*! Ecuador did not meet this extremely
high bar.

First, there is no contradiction between the Tribunal’s liability findings on Law 42 at 50%
and its decision to grant damages to Perenco under Decree 662. While the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Liability “precludes awarding damages for Law 42’s effect prior to Decree
662,” beyond Decree 662 “the Tribunal did not pass on what might be considered in the
damages phase with respect to the possible exercise of the tax modification clauses.”*4?
According to Perenco, that was a question for the Tribunal to answer based on the Parties’
evidence and submissions on quantum, as it did.

Second, there is no contradiction between the finding that Perenco did not sufficiently test
the absorption clauses prior to the enactment of Decree 662, and the finding that it would
have relied on the rights it had under those clauses after Decree 662.°“7

Third, there is no contradiction between the Tribunal declining to determine what
absorption rate the Parties would have agreed to under Law 42 at 50%, and the Tribunal
finding that Perenco did prove futility after Decree 662 and that “the evidence as whole”
showed that ‘but for’ that futility, the Parties would have agreed to a 33% rate. Perenco
notes that “the ‘evidence as whole’ at the damages phase encompassed multiple additional
written briefs, witness statements, expert reports, and two oral hearings discussing
precisely what would have occurred but for Ecuador’s unlawful conduct.”*4+4

Furthermore, Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal failed to state any reasons for its finding
that the stabilized rate would have been 33% as of October 2008 ignores the Award.
Perenco contends that the Tribunal provided its reasons in paragraphs 366-387, 394-411,

54° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 212

4! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 214.

342

343

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 215; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 169.

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 216; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 169.

4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 217; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 169.

86

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

392.

345

592, 603-627, 686 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, and 127-146, 215, 385 of
the Award.*4°

As regards the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Perenco claims that
Ecuador is wrong that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
because it adopted a specific absorption rate that neither Party advanced: Law 42 at 33%.
Perenco observes that ICSID arbitration is not “baseball” arbitration and the right to be
heard does not constrain tribunals to adopt the arguments of either one party or another.
Perenco further argues that the right to be heard requires that Ecuador have a reasonable
opportunity to present its case and Ecuador admits that it had such an opportunity.*4°

Consequently, the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers, fail to state reasons, or
seriously depart from a fundamental rule of procedure in finding that the Parties would
have agreed to Law 42 at 33%.74”

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that in deciding that Law 42’s 50% rate would have been stabilized at 33%,
the Tribunal awarded Perenco damages for what the Tribunal itself had previously held to
be a lawful measure—the enactment of Law 42—which complied with the Participation
Contracts and the Treaty, therefore manifestly exceeding its powers. Ecuador further
argues that in concluding that the Parties would have agreed to stabilize Law 42 at 33%—
below Law 42’s 50%—, the Tribunal carried out an irrational assessment of the evidence
and substituted itself for the Parties by proceeding to divine what the outcome of their
negotiations would have been and acted ex aequo et bono.

Ecuador also considers that in deciding that the Parties would have agreed to stabilize Law
42 at 33% as of October 5, 2008, the Tribunal not only contradicted its own reasoning in
the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability in such a way that it failed to state any reasons,
but also failed to state the reasons for such finding.

Finally, according to Ecuador, the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
by concluding sua sponte to adopt a stabilized rate of 33% for the windfall tax enacted by
Law 42 without affording the Parties an opportunity to comment on such rate.

The Committee stresses that the Award cannot be read in isolation. A review in context
with other Decisions of the Tribunal incorporated in the Award—including the Decision
on Jurisdiction and Liability—is required to determine whether the grounds for annulment

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 218; Tr., Day 1 January 12, 2021, Perenco’s Opening Statement, p. 47.

46 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 219; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 170.

7 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 220; Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 173.

87

393.

394.

395.

396.

invoked by Ecuador should stand. Such review in context requires a review of the timing,
elements, and scenarios analyzed by the Tribunal in each instance.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal arrives, inter alia, at the following
conclusions in relation to the Participation Contracts’ stabilization clauses and Law 42:

Clauses 11.7 and 11.12 of the Participation Contracts did not preclude the State from
introducing new taxes or modifying existing ones, but in the event that measures were
introduced that had “consequences for the economy of” the Contract, the obligation arose
to negotiate a “correction factor” that would absorb the increase or decrease in the tax
burden.*#8 “(T]he predicate for the introduction of any correction factor was the
demonstration (and subsequent agreement of the parties) that the new or modified tax had
‘consequences for the economy’ of the contract; a new or modified tax that did not have
such consequences would not require a correction factor.”*#? According to the Tribunal,
Clause 11 did not stipulate how the correction factor would be calculated; however, it did
stipulate the ultimate result, namely, “a change in the parties’ respective participations
‘which absorbs the increase or decrease in the tax burden.’ The process envisaged was one
of the negotiation in good faith of a mutually agreeable offset that would result in an
amended contract.”3*°

As a taxation measure, Law 42 modified the tax regime governing the Participation
Contracts with the result that Perenco was entitled to require Petroecuador to engage in
negotiations to determine the effects of Law 42 on the economy of the Participation
Contracts and to arrive at a consequent correction factor (in the event the Parties agreed
that the tax affected the economy of the Contract).*>!

It was incumbent upon Perenco to pursue negotiations with the new administration until
they were shown to be futile. Yet, Perenco did not do so although it was the Party claiming
that Law 42 had an impact on the Participation Contracts’ economy.**? The Tribunal
acknowledged that any such negotiations would have been challenging given that: (i)
Ecuador would have advanced that Law 42 did not have an impact on the economy of the
contracts; (ii) the Parties would have debated the meaning of “economy of the contract”;
(iii) had Perenco submitted its study on its financial performance prior to and after Law
42—which it did not submit at the time—, Petroecuador would have found that Perenco
had performed well; and (iv) all the evidence that has been presented by both Parties in the
Underlying Arbitration (pricing and profitability expectations at the time of the Contracts’

+48 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 362 (AAE-163).
9 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 365 (AAE-163).
359 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 365 (AAE-163).
35! Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {| 378 (AAE-163).
352 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, | 400 (AAE-163).

88

397.

398.

399.

400.

401.

402.

making, general industry expectations of returns on investment, etc.) would have been
discussed. Nonetheless, the complexity of such negotiation does not support a finding of
futility.°°

The Tribunal did not consider it necessary or appropriate in the circumstances*™ to pursue
the issue of whether or not Law 42 at 50% affected the economy of the Participation
Contracts. If that was the case, the Tribunal was of the view that it was incumbent to
Perenco to pursue the procedure set out in Clauses 11.12 of the Block 7 Contract and 11.7
of Block 21.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability the Tribunal stated three additional reasons
for declining to divine what would have happened in the negotiation should Perenco had
invoked Clause 11 under Law 42 at 50%:

First, the clause required the Parties to determine whether Law 42 had an impact on the
contract’s economy, and if so, to calculate an adjustment to absorb that impact. However,
the precise means of correction could only be determined through negotiations that arrived
at a mutually agreeable outcome (or, if such negotiations foundered, thereafter by a tribunal
armed with all of the relevant documentation produced by both Parties during the
negotiations).**>

Second, with the passage of time and the absence of critical contemporaneous data, it
would be wholly speculative for the Tribunal to try to estimate what the Parties would have
done.

Third, Perenco did not produce to the Tribunal the contemporaneous analysis that Perenco
prepared to demonstrate the impact of Law 42 on the Participation Contracts.

As regards Decree 662, the Tribunal decided that in moving beyond 50% up to 99% the
Respondent breached the Participation Contracts. In the Tribunal’s view, whatever might
have transpired in Clause 11 negotiations on the impact of Law 42 at 50% on the economy
of the Participation Contract (had they occurred), moving from 50% to 99% was no longer
an attempt to claim an equitable distribution of the windfall revenues generated by an
unexpected and significant increase in oil prices, and could not be justified under the
applicable Ecuadorian legal standards for the exercise of the jus variandi power. The
Tribunal also concluded that Decree 662 was intended to prompt negotiations with oil

553 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {| 393 (AAE-163).

354 The circumstances at the time period being evaluated in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability did not include Decree 662
(which had not been issued) and did not include caducidad and the breach resulting from the abrupt termination of the negotiations.

355 In the view of the Committee this understanding in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability is crucial for the Tribunal’s
decision in the Award.

89

403.

404.

405.

406.

407.

companies, and unilaterally converted the Participation Contracts into de facto service
contracts while the State developed a new model for such contracts.**°

In the Award, the Tribunal proceeded to value the damages caused by Ecuador’s breaches.
For that purpose, the Tribunal decided to take different valuation dates for Decree 662 and
caducidad.**’ For the first breach (Decree 662), the Tribunal built a “but for” scenario
between October 4, 2007 to July 20, 2010.3>8 For the second breach (caducidad), the
Tribunal took an ex-ante approach.

As regards a “hypothetical tax threshold” between 50% and 99%, the Tribunal considered
that Brattle did not explain why such threshold was appropriate when the Tribunal’s task
was to eliminate Decree 662 in its entirety.*°° By rejecting the aforementioned threshold
and taking 50% as a departing point of the negotiation envisaged in the “but for” scenario,
the Tribunal eliminated Decree 662.

With respect to the question on whether Law 42 would have been completely absorbed,
the Tribunal concluded that, consistent with its finding in its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability, no damages can flow prior to the issuance of Decree 662, that is, before October
4, 2007.3

On the above point the Tribunal stated in the Award that in its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability it “did not pass on what might be considered in the damages phase with respect
to the possible exercise of the tax modification clauses (except to note how the contract’s
provisions were expected to operate).”*°! Therefore, at the time of its Decision on
Jurisdiction and Liability, the Tribunal decided not to engage in determining a “but for”
scenario for a damage quantification and reserved that decision for the damages phase of
the arbitration.

In the “but for scenario” for the damages phase in the Award, the Tribunal concluded that
if Perenco exercised its contractual rights in the ‘but for’ scenario, Ecuador would have
responded in good faith by negotiating an absorption of the additional tax burden. After
considering the evidence, the Tribunal found that in the ‘but for’ scenario for the period
after Decree 662 came into effect, Perenco would have sought an offset. But having regard
to the evidence as whole, the Tribunal was not convinced that Perenco would have sought
the complete elimination of Law 42 (which would result in a 0% rate). Rather, it would

356 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {ff 409-411. (AAE-163).
357 Award, 177 (AAE-031).

358 Award, 111 (AAE-031).

389 Award, 93 (AAE-031).

360 Award, {| 140 (AAE-031).

361 Award, { 140 (AAE-031).

90

408.

409.

410.

411.

412.

have sought to undo the effect of Decree 662 and, to the extent reasonably possible, Law
42.

At paragraph 143 of the Award, the Tribunal explains the reasons why it considers that in
the ‘but for’ world, Perenco would have most likely sought a negotiation under the tax
modification clauses that would have reduced the State’s take of the extraordinary
revenues, whilst maximizing the company’s chances of its obtaining an extension of its
operatorship of Block 7. Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded that Perenco’s interests in
the two Contracts would have been adjusted to Law 42 at 33% as of October 5, 2008
through the expiration of the Participation Contracts (August 2010).

Finally, to arrive at the NPV of the DCF that would have been derived from Blocks 7 and
21, the Tribunal devised the “harmonised model,” i.e., the “Model” in the present
annulment proceedings. As such, the Tribunal forecasted the production in both Blocks in
the two periods already mentioned: 1) between October 4, 2007 and July 20, 2010 (for the
first breach under the “but for” scenario, i.e. with Law 42 at 33% after October 5, 20087);
and (ii) after caducidad (on an ex ante basis).

The Tribunal noted that it used Perenco’s contemporaneous NPV calculations of the impact
of Law 42 at 50% and 99% as a check of its assessment. These calculations were made
after Decree 662 was issued. For the Tribunal, it was good evidence of the Block’s
estimated value with Law 42 at 50% and 99% at the time of the first breach.*

The above review of the analysis of the Tribunal in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability and the Award leads the Committee to conclude that, for the reasons below, the
grounds for annulment invoked by Ecuador in connection with the stabilization of Law 42
and 33% do not stand.

In relation to the manifest excess of powers ground, it was invoked by Ecuador in two
instances, first, arguing that in deciding that Law 42’s 50% rate would have been stabilized
at 33%, the Tribunal awarded Perenco damages for what the Tribunal itself had previously
held to be a lawful measure. Second, that in concluding that the Parties would have agreed
to stabilize Law 42 at 33%—below Law 42’s 50%—, the Tribunal carried out an irrational
assessment of the evidence and substituted itself for the Parties by proceeding to divine
what the outcome of their negotiations would have been and acted ex aequo et bono.

362 From the Award it may be inferred that the Tribunal’s decision to fix October 5, 2008 as the date after which Law 42 applied at
33% is related to the fact that the last negotiations conducted by the Parties (in which they were apparently negotiating in good
faith until before the abrupt termination of the negotiations, which termination the Tribunal considers as a breach) date to October

2008.

363 Award, ff 119, 123 (AAE-031).

91

413.

414,

Als.

416.

As explained above, regarding the first issue, the scenarios that the Tribunal analyzed in
the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability and the Award were different and what the
Tribunal “declined to divine” in each scenario as regards the negotiations between the
Parties are also different. What the Tribunal did in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability was to indicate that it would not make an assessment for purposes of liability in
the abstract, which it did not, but did not indicate or suggest that it would not make such
assessment during the damages phase for purposes of calculating the damages.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability and for purposes of liability before Decree
662 (which had not been issued at the time), the Tribunal only declined to guess what
would have happened had Perenco triggered Clause 11 under Law 42 at 50%. In the Award,
in turn, the Tribunal determined what would have happened in the “but for world”, i.e., in
a scenario where Decree 662 had been issued, where there was a change in the policies of
Ecuador as regards participation contracts, where the negotiations had commenced and
were abruptly terminated and where caducidad had been declared. Therefore, the
Committee sees no contradiction between the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability and
the Award, as claimed by Ecuador, and no manifest excess of power.

In relation to the second issue, in the view of the Committee, the finding by the Tribunal
in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability that Law 42 at 50% was lawful and did not
constitute a breach to the Participation Contracts or the Treaty, did not prevent the Tribunal
from analyzing, as it did, what would be the quantum of the damages emerging from the
issuance of Decree 662. In other words, under the Tribunal’s reasoning read in context, the
fact that Law 42 at 50% was declared lawful by the Tribunal under the Treaty or the
Participation Contracts did not prevent the Tribunal from considering that in a negotiation
in good faith under the “but for scenario”, excluding Decree 662 and assuming the Parties
would have negotiated in good faith on a rate that was acceptable to both and that was not
necessarily 50%.

In sum, the “but for world” of the Tribunal is one in which: it eliminated the disputed
measure Decree 662 and the frustrated negotiation from the equation; assumed therefore
that the departing point was a negotiation where Ecuador would have sought no offset
despite the 50% provided for in Law 42 (i.e., charge the 50% and not to absorb any impact),
and Perenco would have sought an offset (i.e., for Ecuador to assume all the impact as if
the 50% did not exist); assumed that the Parties would have interest in maintaining the
Blocks (not the same contract but the operation of the Blocks) and thus in reaching an
agreement (evidence of the will of the Parties to negotiate is cited elsewhere in the Decision
on Jurisdiction and Liability and the Award) they would have reached an agreement at
33%.

92

417. As regards the claim by Ecuador that the Tribunal carried out an irrational assessment of
the evidence and acted ex aequo et bono, on the one hand, it is not for ad hoc committees
to second guess the valuation of the evidence by the arbitral tribunals, and on the other, the
exercise of the discretion of a tribunal, as in this case, does not mean that the Tribunal acted
ex aequo et bono. The Tribunal did not decide ex aequo et bono, it applied the law that it
had already considered applicable, i.e. the Participation Contracts which, in the absence of
Decree 662, would have led to a successful negotiation between the Parties. Again, there
is no manifest excess of power in this instance.

418. Now, Ecuador additionally claims that the Tribunal did not provide reasons for its
conclusion that the Parties would have agreed to 33% and as to why the Tribunal picked
October 5, 2008.

419. The Committee considers that, in addition to the standards that have already been explained
in Section III.D.2, which include the possibility of finding implied reasons in the analysis
of the Tribunal, three additional points must be considered:

420. The Parties in the Underlying Arbitration agreed that their experts would provide the
Tribunal with a joint model for calculation of the damages and that reference to such
agreement and the joint model would not be included in the Award. The Parties debate
whether or not the Tribunal was under the obligation to disclose the joint model to the
Parties, but it is not for this Committee to decide such difference. The Award, therefore,
does not include, by agreement of the Parties, references to the calculations made on the
basis of the joint model. The Tribunal cannot, therefore, be blamed for not being able to
refer to such joint model if the numbers in the Award were based on such model.

421. A “but for” scenario is a hypothetical scenario, it does not refer to what has occurred but
to what may have occurred in the absence of certain measures or conducts. Therefore, a
“but for” scenario requires a certain degree of speculation as it would not be possible to
determine with absolute certainty what would have likely occurred absent the measures or
the conduct.

422. As noted above,* ICSID tribunals and ad hoc committees have consistently held that in
determining damages tribunals enjoy a margin of discretion.**

3 See FJ 362-367 of the present Decision.
36 Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, CSTD Case
No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Annulment, November 2, 2015, {{] 412, 417 (AALA-061); Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, { 91 (AALA-046); UAB E ENERGIJA
(LITHUANIA) v. Republic of Latvia, CISD Case No. ARB/12/33, Decision on Annulment, April 8, 2020 (AALA-110); Rumeli
Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/OS/16
(Annulment), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010, J 144-145, and 147 (AALA-086).

 

  

93

423.

424.

425.

426.

427.

In the instant case, the Committee considers that the reasons for the Tribunal to have picked
October 5, 2008 (and not any other date) are implied in the Award. October 2008
corresponds to the period where the “Actas de Acuerdo Parcial” were signed and the
negotiations terminated (October 3 and 17) and in the “but for” scenario explained in the
Award, the negotiations would have been made in good faith and would have concluded
with an agreement.*® The selection of October 5 is within the margin of discretion of the
Tribunal to determine the date on which the negotiations would likely have not been
terminated if the assumption in the “but for” scenario of the Award is that the negotiations
would have been made in good faith.

With respect to the selection of 33%, the Committee has already found that in the “but for”
scenario the Tribunal eliminated Decree 662 and assumed that negotiations would be
conducted in good faith. The Committee further finds that the Tribunal’s decision that Law
42 was legal neither contradicts the Tribunal’s findings on the “but for” scenario nor
resulted in an obligation for the Tribunal to consider that a negotiation would necessarily
result in a rate of 50%.

The Award, based on the available evidence, concludes that the Parties would have
negotiated and explains that, in the “but for” scenario, Perenco would have sought an offset,
but the Tribunal was not convinced that Perenco would have sought the complete
elimination of Law 42 (which would result in a 0% rate), rather it would have sought to
undo the effect of Decree 662 and, to the extent reasonably possible, Law 42. In sum, the
negotiation in good faith, according to the Award, in a “but for” scenario, would have
resulted in a rate higher than 0% (which could have been the rate should an offset under
the Participation Contracts had applied) but lower than 50%.°°” The rate of 33% is within
the range explained by the Tribunal for the “but for” scenario and is a tenable figure
considering the facts explained in the Award and a reasonable exercise of the discretion of
the Tribunal as regards the determination of damages. The Committee finds that there is
no failure to state reasons in this regard in the Award.

Therefore, for the reasons above, the grounds claimed by Ecuador regarding manifest
excess of powers and failure to state reasons fail.

With respect to the alleged departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the Committee
has already found (See Section III.C.2) that a tribunal does not necessarily depart from the
right to be heard by not adopting either of the positions raised by the Parties. Tribunals
may conduct their own analysis based on the documents, evidence, pleadings, and legal
authorities presented by the Parties and reach a conclusion different from the positions
submitted by the Parties. The Committee further found that the Tribunal has reached the

366 Award, {i 136-137.
367 Award, {if 141-143 (CAA-043).

94

428.

429.

430.

431.

432.

33% based on its analysis of the “but for” world, which implies a degree of reasoned
speculation, and in the degree of discretion tribunals have as regards damages. The
Committee, therefore, finds that there was no violation of a fundamental rule of procedure
for the Tribunal not having requested the opinion of the Parties about the 33% rate.

The ground related to departure from a fundamental rule of procedure thus fails.

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to award value to Perenco’s loss of
opportunity to extend the Block 7 Participation Contract

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador states that the Tribunal’s decision to award US$25 million to Perenco to
compensate its loss of opportunity on the extension of its operation of Block 7 constitutes
a manifest excess of powers, a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, and
a failure to state reasons.*°°

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal failed to apply the
applicable law for two reasons. First, the Tribunal failed to apply the proper method for
calculating the value of a lost opportunity, which consists in determining the value of loss
or benefit and multiplying it by the probability of such loss or benefit. The Tribunal simply
came up with a value, exceeding mere discretion.*°? Second, although Perenco neither
quantified its alternative loss of opportunity claim, nor estimated the probability of its
chance to secure an extension of the term of the Block 7 Participation Contract, the Tribunal
awarded it US$25 million to compensate for its lost opportunity. In so doing, the Tribunal
failed to apply the applicable evidentiary law, and manifestly exceeded its powers.*”°

As to the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador states that because
Perenco neither quantified its loss of opportunity claim nor estimated the probability of its
chance to secure an extension of the term of the Block 7 Participation Contract, Ecuador
never had the opportunity to debate either issue and therefore the Tribunal violated its right
to be heard.37!

As to the failure to state reasons, the Tribunal did not provide a single line of reasoning as
to its calculation of the hypothetical loss or benefit, and the probability of such loss of
benefit occurring.

368 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 417-420.
3 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 422-426
© Memorial on Annulment, { 429.

3! Memorial on Annulment, {ff 431-432.

95

433.

434.

435.

436.

437.

3

Ecuador thereby requests that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decision to order
Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, to the extent that the calculation of such
amount includes the value of Perenco’s lost opportunity to extend the Block 7 Participation

Contract.*”

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, failed
to state reasons, and seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by granting
Perenco US$25 million for the lost opportunity to extend the Block 7 Contract. According
to Perenco, the Tribunal had discretion to determine the appropriate measure of damages
to compensate Perenco, without having to apply a specific-mathematical formula, for a
proven valuable asset that Perenco would likely have obtained ‘but for’ Ecuador’s
wrongful acts.*”

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Perenco contends that Ecuador failed to
demonstrate that under the applicable law the Tribunal lacked discretion and had to apply
a specific-mathematical formula to calculate the damages emerging from Perenco’s loss of
opportunity.*”* In the Award, the Tribunal carefully analyzed the law on loss of chance,
including the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, investment treaty decisions such as
Gemplus and Murphy, and damages commentators such as Ripinsky & Williams.
According to Perenco, these sources confirm that the standard of full reparation does not
determine the valuation methodology and thereby the Tribunal enjoyed a large margin of
appreciation to assess Perenco’s loss of chance damages, including through an “equitable
quantification of the harm sustained.”>7>

Although Ecuador claims that the law on the calculation of loss of opportunity requires (i)
determining the value of the loss or benefit, and (ii) multiplying it by the probability of
such loss or benefit occurring, it has not identified a single authority supporting its
contention that tribunals must apply this formula.*” In any event, if the Tribunal had
applied Ecuador’s proposed mathematical formula, it should have granted Perenco
damages that were at least 51% of US$626 million, that is US$319 million at a
minimum.?””

In relation to the existence of Perenco’s loss, the Tribunal found that “‘‘but for the breaches,
the parties more likely than not’ would have extended the Block 7 Participation Contract,

Memorial on Annulment, {| 438.

573 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 221; Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 174.
54 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 223-226; Rejoinder on Annulment, J 176-177.

575 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 176.

376 Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 177.

377 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 181

96

438.

439.

440.

including because (i) Block 7 was a proven field with valuable oil reserves; (ii) there is no
question Perenco wanted to stay in Ecuador; and Perenco submitted ‘substantial’ and
‘considerable’ evidence showing that the State itself would have preferred Perenco to stay
in Ecuador.”578

As regards the failure to state reasons, Perenco argues that Ecuador’s claims are misplaced
because the Tribunal did not have to develop a mathematical calculation to determine the
damages Perenco is entitled to for its proven loss of opportunity to extend its operatorship
in Block 7. Ecuador’s claims are also false because the Tribunal explained that the
probability of Perenco’s loss occurring was greater than 50% and confirmed that there was
“a substantial body of evidence on the record” supporting Perenco’s contention that it
would have obtained an extension in Block 7 ‘but for’ Ecuador’s wrongful acts. According
to Perenco, the Tribunal’s reasons are provided in paragraphs 206-222, 312 -326 of the
Award.3”?

As regards the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Perenco contends
that Ecuador’s position is flawed because Ecuador had ample opportunity to debate both
the probability of Perenco’s chance to secure an extension and the quantification of such
lost opportunity. Yet, Ecuador chose not to rebut either point.**° Although Ecuador states
that it was not permitted to address the Tribunal on its “novel” findings regarding the
probability of the extension and the US$25 million, Ecuador had a reasonable and fair
opportunity to present its case on Perenco’s claim for loss of opportunity.**! Perenco
further contends that, contrary to Ecuador’s suggestion, the Tribunal was not limited to
adopting a figure previously submitted by one of the Parties, nor did it have to give the
Parties a draft of the Award for comments.**”

Accordingly, the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers, fail to state reasons, or
seriously depart from a fundamental rule of procedure in finding that Perenco is entitled to
damages for its lost opportunity to extend the valuable Block 7 Contract. If, however, the
Committee were to apply Ecuador’s proposed formula, it would have to multiply the
maximum possible damages (US$626 million) by the probability of such loss or benefit
occurring (at least 51%), thereby granting Perenco at least US$319 million in loss of chance
damages.**>

578 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 228

9 Tr., Day 1 January 12, 2021, Perenco’s Opening Statement, p. 47.

38 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 235

38! Rejoinder on Annulment, 188.

382

383

Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 189.
Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 191

97

441.

442.

443.

444,

445.

446.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal’s decision to award US$25 million to Perenco to
compensate its loss of opportunity on the extension of its operation of Block 7 constitutes
a manifest excess of powers, a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, and
a failure to state reasons.

According to Ecuador, there is an excess of powers because the Tribunal failed to apply
the proper method for calculating the value of a lost opportunity—which consists in
determining the value of loss or benefit and multiplying it by the probability of such loss
or benefit—and because the Tribunal awarded it US$25 million to compensate for its lost
opportunity despite the fact that Perenco neither quantified its loss of opportunity claim or
estimated the probability of its chance to secure an extension of the Participation Contract.

Nowhere in the applicable law is there a mathematical formula to quantify loss of
opportunity. As mentioned before, tribunals enjoy a degree of discretion to assess damages
and it is not for ad hoc committees to question the methodology used by a tribunal to reach
its conclusions on damages or to impose a certain method for calculation of the damages.
This ground therefore fails.

Ecuador claims a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, because Perenco
neither quantified its loss of opportunity claim nor estimated the probability of its chance
to secure an extension of the term of the Block 7 Participation Contract, and Ecuador never
had the opportunity to debate either issue and, therefore, the Tribunal violated its right to
be heard.

Again, the Tribunal was under no obligation to apply a specific end exclusive methodology
to calculate the loss of opportunity. It is true that in the Award it did not estimate the
probability of Perenco’s chance to obtain an extension, but the consequence thereof, as will
be analyzed below, is that the decision on this point lacks reasoning not that the Tribunal
violated a fundamental rule of procedure. As already stated in Section III.C.2, the Tribunal
is not under the obligation to discuss with the Parties every step of its decision making
process and can make its own assessment of the evidence, legal authorities, documents,
pleadings, expert reports and witness statement presented by the Parties, so long as the
Tribunal’s decision remains within the legal and factual framework of the debate in the
arbitration. The Committee finds no serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal did not provide a single
line of reasoning as to its calculation of the hypothetical loss or benefit, and the probability
of such loss of benefit occurring. The Committee finds that the premises referred to by the
Tribunal in its Award do not lead to the conclusion that the value of the loss of opportunity

98

447.

448.

449.

450.

should be a nominal one and that the nominal value should be US$25 million and therefore
agrees that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for such conclusion.

In the Award the Tribunal accepted that Ecuador had a substantial measure of discretion
when it came to deciding whether to grant an extension of the Participation Contract and
indicated that in the “but for” world, an extension would at its best not have entailed an
extension of the existing Participation Contract, but rather the Parties would have agreed
on a new model.*** The Tribunal remarked that “it is not possible, on the evidence before
it, [...] to know what contractual terms might have been arrived at in a successful
negotiation but for the unlawful acts.”?85

 

The Tribunal explained that there is an inherent difficulty of choosing a proxy for the Block
7 extension scenario based on the October 2008 Acta de Acuerdo Parcial and referred to
Perenco’s characterization of the Acta as a “vague, incomplete and risky substitute
contract.”**° The Tribunal further considered that “employing a services contract like the
Block 10 AGIP Contracts as a proxy for what might or might not have been agreed for
Block 7 [as proposed by Perenco], is in the end a bridge too far for the Tribunal.”°°”

The Tribunal disregarded Perenco’s analysis indicating that “much of Perenco’s damages
analysis is based on what Petroamazonas has done since it assumed operations of the
Blocks.” Yet, the Tribunal stated that it “is not convinced that the economics of the
operations of Petroamazonas, a State-owned entity, provides an appropriate ‘apples to
apples’ comparator of what Perenco would have done in the ‘but for’ scenario.” The
Tribunal remarked that the adjudicator must seek to avoid speculative damages.***

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal rejected Perenco’s extension argument as “too
remote, uncertain and ultimately too speculative, particularly when Perenco itself accepted
that it is necessary to use other contractual models as a proxy for what might have been
agreed between the Parties.”**? The Tribunal then acknowledged that the Parties might
have been unable to reach an agreement or that the State might have decided not to extend
the Block 7 Contract. Accordingly, the Tribunal concluded that in the present case there is
an “insufficient degree of confidence as to the terms of the contract that might have been

concluded such that there could be an estimate of lost cash flows.”*”°

384 This is consistent with the Tribunal’s reasoning on the Law 42 at 33%.
385 Award, {212 (AAE-031).

386 Award, {215 (AAE-031).

387 Award, {i 216-217 (AAE-031).

388 Award, {i 218-219 (AAE-031).

38 Award, {{ 220 (AAE-031).

39 Award, {{ 220 (AAE-031).

99

451.

452.

453.

454.

The Tribunal then turned to the valuation of the loss of opportunity to negotiate an
agreement to continue to operate Block 7 until August 2018 and stressed that this exercise
differed from valuing the loss of profits expected under an executed contract.*?!

The Tribunal discussed the relevance of the Gemplus award and concluded that although
it was facing dramatically different factual circumstances than the present case “the
Gemplus tribunal highlighted two points on ‘loss of opportunity’ that resonate with the
present Tribunal.” First, there was “no certainty or realistic expectation of this project’s
profitability as originally envisaged, but there was nonetheless a reasonable opportunity”
and that “opportunity, however small, has a monetary value” at international law. Second,
“it would be wrong in principle to deprive or diminish the Claimants of the monetary value
of that lost opportunity on lack of evidential grounds when that lack of evidence is directly
attributable to the Respondent’s own wrongs.”*””

The Tribunal, after summarizing the facts of the case, concluded that ‘but for’ the breaches
the Parties more likely than not would have arrived at a solution whereby Perenco would
be operating Block 7 under a different contractual regime. But the Tribunal has also found
that it “cannot engage in the kind of speculation about a specific contractual model which
would then be married with Mr. Crick’s projections in order to arrive at an amount of
damages.”*>

Quoting from Perenco’s submissions, the Tribunal referred to Ripinsky and Williams’s
Damages in International Investment Law, where the authors observed:

Loss of chance can thus be used as a tool allowing the injured party to
receive some form of compensation for the loss of chance to make profit.
In theory, the loss of chance is assessed by reference to the degree of
probability of the chance turning out in the plaintiff's favour, although in
practice the amount awarded on this account is often discretionary. [...] In
some other cases, arbitral tribunals have determined the amount of lost
profits in a discretionary manner. Where this lack of numerical support
was due to the fact that a tribunal could not estimate the loss of profits with
satisfactory precision, such awards may be classified as compensation for
the loss of business opportunity. Amounts awarded under this head of
damage are likely to be conservative and reflect a tribunal’s view of an
equitable, reasonable and balanced outcome rather than being a result of a
mathematical calculation.*”*

391 Award, 312 (AAE-031).
32 Award, {316 (AAE-031).
33 Award, {317 (AAE-031).
3° Award, ff 318-319 (AAE-031). Footnotes omitted.

100

455.

456.

457.

458.

459.

460.

Thereafter, the Tribunal stressed that a claim for loss of opportunity is not to be equated to
a lost profits claim based upon a final, executed contract, because in the former there is an
element of uncertainty that must be taken into consideration.**>

The Tribunal proceeded then to mention that in arriving at its decision, it considered the
ILC Articles, particularly Article 36, and the commentaries (specifically (27) and (32)
thereto) to conclude that financial damage must not only be proximately caused by the
unlawful act(s), but that it also be “assessable”, that is, capable of being assessed and seek
to avoid granting “inherently speculative” claims or to put it the other way, seek to
determine whether there are “sufficient attributes to be considered a legally protected
interest of sufficient certainty to be compensable.”°

According to the Tribunal, the circumstances of the case are unusual. “The parties arrived
at an ‘in principle’ negotiated change to their contractual relationship which contemplated
the extension of Block 7’s term. However, it was Ecuador, and not Perenco, which, due to
Burlington’s recalcitrance, balked at its implementation. The Tribunal found this refusal
was a breach of the Treaty by Ecuador which deprived Perenco of the chance to reach an
agreement on extension. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that Perenco is entitled to
compensation for the loss of that opportunity.”*°”

The Tribunal thereafter “frankly acknowledges that any estimation of the value of the loss
of opportunity is an exercise of discretion and therefore it has decided to award a nominal
value”.*°8

The Tribunal repeated that since a loss of opportunity to have the contract is different from
the loss of a fully crystallised legal right to an extension of a contract, “the expected cash
flows of which could be modelled on a DCF basis, such value must necessarily be
significantly lower than the amount claimed by Perenco based on the AGIP contract model
applied by Mr. Crick’s drilling forecasts for Block 7 through to 2018.”°%?

Finally, the Tribunal concluded that “[iJn all of the circumstances, the Tribunal holds that
an award of US$25 million is appropriate. It cannot but note that the equities tend strongly
in favour of the granting of this relief. This however is not a decision ex aequo et bono. It
is one grounded in law.”4°

35 Award, {{ 320 (AAE-031).
396 Award, {i 321-322 (AAE-031).
397 Award, {323 (AAE-031).
398 Award. {324 (AAE-031).
3 Award, 325 (AAE-031).
40 Award, | 326 (AAE-031).

101

461.

462.

463.

464.

465.

466.

467.

In the view of the Committee the Tribunal reached a decision that does not follow from its
analysis and therefore fails to state reasons for its conclusion on loss of opportunity.

Throughout paragraphs 323-326 of the Award, the Tribunal disregarded all possible
comparative scenarios proposed by Perenco to support its quantum claim on the loss of
opportunity: the Acta de Acuerdo Parcial, the economics of Petroamazonas, the Block 10
AGIP Contracts, and acknowledged not only that the Parties might have been unable to
reach an agreement, but that Ecuador might have decided not to extend the Block 7
Contract.

Then, it stressed several times that a loss of opportunity is not the same as a contract
extension or a loss of profit claim based on a final executed contract and that it is not
possible to apply a DCF model to determine a loss of opportunity and therefore the value
must necessarily be significantly lower than the amount claimed by Perenco based on the
AGIP contract model applied by Mr. Crick’s drilling forecasts for Block 7 through to 2018.

Likewise, the Tribunal indicated that it cannot engage in the kind of speculation about a
specific contractual model and apply Mr. Crick’s projections in order to arrive at an amount
of damages.

The quote from Ripinsky and Williams referred to by the Tribunal in the Award indicates
that the loss of opportunity can be used as a tool to determine the compensation for the loss
of chance to make profit and that, at least in theory, the loss of chance is assessed by
reference to the degree of probability of the chance turning out in favour of a claimant,
although in practice the amount awarded on this account is often discretionary. In the same
quote, the authors add that this type of damages awarded is likely to be conservative and
reflect a tribunal’s view of an equitable, reasonable and balanced outcome rather than being
a result of a mathematical calculation.

However, rather than explaining whether it disregarded the degree of probability as a tool
and the reasons therefore, or what, in the Tribunal’s view, an equitable, reasonable and
balanced outcome is, or what could have been the impact of the degree of discretion that
Ecuador had not to extend the Participation Contract or, generally, refer to a conclusion
from the premises contained in paragraphs 312 to 326, the Tribunal simply
“acknowledged” that it has discretion and decided to award “a nominal value.” No
explanation whatsoever is given as to what is the concept of a nominal value or the reason
to award a nominal value as opposed to any other value.

There is no doubt that tribunals have discretion in the awarding of damages, however the
Committee fails to see, because the Tribunal does not explain, how merely acknowledging
that the Tribunal has discretion is the consequence of the analysis proposed by the Tribunal
as regards loss of opportunity. The acknowledgement that a tribunal has discretion is

102

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

merely a general affirmation of one of the powers of a tribunal, but such general
affirmation, in the context of the Award, cannot be the sole reason to award a nominal
value of damages. The acknowledgement by the Tribunal of its discretion is a stand-alone
affirmation that has no clear connection with the preceding paragraphs so that the reasoning
of the Tribunal from the premises to the conclusion can be followed.

The Tribunal seems to be aware of the lack of sufficient reasoning for its conclusion when
it considers necessary to stress that the decision on loss of opportunity is not a decision ex
aequo et bono but rather grounded in law.

Based on the standard referred to in Section III.D.2, the Committee considers that the
Tribunal failed to state reasons to conclude that loss of profit should be awarded and the
amount therefor.

However, the Committee finds no basis, and Ecuador has not even invoked the basis, to
annul the entirety of the Award as a result of the absence of reasons in a specific point that
can be clearly isolated from the remaining of the Award. The fact that one part of the
Tribunal’s decision that can be isolated from the remainder of the Award is not reasoned
is not enough to annul the whole process of calculation of damages performed by the
Tribunal, much less the entirety of the Award. The Committee therefore concludes that the
US$25 million awarded as damages for loss of opportunity must be deducted from the
US$416.5 million awarded to Perenco, prior to the adjustment factor.

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco would have drilled 23 new
wells on Block 7

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

In the Award, the Tribunal held that “23 additional wells would have been drilled during
the life of the Block 7 Participation Contract [i.e., even more than the 21 claimed by
Perenco],” assuming the contract term would not have been extended. Specifically, the
Tribunal held that “the Consortium would have drilled four wells by January 2008 and 19
wells from February 2008 to August 2009.” Ecuador submits that in so deciding, the
Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state the
reasons for this decision.‘°!

As to the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, prior to deciding sua sponte that
23 new wells would have been drilled on Block 7 (i.e., 2 more than what Perenco asserted
that it would have drilled), the Tribunal never invited the Parties to comment on a drilling

40! Memorial on Annulment, {ff 441-442

103

473.

474.

475.

476.

477.

478.

402

program even more ambitious than that put forward by Perenco. In so doing, the Tribunal
also seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure, insofar as it infringed
Perenco’s right to state its claim, and Ecuador’s correlative right to state its defense, and to
produce all arguments and evidence in support of it.4°?

As to the failure to state reasons, the Tribunal has not provided any reasons regarding the
number of wells that would have been drilled on Block 7 absent Decree 662, nor the period
of time across which such drilling by Perenco would have taken place.

Accordingly, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to order Ecuador
to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar as the calculation of such amount is based on
the volume of oil that Perenco’s 23 new Block 7 wells would have produced.**

(ii) Perenco’s Position

According to Perenco, Ecuador’s complaints about the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco
would have drilled 23 new wells on Block 7 ‘but for’ Ecuador’s unlawful conduct are based
on a mischaracterization of the Award.*°°

The Tribunal granted Perenco damages based on 23 ‘but for’ wells that represent two wells
Perenco actually drilled right after Ecuador imposed Decree 662 plus 21 new wells that
Perenco would have drilled ‘but for’ Decree 662. For the sake of coherence, the Tribunal
uniformly labelled these 23 wells as ‘but for’ wells. That was exactly the same number of
wells that Perenco requested when it claimed future production from the two actual wells
that it drilled right after Decree 662 plus 21 new wells, that is a total of 23 wells after
Decree 662.4

Consequently, the Tribunal neither failed to state reasons, nor seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure by deciding that Perenco would have drilled 23 new wells
on Block 7.4°7

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador argues that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
and failed to state reasons when deciding that Perenco would have drilled 23 new wells on
Block 7.

Memorial on Annulment, {| 443.

403 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 444.

404 Memorial on Annulment, {| 447

405

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 241

4° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, ff 242-247.

407

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 255; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 193.

104

479.

480.

481.

482.

As to the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, Ecuador states that the
Tribunal breached the Parties’ right to be heard by deciding sua sponte that Perenco would
have drilled 23 new wells on Block 7 in a ‘but for’ scenario (two more wells than the ones
claimed by Perenco) and by not allowing the Parties to comment on this thesis. The
Committee, however, does not find that the Tribunal breached the Parties’ right to be heard.

In the first place, the Committee observes that both Parties had ample opportunity to
present their case as regards the damages caused by Decree 662 and the impact on
Perenco’s drilling plans on Block 7. In fact, Ecuador does not dispute that the Parties had
several procedural opportunities to debate the number of wells that Perenco would have
drilled in a ‘but for’ scenario, absent Decree 662. As stressed by Perenco, these
opportunities include four rounds of written pleadings on quantum, witness statements,
expert reports and oral submissions at the Quantum Hearing and the Closing Arguments
Hearing.*°* Ecuador's case is thus mainly based on the allegation that the Tribunal departed
from the exact pleadings advanced by the Parties and decided sua sponte that Perenco
would have drilled 23 wells.

Yet, as repeatedly stated throughout this decision, the Committee is of the view that the
Tribunal was not obliged to adopt either of the positions exactly as advanced by each Party.
As long as the Tribunal’s decision fits the legal framework argued during the arbitration,
the Tribunal can make its own assessment of the evidence, legal authorities, documents,
pleadings, expert reports and witness statement presented by the Parties. The fact that,
based on the evidence in the record, the Tribunal arrived at a number of 23 wells—instead
of 21 or 24 wells—does not amount to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. The Tribunal’s conclusion is based on the Parties’ submission on whether in a
“but for’ scenario Perenco would have drilled the Oso fields and/or the Lobo and Coca-
Payamino fields, the number of wells it could have drilled, and the time extension of the
drilling. The Committee does not see that the Tribunal based its decision on external or
novel arguments, documents, or legal authorities not pleaded by the Parties. To the
contrary, the Committee observes that the Tribunal paid due consideration to the opinion
of the quantum experts, particularly to Mr. Crick’s production profiles.* Thus, Ecuador’s
argument that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure fails.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal did not provide
“reasons for its conclusion regarding the number of wells that would have been drilled on
Block 7 absent Decree 662, nor the period of time across which such drilling by Perenco

48 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 241; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 199.
4 Award, (f 206-255 (AAE-031).

105

483.

484.

485.

would have taken place.”*+!° The Committee is not persuaded by Ecuador’s argument given
that the Tribunal did state the reasons leading to its decision.

The Committee finds that five premises referred to by the Tribunal in its Award are critical
to the conclusion that in a ‘but for’ scenario Perenco would have drilled 23 new wells: (i)
no damages can flow at least until October 4, 2007 when Ecuador committed the unlawful
act of enacting Decree 662;*!' (ii) it cannot be assumed that the “the extension of Block 7
would have been based on the AGIP contract or some other proxy”, thus drilling plans for
Block 7 for the period after the date of the Block 7 Contract’s expiry on 16 August 2010
cannot be taken into consideration;”*!” (iii) “in absence of a contract extension, Perenco
would have stopped drilling in Block 7 in August 2009 in order to ensure an adequate
payback on the new wells;’”*' (iv) Perenco would have concentrated in the less challenging
Oso field than in the riskier and more expensive waterflooding Lobo and Coca-Payamino
fields;*'* and (v) “the sharply rising price of oil leading up to October 2007 would have
induced Perenco to seek to drill as many wells as were economically possible in the Oso
field in the time remaining in that Contract.”445

From the said premises it follows that, contrary to Ecuador’s assertion, the Tribunal did
identify the period in which the drilling would have taken place in a ‘but for’ scenario:
between October 2007 and August 2009. As regards the number of wells, the Committee
observes that although the Tribunal does not expressly mention how it arrives to the
number of 23 wells, it can be inferred that the Tribunal derived its conclusion from
Perenco’s assertion that:

But for Decree 662, Perenco argued, it would have continued to drill one
well per month in Oso, just as it was doing at the time that Decree 662
came into effect and it would have continued this drilling programme for
as long as it remained profitable to do so. Perenco asserted that this ought
not to be controversial: further Oso wells would undeniably produce new
reserves and Perenco indisputably had previously achieved a one-well-
per-month drilling schedule in Oso.*!®

The number of 23 new wells is correlated to the number of months in which the drilling
would have taken place: one-well-per-month.

1 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 44.
411 Award, { 127 (AAE-031).
422 Award, {223 (AAE-031).
413 Award, {252 (AAE-031).
414 Award, (ff 253-254 (AAE-031).
415 Award, {252 (AAE-031).
416 Award, {229 (AAE-031).

106

486.

487.

488.

489.

490.

491.

This conclusion finds further support on the fact that the Tribunal expressly indicated that
“the Consortium would have drilled four wells by January 2008 and 19 wells from
February 2008 to August 2009.”

Thus, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state the reasons for its decision
that absent Decree 662, Perenco would have drilled 23 new wells.

In sum, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal neither seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure nor failed to state the reasons for its decision.

(4) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to award Perenco damages amounting to
US$448,820,400

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador states that to reach the amount of US$448,820,400 of damages awarded to
Perenco, the Tribunal relied on an adjusted discounted cash flow model (the “Model’”)
which it neither disclosed nor explained, although the Parties had agreed on such
disclosure. Thus, neither Party is in a position to know how the various components of its
calculations led to the final amount of compensation indicated in the Award. In awarding
said damages to Perenco, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision and also
manifestly exceeded its powers.*!”

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador refers to the agreement reached by the Parties
and the Tribunal that the quantum experts be made the Tribunal’s experts. Ecuador notes
that it accepted the Tribunal’s proposal on the understanding that “in its award, the Tribunal
may use the figures provided by the economic experts, but will not mention this agreement
nor the process resulting therefrom.”*!* Perenco, in turn, acceded to the proposal, including
Ecuador’s condition, but sought to add other conditions.

The Tribunal decided to follow the Parties’ agreement without expressing any further
concerns. One year later, on May 30, 2017, the Tribunal confirmed to the Parties that it
would disclose the joint calculations provided by the quantum experts in the Model,
simultaneously with the dispatch of the Award.*!? In the Award, however, the issues related
to the quantification of Perenco’s damages are dealt with in less than 13 pages, and the
Model is neither enclosed nor explained.*”°

417 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 449.
418 Memorial on Annulment, {| 451
419 Memorial on Annulment, {| 455.

#20 Memorial on Annulment, {| 457

107

492.

493.

494.

495.

496.

On October 2, 2019, five days after the Award was rendered, Ecuador requested that the
Tribunal disclose to the Parties the “harmonised model” on which it relied to calculate
Perenco’s compensation. However, on October 9, ICSID informed Ecuador that the
Tribunal was functus officio and therefore the Parties would not receive the Model.*”!
Accordingly, it was impossible for Ecuador to discern how and why the Tribunal had
reached its decision on this point.

Furthermore, the Tribunal did not provide any reasons for the adjustments made to the
Parties’ calculations. The Tribunal failed to include a description of the precise inputs of
the Model and the adjustments the Tribunal applied to the Parties’ models to come up with
its own Model. Whilst the Tribunal indicated some numerical values in certain paragraphs
of the Award, these values are insufficient for Ecuador to follow the reasoning through
which the Tribunal derived said values. In contrast, in the counterclaims stage of the
proceedings, the Tribunal conveyed to the Parties the report issued by the environmental
expert appointed by it, and the Parties had the opportunity to question the expert at the
hearing convened at The Hague.‘

Likewise, the Tribunal failed to state its reasons when it decided that a “fair amount” for
the ‘true-up’ should be US$36.4 million, as it did not provide any reasoning regarding the
third component of the ‘true-up’, i.e., “the confluence of events and the Parties’ various
actions surrounding the coactivas;” it did not indicate the values of the first three
components of the ‘true-up’ nor the process through which it allegedly determined such
values; and given that it did not indicate the numerical values of the first three components,
it is impossible for Ecuador to determine how the Tribunal concluded that their balance
was of US$-5.9 million.“?3

As to the manifest excess of powers, in the Award, the Tribunal concluded “that a fair
amount for the ‘true-up’ should be US$36.4 million.” Instead of ascribing value to each
component of the ‘true-up’, the Tribunal came up with what it subjectively deemed to be a
“fair” amount. In so doing, the Tribunal acted as an amiable compositeur, exercising a
power which the Parties had not vested in it and thus manifestly exceeded its powers.*74

For the above reasons, Ecuador requests that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decision
to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco, insofar as (i) the Tribunal’s
determination on compensation is also based on the Tribunal’s decisions that the Parties
would have agreed to stabilize Law 42 at 33% and that Perenco is entitled to US$25 million

2! Memorial on Annulment, 458.
#22 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 463-465
23 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 467-479.
2 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 480.

108

497.

498.

499.

500.

for the lost opportunity to extend the Block 7 Participation Contract,*?> and (ii) the
calculation of such amount is based on the application of a ‘true-up’ of US$36.4 million.*”°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco states that although Ecuador challenges the Tribunal’s damages assessment
claiming that it is a “black box” because the Tribunal allegedly did not “disclose” or
“explain” the adjusted discounted cash flow model on which it relied, the Award is fully
reasoned and explains the adjusted calculations that the Tribunal relied on, as agreed by
the Parties. Therefore, the fact that the “Model” was not rendered with the Award is neither
a failure to state reasons nor a manifest excess of powers.*?”

Perenco argues that “the Tribunal explained ‘the methodology that was used to estimate
the damages to be awarded for each individual claim in light of the factual and legal
findings’ and the ‘harmonised model’ [that] could be produced through the adjustments of
the models [provided by the Parties’ economic experts] to implement the Tribunal’s
findings.”*?* The Tribunal then described in detail each of the steps taken in relation to the
harmonised model, including production forecasts, its reasoning on oil prices, CAPEX
costs for the Block 7 wells, and the 1.0776 adjustment factor to account for pre-award
interest rates.

Perenco stresses that the Tribunal worked confidentially with both Parties’ quantum
experts as joint tribunal experts. Yet, for political reasons, Ecuador insisted that in the
Award, “the Tribunal may use the figures provided by the economic experts but will not
mention this agreement nor the process resulting therefrom” and that “Ecuador cannot
agree with the Tribunal stating in the award that it followed a process agreed by the parties
to determine the amount of compensation.” Ironically, Ecuador is now alleging that the
Tribunal was not sufficiently transparent, and the Award must be annulled. Such position,
however, cannot succeed. More than 100 pages in the Award contain reasons for the
Tribunal’s damages assessments. Furthermore, both Ecuador’s agreement with Perenco
and the Tribunal about the post-hearing process and fundamental fairness prevent Ecuador
from now trying to take advantage of its politically motivated efforts to hamper the
Tribunal’s ability to freely write the Award.*??

Although Ecuador contends that the “Parties allegedly agreed that the quantum experts’
discounted cash flow model ‘would be communicated to the Parties together with the

#5 Memorial on Annulment, {[ 466.

#26 Memorial on Annulment, {| 481

27

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 256.

#8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 259.

#29 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 265.

109

501.

502.

503.

504.

Award’ and that the Tribunal ‘failed to disclose the Model,’ it does not support its claim
with the actual record in the arbitration. Perenco notes that in the May 2017 letter, the
Tribunal stated to the Parties that ‘[i]f the Parties so wish, the Tribunal [...] will disclose
to the Parties [...] the joint calculations provided by the economic experts,’ subject to the
‘redaction of any and all instructions from the Tribunal to the experts which describe or
otherwise disclose the Tribunal’s consideration of the Parties’ submissions and its internal
thinking.’”**° Nonetheless, none of the Parties responded to the Tribunal that they
“wished” to receive the experts’ joint calculations subject to the redactions described by
the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Tribunal did not disclose the Model, as it was not obliged
to do it in accordance with the Parties’ agreement.**! In any event, if Ecuador considered
that the Tribunal committed an annullable error in not disclosing any calculations or model,
it could have petitioned the Tribunal to rectify or supplement its Award pursuant to Article
49(2) of the ICSID Convention. It did not.”

According to Perenco, Ecuador wrongly claims that the Tribunal failed to state reasons and
manifestly exceeded its powers when it deducted US$36.4 million from Perenco’s
compensation to account for amounts owed by Perenco to Ecuador, i.e., the ‘true-up’. The
Tribunal explained its reasoning on the true-up, including the coactivas issue and the values
of the other three components. In the same line, the Tribunal did not act as an amiable
compositeur merely because it used the word “fair”, its findings regarding the true-up were
based on the Parties’ fact and expert evidence.**?

Accordingly, the Tribunal neither failed to state reasons nor manifestly exceeded its powers
in finding that Perenco is entitled to US$448.8 million in damages.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee notes that Ecuador’s claims are focused on two main points: (i) the
Tribunal’s alleged failure to disclose the Model with the Award and its alleged failure to
state the reasons for its decision to award damages to Perenco amounting to
US$448,820,400; and (ii) the Tribunal’s alleged failure to state reasons and manifest excess
of powers when deciding that the “true-up” amounted to US$36.4 million.

The Committee will address the first issue. For the purpose of illustrating the scope of the
agreement between the Tribunal and the Parties on the joint expert calculations, and the
Tribunal’s alleged obligation to disclose the Model with the Award, the Committee will

430 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 204.

4! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 266; Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 204.

432

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 270.

433 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 271-274; Rejoinder on Annulment, {J 213-216.

110

recount the facts related to the Parties’ agreement, as submitted and alleged by the Parties
in this annulment proceeding.

505. At the Hearing on Quantum, the Tribunal proposed to the Parties that the quantum experts
be made the Tribunal’s experts. On April 26, 2016, the Tribunal communicated the
following message to the Parties:

The Tribunal notes that the parties are still discussing the Tribunal’s
proposal that the quantum experts be made the Tribunal’s experts. The
Tribunal understands that this matter is still under discussion and that the
Tribunal will be informed shortly.

The Tribunal strongly recommends to the parties that they adopt the
Tribunal’s proposal. If they do not, the Tribunal will be obliged to appoint
another financial expert to assist it in arriving to at the appropriate figure
for quantum. This will lead to additional costs and delay and in any event
such expert will need access to the computer programs, schedules, etcetera
that have been used by the parties’ experts to date.

The Tribunal therefore looks forward to hearing from the Parties at their
earliest convenience that the Tribunal’s proposal is acceptable.*™

506. On May 3, 2016, Ecuador confirmed its agreement with the Tribunal’s proposal as follows:

[...] Ecuador agrees to proceed as per the Tribunal’s proposal with the
understanding that, in its award, the Tribunal may use the figures provided
by the economic experts, but will not mention this agreement nor the
process resulting therefrom [...].**°

507. On May 6, 2016, Perenco presented its comments on Ecuador’s proposal:

Perenco writes at the Tribunal’s 3 May 2016 invitation to comment on
Ecuador’s proposal that the Tribunal’s award “not mention” the Tribunal’s
proposed process to determine the damages due to Perenco or the parties’
agreement to that process. As Perenco has previously stated, it accepts the
Tribunal’s proposal to have the parties’ respective valuation experts
conduct joint analyses at the Tribunal’s direction, to do so confidentially
without conferring with the parties, at the parties’ expense. Ecuador now
appears also to accept that proposal, but provided that the Tribunal not
disclose that it used such a process.

While Perenco wishes to be flexible and constructive, it has serious
reservations about Ecuador’s condition. Ecuador’s condition is
objectionable in principle, in that it seeks to constrain the Tribunal in how
it explains its award. Moreover, it is potentially dangerous. The parties
mutually expect the Tribunal to provide reasons for its decision. If the

44 Tribunal Email to the Parties, April 26, 2016 (CEA-043).
5 Ecuador Email to the Tribunal, May 3, 2016, p. 1 (CEA-044).

111

Tribunal simply presents certain figures with no explanation as to how it
arrived at them, it could leave a potentially serious gap in the reasoning.
This gap might undermine the purpose of providing reasons, and might
provide an argument for annulment of the Tribunal’s award.

Perenco would therefore strongly prefer transparency about the process
the Tribunal will use to determine the particular amount due to Perenco.
To be transparent, the Tribunal should describe the process that it used, as
well as the calculations the experts have jointly made.

Despite these reservations, Perenco wishes to be as accommodating and
pragmatic as possible without prejudicing its rights. Accordingly, Perenco
would be prepared to accept Ecuador’s condition, provided that (1) it is
acceptable to the Tribunal; (2) in the award the Tribunal states that it has
followed a process agreed by the parties to determine the amount of
compensation owed to Perenco (without describing that process in detail);
(3) the Tribunal discloses to the parties, and is free to describe in the award,
the joint calculations (although without disclosing in the award that they
reflect the joint work of the experts); and (4) that Ecuador provides an iron
clad representation and undertaking that it will in no way use the absence
of additional detail about the Tribunal’s assessment of the compensation
amount as any kind of basis for seeking annulment.

Should the Tribunal reject Ecuador’s condition, then Perenco continues to
believe that the most fair and efficient process would for the Tribunal
simply to issue an interim decision and direct the parties’ experts to
provide, jointly or singly, analyses of the ensuing valuation consequences
within a short and defined time frame.**°

508. On May 13, 2016, Ecuador sent the following message to the Tribunal:

To avoid protracted discussions and since Ecuador has already stated its
position in its communication of 3 May 2016, Ecuador will only address
the four conditions Perenco seeks to impose on Ecuador and the Tribunal
in its email of 6 May 2016.

Ecuador has no objection to conditions 1 and 3 as they mirror Ecuador’s
position.

However, Ecuador cannot agree to conditions 2 and 4. In particular:

On condition 2, Ecuador cannot agree with the Tribunal stating in the
award that it followed a process agreed by the parties to determine the
amount of compensation; and

Condition 4 proceeds on a false premise. Indeed, the process proposed by
Ecuador in no way limits the Tribunal’s ability to give reasons for its

decision in the award, as tribunals most often do when deciding quantum
issues. Ecuador’s proposal allows the Tribunal to explain how it arrived at

486 Ecuador Email to the Tribunal, May 13, 2016, pp. 2-3 (CEA-045).

112

a certain amount, if any. While Ecuador is willing to make its experts
available to the Tribunal—to limit the time and costs involved in the
Tribunal appointing its own expert—it cannot accept that any agreement
or agreed process be referred to in the award. Should Perenco maintain its
position, Ecuador understands that the Tribunal will appoint its own expert
to assist it in the decision of the quantum phase of these proceedings.*”

509. On May 31 and June 1, 2016, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had reached an
agreement (the “Parties’ Agreement”), and communicated the agreed conditions as
follows:

First, the Award will not mention the joint expert process nor the parties’
agreement to that process.

Second, the Tribunal will disclose to the parties, and is free to describe and
use in the Award, the joint calculations provided by the economic experts
(although without disclosing in the Award that they reflect the joint work
of the experts).

Third, Ecuador specifically acknowledges, for the avoidance of doubt, that
Perenco may submit to an annulment committee, should one be
constituted, the parties’ exchanges showing Ecuador’s consent to the
process regarding the quantum experts.

Fourth, the parties’ experts should respect the relevant confidentiality rules
in their invoices to the parties, and each expert should send its invoices to
the party that had initially hired the expert, copying the Tribunal secretary
and counsel for the other party.

Additionally, this agreement by the parties is of course subject to the
approval of the Tribunal, for it is the Tribunal that ultimately must write
the Award and provide its reasons. Nothing in this agreement is intended
to interfere with the Tribunal’s ability to do so. The parties would be happy
to answer any questions the Tribunal may have about the foregoing
agreement. If the Tribunal finds it acceptable, we would be grateful for
confirmation that the Tribunal will proceed along the lines that the parties
have proposed.***

510. On June 10, 2016, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties taking note of the Parties’
Agreement and informing them that “it has decided to follow the [...] agreement.”*°

511. On May 30, 2017, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties communicating “its decisions on
various pending requests of the Parties,” including that:

47 Ecuador Email to the Tribunal, May 13, 2016, p. 1 (CEA-045).
438 Correspondence between the Parties and the Tribunal, May 31, 2016 (AAE-171).
+9 Tribunal Letter to the Parties, June 10, 2016, p. 2 (CEA-046).

113

The Tribunal will not seek the comments of the Parties on the joint
calculations performed for it by the quantum experts. If the Parties so wish,
the Tribunal, in accordance with the Parties’ agreement as reflected in the
Tribunal’s letter of 10 June 2016, “will disclose to the Parties [...] the joint
calculations provided by the economic experts.” This will be done
simultaneously with the dispatch of the Award in which the Tribunal, in
accordance with the above-mentioned agreement of the Parties, cannot
“disclos[e] [...] that [the calculations] reflect the joint work of the
experts.” Since the Tribunal cannot make such a disclosure in the publicly
available version of its Award, subject to the redaction of any and all
instructions from the Tribunal to the experts which describe or otherwise
disclose the Tribunal’s consideration of the Parties’ submissions and its
internal thinking, the Tribunal sees no impediment to the experts’ joint
calculations being disclosed with the Award after the deliberations are
concluded. The Tribunal directs the Parties’ attention in this regard to Rule
15(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which provides that: ‘The
deliberations of the Tribunal shall take place in private and remain

secret.”"°

512. None of the Parties manifested that it wished that the Tribunal disclose the joint expert
calculations provided by the economic experts with the dispatch of the Award.

513. On September 27, 2019, the Tribunal issued the Award. It did not enclose with the Award
the “Model” with the joint calculations performed by the quantum experts.

514. On October 2, 2019, Ecuador requested that the Tribunal disclose to the Parties the

“harmonised model” on which it had relied to calculate Perenco’s compensation.4!

515. On October 9, 2019, ICSID sent a letter to Ecuador with the following message:

[...] [W]e remind the parties that the above case concluded on September
27, 2019, when the Acting Secretary-General dispatched certified copies
of the Tribunal’s Award in accordance with Article 49(1) of the ICSID
Convention.

We also note that on October 4, 2019, the Acting Secretary-General
registered Ecuador’s Application for Annulment dated October 2, 2019, in
accordance with Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule
50.422

516. In the light of the above mentioned documents, the Committee finds: (1) that it was the
Applicant who required the special agreement on the joint expert report and that the Parties’
Agreement was freely and jointly entered into by the Parties; (2) that the Tribunal accepted
to follow the Parties’ Agreement; (3) that the Tribunal could not mention in the Award the

+4 Tribunal Letter to the Parties, May 30, 2017, pp. 3-4 (CEA-048).
4! Ecuador’s letter to the Tribunal, October 2, 2019 (AAE-174).
*# Letter from ICSID to the Parties, dated October 9, 2019 (AAE-175).

114

517.

518.

519.

520.

joint expert process nor the Parties’ Agreement; (4) that the Parties’ Agreement provides
that the “Tribunal will disclose to the parties, and is free to describe and use in the Award,
the joint calculations provided by the economic experts,” not that the Tribunal must
disclose the spreadsheet with the experts’ joint calculations (5) that the Tribunal could not
disclose in the Award that the calculations reflected the joint work of the quantum experts;
(6) that the Parties’ Agreement is not intended to interfere in the Tribunal’s ability to
provide reasons for its decisions in the Award; and (7) that despite being asked by the
Tribunal, the Parties did not indicate that they wished that the Tribunal disclose the joint
expert calculations with the dispatch of the Award.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee concludes that although the Tribunal was not
obliged to enclose to the Award a spreadsheet with the joint experts’ calculation—such as
the “Model”—, the Tribunal was obliged to state the reasons for its decision. As noted in
Section III.D.2, the Parties to an ICSID arbitration cannot validly waive the obligation of
the Tribunal to “state reasons”. Therefore, the Parties’ Agreement cannot be understood in
the sense that it relieves the Tribunal’s duty to state the reasons for its decision. In fact, the
Parties’ Agreement expressly states that “[nJothing in this agreement is intended to
interfere with the Tribunal’s ability to [state its reasons].”*?

Notwithstanding the above, the Committee is of the view that the Parties’ Agreement made
the Tribunal’s duty to state reasons more complex given that it could not refer to such
agreement or the joint expert process, and it could not disclose that the calculations
reflected the joint work of the experts in the Award. What is more, the Parties did not
manifest that they wished that the Tribunal disclose the joint experts’ calculations provided
by the economic experts with the dispatch of the Award. These circumstances made the
Tribunal’s task a challenging one.

The Committee stresses that ICSID arbitral tribunals have a margin of discretion to
determine the amount of the damages awarded to a party.*## Furthermore, the duty to state
reasons does not oblige arbitral tribunals to disclose each mathematical calculation
supporting its estimation of the damages. Thus, the Committee considers that the Tribunal
did not breach its duty to state reasons merely because it did not enclose the “Model” to
the Award. In the Committee’s view, what is paramount is that the Tribunal’s conclusions
are supported by a set of implicit or explicit premises.

In view of the aforesaid, the Committee will now turn to examine whether the Tribunal
provided reasons for its decision to award damages to Perenco amounting to
US$448,820,400.

+ Correspondence between the Parties and the Tribunal, May 31, 2016 (AAE-171).
#4 See {| 362-367 of the present Decision.

115

521.

522.

523.

524.

The Committee observes that the Tribunal developed its analysis on damages in
approximately 268 pages. The Tribunal began its analysis by referring to the Parties’
positions in the damages phase.**> Then, it identified the four main issues that separated
the Parties: (i) restitution, i.e., whether Perenco’s damages should be calculated at the date
of the Award or at the date of the breach; (ii) production, i.e., whether the calculation of
the number of wells that Perenco would have drilled and the volumes of oil should be based
on Mr. Crick’s or RPS’s forecast; (iii) absorption, i.e., whether Perenco’s right to
absorption of all Law 42 should be valued or not; (iv) extension, i.e., whether Perenco
should be accorded value for the extension of the Block 7 Contract that would have been
agreed absent Ecuador’s breaches.**°

The Tribunal then proceeded to explain how it “intends to deal with the principal issues
identified by the Parties,” and indicated that certain issues are addressed at the outset,
including: (i) the dates of valuation of damages, (ii) the Tribunal’s decision to employ two
valuation dates; and (iii) the use of contemporaneous evidence in the valuation.

As to the valuation date, after referring to Article 36(1) of the ILC Articles on the
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, and analyzing and contrasting
the Parties’ positions and the experts’ opinions, the Tribunal concluded that “Decree 662
and caducidad [...] cannot be lumped together so as to land on a single date that is then
used to value the breaches’ collective impact.”447 Thus, the Tribunal “decided that it is
appropriate to seek to value the damages caused by different breaches occurring at different
times.”*#8 The Tribunal further analyzed whether the FET breaches that took place after
Decree 662 and before the caducidad declaration “have been shown to result in a
recognisable harm.”“? In this regard, the Tribunal concluded that “the financial impact of
the non-Decree 662 breaches has either been accounted for in the ‘but for’ analysis of
Decree 662 as of 4 October 2007 or was not quantified by the expert reports submitted with
the Claimant’s pleadings on quantum.”*°°

As to the Tribunal’s decision to employ two valuation dates, the Tribunal explained why it
decided to account for an initial valuation of the damages caused by Decree 662 and then
a second valuation (a “clean sheet”) of the damage caused by the caducidad declaration.**!
The Tribunal further explained that, “[t]he result is an initial award of damages for Decree
662’s impact during the roughly 33-month period between the first completed breach and

+5 Award, 55-65 (AAE-031).
486 Award, {68 (AAE-031).

497 Award, {77 (AAE-031).

488 Award, { 100 (AAE-031).

+9 Award, { 102 (AAE-031).

450 Award, {107 (AAE-031).

451 Award, (ff 108-117 (AAE-031).

116

525.

526.

527.

the last breach. Then, because of the effect of the expropriation, a new valuation is
performed, based on pricing and market information available as of the date of the
expropriation. The initial award of damages attributable to Decree 662 is capped at that
point; this then requires the Tribunal to make certain determinations as to the nature of the
contractual rights that were terminated. These are included in the calculation and the value
of the one-month interest in Block 7 as well as the approximately 10-year period left on
Block 21 will be estimated.”*°? The Tribunal also decided to calculate the caducidad
damages primarily under an ex ante approach and explained the reasons for doing so.*>

As to the use of contemporary evidence of value, the Tribunal referred to the availability
of Perenco’s net present value (NPV) of the impact of Law 42 at 50% and 99% on both
Blocks, which were performed immediately after Decree 662’s announcement.** For the
Tribunal, “these documents of the Claimant’s own making are, in the Tribunal’s view, good
evidence of the Blocks’ estimated value with Law 42 at 50% and 99% in light of the
existing and expected market circumstances at the time of the first breach,”**> and therefore
“it is a good way to check the results that the Tribunal arrives at.”°°

Thereafter, before estimating the quantum of damages awarded to Perenco under the
“harmonised model”,**” the Tribunal proceeded to address the following issues: (i) the
financial impact of Decree 662 on Perenco’s interests in the Blocks as of October 4,
2007;*°8 (iii) the impact of Decree 662 on Perenco’s drilling plans for Blocks 7 and 21;*
(iii) the impact of caducidad declaration of the balance of Perenco’s contractual rights in
Blocks 7 and 21;4 (iii) whether, in the ‘but for’ world, Perenco would have enjoyed an
extension of its operatorship in Block 7 after August 2010 (Perenco’s loss of opportunity
to operate Block 7),*°! (iv) Perenco’s alleged contributory negligence;** and (v) the ‘true-
up’ issue.4%

The Tribunal then continued to estimate the financial consequences on Blocks 7 and 21 of
Ecuador’s breaches. The Tribunal explained that as methodology used to award damages
for each individual claim a “’harmonised model’ was devised through which the Tribunal

452 Award, { 114 (AAE-031).
453 Award, (ff 115-117 (AAE-031).
454 Award, 118 (AAE-031).
455 Award, { 119 (AAE-031).
456 Award, { 124 (AAE-031).

457 Award, (ff 125-127 (AAE-031).
458 Award, (ff 127-149 (AAE-031).
459 Award, (¥{ 150-304 (AAE-031).
460 Award, 4 305-311 (AAE-031).
461 Award, ( 312-326 (AAE-031).
462 Award, (f 327-363 (AAE-031).
46 Award, {ff 364-380 (AAE-031).

117

528.

529.

has calculated the damages to be awarded.”** The Tribunal further noted that the
“harmonised model” could be produced through the adjustments of Professor Kalt’s and
Brattle’s models to implement the Tribunal’s findings described above. *°> The Tribunal
proceeded to describe the changes implemented to the models of the quantum experts and
also described the “harmonised model.”

In this regard, the Tribunal noted that “[t]he ‘harmonised model’ assumes away the effect
of Decree 662 and caducidad in order to arrive at the net present value of the discounted
cash flows that would have been derived from Blocks 7 and 21.”*°°

According to the Tribunal, such calculations were based on the following premises
incorporated in the ‘harmonised model’:

e “The production decisions that the Tribunal has found Perenco would have made but
99467

for the unlawful measures.

e The Model was employed to make “an initial valuation of the damage caused by
Decree 662 and then a second valuation of the damage caused by the declaration of
caducidad.”*

e “[I]n the ‘but for’ world, Law 42 at 50% would have continued to apply from October
2007 until 5 October 2008 at which point, by party agreement, the rate would have
been 33%, which rate would have applied from that date through to the respective
expiry dates of the two Participation Contracts.”

e The Tribunal forecasts the production in both Blocks in the ‘but for’ world for the

first period and for Block 21 for the second period on an ex ante basis.*”°

e “After estimating the production levels, the production is then priced on the basis of
ex ante expectations at the relevant times.”*7!

e The estimation of the amount of CAPEX and OPEX, and other costs, associated with
the assumed levels of production.*””

464 Award, {382 (AAE-031).
465 Award, {383 (AAE-031).
466 Award, | 384 (AAE-031).
467 Award, | 384 (AAE-031).
468 Award, | 384 (AAE-031).
469 Award, {385 (AAE-031).
470 Award, {386 (AAE-031).
471 Award, {386 (AAE-031).
472 Award, | 386 (AAE-031).

118

530.

531.

532.

533.

534.

e “The cash flows are then discounted to the relevant date of valuation, and then brought
forward to the date of the Award at pre-award interest rates.”47

e “Finally, the true-up is applied to reflect the acts discussed previously that affect the
quantum calculation.”4”4

Thereafter, between paragraphs 389 and 419, the Tribunal explains “each of these steps
taken in relation to the ‘harmonised model.’”*”>

The Committee observes that besides the aforesaid “steps”, in paragraphs 420 and 421 of
the Award, the Tribunal accounted for the “OCP deductibility” and the “value of loss of
opportunity.” Finally, at paragraph 422 the Tribunal concluded that:

The sum of US$416.5 million arrived at above is then brought forward to
the date of this Award by means of multiplying that sum by an adjustment
factor of 1.0776 to arrive at a final figure of US$448,820,400.00. This sum
is the damages that are awarded to Perenco and shall be paid by the
Respondent, the Republic of Ecuador.

After having analyzed the Tribunal’s reasoning, the Committee concludes that contrary to
Ecuador’s contention, the Tribunal did state the reasons for the adjustments made to the
quantum experts’ models to arrive to a “harmonised model,” and it did state the premises
leading to its decision to award US$448,820,400 to Perenco. Notwithstanding the previous
finding, the Committee will address four specific elements of the Tribunal’s reasoning that
Ecuador particularly emphasizes:

First, the oil production. For Ecuador, the Tribunal “slightly adjusted Perenco’s forecasts,
but failed to identify either the specific adjustments or the manner in which they were
implemented in such forecasts.”4”° According to Ecuador “without the Model, it is
impossible to understand how the Tribunal altered Perenco’s production profiles to arrive
at the total oil production figures stated in paragraphs 394 and 397 of the Award.”477

The Committee observes that Ecuador acknowledges that in the Award, the Tribunal “(i)
indicated the number of new wells that would have been drilled on the Blocks absent
Decree 662, (iii) provided the aggregate production figures for the ‘base’ and ‘incremental’
productions, and (iii) disclosed the risk adjustment factors it had applied.”*7* The fact that
Ecuador considers that the Tribunal’s reasoning is incomplete or insufficient does not

473 Award, {386 (AAE-031).
474 Award, {387 (AAE-031).
475 Award, | 388 (AAE-031).
476 Reply on Annulment, {| 384.
477 Reply on Annulment, {| 384.
478 Reply on Annulment, {| 384.

119

535.

536.

537.

538.

539.

amount to a failure to state reasons. Furthermore, the duty to state reasons does not require
that the Tribunal explain every single argument or mathematical calculation supporting its
estimation of damages.*”? Therefore Ecuador’s argument fails.

Second, the oil prices. Ecuador claims that the “Award does not contain a single line of
reasoning as to how the Tribunal calculated ‘the ex ante prices for oil production from each
Block and over different time periods.’”**° Ecuador further alleges that “[a]bsent the
Model, Ecuador cannot know what such prices actually were. Nor did the Tribunal indicate
the ‘periods of time’ over which it calculated such prices.”**!

The Committee finds that the Tribunal did provide reasons regarding its assessment of the
oil prices. This is evidenced between paragraphs 398 and 401 of the Award, where the
Tribunal explained that the oil quality of each Block differed and therefore the ex ante
prices for oil production from each Block and over different time periods had to be
calculated. The Tribunal further explained (i) that WTI prices (NYMEX future prices) were
used at the two key dates of valuation: October 2007 and July 2010, (ii) that these prices
were adjusted to reflect the differences in the quality of the oil referenced in WTI crude oil
and that produced in Ecuador, (iii) that these prices were adjusted to reflect the specific
quality of the oil produced in Blocks 7 and 21, and (iv) that the field-specific adjustment
factors were applied to the benchmark oil prices in Ecuador to generate field-specific
prices. Albeit Ecuador might consider these reasons insufficient, that is not tantamount to
a failure to state reasons. Thus, Ecuador’s argument fails.

Third, the CAPEX. Ecuador contends that it is not sufficient that the Tribunal state that it
relied on Professor Kalt’s calculations, adjusted to reflect the schedule pursuant to which
the new wells would have been drilled. For the Applicant, “the particulars of such
adjustment are nowhere to be found in the Award.”4

The Committee observes that Ecuador’s contention is based on the allegation that the
Tribunal’s reasons are insufficient. As previously explained, the fact that a Party considers
the reasoning insufficient does not amount to a failure to state reasons. In any event, the
Committee finds that the Tribunal provided reasons for its conclusions regarding the
CAPEX in Blocks 7 and 21.

As to Block 7, the Tribunal explained that (i) the Oso capital expenditure is based on Mr.
Crick’s evidence which was utilised by Professor Kalt in his financial model, (ii) all
assumed capital expenditures reflect the same essential build-up of individual per-well and

479 See q¥] 362-367 of the present Decision.
489 Reply on Annulment, { 387.
481 Reply on Annulment, { 388.
482 Reply on Annulment, { 390.

120

540.

S41.

542.

543.

544.

545.

facilities costs reflected in Professor Kalt’s first Quantum calculations, (iii) said
calculations were adjusted to reflect the Tribunal’s conclusions that 4 wells would have
been drilled by January 2008 and 19 wells drilled between February 2008 to August 2009,
and (iv) that the starting point for calculations should be on an ex ante basis.

As to Block 21, the Tribunal explained that (i) CAPEX was estimated following cost
information contained in Mr. Crick’s Yuralpa development plan, and (ii) said CAPEX was
adjusted to reflect the Tribunal’s findings on the 16-well programme and the water
sensitivities. ***

Therefore, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its
conclusion regarding CAPEX.

Fourth, the adjustment factor of 1.0776. Ecuador states that “nowhere in the Award is there
any statement to the effect that the 1.0776 adjustment factor accounts for pre-award
interest.”484 The Committee, however, finds that at paragraph 386 of the Award, after
explaining the steps for estimating damages, the Tribunal concluded that “[t]he cash flows
are then discounted to the relevant date of valuation, and then brought forward to the date
of the Award at pre-interest rates.” Then, at paragraph 410 of the Award, the Tribunal
explained the process for determining the applicable pre-award interests. Although it is true
that in paragraph 422 the Tribunal did not explicitly state that the 1.0776 adjustment factor
accounts for pre-award interest, such premise is implicit and can be found at paragraphs
386 and 410 of the Award.

In sum, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons by not
disclosing the Model and that it did provide reasons for its decision to award Perenco
damages amounting to US$448,820,400.

The Committee will now turn to Ecuador’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons and manifestly exceeded its powers when deciding that the “true-up” amounted to
US$36.4 million.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador argues (i) that the Tribunal failed to provide as
much as a single line of reasoning regarding the third component of the ‘true-up’; (ii) that
the Tribunal failed to indicate the values of any of the first three components of the ‘true-
up’, nor did it explain the process through which it allegedly determined such values;**>

483 Award, {¥{ 403-405 (AAE-031).
48 Reply on Annulment, {| 393.

485

Memorial on Annulment, { 474.

121

546.

547.

548.

549.

and (iii) that the reasoning provided by the Tribunal in the Award is insufficient to replicate
the calculations that led the Tribunal to the total value of the ‘true-up’.*®°

The Committee observes that between paragraphs 364 and 380 of the Award, the Tribunal
addressed Ecuador’s ‘true-up’ case. After presenting the Parties’ positions,**’ the Tribunal
explained its views on the ‘true-up’: (i) to the extent that a ‘true-up’ is appropriate with
respect to unpaid Law 42 levies, after the Consortium suspended payment in April 2008,
the true-up must adhere to the ex ante assumptions of future oil prices; (ii) the applicable
level of taxation is that of Law 42 at 50% up to October 2008 and an assumed agreement
at 33% thereafter; (iii) the ‘true-up’, as originally calculated by Brattle, was adjusted to
take out Brattle’s initial use of ex post pricing data; (iv) when calculating the ‘true-up’, the
Tribunal took into consideration that the Consortium paid Law 42 dues at 99% from
October 4, 2007 until April 30, 2008 in the off-shore bank account, but it did not actually
remit the Law 42 fees to Ecuador; (v) the ‘true-up’ was adjusted to reflect the Tribunal’s
findings that Law 42 at 50% was lawful, that Law 42 at 99% was unlawful, and that as of
October 2008 the Parties would have agreed to stabilization of Law 42 at 33%; (vi) the
‘true-up’ was adjusted to address Perenco’s share of termination costs related to the
implementation of Decree 662; (vii) the ‘true-up’ was adjusted to address Ecuador’s
claimed expenses during the time of Perenco’s operatorship; and (viii) the ‘true-up’ was
adjusted to address the coactivas issue in line with the Tribunal’s finding that Law 42 at
50% was lawful, while Law 42 at 99% was unlawful.*88

Thereafter, in paragraphs 412-419 of the Award, the Tribunal describes the steps it took to
determine the amount of the true-up, expressly referring to certain calculations provided
by the quantum experts.

Although the Tribunal did not provide the mathematical model supporting its reasoning
and calculations, as explained in Section III.D.2 above, it is enough that the Tribunal
explains the premises leading to its conclusion and that the conclusion follows from the
premises. The Committee observes that the Tribunal did explain the elements that it took
into consideration when calculating the damages.**° Therefore, the Committee concludes
that Ecuador’s claim under Article 52(1)(e) fails.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador seems to take issue with the fact that the
Tribunal refers to a “fair amount” when concluding that the ‘true-up’ should be US$36.4
million. However, as explained in the previous paragraphs, the Tribunal explained that it
based its calculations on the Parties’ positions and on the opinions of the quantum experts,

486 Memorial on Annulment, 475.
487 Award, (ff 364-371 (AAE-031).
488 Award, ({[ 372-380 (AAE-031).
489 Award, ({ 414-418 (AAE-031).

122

550.

551.

552.

553.

554.

and applied the pertinent adjustments to reflect its findings on various matters. The
Committee therefore concludes that the Tribunal did not act as an amiable compositeur, as
Ecuador claims. Thus, Ecuador’s case regarding the Tribunal’s manifest excess of powers
fails.

In conclusion, by deciding to award Perenco damages amounting to US$448,820,400 the
Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers, nor failed to state reasons for its decision.
The only amounts to be deducted from the amount of damages of US$448,820,400 are the
ones resulting from the Committee’s findings at paragraphs 470 and 574 of the present
decision.

(5) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to apply a post-award interest rate
equivalent to LIBOR for three-month borrowings plus two percent,
compounded annually, until the date of payment

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador contends that by deciding to apply a post-award interest “at a rate of LIBOR for
three-month borrowing plus two percent, compounded annually,” the Tribunal
(i) manifestly exceeded its powers, and (ii) failed to state the reasons for its decision.*”°

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador observes that the Tribunal granted Perenco
an interest rate which that Party had not requested, and which, in December 2019, when
post-award interest started to accrue, was twice as high as the rate Perenco actually
requested: the equivalent to the historical yield of the 10-year of U.S Treasury note (on
December 1, 2019, the rate was of 1.86%). In so deciding, the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers.*?!

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal did not devote even a
single sentence in the Award to explain the reasoning underpinning its decision to grant
post-award interest at the higher LIBOR 3-month borrowing rate plus 2%, instead of the
yield of the 10-year U.S. Treasury note requested by Perenco.

For these reasons, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to grant
Perenco post-award interest at the LIBOR 3-month borrowing rate plus 2%, compounded
annually.*??

4° Memorial on Annulment, {| 483

1 Memorial on Annulment, {| 488

492

Memorial on Annulment, { 491

123

555.

556.

557.

558.

559.

560.

493

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco states that the Tribunal neither exceeded its powers nor failed to state reasons in
finding that Perenco was entitled to post-award interest accruing at a rate of LIBOR for
three-month borrowing plus two percent, compounded annually.*”°

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Perenco notes that Ecuador is wrong that the
Tribunal exceeded its powers by allegedly granting Perenco “higher-than-claimed post-
award interest,” considering that Perenco requested post-award interest at “commercial,
annually compounding rates.”*** Furthermore, the Tribunal had wide discretion to assess
the post-award interest rate. Albeit Ecuador claims that Ecuadorian law allegedly prohibits
compound interest, it does not explain why domestic law prohibitions on payment of
interest would apply to claims under an investment treaty that are also governed by
international law. Moreover, Ecuador itself requested in the counterclaim that the
Committee order Perenco to pay compound interest at an adequate commercial interest
rate.‘°°

As regards the failure to state reasons, Perenco contends that the Tribunal need not justify
its decision to fully compensate Perenco by ordering Ecuador to pay post-award interest at
acommercial, annually compounding rate. International tribunals usually dispose of a large
margin of discretion when fixing interest. Also, “reasons ‘may be implicit and inferred’
from the decision or record and not every ‘gap’ constitutes a failure to state reasons.”*°°

Consequently, the Tribunal neither exceeded its powers nor failed to state reasons in
finding that Perenco was entitled to post-award interest accruing at a rate of LIBOR for
three-month borrowing plus two percent, compounded annually.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state the
reasons for its decision to apply a post-award interest “at a rate of LIBOR for three-month
borrowing plus two percent, compounded annually.””

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal awarded an
interest rate that was not pleaded by the Parties. The Committee, however, finds that

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 276.

#4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 277.

495

Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 225.

6 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 280; Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 226.

497

Memorial on Annulment, { 483.

124

S61.

562.

563.

498 499 Tt

Perenco requested a compound interest at a commercial rate,*”’ and so did Ecuador.
is undisputed by the Parties that the rate of LIBOR for three months borrowing is a
commercial rate of interest. Thus, the Committee finds that the Tribunal’s decision is

circumscribed to the Parties’ requests.

Ecuador also manifests that the rate of interest awarded by the Tribunal does not comply
with Ecuadorian law. Nonetheless, on the one hand, it is not for this Committee to
determine whether or not a given rate complies or not with Ecuadorian law. That
determination exceeds the limited powers of ad hoc committees. But in addition, even if
the Committee had the power to second guess the law applicable to interest, which it does
not, it cannot ignore that Ecuador also requested a compound interest at a commercial rate
and that it is not challenging the Tribunal’s decision to grant interests to Ecuador at exactly
the same rate as the one awarded to Perenco. Ecuador’s claim regarding the Tribunal’s
manifest excess of powers fails.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal did not explain why it
decided to grant post-award interest at the higher LIBOR 3-month borrowing rate plus 2%,
instead of the yield of the 10-year U.S. Treasury note requested by Perenco. Yet, as
explained above, the Tribunal granted a “commercial rate”, as requested by both Parties.

Furthermore, the Committee stresses that the Tribunal was not obliged to follow the rate
proposed by the experts, and to the contrary, it had discretion to determine the rate of
interest. The Tribunal did explain that the amount of damages had to account for full
reparation under international law in order to “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal
act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act
had not been committed.” Given that interest is part of the full reparation standard, the
Tribunal was not obliged to provide further reasons on this point. The Committee therefore
finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its decision to apply a post-award
interest “at a rate of LIBOR for three-month borrowing plus two percent, compounded
annually.”

(6) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully
tax-deductible

a. The Parties’ Position

(i) Applicant’s Position

“8 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {§[ 282, 286(g) (AAE-163); Award, 61 (AAE-031).
“9 Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, {{ 284, 287(g) (AAE-163); Award, J 1009 (AAE-031).
500 Award, {{ 324 (AAE-031), referring to Murphy v. Ecuador, Partial Final Award, May 6, 2016, {481

125

564.

565.

566.

567.

568.

569.

According to Ecuador, only the portion of the shipping costs corresponding to amounts
actually transported through the OCP pipeline was tax deductible. With the exception of
three months in 2004, Perenco was never able to produce enough crude from Block 21 to
meet its 20,000 barrels per day ship-or-pay commitment with the OCP consortium.
Nonetheless, the Tribunal decided that “there should be full tax deductibility in relation to
Block 21’s OCP ship-or-pay costs” and that “this adds US$9 million to the quantum to be
awarded to Perenco.” By so deciding, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and
failed to state the reasons for its decision.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal failed to apply
Ecuadorian law (specifically the Accounting Rules applicable to the Participation
Contracts) to the question of the tax deductibility of Perenco’s full ship-or-pay
commitment.*”!

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador states that the Tribunal failed to provide a single
line of reasoning to reach its conclusion that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully
deductible in Ecuador, disregarding mandatory provisions of the Accountability Rules
applicable to Participation Contracts. Likewise, the Tribunal failed to provide any
explanation for its decision that the costs were worth an additional US$9 million to
Perenco, despite the fact that Perenco’s expert quantified the value of such deduction at
US$10.6 million. >”

For the above reasons, the Tribunal’s decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to
Perenco, insofar as the calculation of such amount includes the value of the deduction to
which Perenco was entitled as a result of the full deductibility of its OCP ship-or-pay
obligation, must be annulled.>

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco states that the Tribunal neither failed to state reasons nor manifestly exceeded its
powers by finding that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully tax deductible.*™

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco contends that deciding a contested issue that
was submitted by the Parties for adjudication, namely the tax treatment for the OCP ship-
or-pay costs is within the Tribunal’s powers. The Parties debated whether or not
Ecuadorian law and practice allowed for full tax deductibility, presented arguments and
evidence supporting their positions, and the Tribunal sided with Perenco.*” Although

5! Memorial on Annulment, {ff 511-512
52 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 505-509.

503

Memorial on Annulment, {| 513.

5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 282

505

Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 234.

126

570.

S71.

572.

573.

574.

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal did not apply Ecuadorian law and therefore manifestly
exceeded its powers, there is no indication that the Tribunal decided to apply a different
body of law.*°° Furthermore, Perenco alleges that, on the value of the OCP ship-or-pay
costs, Ecuador has also failed to demonstrate any prejudice or material effect upon the
outcome of the case. To the contrary, Ecuador’s damages expert itself expressly agreed
that the value of such costs was US$10.6 million. Thus, if anything, the Tribunal gave
Ecuador a discount of US$1.6 million in tax-deductible costs.>”

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador ignores both the Tribunal’s overall damages
analysis and that reasons may be inferred from the Award or record. According to Perenco,
an award is not subject to annulment if the committee can infer or reconstruct implicit
reasons for a decision from the terms of the award and the record before the tribunal.*°*
Accordingly, the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers nor it failed to state the
reasons for its decision that that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully tax-deductible.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has been unable to find one single reason in the Decision on Jurisdiction
and Liability, in the Award, or in any of the other decisions that form part of the Award,
that supports the Tribunal’s conclusion stated in paragraph 420 of the Award.

Albeit in footnote 13 of the Award the Tribunal stated that the quantum experts disagreed
on the tax treatment of tariffs applicable to the OCP Pipeline, the Tribunal did not explain
what the position of the Parties was in this regard, or whether it agreed with the position of
one of the Parties, as claimed by Perenco at the Hearing on Annulment.

The Committee therefore finds that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision
that that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully tax-deductible. This decision, however, is
without prejudice to the Committee’s previous finding that the Tribunal did not fail to state
reasons or manifestly exceeded its powers when deciding to Award Perenco damages
amounting to US$448,820,400. As already mentioned in Section III.D.2, the fact that one
part of the Tribunal’s decision is not reasoned is not enough to annul the whole process of
calculation of damages performed by the Tribunal. The Committee therefore concludes
that the US$9 million awarded in paragraph 420 of the Award must be deducted from the
US$416.5 million awarded to Perenco, prior to the adjustment factor.

5% Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 290.

5°7 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 291
508 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 283; Rejoinder on Annulment, {{f 232-233.

127

575.

576.

577.

578.

579.

In view of the aforesaid conclusion and for the sake of efficiency, the Committee does not
consider necessary to address Ecuador’s claim regarding the Tribunal’s alleged manifest
excess of powers.

(7) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco’s decision to suspend
operations did not contribute to its own losses

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador claims that by deciding that “Perenco’s decision to suspend operation of the two
Blocks in July 2009 [...] cannot be viewed as a wilful or negligent act which contributed
to the harm that it ultimately suffered,” the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental
tule of procedure, manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state the reasons for its
decision. This, considering that the Tribunal “based its decision on the fact that, as it
decided in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, Perenco’s suspension of operations
was justified under Ecuadorian law pursuant to the exceptio non adimpleti contractus
defense.”*”

Ecuador observes that the Tribunal’s conclusion that Perenco did not contribute to its losses
by suspending operations is based on the Tribunal’s decision that Ecuador’s non-
compliance with the provisional measures amounted to a breach of contract and that
Ecuador breached the Participation Contracts by issuing Decree 662. Such decisions, in
turn, led the Tribunal to its decision to order Ecuador to pay US$448,820,400 to Perenco.
Therefore, the Tribunal’s decision on Perenco’s compensation must also be annulled.>!°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco contends that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers, seriously depart
from a fundamental rule of procedure, or fail to state reasons when deciding that Perenco
did not contribute to its own losses by suspending operations.>!!

Ecuador “cannot appeal the Tribunal’s finding that ‘the various claims of contributory
negligence are unavailing’ and that ‘Perenco’s decision to suspend operation of the two
Blocks in July 2009, which the Tribunal has already found in its Decision could be justified
under Ecuadorian law, cannot be viewed as a willful or negligent act which contributed to
the harm that it ultimately suffered.’”>!

50 Memorial on Annulment, { 515.

5! Memorial on Annulment, { 522.

5! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 293

5!2 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 294.

128

580.

581.

582.

583.

584.

53

Accordingly, there are no grounds to annul the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco did not
contribute to its own losses.

b. The Committee’s Analysis

According to Ecuador, when deciding that Perenco’s decision to suspend operations in the
two Blocks did not contribute to its own losses, (i) “the Tribunal relied on a textual
interpretation of Article 1568 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code which neither Party had
advanced,”*!? and therefore seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure; (ii)
“the Tribunal assumed that the provisions of the Ecuadorian Civil Code apply in all
circumstances to private and administrative law contracts,”>!4 and by so doing, the Tribunal
grossly misapplied the law, which amounts to a manifest excess of powers; and (iii) “the
Tribunal failed to state the reasons upon which it based its decision that Ecuadorian law
permitted Perenco to suspend performance of its contractual obligations.”>!°

The Committee observes that Ecuador bases its claim on the same arguments advanced in
regard to the Tribunal’s decision that Perenco was entitled to suspend operations under the
exceptio non adimpleti contractus principle, already addressed in Section IV.B.2.b of the
present Decision. The Committee therefore does not consider necessary to repeat its
assessment on the same issues, as the same reasoning applies.

Given that the Committee already dismissed Ecuador’s arguments regarding the Tribunal’s
interpretation and application of the exceptio non adimpleti contractus, Ecuador’s claims
regarding Perenco’s contributory negligence are dismissed too. The Committee therefore
finds no ground to annul the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco’s decision to suspend
operations did not contribute to its own losses.

GROUNDS ON THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON COUNTERCLAIMS

() Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that the strict liability regime of the 2008
Constitution does not have retroactive effect

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador notes that in its Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal
concluded that the strict liability regime for environmental harm provided for in Article
396 of the 2008 Constitution does not have retroactive effects, and therefore, the fault-

Memorial on Annulment, {| 517.

5!4 Memorial on Annulment, { 519.

sis

Memorial on Annulment, {521

129

585.

586.

587.

based liability regime applied to Perenco from the date it acquired its interests in the Blocks
until October 20, 2008, when the amended Constitution entered into force.>!© In so
deciding, the Tribunal disregarded the public policy exception to the Constitution’s
prohibition against the retroactive application of law, failed to apply Article 396 of the
2008 Constitution to all the environmental harm identified in Blocks 7 and 21, and reduced
Perenco’s liability in the amount of US$73,897,100. In so doing, the Tribunal so grossly
misapplied Ecuadorian law that it should be considered that it did not apply Ecuadorian
law at all and, thereby, manifestly exceeded its powers.*!”

For these reasons, Ecuador requests the annulment of Tribunal’s decision to apply the fault-
based regime between September 4, 2002 (when Perenco first acquired its interests in the
Blocks) and October 19, 2008.°!®

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its power
because it wrongly dismissed Ecuador’s arguments that the strict liability regime should
also apply before October 2008. Perenco states that Ecuador’s argument that the Tribunal
made an error of law in the way it applied the correct body of law is not a basis for
annulment. Ecuador is also wrong that the Tribunal applied Ecuadorian law incorrectly. In
fact, the Tribunal addressed and rejected the same arguments that Ecuador presents before
the Committee, explaining in detail why the record did not support Ecuador’s
unprecedented and unprincipled argument that the strict liability regime of the 2008
Constitution should apply retroactively. Finally, even if the Tribunal had exceeded its
power in so interpreting Ecuadorian law, it would make no difference to the outcome of
the Award, because the difference between the fault-based regime and the strict liability
regime was negligible.>!?

b. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee observes that Ecuador’s claim is based on the allegation that the Tribunal
“grossly” misapplied Ecuadorian law when concluding that Article 396 of the 2008
Constitution does not have retroactive effects, and therefore manifestly exceeded its
powers. As explained in Section III.B.2, “misapplication” of the law is not a manifest
excess of powers annullable under the ICSID Convention. The Committee in turn must
determine whether the Tribunal identified the proper law and endeavored to apply it, which
it deems to be the applicable standard.

516 Memorial on Annulment, { 528.

517 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 523-525.

518 Memorial on Annulment, { 543.

519 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{f 298-303.

130

588. The Committee notes that in its Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal
properly identified the applicable law, namely, Ecuadorian law. In fact, as recognized by
Ecuador:

In this case it was not disputed that Ecuadorian law was the applicable law
to Ecuador’s environmental counterclaim. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s
discussion of “The Framework of the Applicable Law” in section IIIB of
its Interim Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim was entirely
devoted to discussing Ecuadorian law (i.e., the 2008 Constitution, the
Environmental Management Law, the Reglamento Ambiental para las
Operaciones Hidrocarburfferas en el Ecuador (“RAOHE”), and the Texto
Unificado de Legislacién Ambiental Secundaria (“TULAS”)) as well as
the contracts governed by Ecuadorian law (i.e., the Participation
Contracts).°?° (Emphasis of the Tribunal)

589. Likewise, the Tribunal endeavored to apply such law:

With respect to Ecuador’s contention that the entirety of Perenco’s
operatorship is to be adjudged under the 2008 Constitution’s strict liability
regime, the Tribunal does not read the “immediate application” text of the
Constitution to have retroactive effect. The general rule under Ecuadorian
law is that laws may not in principle be given retroactive effect and that
rule has been continued in the 2008 Constitution. The Tribunal is aware
of the “public order” exception to the Constitution’s prohibition against
the retroactive application of law, but it has not been satisfactorily shown
that this has occurred in Ecuadorian legal practice. The Tribunal therefore
does not agree with Ecuador’s arguments in favour of giving the
Constitution’s regime of strict liability an application which to the
Tribunal appears to be retroactive. Based on its understanding of the
Ecuadorian case law that the Parties put before the Tribunal in their
pleadings and reviewed with the legal experts at the hearing, a distinction
must be drawn between the pre-and post-2008 constitutional regimes.*?!

590. The fact that the Tribunal did not uphold Ecuador’s interpretation of the Ecuadorian law
that Article 396 of the 2008 Constitution applied retroactively, and conversely concluded
that the strict liability environmental regime set out in Article 396 could not be applied
retroactively is not a ground for annulment. Even if the Committee were to find that
Ecuador’s interpretation is correct, a difference of interpretation on the applicable law is
not a ground for annulment.

591. The Committee thus finds that Ecuador’s claim fails as the Tribunal did not manifestly
exceed its powers by deciding that Article 396 of Ecuador’s Constitution did not apply
retroactively.

520 Memorial on Annulment, { 527.
52! Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, { 356 (AAE-106).

131

592.

593.

594.

595.

596.

522

(2) Grounds on the Tribunal’s finding that Perenco is only liable for the mud
pits it built or used

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador objects the Tribunal’s decision that Perenco can only be held liable for the period
commencing on September 4, 2002 and, therefore, ““Perenco cannot be held liable for pits
constructed by prior operators which it itself did not use, because by definition it would be
able to show that any damage caused from leachates escaping from such pits cannot be
attributed to it.” As a result, the Tribunal’s Environmental Expert did not evaluate all mud
pits in the Blocks, and, in the Award, the Tribunal held Perenco liable only for mud pits it
built or used.*??

Under Ecuadorian law, Perenco had an obligation to monitor, maintain and remediate mud
pits built by prior operators, thus, it should be held liable for all mud pits that—although
built by prior operators—ruptured or leached (for example, due to lack of maintenance or
monitoring by Perenco) under Perenco’s watch. In deciding otherwise, the Tribunal failed
to apply Ecuadorian law, thereby manifestly exceeding its powers.°”?

At the same time, the Tribunal failed totally to discuss Perenco’s failure to monitor,
maintain and remediate all mud pits, including those that had been built by prior operators.
This complete lack of reasoning clearly amounts to a failure to state its reasons and an
annullable error.*74

For these reasons, the Tribunal’s decision to limit Perenco’s liability to mud pits it built or
used after September 2002 must be annulled. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s ensuing decision
to exclude Perenco’s liability for mud pits built by prior operators (which has an impact of
US$35.3 million, as quantified by the Independent Expert) should also be annulled.*7>

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco contends that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers. When insisting
on causation as a necessary element of liability, it applied Ecuadorian law to conclude that
Perenco was not liable for contamination that it did not cause. It correctly limited its
investigation of mud pits to the ones that Perenco built or used.>”°

Memorial on Annulment, {| 553.

523 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 554-559.

524 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 560-572.

525 Memorial on Annulment, {| 573.

526 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 305-309.

132

597.

598.

599.

600.

601.

602.

603.

Likewise, the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons on this issue. Although Ecuador alleges
that the Tribunal “simply limited itself to stating” its reasoning in one sentence, “it ignores
the Tribunal’s extensive analysis in no fewer than 233 paragraphs, in which it set out the
applicable legal framework and its reasoning in detail and in a manner that the Parties can
understand.”52”

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons
when deciding that Perenco was only liable for the mud pits it built or used.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador alleges that the Tribunal’s reasoning is limited
to a single sentence stating that Perenco could not be held liable for contamination in mud
pits that it did not build or use. The Committee is not persuaded by Ecuador’s position.

The Committee observes that between paragraphs 319 and 448 of its Decision on the
Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal conducted an extensive analysis on the legal
framework governing the dispute.°?* Among other findings, the Tribunal concluded that:

First, the 2008 Constitution does not establish per se the applicable legal standards
governing the environmental conditions on the Blocks and therefore the Tribunal must look
at the Ecuadorian technical standards as promulgated by relevant authorities and as applied
before and after the promulgation of the 2008 Constitution.>”?

Second, Article 396 of Ecuador’s Constitution had no retroactive effects and thus the strict
liability regime—instead of the fault-based regime—applies to post-October 20, 2008
damages resulting from regulatory exceedances.**”

Third, despite the previous conclusion, the Tribunal “does not see major differences
between the two regimes given that: (i) it appears that ultimately all of the experts agreed
that even under the strict liability regime there are still questions of causation; and (ii)
Ecuadorian law prior to 2008 presumed that the party engaged in a harmful activity was
responsible for any environmental damage and the burden shifted to that party to
demonstrate that some other party was responsible.”>*!

527 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 304, 310-314.

528 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {9[ 319-448 (AAE-106).
529 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 352 (AAE-106).

530 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {¥] 353-359 (AAE-106).
53! Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 358 (AAE-106).

133

604.

605.

606.

607.

608.

609.

Fourth, Perenco is only liable for the regulatory exceedances that predate Petroamazonas’
operatorship of the Blocks and which have not been overtaken by Petroamazonas’
works.532

Fifth, as regards the fault-based regime, “if a regulatory exceedance occurred, Perenco is
to be taken to have fallen below the requisite duty of care and will be held liable unless it
can prove on a preponderance of evidence: (i) an occurrence of a force majeure event; (ii)
that it did not fall below the standard of care in respect of that specific instance of
contamination; or (iii) that some other person caused the harm.”>??

Sixth, the evidence in the record shows that there were environmental problems predating
Perenco’s operatorship at the Coca-Payamino Field and the Oso | platform. Yet, evidence
does not suggest major environmental problems.>*+

Seventh, the evidence in the record shows that Perenco was not a responsible
environmental manager.**>

Thereafter, between paragraphs 750 and 811 of the Award, the Tribunal specifically
addressed the issue of causation and attribution, departing from two fundamental
principles: (i) that Perenco cannot be held responsible for any contamination caused by
Petroamazonas after it took over the Blocks in July 2009; and (ii) that although Perenco
was prima facie liable for the contamination in the Blocks, it cannot be held responsible
for any contamination that the evidence shows was caused by other operators prior to its
assumption of operations in 2002.>*°

After analyzing the evidence in the record as regards the state of contamination of the
Blocks before Perenco assumed operations, the Tribunal explained that there was a
potential of layering of contamination by different operators, which “militates in favour of
allocating responsibility based on the length of tenure or based on some other weighting
factor.”°*7 According to the Tribunal:

Given the documentary evidence showing substantial drilling of such
wells prior to 2002, it follows that barium exceedances at those sites have
been shown by Perenco, on a preponderance of evidence, to have resulted
from the actions of its predecessors. Given the location of those wells,
together with the mud pits constructed and used by Perenco’s

582 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {{] 365-370 (AAE-106).
553 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 379 (AAE-106).

534 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {{] 380-405 (AAE-106).
585 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {¥[ 406-447 (AAE-106).
536 Award, {i 764-765 (AAE-031).

537 Award, {{ 807 (AAE-031).

134

610.

6ll.

612.

613.

614.

predecessors, and the Tribunal has been able to exclude liability, either
wholly or partially, for different parts of the various sites investigated.***

Finally, in view of its previous findings, the Tribunal explained the methodology it
employed for allocating liability between Perenco and previous or succeeding operators:

To be clear: before using a time-based weighting system in respect to a
particular site, areas within the site that could be clearly designated as
“non-Perenco” or “Perenco” were segregated and placed in the
corresponding “bucket” of responsibility. In addition, where other criteria
could be used, these were applied in lieu of the time-weighted approach.
But sometimes it has been necessary to allocate responsibility between
successive operators. So far as prior operators are concerned, the time of
first well drilling at a specific site is used as the starting point and July
2009, when Perenco ceased operations in the Blocks, is used as the end
date (with the exception of sites where the ‘Petroamazonas temporal issue’
applies). This tends to bias in favour of Perenco, and therefore is a
conservative estimate of its responsibility, because it does not consider the
possibility of later contaminant release dates and the fact that some fields
were drilled but not heavily exploited until Perenco arrived (i.e., Oso and
Yuralpa). As for any allocation as between Perenco and Petroamazonas,
to the limited extent that it is used (for the reasons previously given), the
time-weighted system uses July 2019 as the end date. This is relevant only
for a few sites for groundwater (Coca 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino
1/CPF) and therefore assumes much less importance than the system used
for Perenco and prior operators.**

The Committee thus observes that the Tribunal did provide reasons for its decision that
Perenco is only liable for the mud pits it built or used.

The Committee will now delve into the specific issues raised by the Applicant as regards
the Tribunal’s alleged failure to state reasons.

Ecuador stresses that without reason the Tribunal excluded three mud pits at Coca 8 and
the mud pit contamination at Jaguar 2. The Committee however finds that the Tribunal did
provide reasons for so doing.

First, the Tribunal stated that Perenco was only liable for the damage caused by the mud
pits it built or used. This issue has already been discussed in the preceding paragraphs of
this Decision. Second the Tribunal remarked, specifically referring to the Coca-Payamino
field, that “in [its] view, it is more likely than not that Petroproduccién and other operators
at the time caused damage.”™” Therefore, it can be inferred from the above reasoning that
the three mud pits at Coca 8 were not included because the Tribunal considered that the

538 Award, {{ 809 (AAE-031).
53° Award, {811 (AAE-031).
540 Award, {800 (AAE-031).

135

615.

616.

617.

618.

619.

contamination at the sites had been caused by Petroproduccién and not by Perenco. The
Committee stresses that the Award must be read as a whole and therefore the overall
analysis of causation and liability made by the Tribunal must be considered.

As to the Jaguar 02 field, the Tribunal explained that “in Jaguar 02, drilled in January 1994
and taken out of service in 2000, and therefore only operated by Perenco’s predecessors,
there was a pre-existing non-Perenco mud pit which experienced a slope failure. This was
not attributed to Perenco.”**! The Committee finds that such proposition is consistent with
the Tribunal’s decision that Perenco could not be held liable for damage caused by other
operators.

The Committee thus finds that the Tribunal stated either implicit or explicit reasons for
excluding the contamination from the three mud pits at Coca 8 and the mud pit at Jaguar
02 from the allocation of responsibility to Perenco.

Ecuador further stresses that the Tribunal did not provide reasons to explain “why the fact
that mud pits were built by prior operators would excuse Perenco of its obligation in
Articles 12 and 59 of the RAOHE to regularly monitor, maintain and remediate the
environmental conditions around mud pits.”*4?

The Committee notes that although the Tribunal did not expressly refute Ecuador’s
interpretation of Articles 12 and 59 of the RAOHE, in its Decision on the Environmental
Counterclaim, the Tribunal did explain its “findings on the regulatory standards that should
be applied.”*** Particularly, the Tribunal addressed the following issues:

(i) whether RAOHE Annex 2, Table 6 represents the comprehensive list
of contaminants when testing for environmental damage as a result of
hydrocarbon operations or whether TULAS Tables 2 or 3 provide
additional remediation criteria that should be applied; (ii) whether the
regulatory criteria in Ecuador requires the use of “indicator parameters”
when testing for contamination of the environment by hydrocarbon
activities; (iii) which land-use classification should be applied under
Ecuador’s regulatory criteria; (iv) whether Table 7(a) or Table 7(b) of
RAOHE applies to the testing of the mud pits in the two Blocks; and (v)
in relation to groundwater testing, whether Ecuadorian regulatory criteria
for groundwater testing admit of filtration in collecting samples.

Moreover, when explaining “the approach to the testing and evaluation of mud pits,” the
Tribunal indicated that:

541 Award, {885 (AAE-031).

542

Reply on Annulment, {{ 502.

5 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {][ 457-569 (AAE-106).
5 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 458 (AAE-106).

136

Although it recognises that Ecuador’s primary case was premised
principally on the full restoration objective, the Tribunal considers that
drilling muds and cuttings are properly disposed of under the current
regime if: (i) they are placed in properly constructed and graded pits as
required by law; (ii) the operator properly treated the contents of the pits
so as to ensure that it did not deposit muds and cuttings that contained
analytes in quantities in excess of the applicable regulations; (iii) the pits
have been properly covered and closed; and (iv) soil sampling at places
around the pits shows no sign of leaching.

620. After presenting its assessment of the evidence and the applicable standards, the
Tribunal presented its conclusions on the mud pits issue, as follows:

(a) Table 7 of Annex 2 of RAOHE provides the applicable technical
standard.

(b) Perenco has no obligation to dig up and remediate properly constructed
and confined mud pits whose contents do not exceed the applicable
regulatory standard.

(c) At the same time, it was not improper for IEMS to sample the contents
of closed mud pits to determine whether or not they exceeded the
permissible tolerances contained in Table 7 of Annex 2 of RAOHE or
contained substances that should not have been deposited in the first place.

(d) Drilling muds and cuttings are properly disposed of under the current
regime if: (i) they are placed in proper pits as required by law; (ii) the
operator properly treated the contents of the pits so as to ensure that it did
not deposit muds and cuttings that contained analytes in quantities in
excess of the applicable regulations or other substances that should not
have been deposited therein; (iii) the pits have been properly covered and
closed; (iv) such pits are constructed with proper berms and at grade; and
(v) that soil sampling at places around the pits shows no sign of leaching.

(e) As to whether regard should be had to Table 7(a) or 7(b), if a pit has
an impermeable liner, Table 7(b) applies. Conversely, if there is no
impermeable liner, Table 7(a) applies. The Appendix A to Claimant’s
Reply Post-Hearing Brief on Counterclaims, Schedule of Closed Pits in
Blocks 7 and 21 as of 2009, shows that the Parties continue to have
substantial disagreements as to whether or not certain pits have been
closed with impermeable liners. This will be the subject of further
investigation (as to which see below). In any case of doubt, the more
environmentally protective standard set out in Table 7(a) shall be applied.

621. Thus, the fact that the Tribunal did not explicitly reason the Award by expressly refuting
Ecuador’s interpretation of the law—but rather by explaining how, in the view of the
Tribunal, the law should be interpreted—, does not mean that the Tribunal did not explain

545 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, #{{ 501-525 (AAE-106). Footnotes omitted.

137

622.

623.

624.

625.

626.

its views on whether Perenco could be held liable for the pits built and used prior to its
operatorship. It is not on the Committee to second-guess what the Tribunal’s approach
should have been and how the Tribunal should have answered the question posed by the
Parties. That is part of the Tribunal’s choice of methodology.

As explained in Section T.c.2,>4° pursuant to Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention, the
Tribunal had the obligation to address every question submitted to it. The question
submitted by the Parties was whether Perenco was responsible for the contamination
caused by its predecessors. The Tribunal answered the question and provided reasons for
its conclusion. The Committee thus finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal failed to apply
Ecuadorian law by ignoring that “oilfield operators are bound to regularly monitor,
maintain and remediate the environmental conditions of and around existing mud pits,
including historical mud pits (i.e., built by prior operators) in the areas where they
operate.”*47

The Committee stresses that while Ecuador may disagree with the Tribunal’s interpretation
and application of the law, as explained above, the Tribunal properly identified the
applicable law—which is undisputed by the Applicant—and endeavored to apply such law.
The Committee therefore has no basis to conclude that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

(3) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to allocate liability between Perenco and
other operators of Blocks 7 and 21

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

The Applicant contends that by reducing Perenco’s liability for the environmental harm
found in Blocks 7 and 21 on account of the purported liability of other prior and successive
operators of such Blocks, the Tribunal asserted jurisdiction over entities beyond its limited
jurisdiction and failed to apply Ecuadorian law on joint liability. Thereby, the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers.*“*

In relation to the excess of jurisdiction over third parties, the Applicant notes that despite
the Tribunal having acknowledged that “it lacks jurisdiction to assess damages payable by

54 See footnote No. 98.
547 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 556.
548 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 576.

138

627.

628.

629.

630.

non-parties to the arbitration,”*“? it did assess damages payable by non-parties to the

arbitration when it reduced Perenco’s liability by US$73,897,100 on account of the liability
attributed by the Tribunal to prior operators and to Petroamazonas, over whom it did not
have jurisdiction. In so doing the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.°°°

In relation to the applicable law, Ecuador argues that in accordance with Ecuadorian law
(Article 2217 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code), where the environmental harm has been
caused by several polluters (i.e., responsible for the same tort), each one of them is jointly
liable to compensate the full amount of the relevant harm. Yet, despite being aware of
Ecuadorian law on joint liability, the Tribunal disregarded it, manifestly exceeding its
powers.*>!

Based on the above reasons, Ecuador requests the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to
limit Perenco’s liability to environmental harm occurring in the Blocks between September
4, 2002 and July 16, 2009, and the ensuing decision to reduce the damages Perenco owes
to Ecuador by US$73,897,100.°°

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco argues that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers in apportioning
liability between Perenco and other operators.**? The Tribunal not only endeavored to
apply the proper law, but also applied it correctly. The Tribunal based its decision on
principles of causation and joint and several liability under Ecuadorian law. The fact that
the Tribunal did not uphold Ecuador’s mistaken interpretation of Article 2217 of the
Ecuadorian Civil Code is no ground for annulment.*>+

Also, the Tribunal did not exercise jurisdiction over non-party operators in finding Perenco
liable for only part of the damages.*° Upon obtaining the Tribunal Expert’s quantification
of the total extent of the remediation required in the Blocks, the Tribunal allocated the
relevant part of that total to Perenco.**°

59 Award, footnote 886 (AAE-031). See also, Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {166 (AAE-106)
550 Memorial on Annulment, { 586.
551 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 577-582.

552

Memorial on Annulment, {[ 590.

553 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 316; Rejoinder on Annulment, {{{ 267-268.
554 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 269.

555 Rejoinder on Annulment, {ff 274-276

556 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 276.

139

631.

632.

633.

634.

635.

636.

Hence, Ecuador failed to establish that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when
deciding to apply the principles of joint and several liability and causation under
Ecuadorian law in order to apportion liability between Perenco and other operators.>>”

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the
proper law and by exercising jurisdiction over third parties.

As to the failure to apply the law, Ecuador states that the Tribunal failed to apply Article
2217 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code, providing for joint and several liability for
environmental harm. The Committee however is not convinced by Ecuador’s position.

The Applicant does not contest that the Tribunal properly identified the applicable law, but
that it failed to apply Article 2217 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code, as interpreted by Ecuador.
Even though the provision invoked by Ecuador does provide for a rule on joint and several
liability, as explained in Section IV.D.2.b above, pursuant to its interpretation of
Ecuadorian law—mainly as regards the fault-based regime—, the Tribunal concluded that
causation was paramount when determining the allocation of responsibility and therefore
Perenco could not be held liable for environmental damages it did not cause. The Tribunal
did not uphold Ecuador’s interpretation that Article 2217 was the applicable rule of
Ecuadorian law to allocate responsibility and thereby Perenco and prior operators were
jointly and severally liable. The Tribunal opted for a theory of causation under Ecuadorian
law to allocate liability based on who may have caused the damage. One may disagree with
such interpretation, but a mere disagreement on the interpretation is not a ground for
annulment. The Tribunal identified the proper law—Ecuadorian law—and endeavored to
apply it. Whether the interpretation of Ecuadorian law is or not correct is not for this
Committee to review.

As to the “excess of jurisdiction”, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not exercise
jurisdiction over third parties. Under its interpretation of Ecuadorian law as regards
causation, the Tribunal decided what should be the starting point in time to allocate liability
to Perenco and then proceeded to allocate the quantum of remediation corresponding to
Perenco.

In deciding the amount attributable to Perenco, the Tribunal did not exercise jurisdiction
over other operators nor allocated liability to other operators for three main reasons:

557 Rejoinder on Annulment, 277.

140

637.

638.

639.

640.

641.

642.

643.

First, the decision of the Tribunal as regards its jurisdiction and the merits is only binding
on Perenco, not on the operators that were not a party to the arbitration. This is undisputed
between the Parties.

Second, neither the Award nor any of the other decisions of the Tribunal determined the
total extent and amount of the liability of each of the operators of the Blocks, other than
Perenco and Burlington, or whether their liability is joint and several or not.

Last but not least, in the Award, the Tribunal calculated the remediation costs attributed to
Perenco by deducting from the total quantum of remediation the damages that were found
to be caused by other operators. That does not mean, as suggested by Ecuador, that the
Tribunal exercised jurisdiction over the other operators of the Blocks. The only amount
that is final and binding is the one allocated to Perenco.

In sum, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers
when deciding to allocate liability between Perenco and other operators of Blocks 7 and
21.

(4) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to apportion liability for environmental
remediation between Perenco, Petroamazonas, and prior operators

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador observes that in the Award the Tribunal decided that for ground water remediation
costs, the Tribunal not only allocated costs as between Perenco and its predecessors, but
also included Petroamazonas in the time-weighted allocation, using July 2019 as the end
date. In so doing, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state the
reasons for its decision.**

As to the failure to state reasons, the Applicant argues that the Tribunal failed to state any
reasons (i) for its decision to apportion liability between Perenco and Petroamazonas for
ground water contamination at Coca 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino 1/CPF, as well
as (ii) for its calculation of the groundwater remedial costs attributed to Petroamazonas.**?

As to the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that in deciding to attribute liability
for groundwater contamination at Coca 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino 1/CPF
between Perenco, Petroamazonas and prior operators, the Tribunal resorted to its own
notion of equity and adopted a “time-based weighing system”, disregarding the application

558 Memorial on Annulment, {592
5° Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 593-618.

141

644.

645.

646.

647.

of Article 2217 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code. Furthermore, the Tribunal asserted
jurisdiction it did not have over Petroamazonas and prior operators. In so doing, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.>®

For the above reasons, Ecuador requests that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decision
to limit Perenco’s liability to groundwater contamination occurring in the Blocks between
September 4, 2002 and July 16, 2009. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s ensuing decision to
allocate liability for groundwater contamination between Perenco, Petroamazonas and
prior operators using a time-weighing system—exonerating Perenco from payment of
US$4,717,790 in remediation costs for groundwater at Coca 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF and
Payamino 1/CPF641—should also be annulled.

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco argues that the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers nor failed to state
reasons when deciding to allocate groundwater liability between Perenco and other
operators.*°!

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco asserts that the Tribunal applied Ecuadorian
law and it did so correctly because Perenco cannot be jointly and severally liable with prior
or successor operators. Also, the Tribunal did not assert jurisdiction over Petroamazonas
and prior operators when determining that those other operators would be liable for
environmental harm.

As to the failure to state reasons, Perenco contends that while Ecuador may disagree with
the substance of the Tribunal’s findings, the Tribunal gave reasons for its decision to rely
on a time-based weighing method to allocate groundwater costs at Gacela 1/CPF, Coca 2,
and Payamino 1/CPF.°° Likewise, the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons when
quantifying damages owed for groundwater liability; “the standard for a failure to state
reasons does not require that Ecuador be able to reverse engineer the Tribunal’s
calculations on quantum, but solely that ‘reasons—albeit “very limited’”—must be
given.’***” Finally, the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons when relying on July 2019 as
the end date for allocating groundwater liability on a time basis. In its Decision on the
Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal “explained that ‘[s]ince Perenco ran the Blocks
from late 2002 until mid-July 2009 (roughly six and a half years) and Petroamazonas has
operated them from mid-July 2009 to the present day (roughly five and a half years) the

5 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 619-624.
561 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 278.

562

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 327.

563 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{[ 328-334; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 280; Tr., Day | January 12, 2021, Perenco’s Opening
Statement, p. 47.
5 Rejoinder on Annulment, {{ 286.

142

648.

649.

650.

651.

652.

653.

565

allocation will be based on the amount of time in which the Blocks have been under the
stewardship of the two operators (e.g., 55/45%).’”°°

Therefore, the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers nor failed to state reasons
when holding that, under Ecuadorian law, Perenco was only liable for the groundwater
contamination that the Consortium—and not the prior or successor operators—caused.*°

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons
when deciding to apportion liability for groundwater remediation between Perenco,
Petroamazonas and prior operators on the basis of the time-period each had operated the
Blocks until July 2019.5

As to the manifest excess of powers, the Committee notes that the arguments advanced by
Ecuador to support its position regarding the Tribunal’s alleged failure to apply the law are
very similar to those presented to request the annulment of the Tribunal’s decision to
allocate liability between Perenco and the other operators of Blocks 7 and 21, analyzed in
Sections IV.D.2.b and IV.D.3.b above. The Committee thereby refers the Parties to the
analysis conducted in those sections for the substantiation of its decision that the Tribunal
did not manifestly exceed its powers when deciding to apportion liability for environmental
remediation between Perenco, Petroamazonas, and prior operators.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador claims that the Tribunal failed to state reasons
(i) for its decision to allocate liability between Perenco and Petroamazonas for ground
water contamination at Coca 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino 1/CPF, (ii) for its
calculation of liability pursuant to the “time-based weighting system”; and (iii) for its
decision to rely on July 2019 as the end date for allocating groundwater liability on a time
basis.>%

In relation to allocation of liability, the Committee observes that the Tribunal did state
reasons for its decision to allocate liability between Perenco and Petroamazonas for ground
water contamination at the three sites.

In the Award, the Tribunal explained its application of the “time-weighted sharing”
approach to allocate remedial costs for groundwater, indicating that:

Time-weighted sharing was used for soil contamination (when the record
evidence could not be used to allocate costs, as noted in paragraph 883

Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 290.

566 Rejoinder on Annulment, { 295.
567 Reply on Annulment, {{{ 530-561
568 Reply on Annulment, {ff 533-554.

143

above), and groundwater impairment. For example, with respect to the
Gacela 02/CPF, for the groundwater impairment downstream of the API
separator, the Tribunal considered it appropriate to allocate some
responsibility to Petroamazonas due to its continued use of the separator.
For the groundwater impairment to the southeast of the facility, the soil
samples were collected shortly after Perenco’s tenure came to an end and
responsibility therefor is allocated as between Perenco and _ its
predecessors. As a result, Perenco was assigned US$452,530 in remedial
costs, its predecessors were assigned US$458,990, and Petroamazonas
was assigned US$485,480 in remediation costs.*

654. Then, the Tribunal explained that the results of such application are set out in Annex A to
the Award:

The approach taken by the Tribunal, as just described, had been applied to
each site and the results of this process are set out in Annex A to this
Award which sets forth the Tribunal’s findings in tabular form for: (i) sites
where Perenco used mud pits and/installed crude oil production wells; (ii)
sites where responsibility for soil remediation is allocated between prior
operators and Perenco; (iii) groundwater sites where responsibility is
allocated between prior operators, Perenco, and Perenco’s successor; and
(iv) certain other sites that the Tribunal has accepted give rise to
responsibility on Perenco’s part.>”

655. At Table 3 of Annex A to the Award “Allocation of Remedial Responsibilities — Sites
Affected with Groundwater)’>”!, the Tribunal indicated the time-based allocation of
remedial costs for groundwater, and presented its analysis on, among other, Coca 2/CPF,
Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino 1/CPF sites.

656. In respect to Coca 02/CPF, the Tribunal explained that:

The affected areas of groundwater next to the non-Perenco mud pit and
the pre-Perenco formation water pit are attributed to Perenco's
predecessors. In the swampy area to the southeast of the CPF, potential
contributions by Petroamazonas to groundwater from continued use of the
API separator cannot be discounted.*””

657. As regards Gacela 1/CPF, the Tribunal observed that:

In the affected area of groundwater downstream of the API separator at
Gacela 1/CPF, potential contributions by Petroamazonas to groundwater
from continued use of the API separator cannot be discounted. For the
groundwater to the southeast of the facility, the soil samples were collected

5 Award, 887 (AAE-031).

57 Award, {i 887-888 (AAE-031).

571 Award, Annex A, Table 3, p. 4 (AAE-031).
52 Award, Annex A, Table 3, p. 4 (AAE-031).

144

658.

659.

660.

661.

662.

shortly after Perenco's tenure and limit responsibility to Perenco and its
predecessors.*”>

As to Payamino 01, CPF, the Tribunal stated that:

In the affected area of groundwater impairment adjacent to the stream to
the northwest of the Payamino 1/CPF, potential contributions by
Petroamazonas to groundwater resulting from its continued use of the CPF
cannot be discounted. For the affected area of groundwater in the
catchment area to the west of the CPF, the soil samples were collected
shortly after Perenco's tenure and limit responsibility to Perenco and its
predecessors.*”

The Committee finds that the reasons provided by the Tribunal are not frivolous, absurd or
irrelevant. The record of the Underlying Arbitration shows that the Tribunal based its
decision on the findings of the Tribunal’s Independent Expert and are pertinent to resolve
the question posed by the Parties.*”> Albeit Ecuador may consider said reasons to be
“insufficient” or “inadequate”,*”° as noted in Section III.D.2 above, “insufficient reasons”

is not a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e). Ecuador’s argument thus fails.

Ecuador also claims that the Tribunal contradicted itself on three main points, thereby
failing to state reasons.

The first alleged contradiction is that, in the Section “the Tribunal’s Findings”, the Tribunal
concluded on the “‘Petroamazonas issue’ that the use of a generally applicable discounting
factor based exclusively upon a split between the length of time that Perenco and
Petroamazonas’ operated in the Blocks, would, by itself, be too crude a method for
allocating responsibility and insufficiently connected to the record evidence.”>”’ Yet, in the
section “The Tribunal’s quantification of the damages payable by Perenco,” the Tribunal
stated in respect to groundwater contamination that “allocating responsibility based on time
of operation is, in the Tribunal’s view, an appropriate method to deal with the
uncertainty.”57*

The Committee does not find a contradiction between the Tribunal’s statements. When
read as a whole, the Tribunal’s reasoning regarding how to allocate responsibility between

573 Award, Annex A, Table 3, p. 4 (AAE-031).

5% Award, Annex A, Table 3, p. 4 (AAE-031).

575 Report of the Tribunal’s Environmental Expert with Parties’ Consolidated Comments, pp. 149, 219 (AAE-100); Tribunal’s
Expert Report, Attachment 1-2, Site Dossier, Coca 2-CPF, p. 19 (CEA-161).

576 Reply on Annulment, { 539.
577 Award, {785 (AAE-031).
578 Memorial on Annulment, {596

145

Perenco and the other operators of the Blocks, including Petroamazonas, shows no
contradiction.

663. The Committee observes that after explaining its assessment of the evidence in relation to
the possible contamination caused by Petroamazonas,*” the Tribunal concluded that:

In sum, in relation to what might be called the ‘Petroamazonas temporal
issue’, given the totality of the circumstances (including the Independent
Expert’s restricted mandate, his and his team’s consultations with the
Parties’ experts and counsel throughout his sampling activities, and the
spill reports and other documents produced by Ecuador), the Tribunal has
concluded that the use of a generally applicable discounting factor based
exclusively upon a split between the length of time that Perenco and
Petroamazonas’ operated in the Blocks would, by itself, be too crude a
method of allocating responsibility and insufficiently connected to the
record evidence. The Tribunal concluded that a closer look at the sites
where contamination was found was required before using any
discounting factor based on, for example, the respective length of the two
operators’ tenures.**°

664. Thereafter, when presenting its conclusions regarding contamination caused by prior
operators at paragraph 811, the Tribunal explained the methodology it implemented to
allocate responsibility between Perenco and the other operators of the Blocks, including
Petroamazonas:

To be clear: before using a time-based weighting system in respect to a
particular site, areas within the site that could be clearly designated as
“non-Perenco” or “Perenco” were segregated and placed in the
corresponding “bucket” of responsibility. In addition, where other criteria
could be used, these were applied in lieu of the time-weighted approach.
But sometimes it has been necessary to allocate responsibility between
successive operators. [...] As for any allocation as between Perenco and
Petroamazonas, to the limited extent that it is used (for the reasons
previously given), the time-weighted system uses July 2019 as the end
date. This is relevant only for a few sites for groundwater (Coca 2/CPF,
Gacela 1/CPF and Payamino 1/CPF) and therefore assumes much less
importance than the system used for Perenco and prior operators.**!
(emphasis by the Committee).

 

665. The analysis in both paragraphs reflects that given its concerns, the Tribunal did not
automatically use “a generally applicable discounting factor based exclusively upon a split
between the length of time that Perenco and Petroamazonas operated the Blocks.” Instead,
if required, the Tribunal “took a closer look at each site.” This is consistent with the

579 Award, {i 767-784 (AAE-031).
580 Award, {785 (AAE-031).
581 Award, {811 (AAE-031).

146

666.

667.

668.

Tribunal’s statements at paragraph 811 noting that (i) “where other criteria could be used,
these were applied in lieu of the time-weighted approach”, and (ii) as regards the allocation
between Perenco and Petroamazonas, that the time-weighted system is used to a “limited
extent,” for the reasons previously explained by the Tribunal in the Award. Therefore, the
Committee finds no contradiction, much less a contradiction that amounts to a failure to
state reasons.

The second alleged contradiction is that the Tribunal employed the time-based weighting
method, although it considered said method to be “insufficiently connected to the record
evidence,”**? namely because of the lack of evidence of contamination caused by
Petroamazonas. Ecuador develops its argument under two main contentions:

First, that the Tribunal’s statement at paragraph 771 of the Award,>*? indicates that “had

the Parties’ experts identified fresh traces of contamination attributable to Petroamazonas
in the months it had been operating since July 2009, they would have noted so.”**+

Second, that the contamination confirmed by the Tribunal’s Independent Expert relates to
the same locations and contaminants that had been identified by the Parties’ experts. Yet,
none of the Parties’ representatives, Ecuador’s environmental expert (IEMS), Perenco’s
environmental expert (GSI), Walsh, the Parties, their counsel, or Burlington observed
environmental incidents after July 2009 in the areas analyzed by the Tribunal and the
Tribunal’s Independent Expert.**° As noted by the Tribunal in the Award, that “there was
no mention in the Independent Expert Report of any recent spills witnessed at sites where
Ramboll [i.e., the Tribunal’s Environmental Expert] tested.”>*° In sum, Perenco did not
satisfy the burden of proving that the contamination identified at the Blocks was caused by
Petroamazonas.°*’ The Tribunal therefore concluded that “the use of a generally applicable
discounting factor based exclusively upon a split between the length of time that Perenco
and Petroamazonas operated in the Blocks would, by itself, be too crude a method of
allocating responsibility and insufficiently connected to the record evidence.”*** Despite
all the above, the Tribunal reduced Perenco’s liability by US$1,218,5550, corresponding
to the groundwater remediation costs identified at Cica 2/CPF, Gacela 1/CPF, and

582 Memorial on Annulment, {| 599.

583 Award, 1771 (AAE-031): “Although it cannot be completely ruled out that some contamination was caused by Petroamazonas
prior to IEMS commencing its work (or during the time that it took IEMS and GSI to complete their studies), the Tribunal is
satisfied that it is unlikely that one or the other of the Parties’ experts, particularly Perenco’s experts, would have identified any

 

new contamination that they thought occurred after Perenco’s operators

 

p and included it as being caused by Perenco.”

584 Memorial on Annulment, { 601

585

Memorial on Annulment, {| 603.

586 Memorial on Annulment, { 603, citing Award, {784 (AAE-031)
587 Memorial on Annulment, {{{ 603-605.
588 Memorial on Annulment, { 605, citing Award, {785 (AAE-031)

147

669.

670.

671.

672.

Payamino 2/CPF. Ecuador argues that this alleged contradiction between the Tribunal’s
assessment of the evidence and its other findings amounts to a failure to state reasons.°*°

The Committee does not see a contradiction between the Tribunal’s assessment of the
evidence and its other findings. After presenting its assessment of the evidence in the record
on whether Petroamazonas also had caused contamination at the Blocks, the Tribunal
concluded that “given the totality of the circumstances,” “the use of a generally applicable
discounting factor based exclusively upon a split between the length of time that Perenco
and Petroamazonas’ operated in the Blocks would, by itself, be too crude a method of
allocating responsibility and insufficiently connected to the record evidence.” The Tribunal
therefore decided “that a closer look at the sites where contamination was found was
required before using any discounting factor [...].”°?

Then, when presenting a site-by-site analysis in Table 3 of Annex A to the Award, the
Tribunal explained the reasons to allocate responsibility between Perenco, its predecessors,
and Petroamazonas for the contamination caused at the Blocks. For the Tribunal, there
could be “potential” contributions by Petroamazonas to groundwater at Coca 02/CPF,
Gacela 01/CPF, and Payamino 01/CPF, and therefore it partially allocated responsibility to
Petroamazonas for the “potential” contamination caused at those sites.*”!

Ecuador is not satisfied with the fact that the Tribunal decided to allocate remedial costs
for groundwater to Petroamazonas at the three sites based on a “potential” contribution.
While the Committee considers that there is room for more clarity in the Tribunal’s
assessment of the evidence and the conclusions presented at Table 3 of Annex A to the
Award, the Tribunal did not contradict itself. At paragraph 785 of the Award, the Tribunal
recognized that it could not merely apply a time-based weighting method, but that it had to
take a closer look at the sites. When conducting its site-by-site analysis, the Tribunal found
that Petroamazonas could have potentially contributed to groundwater contamination at
Coca 02/CPF, Gacela 01/CPF, and Payamino 01/CPF, and thereby partially allocated
responsibility to Petroamazonas.

Although Ecuador may disagree with the Tribunal’s decision to allocate responsibility on
the basis of a “potentiality”, such allegation goes to the merits of the case, particularly to
the Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence. While the Committee may not entirely agree
with the Tribunal, annulment under the ICSID Convention has no room for second-
guessing the Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence. If the Tribunal considered that the
burden of proof to allocate responsibility for environmental contamination was satisfied

58° Memorial on Annulment, {| 606.
5 Award, J 785 (CAA-043).
5°! Award, Annex A, Table 3, p. 4 (CAA-043)

148

673.

674.

675.

676.

677.

678.

679.

592

593

with a “potential contribution”, the Committee must not intervene in the Tribunal’s
decision.

In conclusion, the Committee finds no contradiction and thus no failure to state reasons.

The third alleged contradiction is that although the Tribunal manifested that it purported to
have “a closer look” at the three sites, in Annex A to the Award, the Tribunal merely stated
that “the potential contributions by Petroamazonas to groundwater contamination cannot
be discounted.”°*? Ecuador further alleges that the Tribunal’s weighing of the evidence was
“jrrational.”°?

The Committee observes that Ecuador’s contention is based on the sufficiency of the
reasons stated by the Tribunal. As noted in Section III.D.2, the Committee shall not adjudge
whether the reasons given by the Tribunal are “sufficient” or “adequate”. As regards
Ecuador’s contention on the Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence, the Committee notes
that such allegation referring to the “irrational” assessment of the evidence goes into the
correctness of such assessment. This is not a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e),
nor under any other ground. The Committee is not competent to determine whether the
Tribunal correctly or incorrectly assessed the evidence. By doing so, it would be acting as
a court of appeal, which is clearly outside its competence. Ecuador’s claim in this regard
thus fails.

Turning to the issue of the Tribunal’s calculation of the groundwater remedial costs, as
already noted at Section IV.D.2.b above, the Tribunal did explain the reasons for applying
a time-based weighting approach. For efficiency, the Committee does not consider
necessary to address this point again and refers the Parties to the pertinent section.

Finally, the Committee will address Ecuador’s contention that “the Tribunal did not
provide reasons for adopting July 2019 as the end date for its time-weighted system of
attributing liability for groundwater contamination between Perenco, Petroamazonas and
other operators.”°**

Perenco claims that July 2019 is a “proxy for the date of issuance of the Award”>>

explained below, Ecuador does not entirely disagree with such a view.

and, as

The Committee notes that in the Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal
indicated that:

Memorial on Annulment, {{ 607.

Reply on Annulment, { 543

5% Memorial on Annulment, 608.

595

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 340.

149

680.

681.

682.

683.

684.

This issue is complicated by the effluxion of time. The Tribunal considers
that the only equitable solution is for a new, proper groundwater campaign
to be conducted under its expert’s supervision and then an allocation of
any remediation costs (if remediation is required) to be made as between
Perenco and Petroamazonas. Such sampling shall be taken at the same
sites at which the experts took samples. Since Perenco ran the Blocks from
late 2002 until mid-July 2009 (roughly six and a half years) and
Petroamazonas has operated them from mid-July 2009 to the present day
(roughly five and a half years) the allocation will be based on the amount

of time in which the Blocks have been under stewardship of the two
operators (e.g. 55/45%).°°° (emphasis of the Tribunal)

The Committee observes that the Blocks remained under the stewardship of Petroamazonas
beyond the issuance of the Award and therefore it is apparent that the end date fixed by the
Tribunal for allocating liability would be the date of the Award. The issue is, however, that
July 2019 is not the actual date on which the Tribunal issued the Award (September 27,
2019).

Perenco provides an explanation for such difference between the dates. On November 21,
2018, the Tribunal stated that it expected to issue the Award by the end of June 2019.
Thereafter, the Tribunal held its final deliberation on June 3, 2019, completed the English
text of the Award by June 19, 2019, and closed the proceedings as of August 30, 2019.
However, the issuance of the Award was delayed because the Independent Expert
requested that the Parties agree on and sign a waste manifest for the removal of waste
derived from the Tribunal’s investigation.*””

Ecuador recognizes that such explanation is “plausible”. Yet, “implicit reasons are not
enough.”5%8

The Committee considers that the above explanation is in fact plausible. The Tribunal did
explain that the allocation of liability based on the time-weighting system it implemented
would be based on the amount of time in which the Blocks have been under the stewardship
of the two operators. Given that Petroamazonas continued operating through the date of
issuance of the Award, it is apparent that the end date would be the date of issuance of the
Award. When concluding the Award’s drafting on June 2019, the Tribunal estimated that
the date of issuance would be July 2019, however, the Tribunal did not release the Award
until September 2019.

Although the Tribunal might have committed an error by not updating the July 2019 date
at paragraph 811 of the Award, the remedy of annulment as provided by the ICSID

56 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, J 608 (AAE-106).
597 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 340.
5° Reply on Annulment, {ff 545, 547.

150

685.

686.

687.

Convention is not envisaged for correcting errors, another remedy is available for that
purpose. The Committee notes that under Article 49 of the ICSID Convention, the Parties
could have requested that the Tribunal rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in
the Award within 45 days after the Award was rendered. However, none of the Parties
requested that the Tribunal correct the July 2019 date. Annulment is not the opportunity to
make such correction.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal neither manifestly
exceeded its powers nor failed to state reasons when it decided to apportion liability for
environmental remediation between Perenco, Petroamazonas, and prior operators

(5) Grounds on the Tribunal’s decision to treat the amount paid by Burlington
to Ecuador as a down payment on the counterclaims

a. The Parties’ Position
(i) Applicant’s Position

Ecuador states that the Tribunal assumed without any basis or reasoning that 100% of the
damages awarded by the Burlington tribunal corresponded exactly to the same damages it
ascertained in its Award. The Tribunal treated, without any analysis, the full amount
awarded by the Burlington tribunal as a down payment by Perenco both with respect to the
environmental and infrastructure counterclaims, as if there was a perfect overlap between
the harm identified by each tribunal. However, this was not the case. In so doing, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to state the reasons upon which its
assumption is based.>°

As to the manifest excess of powers, the Tribunal failed to assess whether the “same
damage” had been compensated by the Burlington tribunal both for environmental and
infrastructural damages. Instead, the Tribunal simply assumed, without any basis or
reasoning that 100% of the environmental harm for which the Burlington tribunal had
ordered remediation was already part of the same harm identified by the Tribunal’s
Independent Expert. Likewise, the Tribunal treated the amounts awarded by the Burlington
tribunal as a lump sum, instead of comparing the harm to be compensated. As a result, the
Tribunal deprived Ecuador of damages amounting to US$81,384.96 for the infrastructure
in Blocks 7 and 21. In so deciding, the Tribunal resorted to its own subjective notions of
fairness and equity, and substituted itself to Perenco, who did not demonstrate the existence
of double recovery. Thereby, the Tribunal acted as an amiable compositeur, manifestly
exceeding its powers.

5° Memorial on Annulment, {ff 629-630.
© Memorial on Annulment, {ff 632-654.

151

688.

689.

690.

691.

As to the failure to state reasons, Ecuador submits that the Tribunal did not provide reasons
for deducting over US$39 million from the Tribunal’s Award of remediation costs, nor did
the Tribunal provide reasons for not asking its Independent Expert to perform the analysis
of double recovery proposed by Ecuador to identify any true overlaps in the environmental
and infrastructure damages.°°! Furthermore the Tribunal contradicted itself by, on the one
hand, holding that “it cannot be right for the Tribunal to award the same or part of the same
sum twice,” and on the other hand, not verifying whether it was awarding the same sum
twice. In so deciding, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons.

(ii) Perenco’s Position

Perenco argues that contrary to Ecuador’s argument, the Tribunal neither manifestly
exceeded its power nor failed to state reasons when it rejected Ecuador’s argument that the
Perenco and Burlington tribunals did not determine the “same loss” or ‘same harm’ caused
by the Consortium’s operations. “Ecuador’s mere disagreement with the Tribunal’s
application of the prohibition against double recovery, which Ecuador agreed should apply
in this case, cannot amount to a manifest excess of power. Nor can its mischaracterization
of the Tribunal’s reasoning establish any failure to state reasons, when the Tribunal amply
explained and determined that because both the Burlington and Perenco tribunals were
adjudicating the ‘same liability,’ Burlington’s payment of US$42.8 million to satisfy the
full infrastructure and environmental liability of the Consortium (i.e. both Burlington and
Perenco) had to be offset from the damages that Perenco owed Ecuador.”°°?

As to the manifest excess of powers, Perenco objects Ecuador’s position that the Tribunal
failed to apply the proper law on double recovery because it failed to assess whether the
same damage had been compensated by the Burlington tribunal. According to Perenco, the
Tribunal endeavored to and did apply the principle of double recovery in its decision.
Ecuador’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s decision or an alleged error in interpreting the
applicable law cannot establish an excess of power.® Furthermore, the Perenco and
Burlington tribunals assessed the same liability since “the underlying claim for which
Ecuador has sought compensation in the two arbitrations is exactly the same—i.e.,
infrastructure and environmental counterclaims arising under the Participation Contracts
as a result of Perenco’s operations in the Blocks on behalf of the Consortium—and
Perenco’s and Burlington’s underlying joint and several liability is exactly the same.”

As to the failure to state reasons, Perenco asserts that the Tribunal did expressly provide
reasons for its approach. In fact, the Tribunal rejected Ecuador’s approach to assess double

©! Memorial on Annulment, {if 655-660.

602

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 343.

3 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 345-347.
4 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, J 347; Rejoinder on Annulment, {| 298.

152

692.

693.

694.

695.

recovery on a site-by-site basis, and instead adopted Perenco’s approach of offsetting the
Burlington Settlement from the counterclaim liability. Also, the Tribunal did not contradict
itself when it deducted the Burlington Settlement from the counterclaim liability.°
“Contrary to Ecuador’s assertion, the Tribunal rejected Ecuador’s argument that the ‘harm’
assessed in Burlington and Perenco was not the same, and therefore did not have to ‘verify
whether it was awarding the same sum twice’ by comparing the damages in both
arbitrations on a site-by-site basis. There is thus no ground to annul the Tribunal’s
conclusion that the Burlington Settlement compensated Ecuador for the same infrastructure
and environmental liability that the Perenco tribunal had to assess.”°

b. The Committee’s Analysis

Ecuador claims that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons
for its decision to offset the amounts paid by Burlington to Ecuador as a down payment on
the counterclaim.

As regards the manifest excess of powers, Ecuador contends that the Tribunal did not apply
the proper law. Although the Tribunal acknowledged that it had to apply the law on double
recovery and avoid compensation of the same or part of the same sum twice, it failed to
assess whether the same damage was compensated by the Burlington tribunal.°”

The Committee must in turn examine whether the Tribunal identified the proper law and
endeavored to apply it. It is common ground between the Parties that the Tribunal properly
identified the existence of the law on double recovery. In this regard, the Tribunal
emphasized in the Award that:

Mindful of the Burlington tribunal’s statement that ‘as a matter of
principle, the present Decision cannot serve and may not be used to
compensate Ecuador twice for the same damage’ the Tribunal has thought
long and hard about how to protect against double recovery.

The Tribunal also endeavored to apply such law. In paragraphs 890 to 899 of the Award,
the Tribunal explained its approach to assess the issue of double recovery on the
environmental claim. While Ecuador may disagree with the reasoning or approach of the
Tribunal, a mere disagreement is not a ground to annul an award for manifest excess of
powers. Therefore, the Committee finds no ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention.

©5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {[ 347-350.
66 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 350.

7 Memorial on Annulment, {ff 632, 636.

608 Award, 896 (AAE-031).

153

696.

697.

698.

699.

700.

701.

As regards the failure to state reasons, Ecuador argues that the Tribunal treated the amount
paid by Burlington as a down payment without engaging in the specific assessment of
whether there was any double recovery.

After carefully analyzing the submissions and evidence presented by the Parties in this
annulment proceeding, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons
for its decision to offset the amounts paid by Burlington to Ecuador as a down payment on
the counterclaim.

The Tribunal’s approach to resolve the double recovery issue can be recapped as follows:
(i) the Tribunal decided to appoint an Independent Expert to calculate the environmental
damage caused by Perenco in the Blocks; (ii) the Independent Expert found that the extent
of the contamination caused by Perenco was subject to a larger compensation than the one
awarded by the Burlington tribunal; (iii) the Tribunal departed from the findings of the
Burlington tribunal because it considered that the independent expert appointed by the
Tribunal calculated and quantified the environmental damage caused by Perenco—i.e. by
the Consortium—in the Blocks more accurately than the Burlington tribunal; (iv) the
Tribunal considered that Perenco and Burlington were jointly and severally liable as
members of the Consortium for the environmental damage caused in the Blocks;® and
(vi) given that Burlington had already paid US$39,199,373 for the contamination caused
by the Consortium, the Tribunal deducted such payment from the compensation of
US$93,638,890 awarded to Ecuador under the Award.

The Tribunal decided in sum that the environmental contamination caused by the
Consortium in the Blocks had been partially remediated by Burlington—one of the
members of the Consortium—and therefore decided to set off such payment from the total
amount awarded to Ecuador to avoid double recovery.

The Committee is mindful that the site-by-site methodology proposed by Ecuador could
be more precise and probably could have been more accurate than the overall approach
taken by the Tribunal. However, the Committee cannot go into question the Tribunal’s
methodology. This would be adjudging the merits of the case, which is not the purpose of
the annulment remedy, much less of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

Given that the whole spectrum of the Tribunal’s reasoning on the double recovery issue is
to be found in the Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim and in the Award, the
Committee will refer to the relevant sections of both decisions to address in more detail the
Tribunal’s reasoning.

© Award, ({[ 511, 997 (AAE-031).

154

702. In paragraphs 890 and 899 of the Award, the Tribunal presented its reasoning regarding
the “Effect of the Burlington award”. To reach its conclusion that Perenco shall pay
US$54,439,517 to Ecuador under the environmental counterclaim the Tribunal based its
decision on the following premises:

The Burlington tribunal left to the Tribunal the question of potential double recovery
of damages.°!°

Although there is a substantial territorial overlap between the contamination to be
remediated as estimated by the Independent Expert and that estimated by the
Burlington tribunal, the Independent Expert estimated larger areas and additional
contamination, and used higher in-country remediation costs than the Burlington
tribunal.°!!

Ecuador proposed a site-by-site comparison of areas. Under such methodology it
estimated that Perenco was liable for US$130,801,100, plus abandonment costs in
addition to the US$929,722 granted by the Burlington tribunal for the seven sites
listed in Perenco’s November 2008 Well Site Abandonment Plan.°'?

Perenco, in turn, argued that the payment made by Burlington under the Settlement
Agreement, “‘irrevocably, fully and finally paid and discharged, and satisfied’ all of
the Consortium’s obligations and liabilities related to Ecuador’s counterclaims.” In
the alternative, Perenco claimed that the amount paid by Burlington must be set off
from any remediation costs granted to Ecuador, which in any event should result on

zero counterclaims damages.°!?

The Tribunal did not adopt either of the positions advanced by the Parties. Moreover,
the Tribunal partially departed from the findings of the Burlington tribunal
considering that: (i) the Tribunal had doubts on the work of the Party appointed
experts (IEMS and GSI)—the same experts of the Burlington case—and therefore
appointed an independent expert; and (ii) in the Tribunal’s view, it was more likely
that the work performed by the Independent Expert and his team comprehensively
and accurately analyzed the work of IEMS/GSI than the Burlington tribunal.°'+

For these reasons, the Tribunal arrived to a sum on remediation costs different from
the ones awarded by the Burlington tribunal. As noted in paragraph 889 of the Award,

610 Award, { 890 (AAE-031).
oH Award, { 891 (AAE-031).
612 Award, ( 892-893 (AAE-031).
613 Award, { 894 (AAE-031).
614 Award, {{{ 896-898 (AAE-031).

155

the remedial responsibilities estimated by Mr. MacDonald amounted to
US$85,938,890, the Tribunal then adjusted this sum to add up US$7.7 million to
account for certain sites identified by Ecuador.*!> The total sum is US$93,638,890.
This amount is not only different but greater than the US$39,199,373 paid by
Burlington under the Settlement Agreement.

¢ The Tribunal thereby decided to treat the US$39,199,373 paid by Burlington as a
down payment for the total amount of damages, which results in a figure of
US$54,439,517.

703. The Committee will now turn to Tribunal’s methodology to quantify the damage caused
by Perenco, which is the inherent reason explaining the Tribunal’s departure from the
findings of the Burlington tribunal.

704.  Inits Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal set out the environmental
standard and the legal basis of the Consortium’ liability and presented the Parties’ experts’
contradictory methods of assessing the environmental harm. It found that both Party-
appointed experts were not reliable and therefore chose an independent expert (the
“Independent Expert’), whose major task was to quantify the totality of the
environmental damage by sampling and analysing soil, mud pits, etc. Between paragraphs
568 and 608 of the Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, the Tribunal explained
the steps and methodology to be followed by the Parties and the Independent Expert, so
that the latter could determine the extent of contamination of the Blocks for which
compensation is owed.°!®

705. In the Award, the Tribunal concluded that “Mr. MacDonald and Ramboll conducted the
sampling exercise transparently and considered suggestions made by the Parties’ experts
and representatives.” In this regard, the Tribunal referred to the Consolidated Independent
Expert Report, where the Independent Expert indicated that:

It is important to note that the Parties have had the opportunity to pose
questions and comment on my work throughout this engagement including
before and during the performance of the field campaign. In addition,
representatives of the Parties were present during all onsite activities,
including the initial exploratory visit to the Blocks as well as during the
performance of sample mark-outs and collection of samples from all
investigated media. The field program was implemented over a four-
month period and issues raised by the Parties during that time were always
considered; in certain cases, my approach was adjusted to incorporate
expanded information or to address concerns (when these were reasonable
and technically valid). It was not always possible to reach full agreement

615 Award, { 889 (AAE-031).
616 Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, {ff 568-608 (AAE-106).

156

706.

707.

708.

709.

with both Parties, as their commitments to their clients and strategic
approaches differed from my own. However, in all cases, a respectful
dialogue was established with both Parties, and to my knowledge neither
expressed concerns regarding bias for or against either Party in this matter.
Relevant correspondence, emails, and other documentation of this
dialogue between the Parties and myself or field personnel is included in
Appendix B. °!”

The Tribunal further clarified that the Parties were given an opportunity to make
submissions and insert comments into the Independent Expert Report, were given the
opportunity to cross-examine Mr. MacDonald on both days of the Expert Hearing, and
were able to conduct their own laboratory analysis to check the results of the Independent
Expert.°!

After having reviewed the Consolidated Independent Expert Report, the Parties’ separate
written submissions, and the testimony and closing submissions given at the Expert
Hearing, the Tribunal observed that:

Most of the questions and objections that the Parties have raised concern
technical matters that fall within the Expert’s expertise and judgement and
the Tribunal considers that it is not appropriate to second-guess his
technical determinations. That is why he was appointed in the first place:
to provide, in an objective and neutral fashion, the expertise and judgement
which the Tribunal considered the Parties’ experts had failed to provide.°!

Thereafter, the Tribunal analyzed two sets of issues: (i) the allocation of responsibility
between Perenco, its predecessors and successor, and (ii) the scope of the Expert’s mandate
and whether he acted consistently with it.°°° The first issue has been extensively analyzed
in the present Decision.

As to the mandate of the Independent Expert, some of the Tribunal’s propositions and
conclusions relevant to the Tribunal’s methodology to define the double recovery are noted
below:

e Mr. MacDonald was instructed not to perform a de novo study of the environmental
condition of the two Blocks. This meant that there could be contamination that was
not captured by the Parties’ experts or the Independent Expert.°! The Tribunal
recalled that “the present exercise is concerned with the accurate and impartial

617 Award, { 743 (AAE-031).
618 Award, (ff 745-746 (AAE-031).
619 Award, { 748 (AAE-031).
620 Award, { 749 (AAE-031).
621 Award, { 816 (AAE-031).

157

analysis of the work that was done by the experts—who had ample opportunity to
examine the Blocks.”©?

Mr. MacDonald was also instructed not to consider the allocation of responsibility
between the Blocks’ operators, and to perform its work without regard to the
determinations made by the Burlington tribunal.®*

Mr. MacDonald stated that his “investigation of soil and groundwater was restricted
to areas already sampled by the Parties.” And, his “investigation of mud pits was
limited to those known to have been used by Perenco.”®* The Tribunal considered
that this interpretation of the instructions provided by the Tribunal was not
unreasonable and was consistent with the Tribunal’s intention to have all mud pits
used by Perenco assessed, and not to hold Perenco liable for the damage caused by
other operators.°> Thus, the Tribunal considered that Mr. MacDonald acted within
the Tribunal’s mandate.

Ecuador claimed that the Independent Expert did not sample every site where
contamination was found by the either of the Parties’ experts. The Tribunal agreed
with Ecuador and therefore decided to adjust upward by US$7.7 million the damages
estimated by Mr. MacDonald.°°

In regard to the land use, the Tribunal found that Mr. MacDonald and his team
surveyed the situation in the two Blocks, studied the record of the counterclaim, and
consulted Ministry of Agriculture maps. After conducting the sampling activities,
they plotted the delineated areas of contamination on some 51 sites (using aerial
photographs). The Tribunal considers that it is not in position to second-guess Mr.
MacDonald’s determinations and declines to interfere with them.°?7

Albeit Perenco contested the fact that Mr. MacDonald chose the most stringent
standard on mud pits, the Tribunal concluded that in the light of the evidence
available, Mr. MacDonald was entitled to choose that standard.°°

622 Award, { 816 (AAE-031), citing: Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, 4 596 (AAE-106).
623 Award, { 817 (AAE-031).

© Award, { 819 (AAE-031).

©5 Award, {¥[ 824, 827 (AAE-031).

626 Award, { 830 (AAE-031).

©7 Award, { 841 (AAE-031).

628 Award, (¥{ 842-850 (AAE-031).

158

710.

711.

712.

713.

714.

715.

716.

e The Tribunal decided to leave the Independent Expert approach regarding
groundwater contamination undisturbed.°?

It follows from the Tribunal’s reasoning that its intention was that the Independent Expert
make an impartial calculation of the damages, independent from the positions of the
Parties’ experts and the findings of the Burlington tribunal.

Then, based on the calculations and quantifications made by the Independent Expert, and
after some adjustments, the Tribunal proceeded to quantify the damages payable by
Perenco, which amounted to US$93,638,890.°°

After reviewing the Tribunal’s decisions as a whole and read in context, the Committee
also finds that the Tribunal concluded that the contamination caused by Perenco in the
Blocks was the same contamination caused by Burlington “given that Perenco was the
operator, the party with first-hand knowledge of the operations, and therefore the actual (as
opposed to the nominal [i.e., Burlington]) author of some of the contamination that the
Tribunal’s Independent Expert has found in the oilfields.”°! As members of the
Consortium, both companies were jointly and severally liable for the damage caused in the
Blocks, and therefore the US$39,199,373 paid by Burlington partially covered the
remediation costs awarded by the Tribunal to Ecuador. For these reasons, the Tribunal
deducted Burlington’s payment from the US$93,638,890 compensation.

The Committee sees no failure to state reasons herein, and therefore finds no ground to
annul the Tribunal’s Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim under Article 52(1)(e)
of the ICSID Convention.

Finally, in regard to the infrastructure counterclaim, the Tribunal finds no manifest excess
of powers and no failure to state reasons either.

In regard to the manifest excess of powers, it is uncontested that the Tribunal identified the
proper body of law on double recovery. Likewise, in paragraphs 905-963 of the Award,
the Tribunal endeavored to apply such law. While Ecuador may not agree with the
Tribunal’s application of the law, that is not a manifest excess of powers.

Likewise, in regard to the failure to state reasons, the Committee finds that the Tribunal
did state reasons for deciding that Ecuador has been made whole on the infrastructure
counterclaim by Burlington’s payment under the Settlement Agreement.

©9 Award, { 860 (AAE-031).
630 Award, {¥{ 876-889 (AAE-031).
© Award, 1002 (AAE-031).

159

717.

718.

719.

720.

721.

In the Award, the Tribunal departed its analysis from the facts that the Burlington tribunal
had already ruled on and awarded damages in respect of the infrastructure counterclaim.
What is more, both tribunals “heard virtually the same evidence about the same breaches
and considered the same allegations as to damage, but personally observed the climatic and
other conditions when it conducted its site visit.”

Notwithstanding, the Tribunal noted that “consistent with [its] independent duty to
consider the case presented to it, the Tribunal will briefly express its views.”°* The
Tribunal further stressed that it based its determination of the counterclaim on the following
considerations: (i) that “in the declining years of the Blocks Perenco would, on the balance
of probabilities, have been less concerned about maintaining the facilities than hitherto;”**
(ii) that there were challenging conditions of operating in the Amazon rainforest and a
predisposition towards rust and corrosion in that climate; and (iii) that the Blocks had been
operated before and after Perenco’s tenure.°*°

The Tribunal then proceeded to conduct its own analysis of the infrastructure counterclaim.
It analyzed specific issues and presented its own conclusions in relation to the tanks, fluid
lines and pipelines, generator engines, pumps, electrical systems, IT equipment and road
maintenance, and other claims such as the purchase of back-up equipment, spare parts and
materials to bring the operations into line with industry standards.**° From such analysis,
the Tribunal decided to grant US$2,315,969.15 to Ecuador under its infrastructure
counterclaim.

Finally, the Tribunal noted that under the Settlement Agreement, Burlington had already
paid US$2,577,119 for Ecuador’s infrastructure counterclaim. Therefore, to avoid double
recovery, the Tribunal concluded that “Ecuador has been made whole on the infrastructure
counterclaim” by Burlington’s payment.”

The Committee observes that, in an analysis similar to the one performed on the
environmental counterclaim, the Tribunal conducted its own assessment of the submissions
and evidence in the record and reached its own conclusion on the calculation and
quantification of the infrastructure counterclaim. The Tribunal thereby reached a sum
different from the one awarded by the Burlington tribunal. However, given that the amount
awarded by the Burlington tribunal was higher, the Tribunal considered that Ecuador’s

62 Award, { 906 (AAE-031).
633 Award, { 909 (AAE-031).
© Award, { 911 (AAE-031).
635 Award, { 912 (AAE-031).
636 Award, {¥f 927-963 (AAE-031).
©7 Award, 966 (AAE-031).

160

722.

723.

724.

725.

726.

727.

728.

damage had been totally remediated and therefore decided not to include the
US$2,315,969.15 as part of Ecuador’s counterclaim damages to avoid double recovery.

In this sense, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons in
regard to its decision on Ecuador’s infrastructure counterclaim.

In sum, the Tribunal finds that the Tribunal neither manifestly exceeded its powers nor
failed to state reasons when deciding to treat the amount paid by Burlington to Ecuador as
a down payment on the environmental and infrastructure counterclaims.

COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSIONS

The Committee rejects all but two of the twenty specific grounds raised by Ecuador to
request the annulment of the Award.

The Committee decides to annul the Tribunal’s decision to award US$25 million to
Perenco’s loss of opportunity to extend the Block 7 Participation Contract,°** and the
Tribunal’s finding that the OCP ship-or-pay costs were fully tax-deductible.*?

In paragraphs 381 to 422 of the Award, the Tribunal explained how it summed-up the
different components to reach the final amount of compensation of US$448,820,400;
thereby, at paragraph 411 of the Award, the Tribunal concluded that “the initial amount of
damages estimated to be awarded for Block 7 is calculated to be US$145.2 million and the
amount of damages to be awarded for Block 21 is calculated to be US$273.7 million,
totalling US$418.9 million (as of September 2016).” The Tribunal then decided to make
further adjustments: the ‘true-up’, the OCP Deductibility, and the value of loss of
opportunity.

As regards the ‘true-up’, the Tribunal concluded that “a fair amount for the ‘true-up’ should
be US$36.4 million (after discounting and bringing forward the relevant cash flows). Thus,
the total compensation for Blocks 7 and 21 is reduced by that sum to US$382.5 million.”°°

As to the “OCP Deductibility”, the Tribunal concluded “that there should be full tax
deductibility in relation to Block 21’s OCP ship-or-pay costs. Accordingly, this adds US$9
million to the quantum to be awarded to Perenco. The amount of US$382.5 million is
therefore increased by US$ 9 million to amount to US$391.5 million.”*!

68 See G¥ 469-470 of the present Decision.
©9 See | 574 of the present Decision.

© Award, { 419 (AAE-031).

4 Award, { 420 (AAE-031).

161

729.

730.

731.

732.

733.

734.

In relation to the “Value of Loss of Opportunity”, the Tribunal concluded that “[loss of
opportunity] should be valued at US$25 million. This sum is added to the amount of
US$391.5 million to arrive at a total of US$416.5 million as of September 2016.”°”

Thereafter the Tribunal multiplied the US$416.5 million by an adjustment factor of 1.0776
to bring this sum forward to the date of the Award to arrive to a final figure of
US$448,820,400.°

Given that the Committee decides to annul the Tribunal’s decision to add US$25 million
corresponding to the loss of opportunity, and US$9 million corresponding to the ‘OCP
Deductibility’ to the amount of damages awarded to Perenco, the total compensation
should be reduced as follows:

The US$34 million resulting from the sum of the aforementioned amounts, the only
amounts affected by the partial annulment of the Award, should be deducted from the
US$416.5 million before applying the 1.0776 adjustment factor. This amounts to US$382.5
million, i.e. the sum reached by the Tribunal after the ‘true-up’ adjustment but before the
“OCP-Deductibility” and the loss of opportunity. This sum US$382.5 is then multiplied by
the 1.0776 adjustment factor to arrive to a final sum of US$412,182,000.

In conclusion, the total compensation owed to Claimant at paragraph 1023(a) of the Award
should be reduced from US$448,820,400 to US$412,182,000. The rest of the Award
remains unaffected.

Finally, the Committee recalls the commitment made by the Applicant in the Minister’s
Letter on April 20, 2020 as a condition requested by the Committee to grant the stay of
enforcement of the Award pending the annulment decision.

COSTS

APPLICANT’S COSTS SCHEDULE
The Applicant submitted the following schedule of costs:

Professional fees: US$1,049,543.95
Administrative costs: US$512,238.37

© Award, {421 (AAE-031).
© Award, {422 (AAE-031).

162

736.

737.

738.

739.

740.

TAL.

PERENCO’S Costs SCHEDULE
Perenco submitted the following schedule of costs:

Professional fees: US$3,037,668.50
Administrative costs: US$100,615.75

THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION ON CosTS

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award.

Under this provision, applicable to this Annulment Proceeding by virtue of Article 52(4)
of the ICSID Convention, the Committee has broad discretion in allocating the costs of the
proceeding and the Parties’ legal costs and expenses.

Ecuador alleged twenty (20) grounds for annulment seeking either the total or a partial
annulment of the Award. Three (3) of such grounds related to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal which, if successful, would have resulted in the total annulment of the Award.
The Committee rejected all of these grounds. Five (5) grounds referred to findings of the
Award on the merits, which the Committee also rejected. Seven (7) grounds were related
to decisions in the Award concerning damages, all of which, but two, were rejected by the
Committee. Finally, Ecuador submitted five (5) grounds related to sections of the Award
dealing with counterclaims by Ecuador. All of them were rejected by the Committee.

Two (2) of the petitions on annulment presented by Ecuador have succeeded. The
Committee found that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in its decisions on loss of
opportunity,“ and tax deductibility of OCP ship-or-pay costs,° with the result that the
total compensation owed to Claimants is reduced from US$448,820,400 to
US$412,182,000. The rest of the Award remains unaffected.

Considering, on the one hand, the partial success of Ecuador’s application and on the other,
the fact that a number of the grounds submitted by Ecuador were rejected because they

# In its submissions Ecuador invokes five specific grounds on the merits, but the Committee classified them under four headings,
given that the Committee classified Ecuador's claims on the Tribunal’s findings that “Decree 662 breached the Participation

Contract

 

and that “Decree 662 and ensuing measures breached Article 4 of the Treaty” under the same category.

5 See {| 469-470 of the present Decision.
© See {| 574 of the present Decision.

163

742.

743.

VI.

744.

were considered by the Committee as mere appeals of the Award, the Committee has
decided that Applicant shall bear 90% and Claimant 10% of the arbitration costs in relation
to these proceedings, and that each side shall bear its own litigation costs and other
expenses.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Committee, ICSID’s
administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to:

Committee’s fees and expenses

Prof. Zuleta US$166,199.37
Prof. Dr. Knieper US$78,394.23
Prof. Pinto US$70,567.00
ICSID’s administrative fees US$84,000
Direct expenses (estimated) US$36,299.33
Total US$435,459.93

Claimant shall therefore reimburse Applicant the amount of US$43,545.99 corresponding
to 10% of the arbitration costs in relation to these annulment proceedings. The Committee
finds no grounds to award interest on the aforementioned amount.

DECISION

For the reasons set forth above, the ad hoc Committee decides, unanimously, as follows:

a. To partially annul the Award rendered on September 27, 2019 by the Arbitral Tribunal
in the arbitration proceedings between Perenco Ecuador Limited and the Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, solely and exclusively as regards the Tribunal’s
decision to award US$25 million to Perenco’s loss of opportunity to extend the Block
7 Participation Contract,” and the Tribunal’s finding that the OCP ship-or-pay costs
were fully tax-deductible.*

b. The rest of the Award remains unaffected, but as a result of the partial annulment the
amount awarded to Perenco Ecuador Limited at paragraph 1023(a) of the Award is
US$412,182,000.

7 See {| 469-470 of the present Decision.
8 See {| 574 of the present Decision.

164

c. Applicant shall bear 90% and Claimant 10% of the arbitration costs in relation to these
proceedings, and each side shall bear its own litigation costs and other expenses.
Claimant shall therefore reimburse Applicant the amount of US$43,545.99
corresponding to 10% of the arbitration costs in relation to these annulment
proceedings.

d. The stay of enforcement of the Award is lifted.

165

[Signed]

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Professor Ménica Pinto
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: 2? Mo 2O°A Date:

Professor Eduardo Zuleta
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date:

166

[Signed]

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Professor Monica Pinto
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: Date: 22 May 2021

Professor Eduardo Zuleta
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date

167

 

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Professor Monica Pinto
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date: Date:

[Signed]

Professor Eduardo Zuleta
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 27 May 2021

168

