INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

PERENCO ECUADOR LTD.

Claimant

- AND -

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

EMPRESA ESTATAL PETROLEOS DEL ECUADOR (PETROECUADOR)

Respondents

(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Rendered by the Tribunal composed of:
Judge Peter Tomka, President
Mr. Neil Kaplan, C.B.E., Q.C., S.B.S., Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Representing the Claimant

Mr. Mark W. Friedman
Debevoise & Plimpton LLP

Mr. Gaétan J. Verhoosel
Covington & Burling LLP

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 30 June 2011

Representing the Respondents

Republic of Ecuador

Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion

Procurador General del Estado

and

Dr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona

(until 18 April 2011)

Francisco Grijalva Muiioz

Director Nacional de Patrocinio Internacional
Procuraduria General del Estado

and

Messrs. Pierre Mayer and

Eduardo Silva Romero

Dechert LLP

and

Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador)

Contralmirante Luis Aurelio Jaramillo Arias
Presidente Ejecutivo

TABLE CONTENTS

I. FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION

 

1. Introduction.

The Parties -1-

 

The Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts.........
The Dispute.

wk we N

The Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures and Subsequent Developments.....

Il. PROCEDURAL MATTERS.

 

1. Constitution and Reconstitution of the Tribunal..............

 

2. Written Pro di
3. Hearing on Jurisdiction -7-

III. POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON JURISDICTION

 
 

1. Position of the Respondents (Ecuador and Petroecuador) .
2. Position of the Claimant (Perenco)

IV. ANALYSIS

 

 

1. Jurisdiction over the Claimant’s Treaty Claims.

A. The First Limb of Respondents’ Objection (based on the interaction between Articles 1

 

 

 

and 9 of the Treaty) -10-
(i) Position of the Respond -10-
(ii) Position of the Claimant -ll-
(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal -13-

 

B. The Second Limb of the Respondents’ Objection (based upon the omission of the phrase

“directly or indirectly” from Article 1(3) (ii) of the Treaty)).... we l4-
(i) Position of the Respond
(ii) Position of the Claimant
(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal

 

 

 

2. Jurisdiction Rationae Materiae over Claimant’s Contract Claims...

   

A. Position of the Respondents...............

 

B. Position of the Claimant
C. Analysis of the Tribunal
3. Jurisdiction Rationae Personae over Petroecuador............+4+
A. Petroecuador’s Role under the Participation Contracts.....

(i) Position of the Respond

(ii) Position of the Claimant
(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal

 

 

B. Desi, ion of Pet dor to ICSID - 40 -

4. Jurisdiction to Enjoin the Respondent’s from Applying Law 42.....
A. Position of the Respondents...............

 

B. Position of the Claimant
C. Analysis of the Tribunal
Vv. COSTS
VI. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

 

 

BIT or the Treaty

CM

CCM

CR
Exh. C-
Exh, E-

ICSID Convention

FROJ

SROJ

PMD

Tr. Day [#], [page:line]

HCL

iii

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
Bilateral Investment Treaty; Treaty between the Republic of France and
the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investment
Request of Arbitration filed by Perenco on 30 April 2008
Claimant [Perenco]’s Memorial of 10 April 2009

Claimant [Perenco]’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of 17 September
2009

Claimant [Perenco]’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of 15 January 2010
Claimant [Perenco]’s Exhibits
Respondent [Ecuador]’s Exhibits

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, Washington DC 1965

First Respondent [Ecuador]’s Objections to Jurisdiction of 17 July 2009

Second Respondent [Petroecuador]’s Objections to Jurisdiction of 17 July
2009

Respondents [Ecuador and Petroecuador]’s Reply on Jurisdiction of
17 November 2009

Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures of 8 May 2009
Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility
Day 1: Tuesday 2 November 2010

Day 2: Wednesday 3 November 2010

Day 3: Thursday 4 November 2010

Hydrocarbons Law

I. FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION
1. Introduction

On 30 April 2008, Perenco Ecuador Limited (“Perenco”) filed a request for arbitration with ICSID
against the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador”) and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(“Petroecuador”; together, “the Respondents”). The dispute between the parties arises out of a
series of measures adopted by the Respondents which, according to Perenco, are in breach of
Ecuador’s obligations under the Agreement on the reciprocal promotion and protection of
investments concluded between France and Ecuador on 7 September 1994 (hereinafter, “the
Treaty” or “the BIT”) and affects its rights under two Participation Contracts. One of these is a
Participation Contract for the Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in Block 7 of the
Amazon Region, including the Contract for the Coca-Payamino Unified Field (“the Block 7
Participation Contract” or “the Block 7 Contract”), and the other is a Participation Contract for
Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in Block 21 of the Amazon River (“the Block 21
Participation Contract” or “the Block 21 Contract”), (together, the two contracts will be referred as
“the Participation Contracts” or “the Contracts”).

Perenco’s request for arbitration was brought to ICSID on the basis of Article 9 of the BIT, as well
as on the basis of the arbitration clauses contained in the Contracts.

2. The Parties
The Claimant

Perenco Ecuador Limited (“Perenco”) is a company duly incorporated under the laws of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas. The Parties do not appear to contest that Perenco was the wholly-
owned subsidiary of Perenco Gabon S.A., a company incorporated in the Bahamas, at the time
Perenco commenced these proceedings before ICSID. In turn, 92.5% of the shares of Perenco
Gabon S.A. were held by Perenco S.A., another company incorporated in the Bahamas. One-
hundred percent of the shares of Perenco S.A. were held by another Bahamas registered company,
Perenco International Limited, and 92.9% of the shares of Perenco International Limited were held
by the estate of the late Hubert Perrodo, a French national.

Mr. Perrodo died intestate in 2006, and as such, the devolution of his estate is governed by French
law. His estate remains in suspension, and has not been divided among Mr. Perrodo’s four heirs.
Perenco asserts that each of these purported heirs is a French national. For their part, the
Respondents contest the assertion that the shares of Perenco International Limited (Perenco’s
ultimate parent corporation) belong to the purported heirs of Mr. Perrodo.

The Claimant is represented by Mr. Mark W. Friedman, Ms. Sarah H. Wolf, Mr. Thomas H.
Norgaard and Ms. Mary Grace McEvoy of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP; and by Mr. Gaétan
Verhoosel and Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez of Covington & Burling LLP.

The Respondents

The Respondents are the Republic of Ecuador (“Ecuador”) and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del
Ecuador (“‘Petroecuador’).

The national state oil company of Ecuador, Petroecuador, was created pursuant to the Ley Especial
de Petroecuador y sus Empresas Filiales (“Law 45”) on 26 September 1989. Pursuant to Article 1
of Law 45, Petroecuador was created “with legal personality, its own assets, administrative,

-2-
economic, financial and operative autonomy, with its main domicile in the city of Quito.”!
Petroecuador is the successor to the Corporacion Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana (“CEPE”), which
was formed in 1972 and was dissolved in 1989. Article 22 of Law 45 establishing Petroecuador
provides that “[aJll rights, obligations, legal situations and facts of [CEPE] generated by its
Establishing Law ... or resulting from any other legitimate source of obligation, are transferred to
Petroecuador as of the effective date of this Law.”

CEPE was designated by Ecuador to ICSID as an agency of Ecuador pursuant to Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention. CEPE was designated by means of a written notice to the Secretary General
of ICSID on 19 April 1988. All Parties agree that Ecuador has not submitted a formal designation
letter to ICSID for Petroecuador as it did for CEPE.

The Respondents are represented by Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion, Ecuador’s Procurador General;
Dr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona, Dr. Francisco Grijalva Mujioz, and Dr. Francisco Paredes, of the
Procuraduria del Estado; Contralmirante Luis Aurelio Jaramillo Arias, Executive President of
Petroecuador; and Mr. Pierre Mayer, Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero, Mr. Daniel Gal, Mr. Jos¢ Manuel
Garcia Represa and Mr. José Caicedo, of Dechert LLP.

3. The Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts

In Ecuador, the Hydrocarbons Law (“HCL”) provides the legal framework by which private
entities may contract with the Government to explore for and extract crude oil in Ecuador. Prior to
1993, oil contractors would operate predominantly through service contracts, by which the
contractor would perform exploration and exploitation services in a designated area and would
receive from Ecuador reimbursement of its costs and an additional fixed fee. In 1993, Law 44 was
enacted to amend the Hydrocarbons Law, making it possible for oil contractors to operate in
Ecuador through participation contracts. Under a participation contract, the private contractor
assumes all the risks and costs of the exploration and exploitation of oil reserves in the area
designated by the contract and, in exchange, has the right to receive a share of the revenue of the
oil produced.

Following the enactment of Law 44 and its implementing regulations, Ecuador launched bidding
rounds based on the new participation contract model. Foreign investors were invited to participate
in these new bidding rounds. According to Respondents, the Hydrocarbons Law required that the
Comité Especial de Licitaciones (Special Bidding Committee, “CEL”) manage the contract bidding
process and award each of the contracts. CEL is chaired by the Minister of Energy and Mines and
includes representatives of other Ministries as members. According to Respondents, CEL also
appoints officials from Petroecuador and other public servants to negotiate the terms of the
contracts with the oil contractors.

During its Seventh Bidding Round, Ecuador awarded a participation contract for Block 21 to a
group of foreign investors, including an entity called Oryx Ecuador Energy Company (“Oryx”).
The Block 21 Contract was executed on 20 March 1995. According to Perenco, Oryx led the
contractors’ side of negotiations. The parties to the Block 21 Contract are identified in its Clause
3.3.25 as “the Ecuadorian State, through Petroecuador, and the Contractor.” In addition, on 23
March 2000, Ecuador agreed to modify the service contract for the exploration and exploitation of
Block 7 into a participation contract. As with the Block 21 Contract, the parties to the Block 7
Contract are identified in its Clause 3.3.22 as “the Ecuadorian State, through Petroecuador, and the
Contractor.”

Perenco was not part of the original group of foreign contractors to either the Block 7 or Block 21
Contracts at the time the contracts were executed. Perenco became a party to both contracts on 4

"Exh. C-20.

-3-

September 2002. At the same time, Perenco also entered into Joint Operating Agreements with the
other entities holding interests in the Blocks. Perenco became the sole operator and majority
shareholder of rights in both Blocks, holding a 53.7% interest in Block 21 and a 57.50% interest in
Block 7. The remaining interest in both Blocks was held by Burlington Resources Oriente Limited
(“Burlington”), with which Perenco has formed a Consortium.

Under the terms of the Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts, the contractor was
responsible for carrying out the exploration and exploitation activities in the assigned areas.
Perenco has alleged, and it has not been contested, that pursuant to its duties under the Contracts,
Perenco has made substantial investments in personnel, equipment, machinery, technology,
infrastructure and goods and services. In exchange, the Contracts entitled the contractor to share in
the oil production from the blocks. Clause 8.1 of the Contract granted the contractor the right to
receive a share of the production, pursuant to a formula set forth in this provision. This formula
provided that as the volume of production rose, the percentage share of Ecuador would increase to
a specific extent and that of Perenco would decrease. The Contracts made no express reference to
the sale price or value of the oil produced.

4. The Dispute

This dispute arises out of Ecuador’s enactment of legislative measures which increased its
participation under the Participation Contracts on “extraordinary revenues” earned under the
Contracts. Briefly summarized, it is Perenco’s contention that it has certain enforceable contractual
rights as a party to the Participation Contracts, and that in reliance on those rights it invested large
sums in the exploration and extraction of oil in Ecuador. Perenco contends that Ecuador’s
enactment and enforcement of these legislative measures violated the terms of both the
Participation Contracts and the Treaty. Perenco further alleges that the legislative measures also
discriminated against foreign oil companies as they virtually did not affect any Ecuadorian
companies.

On 19 April 2006, the Ecuadorian Congress enacted Law No. 2006-42 (“Law 42”), which amended
the Hydrocarbons Law by adding the following language:

“Participation of the State in surplus prices from the sale of oil and gas not
agreed upon or not foreseen.

Contractor companies that maintain participation contracts for the
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in effect with the Ecuadorian
state under this Law, without prejudice to the volume of crude oil subject to
participation that corresponds to them, when the effective monthly medium
price of FOB sale of Ecuadorian oil petroleum goes above the monthly
average prices in effect at the time of the execution of the contract, expressed
in constant prices for the month of liquidation, will recognize in favour of the
Ecuadorian state a participation of at least 50% of the extraordinary income
generated by the difference in price. For the purposes of this Article,
extraordinary revenues shall be understood to mean the difference in the
above-described price, multiplied by the number of barrels produced.

The price of crude oil as of the date of the contract used as a reference for
calculation of the difference shall be adjusted, considering the Consumer
Price Index of the United States of America, published by the Central Bank
of Ecuador.””

? Exh. C-3.

20.

21.

22.

-4-

Law 42 therefore imposed on contractors with Participation Contracts, like Perenco, the obligation
to grant Ecuador a share of their “extraordinary income,” e.g., any revenues earned per barrel that
exceeded the monthly average selling price of Ecuadorian oil at the time of the execution of the
Contracts (the “reference price”). The Participation Contracts had made no reference to the
monthly average FOB price of Ecuadorian oil at the time of the execution of the Contracts and did
not allot Ecuador a participation of as much as 50% in the price or value of any of the oil produced.

Following the enactment of Law 42, the Ministry of ‘Energy and Mines (now the Ministry of Non-

ble Natural R ) hed the prices, adjusted for inflation,
that were said to be in effect at the time of the Contracts’ execution. The assigned reference prices
would be US$ 25 per barrel for the Block 7 Contract and US$ 15 per barrel for the Block 21
Contract. It is Perenco’s contention that these designated prices were below market at the time of
the Contracts’ execution, and were “dramatically below market” in subsequent years as oil prices
rose.

 

On 11 July 2006, the Government of Ecuador issued Decree No. 1672, implementing Law 42 and
setting the percentage of the “extraordinary income” payable to Ecuador at 50%, payable on a
monthly basis. On each barrel of oil sold at a price above the reference prices, therefore, Ecuador
would receive the agreed contractual percentage of the price up to the reference price, and would
receive 50% of the “extraordinary income” revenue exceeding the reference price.

Decree No 1672 was subsequently amended on 4 October 2007 by Decree No. 662, which
increased Ecuador’s additional participation on unforeseen surpluses from 50% to 99%. This
decree generated a strong outcry from foreign investors. In response, the President of Ecuador
announced on 26 January 2008 that the contractors to Ecuador’s oil participation contracts would
henceforth have three possible options: 1) to renegotiate the original terms of the contracts, 2) to
pay to the Ecuadorian Government the 99% of “extraordinary income” under the contracts, or 3)
leave the country.

Under protest, Perenco paid Ecuador the extraordinary income revenue on Blocks 7 and 21 as
required by Law 42. At the same time, the Parties attempted to negotiate a compromise solution.
Compromise ultimately was not reached and the President of Ecuador terminated negotiations on
12 April 2008. On 30 April 2008, Perenco filed a request for arbitration with ICSID against
Ecuador and Petroecuador, following a similar request made by Burlington to ICSID on 21 April
2008.

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to render an award in its favour:

(a) Declaring that Ecuador has breached its obligations under the Treaty and
international law;

(b) Declaring that Respondents have breached their obligations under the Participation
Contracts;

(c) Directing Respondents to indemnify Perenco for all direct and indirect damages as a
result of their breaches, including payments made to date under the HCL
Amendment, and costs and expenses of this proceeding, in amounts to be
determined at the hearing; and

(d) Directing Respondents to pay Perenco interest on all sums awarded, in amounts to
be determined at the hearing, and to order any such further relief as may be
available and appropriate in the circumstances.*

3 Tr. Day 1, 106:20.
FRA 4 42(a)-(d)

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

-5-

The Consortium subsequently proposed in a letter to the Ecuadorian Minister of Mines and
Petroleum and to Petroecuador that it transfer the disputed Law 42 payments into an escrow
account pending resolution of the dispute. This proposal was not accepted by Ecuador. The
Consortium nonetheless began making payments due under Law 42 into such an escrow account,
starting in June 2008.

On 14 February 2009, the President of Ecuador announced that he had ordered “coercive
measures” against Perenco and Burlington because they had “not paid their taxes on extraordinary
gains (due to the high price of crude).” On 19 February 2009, Ecuador issued the first of three
series of enforcement notices (known as “coactivas”) to Perenco, as the operator of Blocks 7 and
21, to enforce payments in the total of US$ 327.3 million for both Contracts allegedly owed under
Law 42. On 3 March 2009, the Court of Enforcement ordered seizure of the crude oil production
from Perenco, until such time as the entire amount of the Consortium’s debt had been settled.

5. The Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures and Subsequent
Developments

On 19 February 2009, the day that Ecuador issued the first of its coactiva notices to Perenco for the
collection of Law 42 payments, Perenco submitted an Application for Provisional Measures.
Perenco sought to enjoin Respondents from forcibly collecting any Law 42 payments pending
resolution of the claim, stressing the urgency of its request since the Respondents would begin
seizing Perenco’s assets in a matter of days. In a letter to the Parties of 24 February 2009, the
Tribunal requested the Parties “to refrain from initiating or continuing any action or adopting any
measure which may, directly or indirectly, modify the status quo between the parties vis-d-vis the
participation contracts, including any attempt to seize any asset of [Perenco], until it has had an
opportunity to further hear from the parties on the question of provisional measures.”

Following the seizure of Perenco’s oil production on 3 March 2009 and the Parties’ subsequent
communications to the Tribunal, the Tribunal issued a letter to the Parties on 5 March 2009
emphasizing that “its February 24, 2009 request had and continues to have the same authority as a
recommendation, as envisaged in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 39.”

The Parties submitted two rounds of pleadings on Perenco’s Application for Provisional Measures,
followed by a full hearing in Paris on 19 March 2009. At the end of the hearing the President
affirmed that the Tribunal’s request of 24 February and recommendation of 5 March were to be
treated as in force unless or until they were expressly revoked.

The Tribunal issued a Decision on Provisional Measures on 8 May 2009. The Decision, in its
operative clause, states:

“The Tribunal considers that circumstances require it to recommend, and it
does recommend, provisional measures restraining the Respondents from:

(1) demanding that Perenco pay any amounts allegedly due pursuant to
Law 42;

(2) instituting or further pursuing any action, judicial or otherwise,
including the actions described in the notices dated 19 February and 3
March 2009, to collect from Perenco any payments Respondents claim
are owed by Perenco or the Consortium pursuant to Law 42;

(3) instituting or pursuing any action, judicial or otherwise, against
Perenco or any of its officers or employees, arising from or in
connection with the Participation Contracts; and

(4) unilaterally amending, rescinding, terminating, or repudiating the
Participation Contracts or engaging in any other conduct which may

29.

-6-

directly or indirectly affect or alter the legal situation under the
Participation Contracts, as agreed upon by the parties.”*

In addition, considering that “the Respondents should enjoy a measure of security in relation to
sums accruing due to them from Perenco (not the Consortium) under Law 42 from the date of this
Decision forward until such later decision,”® the Tribunal considered that the sums accruing under
Law 42 should be paid into an escrow account, for eventual disbursement upon the direction of the
Tribunal or by agreement of the Parties. The Tribunal requested the Parties to agree to the terms
and conditions of such an account and to establish it within 120 days of the Decision.

Subsequent to the Tribunal’s Decision, Perenco has asserted that Ecuador has “breached
repeatedly” the Tribunal’s Decision by continuing to issue Law 42 assessments on Perenco, despite
the fact that Perenco no longer had custody of the oil production from Blocks 7 and 21 following
Petroecuador’s seizure of the production from both Blocks.’ On 19 May 2009, Perenco informed
the Tribunal that the Respondents had breached the Provisional Measures Decision, and that this
would have consequences on the continuing operation of the Blocks.

On 16 July 2009, Ecuador physically seized the operations of the Blocks, instructing Perenco
employees to ignore any orders from Perenco. On 17 August 2009, Petroecuador sent a notice to
Perenco giving the company 10 days to resume its operations in Blocks 7 and 21. By a letter to the
Tribunal dated 20 August 2009, Perenco responded that it would comply with this notice if
Respondents complied with their obligations under the Provisional Measures Decision and the
Contracts.

On 12 November 2009, the Ecuadorian Ministry of Mines commenced caducidad proceedings in
order to terminate the Contracts. Perenco and Burlington sent communications to the Ministry
requesting that the caducidad procedure be suspended pending the decision of this Tribunal. On 20
July 2010, Ecuador declared caducidad of the Block 7 and 21 Contracts, effectively terminating
them.

Il. PROCEDURAL MATTERS
1. Constitution and Reconstitution of the Tribunal

The Tribunal was initially constituted on 21 November 2008, with the following composition:
Thomas Bingham of the United Kingdom, appointed as President by the party-appointed
arbitrators, after consultation with the parties; Charles N. Brower of the United States, appointed by
the Claimant; and J. Christopher Thomas of Canada, appointed by the Respondents.

On 16 December 2009, following the resignation of Judge Brower, the Secretary-General notified
the Parties of the vacancy on the Tribunal and suspended the proceedings pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 10(2). On 13 January 2010, the Claimant appointed Mr. Neil Kaplan of the United
Kingdom and the Tribunal was reconstituted. On 17 February, following the resignation of Lord
Bingham, the proceedings were suspended again. The Parties were unable to agree on a third
arbitrator to serve as the President of the Tribunal and consequently invoked Article 38 of the
ICSID Convention to request that the Chairman of the Administrative Council designate the
President of the Tribunal. The Chairman designated Judge Peter Tomka, of Slovakia, to sit as
President, and the Tribunal was reconstituted on 6 May 2010.

5 PMD 479.
° PMD 480.
"Tr. Day 1, 11:7.

40.

41.

2. Written Proceedings

Perenco filed its Memorial on 10 April 2009. It was accompanied by the witness statements of
Mr. Eric D’Argentre, Mr. Laurent Combe, and Mr. Patrick Spink, as well as by the first expert
report of Prof. Hernan Pérez Loose.

Ecuador and Petroecuador filed, in separate submissions, Objections to Jurisdiction on 17 July
2009. Ecuador’s Objections were accompanied by the witness statement of Dr. Christian Davalos
and the first expert reports of Professors Juan Pablo Aguilar, Luis Parraguez Ruiz and Hernan
Salgado Pesantes. The Respondents made a formal application under Article 41(2) of the
Convention that their jurisdictional objections be dealt with as a preliminary question.

On 17 September 2009, Perenco filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. It was accompanied by
the witness statement of Mr. Andrew Derman and the second expert report of Prof. Hernan Pérez
Loose, dated 15 September 2009.

Ecuador and Petroecuador jointly filed a Reply on Jurisdiction on 17 November 2009, to which
they attached the second expert reports of Professors Aguilar and Parraguez.

On 15 January 2010, Perenco filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, to which it attached the third
expert report of Prof. Pérez Loose.

3. Hearing on Jurisdiction

The Arbitral Tribunal held the hearing on jurisdiction from 2 to 4 November 2010 in The Hague,
Netherlands. In attendance at the hearing were, in addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the
Secretary, the following party representatives:

(i) On behalf of Perenco:

e Mr. Roland Fox, from Perenco
Mr. Rodrigo Marquez, from Perenco
Mr. Mark W. Friedman, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Sarah H. Wolf, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Mr. Thomas H. Norgaard, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Ms. Mary Grace McEvoy, from Debevoise & Plimpton LLP
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel, from Covington & Burling LLP
Ms. Carmen Martinez Lopez, from Covington & Burling LLP

(ii) On behalf of Ecuador and Petroecuador:
e Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion, Procurador General del Estado
Dr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona, from the Procuraduria General del Estado
Mr. Francisco Paredes, from the Procuraduria General del Estado
Mr. Pierre Mayer, from Dechert LLP
Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero, from Dechert LLP
r. Daniel Gal, from Dechert LLP
1. José Manuel Garcia Represa, from Dechert LLP
r. José Caicedo, from Dechert LLP
r. Lenin Armijos, from EP Petroecuador

M
M
M
M

At the hearing, Dr. Christian Davalos proffered witness evidence and Drs. Juan Pablo Aguilar
Andrade and Luis Parraguez Ruiz proffered expert testimony on behalf of Ecuador. Mr. Andrew
Derman proffered witness evidence and Dr. Hernan Pérez Loose proffered expert testimony on
behalf of Perenco.

-8-

42. Dr. Diego Garcia Carrion, Dr. Alvaro Galindo Cardona, Mr. Pierre Mayer, Mr. Eduardo Silva
Romero, Mr. Daniel Gal and Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa presented oral arguments on behalf
of Ecuador. Mr. Mark Friedman and Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel presented oral arguments on behalf of
Perenco.

43. The jurisdictional hearing was recorded and transcribed verbatim, and copies of the recordings and
the transcripts were subsequently delivered to the Parties.

44. The Tribunal deliberated by various means of communication, including the meetings in The
Hague on 4 November 2010 and 7 March 2011. The Tribunal has taken into account all of the
pleadings, documents and testimony submitted in this case.

Il. POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON JURISDICTION
1. Position of the Respondents (Ecuador and Petroecuador)
45. In its written and oral submissions, Ecuador argues the following:

i. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over Claimant’s Treaty claims because Perenco is not
a French company within the meaning of Article 1(3)(ii) of the Treaty;

ii. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over Claimant’s Block 21 and Block
7 Contract claims because the dispute between the parties is not a “technical and/or
economic dispute”;

iii. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over Petroecuador because Petroecuador is not a
party to the Contracts;

iv. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over Petroecuador because Ecuador has never
designated Petroecuador as an agency to ICSID; and

v. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to grant the relief sought by Claimant in relation to
Law 42.

46. On the basis of these arguments, the Respondents request the Tribunal to declare that:

i. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione personae over Perenco in respect of its

Treaty claims;

ii. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione materiae over the claims advanced by
Perenco purportedly under the Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts;

iii. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to enjoin Ecuador from applying or enforcing Law
42;

iv. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione personae over Petroecuador; and

v. All costs of this phase of the proceedings be awarded to Ecuador and Petroecuador.

2. Position of the Claimant (Perenco)
47. In its written and oral submissions, Perenco argues the following:

i. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimant’s Treaty claims because Perenco is a
company controlled by French nationals;
ii. The Tribunal has ratione materiae jurisdiction over Claimant’s Block 21 and Block 7
Contract claims because it is a “technical and/or economic dispute”;
iii. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Petroecuador because Petroecuador is a party to
the Contracts;

48.

49.

-9-

iv. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Petroecuador because it is the successor of the
Corporacion Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana (“CEPE”), a government agency
designated to ICSID by Ecuador in 1988; and

v. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to enjoin Ecuador from applying Law 42 to Perenco.

On the basis of these arguments, Perenco requests the Tribunal to reject the Respondents’
Jurisdictional Objections in their entirety and to award all costs of this phase of the proceeding to
Perenco.

IV. ANALYSIS
1. Jurisdiction over the Claimant’s Treaty Claims
Introduction

The Respondents’ first objection to jurisdiction is rooted in Article 1(3) of the Treaty, which
defines the term “companies” as:

“i) Any body corporate constituted in the territory of either Contracting Party
in accordance with its legislation and having its registered office there,

ii) Any body corporate controlled by nationals of one Contracting Party or
by bodies corporate having their registered office in the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties and constituted in accordance with that Party’s
legislation.”*

It is Respondents’ contention that Perenco, which clearly does not fall within the
Article 1(3)(i) definition, also does not fall within the Article 1(3)(ii) definition.

As noted above at paragraph 3, on 17 October 2007, the date of its consent to arbitration, 100% of
the shares of the Claimant, a Bahamian company, were owned by another Bahamian company,
Perenco Gabon S.A. (formerly Perenco S.A.). The 92.5% of Perenco Gabon S.A.’s shares were in
turn owned by Perenco S.A. (formerly Perenco Oil & Gas S.A.), also Bahamian, and 100% of
Perenco S.A.’s shares were in turn owned by Perenco Limited (now Perenco International
Limited), another Bahamian company. The 92.9% of the shares of Perenco International Limited
were owned by the late Hubert Firmin Frangois Perrodo, a French national.°

Perenco Ecuador Limited has thus invoked the BIT based upon a chain of corporate ownership that
culminates in the late Mr. Perrodo’s ownership of 92.9% of the shares of its ultimate parent
company. It asserts further that it is controlled by Mr. Perrodo’s heirs.'°

The Article 1(3) definition of “companies”, quoted above, encompasses not only juridical persons
incorporated under the law of France or Ecuador and having their seat there, but also those
incorporated under the law of a third State if they are controlled by nationals of one of the Parties
to the BIT or by such bodies corporate as so defined. The Treaty’s conferral of the right to claim
evidently hinges upon legal persons of third States being controlled by natural or juridical persons
of France or Ecuador, as the case may be, and it is the meaning of the word “controlled” that
divides the disputing Parties.

§C-7 (UNTS, Vol. 1980, p.183)

° Exh. E-1; Letter from Debevoise & Plimpton to Dechert (Paris) LLP dated 8 July 2009, enclosing letter from Debevoise
& Plimpton to the ICSID Secretariat dated 28 May 2008.

RAG.

-10-

A. The First Limb of Respondents’ Objection (based on the interaction
between Articles 1 and 9 of the Treaty)

(i) Position of the Respondents

The first limb of the Respondents’ objection is based on the interaction between Articles 1 and 9 of
the Treaty. They argue that the meaning of the word “controlled” in Article 1(3)(ii) is to be
discerned from its interaction with Article 9 which, using the Claimant’s translation, states that “[a]
company constituted in accordance with the laws in force in one of the Contracting Parties, a
majority of whose shares were held, prior to the dispute, by nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party, shall, in accordance with article 25, paragraph 2(b) of the [ICSID] Convention,
be considered for the purposes of the Convention, to be a company of the other Contracting Party.”

Under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the Treaty must be interpreted
in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms in their context and
in light of the treaty’s object and purpose. Therefore, the word “controlled” in Article 1(3) (ii) “is
to be interpreted in conformity with the text of the Treaty as a whole.”'’ The Respondents argue
that Article 1(3) (ii) must be read to be consistent with the terms of Article 9 of the Treaty, which
they assert defines “control” for purposes of Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention “as being
the ownership of a majority of the shares in a company.”'?

The objection, put simply, is that the Claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas whose shares belong to, and are controlled by, another Bahamian
company rather than French nationals. It is contended that the requisite form of control, namely
direct control, does not exist and therefore the Claimant lacks standing.'* The Respondents argue
that assuming that the heirs to Mr. Perrodo in fact control the ultimate parent of the Claimant
(Perenco International Limited) — a point not conceded’ —, the ultimate parent company has
standing but the Claimant, separated from French nationals by three layers of companies, does
not.”

The Respondents acknowledge that the situation before the Tribunal does not fit within Article
25(2) (b) in fine of the ICSID Convention because Perenco Ecuador Limited is not a juridical
person of Ecuador but rather is a juridical person incorporated under the law of the Bahamas.'®
There is no question therefore of an Ecuadorian juridical person seeking to bring an international
claim against Ecuador.

What the Respondents seek to derive from Article 9 of the Treaty is somewhat different. They
argue that when it came to defining foreign control for the purpose of Article 25(2) (b) in fine, the
Contracting Parties agreed that it must be direct. The Tribunal understands the Respondents to be
arguing that in order to give effect to all terms of the Treaty, such definition must be read back to,
and dictates the meaning of, the general definition of “companies” in Article 1. The result
otherwise would be, in their submission, to render an absurdity because if the test for control used
in Article 9 is not also used in Article 1, then a locally incorporated company that prima facie
would have standing under Article 1 would be deprived of it under Article 9 and this would result
in an absurdity, something to be avoided when interpreting a treaty.'”

" FROJ 421.

 FROJ 422.

'3 RRJ 4§ 56-58; Tr. Day 1, 16:16-17.
“Ty, Day 3, 6: 19-25, 7: 1-23.

'S Ty, Day 1, 25: 4-13.

'° FROJ 437; RRI Gf 14, 17.

" FROJ 44 15, 35; RRJ § 17.

60.

61.

62.

-ll-

The Respondents add that for foreign control to exist under Article 9 of the Treaty, the shares must
“belong to” nationals of the other Contracting Party. They note in this regard that the parties have
used different English translations of the authentic French and Spanish texts. The Claimant used a
text in which the phrase reads “... a majority of whose shares were held ...” while the Respondents
note that the authentic texts used the phrases “... y cuyas acciones, en su mayoria pertenecian ... a
...” and “... la majorité des actions ... appartient aux ...” [emphasis added] which both connote, in
their view, “to belong to” or “to be held by”, and thus requiring ownership in the sense of actual
title to a majority of shares in a company.’ Since the shares of Perenco Ecuador Limited are
owned by another Bahamian company, Perenco Gabon S.A. (formerly Perenco S.A.), it is
contended that it cannot be said that they are directly controlled by the heirs of the late Mr.
Perrodo.

(ii) Position of the Claimant

The Claimant notes that Article 2 of the Treaty provides that its protection shall apply “to the
investments of French nationals or companies in Ecuador ...” and that for “purposes of determining
nationality” it defines “companies” to include not only “[a]ny body corporate constituted in the
territory of either Contracting Party,” but also “[a]ny body corporate controlled by nationals of one
Contracting Party or by bodies corporate having their registered office in the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties and constituted in accordance with that Party’s legislation.” (Treaty, Article
1(3) (i) and (ii)). Taken at their face value, it seems obvious that the Claimant falls squarely within
the Article 1(3) definition.”

It notes further that there is no dispute that “since the December 29, 2006 death of Hubert Perrodo,
the Perenco Group founder, the entire Perenco Group has been fully owned and controlled by Mr.
Perrodo’s heirs, consisting of his widow and three children. All are French nationals and his oldest
son is now Chairman of the Perenco Group.””” Perenco observes that the Respondents “do not
appear to contest that through this complete ownership of the entire Perenco Group the French
nationals as heirs to Mr. Perrodo in fact — albeit indirectly — control” the Claimant.”!

Turning to the meaning of “controlled” as used in Article 1(3) (ii), the Claimant asserts that its
ordinary meaning encompasses control of a company through intermediate holding vehicles.” The
plain meaning of the word “controlled” is “intrinsically broad” and “encompasses control of a
company through intermediate holding vehicles.”** Perenco notes that Black’s Law Dictionary
defines control as “[t]he direct or indirect power to direct the management and policies of a person
or entity, whether through ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise; the power or
authority to manage, direct, or oversee. . os

The Claimant adds that reference to the French and Spanish texts of the Treaty confirms that
neither contains any wording that would qualify the scope of the term “controlled.” In this regard,

'S RRJ 49 47-54.
CCM 4 8-9.
2°CCM 49.

21CCM 49.

2 CCM 49-11.

? Tr. Day 1, 117: 13.
CCM 411.
CCM ¥ 11.

26 CCM 4 13-14.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

-12-

it points to examples where such dictionaries and the legislation of States contemplate that control
encompasses direct and indirect control.””

The Claimant’s interpretation is said to be confirmed by the object and purpose of the Treaty which
is to develop economic cooperation between the two States and “to create favourable conditions for
French investments in Ecuador” and vice versa.”* Article 1(3) (ii) should be interpreted in light of
the Treaty’s broad encouragement of investments.” A broad interpretation is appropriate because it
permits investors to structure their investments in the most efficient manners to accomplish their
particular business goals, without putting at risk the protections of the Treaty.*”

With respect to the Respondents’ reliance on Article 9 of the Treaty, the Claimant points out that it
addresses the specific situation of a juridical entity that is incorporated under the law of the host
State that would not otherwise lack the requisite standing to bring a claim against its own State.
The “purpose of Article 9 is to expand jurisdiction in a very specific factual setting not at issue
here” and it is “irrelevant” to the interpretation of Article 1(3).7"

Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention, the Claimant points out, constitutes an exception to the
fundamental requirement of diverse nationality and thus creates a special rule that expands the
jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal.” Article 9 is the agreement between France and Ecuador to
expand jurisdiction under this second category of Convention Article 25(2)(b).** It does not purport
to address the nationality of companies generally (since that is already covered by Article 1(3)) and
it is therefore irrelevant to the latter’s interpretation.

In this regard, the Claimant notes that other ICSID tribunals faced with similar attempts by
respondents to use a provision like Article 9 to restrict jurisdiction have rejected such attempts. The
cases of Wena Hotels v. Egypt™, Tokios Tokeles v. Ukraine**, and Sempra v. Argentina*® in
particular are cited in support of the view that the second category of Article 25(2)(b), and its
progeny like Article 9 of the Treaty at play in this case, “concern a special circumstance, and that
the rules applicable to that circumstance cannot be extrapolated to more general nationality
provisions of the first category of Article 25(2)(b) and its progeny, like Article 1(3) of the Treaty
here.”*”

Even if Article 9 were applicable in the instant case, the Claimant considers that that does not
require that French nationals hold majority shares directly or (in Ecuador’s words) “in the sense of
actual title.”** Article 9 does not even include the term “control” as the Respondents purport,
“much less ‘expressly define the word [control] to mean majority equity ownership.””” As such,
even if the Respondents are correct that Article 1(3) (ii) must be read narrowly to conform to

27CCM ff 11-15.

28 CCM 4 16-18.

CCM 418.

CCM 419.

51CCM 49 30-31.

CCM 432.

CCM 435.

* Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Award of December 8, 2000.
*Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Award of July 26, 2007

>°Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award of September 28, 2007.
57CCM 444.

58CCM 446.

CRY.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

-13-

Article 9, Perenco would qualify as a French national because “not just a majority but all of
Perenco’s shares are, and at all relevant times were, indirectly held by the French nationals.”

Finally, interpreting “control” in Article 1(3) (ii) to include indirect control would not create absurd
results. It is not uncommon for a BIT to provide substantive rights without providing arbitral
remedies.*' Treaties including the Ecuador-Switzerland BIT confer protection on investors without
providing any means for arbitration.”

(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal

It is common ground between the disputing Parties that Article 9, second paragraph, of the Treaty
defines “foreign control” for the purposes of Article 25(2) (b) of the ICSID Convention.* It is also
common ground that Article 9, second paragraph, does not apply to the Claimant since it is not an
Ecuadorian legal person.

Article 25(2) (b) of the Convention addresses two issues of nationality in relation to juridical
persons. Its first sentence sets out the general rule that such persons must have the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the Contracting State party to the dispute in order to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Centre. Its second sentence addresses the nationality of juridical persons created
under the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute. Although the Convention recognizes
that any such person has the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute, it can be
treated as a national of another Contracting State where “because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed [it] should be treated as a national of another Contracting State...” In this way the
ICSID Convention provides a means for parties to agree that a national of a State that ordinarily
could not bring an international claim against its own State would be granted standing under the
Convention.

In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimant is correct to characterize Article 9, second paragraph, of the
Treaty as a special rule that, consistent with Article 25(2) (b) in fine of the ICSID Convention, is
intended to extend ICSID jurisdiction to instances where a national of the State party to the dispute
would otherwise have no standing to bring a claim against its own State.

The Tribunal does not agree with the Respondents that the Article 9, second paragraph, test of
control must be read back into and dictate the meaning of the general definitions of Article 1.
While the Respondents disavowed any intent to extrapolate the rules applicable to Article 25(2) (b)
in fine to the more general definitions contained in Article 1,“ in the Tribunal’s view, this is what
the objection does. It seems more plausible to apply the Article 1 definitions throughout the Treaty
and, when it comes to Article 9 and the special situation envisaged there, to apply that article’s
specific test of control to a juridical person that is a national of the host State that seeks to claim
against its own State. The Tribunal sees no absurdity in this interpretation, nor does it see, to use
the Respondents’ words, an “internal inconsistency” in the Treaty resulting from such an
interpretation.*°

Given Article 9’s purpose, it is reasonable for the Contracting Parties to require that foreign control
be established in a particular way, in this case choosing to do so by requiring that a majority of the

“CCM 448.

“CR 422, Tr. Day 1, 144: 6.
®CRq22.

43 FROJ 4 22; CCM 432; RRJ §§j 13-17.
*RRIGLL.

*SRRI 410.

74.

7S.

76.

77.

-14-

shares of the local company belong to nationals or a juridical person of a Contracting Party other
than the respondent party. But it does not follow inexorably that the requirements of Article 9 must
dictate the interpretation of Article 1. Accordingly, the first limb of the Respondents’ objection is
dismissed.

B. The Second Limb of the Respondents’ Objection (based upon the
omission of the phrase “directly or indirectly” from Article 1(3) (ii) of
the Treaty))

(i) Position of the Respondents

The second limb of the Respondents’ objection is that the BIT’s negotiating history shows that the
States party to the Treaty deleted a phrase in the definition of “companies” that would have
permitted a company of a third State that was indirectly controlled by nationals of a Contracting
Party to have standing to claim.“° The Tribunal is urged to infer from the express terms of the
Treaty and from its negotiating history that control must be direct in order for a company
incorporated under the law of a third State to have standing to invoke the bilateral Treaty.

This limb of the objection points out that a draft of the treaty initialled in October 1986 included
the phrase “directly or indirectly” in Article 1(3) (ii) when defining how juridical persons of third
States could be controlled by nationals or companies of a Contracting Party."’ It is noted further
that this approach was consistent with the French model BIT at the time that the present Treaty was
negotiated. The model BIT provided that “companies” included “... toute personne morale
constituée sur le territoire de l’une des Parties contractantes, conformément a la législation de celle-
ci y possédant son siége social, ou contrélée directement ou indirectement par des nationaux de
lune des Parties contractantes ...” [emphasis added].

The phrase “directly or indirectly” was, in the Respondents’ view, “deliberately excluded” from
Article 1(3) (ii) in the Treaty that was ultimately signed and entered into force.** The Respondents
note that the parties otherwise retained the definition of “companies” used in the earlier draft and
made it materially identical to the French model BIT except for omitting the words “directly or
indirectly” when defining the scope of control.” This stands in contrast to other BITs signed by
Ecuador or France where the States Parties to the treaty have expressly defined “company” to
include legal persons controlled “directly or indirectly” by nationals of the other contracting
party.*?

The Respondents note further that while “directly or indirectly” was removed from the definition of
“companies” it was added to the Article 1(1) definition of “investment” in the final version of the
Treaty. This is said to reflect the Contracting Parties’ intent to broaden that definition (i.e., the
object of the Treaty’s protections) while narrowing the definition of the legal persons with standing
to claim in respect of such investment.*' The Respondents see the changes in wording as intended
to protect investments in the hands of each other’s nationals and to do so in respect of any direct or
indirect ownership of investments, but this was done by expanding the definition of “investments”
rather than by expanding the class of persons entitled to protect such investments.” They argue that

4° FROJ 4 28-50.

“7 FROJ 49] 42-43.

‘S FROJ 38.

* FROJ 49 67-72.

5° FROJ § 40, Exhs. E-53 and E-54,
5' FROJ 44 60-61.

° Tr. Day 3, 14: 3-25.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

-15-

when the Parties to the BIT meant to convey a broader scope, they deliberately used the phrase
“directly or indirectly,” as they did in Article 1(1)’s definition of the term “investment.”**

The Respondents contend that these changes in the structure of the Treaty must have been
intentional and must be taken to mean that control cannot be indirect.

Finally, the Respondents reject any suggestion that the Treaty’s most favoured nation clause
permits Perenco to borrow the provision of any other BIT signed by Ecuador that offers protections
to indirectly controlled companies of the other State party. They assert that such a claim merely
begs the question, because the MFN clause only applies to “nationals or companies” within the
meaning of the Treaty, which is the central question here.* In addition, “[t]he obligation imposed
by Article 5 applies to ‘nationals or companies of the other party’ only ‘in respect of their
investments and activities in connection with such investments.’ Perenco’s argument that Article 5
operates to expand the category of persons to whom the Treaty applies is hopeless.”**

 

(ii) Position of the Claimant
The Claimant responds that the word “controlled” without modifiers is clear and unambiguous and
should be given its ordinary dictionary meaning.*° If the terms of the treaty can be read without
recourse to supplementary materials such as the ¢ravaux préparatoires, there is no need to consult
them.*”

If such recourse were relevant, in the Claimant’s view, the drafting history of the Treaty does not
call into question the ordinary meaning of Article 1(3) (ii). The “incomplete” records adduced by
the Respondents do not support the contention that the parties deleted the phrase “directly or
indirectly” before the word “controlled” as a way of expressing an agreement to limit qualifying
companies only to those “directly controlled.”**

The Claimant argues further in this regard that the deletion of “directly or indirectly” does not
dictate the conclusion drawn by the Respondents, noting that the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) rejected a similar argument in Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Questions (Qatar v.
Bahrain). Likewise, this Tribunal should not draw the conclusion urged upon it.”’ If the parties had
intended to require direct control, they could have retained that word in order to qualify the
meaning of control. They did not do so.”

The Claimant adds that the travaux préparatoires adduced by the Respondents, likened to the
travaux adduced in the Maritime Delimitation and Territorial Questions case which the ICJ
described as “fragmentary,”°*' are “inconclusive” and “far too equivocal” to permit any firm
conclusion of intent diverging from the ordinary meaning of the terms ultimately used in what
became the final version of the Treaty.”

5. FROJ 426.
“RRIG78.

55 RRI 80.

5° CCM 450.

57CCM 49 49-51.
SCCM 451.

“CCM 451.

"CCM 451.

°! Tr. Day 3, 77: 8-14.
° CCM 49 53-54.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

-16-

Nor should the Tribunal rely upon the Contracting Parties’ “so-called ‘treaty practice’” because
first, no method of interpretation permits replacing the clear provisions in a treaty with “French
policy” or statistics; second, the purported practice is itself “equivocal”; and third, if Ecuador in
other BITs expressly extended protection to indirectly controlled companies, then the French
nationals at issue here should benefit, not suffer, from that practice by application of Article 5, the
Treaty’s MEN clause." If Ecuador in other BITs has extended protection to indirectly controlled
companies the French nationals should benefit from such practice in accordance with the MFN
provision of the Treaty, Article 5.“

In sum, the Claimant argues that it does not logically follow that deleting the phrase dictates the
conclusion urged by the Respondents because the phrase could have also been viewed as
redundant.

(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal

The Tribunal has considered the Parties’ submissions in light of the text of the applicable Treaty
and the rules of treaty interpretation codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. It
has not yet arrived at a conclusion on whether the deletion of the words “directly or indirectly”
could have the effect ascribed to it by the Respondents or whether it is necessary to consult
supplementary materials in order to determine the meaning of Article 1(3) (ii). It has decided that it
requires further evidence and submissions before it determines the Claimant’s standing to invoke
the Treaty. This issue is joined to the merits because in the Tribunal’s view certain other issues
should be clarified prior to arriving at a definitive view as to the Claimant’s standing to invoke the
Treaty. It will now turn to those issues.

What is the Claimant’s Nationality?

In its written pleadings® the Claimant has characterized Article 1(3) of the bilateral Treaty as
dealing with the “nationality” of companies and has urged the Tribunal to find that Perenco
Ecuador Limited “meets the nationality requirements of Article 1(3) (ii) of the Treaty” and further
that “Perenco is a French company for the purposes of the Treaty and the ICSID Convention.”*°
Likewise, during oral argument, counsel for the Claimant asserted that the various Bahamian
companies could be “French nationals under the treaty”.°’ The Respondents too on occasion have
treated Article 1(3) (ii) as going to “nationality requirements.”

Upon closer examination of the Treaty, it is evident to the Tribunal that Article 1(3) (ii) does not
expressly purport to confer the nationality of either Contracting Party upon a company incorporated
under the law of a third State. Rather, in the definitions article, the term “national” is used only in
reference to natural persons.” The standing of companies to bring a claim is addressed, not by the
conferral of nationality per se, but rather through the place of incorporation and seat of a company
or by its being controlled by either nationals or companies of a Contracting Party.

While Article 1 eschews any attempt to confer French or Ecuadorian nationality upon companies
incorporated within the Contracting Parties’ own territory or in third States, at the same time the

® CCM 453.

CCM $53; Tr. Day 1, 152:17.

® COM 9 8, 36, 44, 54; CR 99 2, 4, 14, 15, 17, 31
°° CCM 454.

°T Tr. Day 1, 127: 7-19.

® RRI G9] 64, 68-69.

® Treaty, Article 1(2).

90.

91.

92.

93.

-17-

Treaty, by its substantive terms, links “companies” to one or the other State’s Party. For example,
Article 2 provides that Treaty protection will apply “to the investments of French ... companies in
Ecuador ...” (and vice versa) and Article 3 states that the Parties agree to “permit, promote and
facilitate ... investments made by ... companies of the other Contracting Party.” Article 9 states
that each Contracting Party agrees to submit differences between it and “the nationals or companies
of the other Contracting Party...” (emphasis added).

 

The Tribunal approaches the jurisdictional issues mindful of the fact that the only claimant before it
is a juridical person incorporated under the law of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas which
claims rights of standing under the France-Ecuador BIT. No French national as defined in the
Treaty has asserted a claim nor averred that he or she controls the Claimant on his/her own or in
concert with other such nationals. As far as the Tribunal is aware, this is the only instance where a
juridical person, a national of a third State, has invoked treaty rights held by two other States
without there being at least one national of one of the two State parties to the Treaty (or a juridical
person incorporated under the law of one of the two States parties) also claiming under the treaty.”

This is an unusual situation and the Tribunal considers that care must be exercised in determining
whether rights of standing exist in fact and in law. It is beyond dispute that ordinarily a Bahamian
company could not claim rights under a bilateral treaty to which the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas is a stranger.”!

The Negotiating History

In investor-State arbitration, the private claimant does not speak for its State of nationality nor does
it necessarily have access to the State’s records relating to the negotiating history of the treaty
which it invokes. This latter point has been noted in prior proceedings.”

The Tribunal has noted the apparent deviation of the instant Treaty from other contemporaneous
French BITs and indeed the French model BIT at the time. Without having yet reached a position
on this issue either substantively or under the applicable rules of treaty interpretation, in light of the
Respondents’ having adduced some evidence of the Treaty’s negotiating history, the Tribunal is
interested in receiving any relevant negotiating history of the Treaty that may be in the possession
of Ecuador’s counter-party, the French Republic.

  

™ The case of Mobil Corporation, Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd, Mobil Venezolana de
Petrdleos Holdings, Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro Ltd, and Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/27, Decision on Jurisdiction of June 10, 2010, is one example. In that case claims were brought
by a Netherlands holding company and companies incorporated under U.S. and Bahamian law. Each claimant invoked
the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT.

7! Mihaly International v. Sri Lanka, (CSID Case No. ARB/00/2, Award on Jurisdiction of March 15, 2002, 4§ 23-25

The point was made by Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC in his dissenting opinion in the ICSID ad hoc Annulment
Committee proceeding in Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Peri, S.A. v. the Republic of Peru, CSID
Case No. ARB/03/4, September 5, 2007: “Every case of the interpretation of a BIT by an ICSID Tribunal shares this
unusual feature, namely that the Tribunal has to find the meaning of a bilateral instrument, one of the Parties to which
(the Respondent) will be a party before the Tribunal, while the other Treaty Party by definition will not. Or, to put the
matter the other way round, one of the parties to the arbitration before the Tribunal (but not the other) will have been a
stranger to the treaty negotiation (see paragraph 70 of the Committee’s Decision). That circumstance surely imposes a
particular duty of caution on the Tribunal: it can clearly not discount tions put forward in argument by the
Respondent as to the intentions behind the BIT and its negotiation (since that is authentic information which may be of
importance), but it must at the same time treat them with all due caution, in the interests of its overriding duty to treat the
parties to the arbitration on a basis of complete equality (since it is also possible that assertions by the Respondent may be
incomplete, misleading or even self-serving). In other words, it must be very rarely indeed that an ICSID Tribunal,
confronted with a disputed issue of interpretation of a BIT, will accept at its face value the assertions of the Respondent
as to its meaning without some sufficient objective evidence to back them up.” (Dissenting Opinion of Sir Franklin
Berman KCMG, QC, § 9.)

 

  

 

 

 

94,

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

-18-

The Tribunal therefore invites the Parties to jointly communicate to the French authorities the
Tribunal’s interest in receiving any travaux préparatoires that may shed light on the fact that this
Treaty appears to differ from other French treaties in terms of the deletion of the words “directly or
indirectly” from the definition of Article 1(3) (ii) and their insertion in Article 1(1). In particular,
the Tribunal wishes to understand the process through which the phrase “directly or indirectly” was
deleted from Article 1(3) (ii) and was inserted into Article 1(1).

The Tribunal is not inviting argument from the French Republic. Rather, it wishes to receive any
travaux préparatoires that may shed light on the way in which this Treaty may differ from other
contemporaneous French treaties.

Further Evidence of Claimed Control

The next issue on which the Tribunal wishes to receive further evidence concerns the Claimant’s
allegation that it is controlled by the heirs of the late Mr. Perrodo.

Where an investment is owned and/or controlled by the investor/claimant through a series of
corporations, typically the claimant will adduce evidence as to how it owns or controls such
investment.” In this case it is the investment rather than a French investor that has brought the
claim and it has sought to adduce evidence of how it is controlled by four non-parties to the
arbitration who are nationals of France.

The burden of proof to establish the facts supporting its claim to standing lies with the Claimant.
After the Request for Arbitration, in which Claimant stated that it is a company duly incorporated
under the laws of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, by letter dated 21 May 2008, the ICSID
Secretariat requested further information pertaining to its standing. On 28 May 2008, documents
were filed in support of the claim that French nationals own and control the Claimant. The
Claimant submitted its shareholder register and those of the three Bahamian companies interposed
between it and the founding shareholder of the companies, Mr. Hubert Perrodo.” No other
corporate records such as by-laws, shareholder agreements, management agreements, etc., were
submitted.

Mr. Perrodo died on 29 December 2006, some ten and a half months before Perenco Ecuador
Limited’s consent to arbitration on 17 October 2007. Thus, in order to address the issue of who
controlled Perenco International Limited and its subsidiaries at the time of the consent to
arbitration, the Claimant filed the notarized statement of M. Bernard Reynis, a French lawyer
(hereinafter the “Reynis declaration”), who attested that Mr. Perrodo’s spouse, Ka Yee Wong, and
his children, Frangois Hubert Marie Perrodo, Nathalie Perrodo, and Bertrand Nicolas Hubert
Perrodo, declared that they wished to establish their hereditary status pursuant to the French Civil
Code for those assets of the deceased for which transfer of ownership must be determined in
accordance with French law.”

® See, for example, ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/16, Award of October 2, 2006, 82-85, 131-152. Likewise, see AIG Capital Partners Inc. and CJSC Tema
Real Estate Company v. Republic of Kazakhstan, (CSID Case No. ARB/01/6, Award of October 7, 2003 at 2.1, 3.1,
3.2, and the chart showing how Claimant No. | controlled the investment fund at issue in that case. In A/G, the tribunal
examined documentary evidence and oral testimony on the way in which a minority US shareholder exercised voting
control over a Bermudan company and its wholly owned Bermudan subsidiary which in turn held a 66% ownership,
voting control and Board majority interest in a Kazakh joint venture.

™ RA Exh. 6. It appears that there was a corporate reorganisation after the consent to arbitration by Perenco Ecuador
Limited and just prior to the filing of the Request for Arbitration (30 April 2008). A series of new Class A and Class B
shares were issued on 7 March 2008. See the share register for Perenco Gabon S.A. (formerly Perenco S.A.).

 

RA Exh. 6.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

-19-

At the time of his death the deceased lived outside of France and was recorded by M. Reynis as
“ThJaving the status of ‘nonresident,’ as defined in the tax regulations.” All of the heirs are recorded
in the Reynis declaration as French nationals residing in the United Kingdom, each having the
status of non-resident, as defined in the tax regulations. ”° The declaration records further that the
heirs stated that they were unaware of any last will provisions of the deceased and this was the
result of a formal examination of the central archives on 11 January 2007. The declaration also
notes that Ms. Wong, as the surviving spouse, inherited, at her discretion, either the totality of the
estate in usufruct or full ownership of one fourth of the existing assets of the estate. The three
children are also recorded as heirs to the estate.””

On 31 October 2010, prior to the hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility, the Tribunal requested
clarification as to the relationship between the various Bahamian corporations and the Perrodo
estate.”* In its letter dated 1 November 2010, the Claimant stated that the “share registry of the top
company in that chain, Perenco International Limited, shows that its shares are owned by Hubert
Perrodo (a French national until his death in (2006)...” [emphasis added] and the “foregoing
documents all relate to the situation following Mr. Perrodo’s death, and the facts and relationship
they describe have not changed since July 1, 2009.””

The Tribunal’s question and a further question posed at the hearing have been met with a
reiteration of the points previously made, reference to the documents filed previously and some
supplementation by statements of counsel.*° Counsel stated that nothing has changed, either with
regard to the share registers or with regard to the estate, since Mr Perrodo's death. The estate
evidently has not yet been divided. At the hearing, it was stated further that Mr Perrodo died
intestate and that the devolution of his assets is entirely governed by French law.*'

For their part, the Respondents stated that their understanding is that since Mr. Perrodo's death his
assets are in suspension and the estate has not been distributed. However, they do not accept that
the shares of Perenco International Limited are owned by the heirs of Mr Perrodo.*

There is no record evidence as to whether the shares in Perenco International Limited form part of
the estate for the purposes of French law (i.e. that they are “assets of the deceased for which
transfer of ownership must be determined in accordance with French law” to use the words of the
Reynis declaration) and thus are to be distributed according to that law.

The Tribunal considers that it is being asked to infer that the shares of Perenco International
Limited formed part of the estate, that they will be distributed in accordance with French law, and
that therefore the Claimant is indirectly controlled by the heirs. The Tribunal is not content to leave
this to inference and considers that this must be determined on the basis of evidence rather than
counsel’s representation.

Therefore, the Claimant is directed to file further evidence in support of its averment that it is
controlled by Mr. Perrodo’s heirs. In particular, evidence should be filed to prove: (i) that the

7° RA Exh. 6.

RA Exh. 6.

78 Letter dated 31 October 2010, to the Parties from the Secretary of the Tribunal. Tr., Day 3, 1:6-25; 2:1-6.
™ Letter dated 1 November 2010 from Debevoise & Plimpton to the Secretary of the Tribunal

*° For example, Counsel informed the Tribunal in their letter of | November 2010 that Glenmor Energy is owned by
Francois Hubert Marie Perrodo. In responding to the Tribunal’s question on Day 3, the Tribunal was informed that
Madame Wong is now a director. Transcript, Day 3, 8:14-18 (although no evidence in support of the latter assertion was
provided)

8! Tr. Day 3, 81: 14-18.

© Tr. Day 3, 6-7.

107.

108.

109.

110.

-20-

shares of what is now called Perenco International Limited in fact form part of the estate under
French law and are being or will be distributed to the heirs of Mr. Perrodo in accordance with that
law; and (ii) the means and instrument(s) through which the heirs have exercised control over the
Claimant. The Tribunal recognizes that the heirs may wish to maintain matters pertaining to the
estate confidential. The Claimant is at liberty to apply for an order to protect the confidentiality of
any testimony and/or any supporting documents.

2. Jurisdiction Rationae Materiae over Claimant’s Contract Claims
A. Position of the Respondents
“Technical and/or economic” must be interpreted in light of Clause 20.2

The Respondents object that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction ratione materiae over
Perenco’s Block 21 Contract claims because this dispute is not covered by the Contract’s
arbitration provisions. Specifically, the Respondents contend that only technical matters involving
economic aspects and vice versa may be submitted to ICSID arbitration.

Clause 20 of the Block 21 Contract set forth the terms by which certain disputes may be referred to
arbitration. Provision 20.2, entitled “Technical and/or Economic Arbitration,” provides that
“technical matters involving economic aspects, and vice versa, shall be submitted to consulting and
arbitration accepted under Ecuadorian law. Legal matters shall not be subject to arbitration and
shall be submitted to the jurisdiction and authority provided in relevant legal provisions.” The
parties also added provisions regarding arbitration via Annex XVI of the Contract. Annex XVI
provides that:

“Once the Convention on the Settlement of Disputes Relating to Investments,
ICSID, has been approved by the National Congress of the Republic of
Ecuador and, therefore, is fully in force, the Parties agree that any technical
and/or economic dispute arising out of the application of the Participation
Contract for the Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons in Block 21
of the Amazon Region, which is the object of the present Contract, shall be
resolved according to the provisions of the aforementioned Convention,
leaving, accordingly, without effect the Arbitration procedure provided in
clause 20 of the Contract.”

The Respondents seem to object also to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae for the Block
7 Contract. Although the Block 7 Contract contains different arbitration provisions, and does not
contain an explicit exclusion of “legal matters” from arbitration, this difference is of “no
consequence” because “[t]he Parties simply could not contract out of Ecuadorian law concerning
arbitrability.”*’ Consequentially, to the extent that Perenco contests the constitutionality or legality
of Law 42, the Respondents’ ratione materiae objection extends to the Block 7 Contract claims as
well.

The Respondents first argue that the agreement to arbitrate is expressly limited to “technical and/or
economic disputes,” which this dispute is not. Under Clause 20.2 of the Contract, entitled
“technical and/or economic arbitration,” only “technical matters involving economic aspects,” or
“economic matters involving technical aspects” arising out of the Block 21 Participation Contract
may be submitted to ICSID arbitration.”“* Annex XVI, which also addresses arbitration of any
“technical and/or economic disputes,” must be interpreted in light of Clause 20.2. This is required

SS RRI G89.
“ FROJ 474.

111.

112.

113.

114.

-21-

by Ecuadorian law, which states that contract clauses shall be interpreted in conjunction with each
other, for the best meaning for the whole contract. Consequently, the phrase “technical and/or
economic disputes” as used in Annex XVI must be defined as “any disagreements on technical
matters involving economic aspects, and vice-versa.” Furthermore, the terms of Clause 20.2 and
Annex XVI cannot be read to permit disputes that are simply either “economic” or “technical,” but
rather must have aspects of both. To the Respondents, all potential disputes under the Contract
have economic consequences, and to permit all disputes with economic consequences to go to
arbitration would destroy the limiting effects of Annex XVI.

Second, the purpose of Annex XVI was simply to change the procedure, and not the scope, of
arbitration. Clause 20.2.19 of the Block 21 Contract provided that

“Tn the event that the Ecuadorian Congress approves the Investment Dispute
Settlement Agreement (CIADI) and such agreement therefore comes into
force and effect, said Agreement shall supersede the Arbitration procedure
mentioned in this present Contract.”

As such, Clause 20.2.19 indicated that if ICSID was ratified, it would replace the arbitration
procedure prescribed by the Block 21 Contract. However, “while the dispute resolution procedure
could change, clause 20.2.19 neither altered, nor purported to alter, the subject-matter of the
agreement to arbitrate contained in clause 20.2.”*° Similarly, Annex XVI is designed to affect only
the “arbitration procedure provided in clause 20 of the Contract” upon ratification of the ICSID
Convention. As such, Annex XVI also indicates that only the procedure, and not the subject matter,
or scope, of the arbitration provided for under Section 20 was to be replaced.

Perenco’s dispute is not a “technical and/or economic” dispute but rather a legal dispute

According to the Respondents, Perenco has failed to demonstrate that its claims constitute
“disagreements on technical matters involving economic aspects, or vice-versa.” Instead, Perenco
has presented a claim that is primarily legal in nature. However, the parties to the Block 21
Contract clearly intended to exclude legal matters. Mr. Christian Davalos of Petroecuador, who was
involved in the negotiation of the Contract, stated that the arbitration clause was intended to include
“those matters eminently technical that could have important economic implications, such as
matters relating to the minimum exploratory program (e.g., how seismic [testing] should be done),
drilling (e.g., location of wells, production rates), transportation or environmental technical matters.
This concept is, therefore, limited to operational matters and is defined by opposition to legal
matters whether concerning the law or the contract itself.”*° In addition, the Respondents assert that
“[d]isputes over the implementation of the Development Plan, for example, or the unification of
fields, were the typical types of examples that the parties understood to fall within the scope of
their agreement to arbitrate.”*”

In contrast to the matters listed above, Perenco’s claims are of a legal nature. Perenco’s claims
concern the enactment of Law 42, which allegedly breached Clause 8.1 of the Block 21 Contract.
Specifically, Perenco’s dispute concerns “the validity of the exercise by the State of its public
authority” and “whether such exercise is in conformity with Ecuadorian civil law of contract,”
neither of which are issues that can be arbitrated under Ecuadorian law.** Despite Perenco’s
assertions, this dispute does not chiefly concern the participation calculation of Clause 8 of the
Contract. Consequently, Perenco’s case must be resolved using legal criteria, including an analysis
of Law 42 and the Contract.

SS RRI G94.

8© Witness Statement of Christian Davalos of 8 July 2009 4 23.
SRRIGIIL,

88 RRJ G87.

115.

116.

a

117.

118.

119.

So

120.

-22-

The Respondents do not argue that Clause 20.2 and Annex XVI forbid the arbitration of all
disputes that would require the interpretation and enforcement of the Block 21 Contract. Rather, the
Contract’s arbitration provisions require that a dispute be predominantly economic or technical in
character, and not predominantly legal.

Finally, the exclusion of “legal matters” is not in violation of Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention, which provides that the jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to “any legal dispute”
arising out of an investment. “Legal disputes” as used in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and
“legal matters” as used in the Block 21 Contract are two different concepts. Article 25 is much
broader, encompassing both legal matters but also technical or economic disputes. Furthermore, the
ICSID concept of “legal disputes” is an international legal concept, while “legal matters” is defined
by Ecuadorian law.

B. Position of the Claimant
Annex XVI permits arbitration of any economic dispute, such as the present dispute

Annex XVI of the Block 21 Contract permits arbitration of “any ... economic dispute related to”
that Contract. Perenco’s claims, which concern one of the fundamental economic terms of the
Block 21 Contract, are clearly “economic” in nature. The language of Annex XVI, which covers
“any” dispute, that is either technical “and/or” economic, is expansive.

Ecuador is wrong to rely on the narrow language of Clause 20.2 for its assertion that only
“technical matters involving economic aspects and vice versa” can be arbitrated under the Contract,
because this language is not included in Annex XVI. First, Annex XVI expressly displaced Clause
20.2, by providing after ratification of Convention, technical and/or economic disputes shall be
resolved in accordance with the provisions of the Convention, “thus leaving without effect the
arbitration procedure set out in clause twenty of the Contract.” The Respondents are wrong to
assert that Annex XVI only displaced the “arbitration procedure” provisions of Clause 20.2.
“Arbitration procedure” as used in Annex XVI “includes the kind of disputes that could be subject
to arbitration under Clause 20.”*” Furthermore, Annex XVI is “not purely procedural. In paragraph
7, it contains a substantive term concerning allocation of the expenses and fees of the arbitral
tribunal. In paragraph 8, it contains a substantive term regarding consequential damages.”””

Second, the Parties intended that Annex XVI would replace the prior dispute resolution clause in its
entirety according to Mr. Andrew Derman of Oryx, the then-representative for the Contractors
during negotiations. Both the “bases for contracting” and the Hydrocarbons Law allowed for
arbitration of “technical or economic disputes.””'

Third, Ecuador is wrong to assert that Clause 20.2 and Annex XVI are to be read together, such
that “technical matters involving economic aspects and vice versa” language of Clause 20.2 defines
the “technical and/or economic” language of Annex XVI. According to Perenco, “Clause 20.2 was
self-evidently meant to apply before congressional approval of the ICSID Convention, while
Annex XVI was meant to apply after congressional approval of the ICSID Convention.” The
mere fact that Clause 20.2 is entitled “technical and/or economic arbitrations” does not mean that
the language used in Clause 20.2 regarding “technical matters involving economic aspects and vice
versa” must be imputed to Annex XVI to further define Annex XVI’s reference to “technical
and/or economic disputes.” Definitions are spelled out in Clause 3.3 of the Contract, not in Clause

SCR q44.
"CR 446.
°! Tr. Day 1, 156: 6.
CR qY48.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

-23-

20.2, and Clause 3.1 states that section headings are included “merely for identification and
reference purposes.””?

Even if the Block 21 Contract does limit arbitration to “technical matters involving
economic aspects and vice versa,” Perenco meets this standard

Assuming that the Respondents are correct that only “technical matters involving economic aspects
and vice versa” can be submitted to arbitration, Perenco’s claims still meet this definition. Perenco
asserts that the dispute is “plainly of an economic character,” and that it is also “a dispute with
technical aspects.” The dispute can be resolved by reference to these economic criteria in the
Contract, which involve technical aspects. For example, the calculation of Perenco’s participation
requires the determination of the daily average output, variables that are competencies of
hydrocarbons engineers.

Moreover, the dispute does not concern “legal matters” as this is meant under Clause 20.2. As an
initial matter, this prohibition of “legal matters” is not applicable, because it is only contained in
Clause 20.2 of the Block 21 Contract, not in the Annex XVI that replaced it. Second, Clause 20.2’s
exception for “legal matters” represents a “carve out” for matters that “must be decided by the
competent authority” even if they were otherwise subject to the arbitration clause; in other words,
“legal matters’ simply meant those matters which were not amenable to arbitration under
Ecuadorian law.””°

Furthermore, the exclusion of “legal matters” cannot be read “to exclude all matters of
interpretation and enforcement of the Block 21 Contract and the underlying law.””* Under
Ecuadorian law, a decision by arbitrators should be based on law. Clause 22.1 of the Contract
recognizes the ICSID Convention as part of the “legal framework” of the Contract. Article 25(1) of
the Convention provides that the jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to “any legal dispute”
arising out of an investment. It wouldn’t make sense for the Parties to agree to arbitration under the
Convention for resolution of legal disputes, only to then reject arbitration of legal disputes and
permit it only for “technical matters.”

Finally, Perenco is not contesting the constitutionality or legality of Law 42 and its regulations.
Rather, even if they were enacted in a manner permitted by Ecuadorian law, they nevertheless
breached the Participation Contracts.

C. Analysis of the Tribunal
Jurisdiction ratione materiae under the Block 21 Participation Contract

The Tribunal starts with recalling the provisions of the Block 21 Participation Contract relating to
arbitration. They are contained in Section Twenty, entitled “Consultation and Technico-Economic
Arbitration.”

Clause 20.2.12 provides that:

“The arbitration shall be guided by the provisions of this Contract, annex XVI, the
documents that are related with the case submitted for arbitration, and Ecuadorian laws, as
the case may be.”

°° Tr. Day 1, 169: 1
°* CCM 477.
°5 CCM § 80.
°8 CCM § 82.

126.

127.

128.

oO

129.

130.

131.

-24-
The relevant parts of Annex XVI read as follows:

“Once the Convention on the Settlement of Disputes Relating to Investments, ICSID, has
been approved by the National Congress of the Republic of Ecuador, and, therefore, is fully
in force, the Parties agree that any technical and/or economic dispute arising out of the
application of the Participation Contract for the Exploration and Exploitation of
Hydrocarbons in Block 21 ..., which is the object of the present Contract, shall be resolved
according to the provisions of the aforementioned Convention, leaving, accordingly, without
effect the arbitration procedure in clause twenty of the Contract.

For the application of the Convention on the Settlement of Disputes Relating to Investments,
ICSID, the following procedural rules shall also apply:

1. The Parties agree to submit to the INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES any technical and/or economic
dispute relating to this Participation Contract...through the [system] of arbitration,
which for all effects is hereafter referred to as “THE CENTRE.”

2. The Parties acknowledge that the object of the Participation Contract implies the
making of investments, so that the ICSID Arbitration procedure is applicable to the
Contract.

3. The Parties acknowledge that the Contractor's right to submit any technical and/or
economic dispute to the CENTRE shall not affect the Contractor’s ability to receive
total or partial compensation from any third party in relation to any damage or loss of
the object in dispute.” (Italic emphasis added).

When the Block 21 Participation Contract was executed in 1995, Ecuador was not a Contracting
Party to the ICSID Convention. This explains the language used in Clause 20.2.12 providing for the
arbitration to be governed by different rules depending on whether Ecuador was or was not a
Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention at the moment of the institution of the arbitral
proceedings.

It is not disputed that Ecuador was a Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention on 30 April 2008
when Perenco instituted the present arbitral proceeding by filing its Request for Arbitration with
the ICSID Secretariat.

This is the scenario precisely contemplated by Annex XVI of the Block 21 Participation Contract.
The Parties expressly agreed that once the ICSID Convention is in force for Ecuador, “any
technical and/or economic dispute arising out of (“derivada’”) the application of the Participation
Contract” shall be resolved through the arbitration within ICSID in accordance with “the provisions
of the [ICSID] Convention.” Further, the Parties agreed that the fact of the ICSID Convention
being in force for Ecuador rendered “without effect the arbitration procedure provided in clause
twenty of the Contract.”

The Tribunal thus considers that it is Annex XVI which is applicable to the present case and has to
be looked at when determining the Tribunal’s competence over contractual claims, including its
scope ratione materiae. At the same time, the provision of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
has to be recalled. It provides that “[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any /egal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State...and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.” The
requirements of this provision have to be met in the case at hand.

The Respondents do not argue that the dispute does not arise directly out of an investment. In fact,
the dispute concerns Ecuador’s compliance with its obligations under the Participation Contract.
The Parties in Annex XVI expressly “acknowledge that the object of the Participation

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

-25-

Contract...implies the making of investments, so that the ICSID Arbitration procedure is
applicable to the Contract.”

Ecuador further accepts that the dispute at hand is a legal one. It expressly admits that Perenco’s
contract claims in relation to Block 21 “are undoubtedly of a legal nature and involve legal
matters.”°"”

It is precisely because of this admitted qualification of Perenco’s claim as “involving legal
matters,” that Ecuador is now challenging the jurisdiction of ICSID and the Tribunal’s competence,
relying on Clause 20.2 of the Block 21 Participation Contract which provides that “[I]egal matters
may not be submitted to arbitration and shall be submitted to the jurisdiction set forth in the
applicable legal provisions.” Ecuador maintains that the Tribunal has no competence over
Perenco’s contract claims as “they do not involve any ‘technical and/or economic’ matter.””*

The Tribunal is of the view that this interpretation based on the opposition of “legal” versus
“technical and/or economic” cannot be accepted as it would result in depriving Annex XVI of its
applicability in general. The ICSID Convention requires the dispute to be a legal one. This
requirement was adopted, after some discussion, and was explained in the Report of the Executive
Directors which states

“26. ... The expression “legal dispute” has been used to make clear that while conflicts of
rights are within the jurisdiction of the Centre, mere conflicts of interests are not. The dispute
must concern the existence or scope of a legal right or obligation, or the nature or extent of
the reparation to be made for breach of a legal obligation.”

The Parties to the Block 21 Participation Contract agreed, in its Annex XVI, “to submit to the
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES any
technical and/or economic dispute relating to this Participation Contract.” It is thus the task of the
Tribunal to ascertain whether the contractual claims advanced by Perenco in this arbitration
concern a “technical” or “economic” dispute relating to the Block 21 Participation Contract. The
language “and/or” suggests that the dispute does not need to be of a cumulative nature, i.e.,
“technical and economic.” The Tribunal does not accept the Respondents’ attempt to treat “and/or”
as requiring that a dispute be technical and economic. It is sufficient if it is either technical or
economic.

In its Memorial, Perenco when introducing its contract claims stated:

“142. By the enactment of Law 42 and the issuance of the Implementing Regulations,
Respondents have also breached their obligations under the Contracts, in particular Clause
8.1, and violated the Constitutional proscriptions of confiscation, discrimination and
retroactivity of laws.”

The Tribunal accepts that the alleged violation of the Ecuadorian Constitution, its provisions on
confiscation, discrimination and retroactivity of laws concerns essentially legal matters, and cannot
qualify as a “technical and/or economic dispute relating to [the] Participation Contract.” These
matters are not covered by the Parties’ consent to arbitration under Annex XVI and therefore lie
outside the Tribunal’s competence.

Perenco, as quoted in para. 136 above, alleges the violations by the Respondents of “their
obligations under the Contracts, in particular Clause 8.1.”

°7 FROJ 4 83.
°S FROJ § 84, emphasis in the original.

-26-
139. Clause 8.1, which follows the title of this clause
“PARTICIPATION AND DELIVERY AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES”
reads as follows:

“8.1- Calculation of the Contractor’s Share: The Contractor’s Share shall be calculated using
the parameters set out hereunder, in accordance with the following formula:

PC= XQ

Where:

PC = Contractor’s Share

Q=_ annual Inspected Output in the Contract Area

X= Average factor, in a percentage, corresponding to the Contractor’s Share. It is
calculated using the following formula:

X= XLql +X2.q2 + X3.q3
. +Y

 

q=_ is the daily average annual Inspected Output
ql = is the part of q less than LI
q2 = is the part of q between L1 and L2

= _ is the part of q greater than L2

The parameters L1, L2, X1, X2 and X3 offered by the Contractor and [illegible] hereunder,
are the following:

L1= 30,000 barrels a day

L2= 60,000 barrels a day

X1= 67.5%
X2= 60.0%
X3 = 60.0%

LI and L2 shall be expressed in the same units as q, that is, in barrel. L1 and L2 serve to
delimit three intervals of production.

The parameters X1, X2 and X3 are associated with the three production intervals; they are
percentages and therefore must be between 0 and 100, and X3 must be less than or equal to
X2 and less than X1.

“Y” is a correction parameter with respect to the quality (C) of the Crude Oil produced in the
Contract Area, expressed as a percentage. If the Crude oil from the Contract Area is of a
quality less than 25 API, but greater than 15 API, there is compensation on behalf of the
Contractor, and on behalf of the State whenever the Crude Oil produced in the Contract Area
is of a quality greater than 25, but less than 35 API, and is calculated in the following
manner:

a) If 15 API<C<25 API, then Y = 2.0 x (25-C)

b) If 25 API<C<35 API, then Y = 1.0 x (25-C)

c) IfC>35 API Y=-10

“C” is the average annual quality of Crude Oil from the Contract Area, measured in API
degrees.

The State’s Share of these discoveries may not be less than twelve point five percent (12.5%)
when the gross output of crude oil does not reach thirty thousand barrels a day. The share
shall go up to a minimum of fourteen percent (14%) when the daily output is between thirty

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

-27-

thousand and sixty thousand barrels; and it shall not be less than eighteen point five percent
when production exceeds sixty thousand barrels a day. Consequently, the Contractor’s Share
may not exceed, in any event, the limits of eighty-seven point five percent, eighty-six
percent, and eighty-one point five percent, respectively. Average daily annual output (q)
shall be estimated in advance by the Contractor and agreed to by PETROECUADOR to
establish the amount of the Contractor’s Share each month. These estimates may be adjusted
quarterly. To calculate the definitive amount, the annual Inspected Output from the current
period shall be used.”

As it can be seen, Clause 8.1 constitutes a complex and detailed formula for the calculation of the
Contractor’s share in the crude oil produced in the contract area. This is a key provision relating to
sharing of the economic benefits between the Parties to the Block 21 Participation Contract.

Perenco complains in its Memorial that the Respondents “enacted and began to enforce Law 42,
which in effect unilaterally amended the participation percentages such that Respondents now
claim for themselves 99% of all oil revenues above relatively low reference prices.”

Law 42 leaves no doubt that the main and principal reasons for its adoption were economic
considerations. Its Preamble states inter alia that “it is necessary to apply criteria of justice and
equity within oil and gas procurement processes, so that contracts [with investors] will be framed
within principles of economic equilibrium and legal certainty for the parties.” It further states that
“the economic conditions of those contracts have changed, exclusively in favour of the contractor
companies.” It further adds that “[t]he international price of a barrel of oil is a fundamental element
to be considered in order to maintain the economic equilibrium of the relationship between the
investor and the government.” The Preamble of Law 42 finally states that:

“Tt is indispensable to incorporate in the substantive part of the Hydrocarbon Law principles
regarding economic and financial equilibrium, as well as principles of legal certainty that
make it possible to perform the participation contracts signed by the Ecuadorian government
based on criteria of justice and equity for the parties.”

Article 2 of Law 42 provides:
Following Article 55 [of the Hydrocarbons Law], add the following:

“Article ... Participation of the State in surplus prices from the sale of oil and gas not agreed
upon or not foreseen. Contractor companies that maintain participation contracts for the
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in effect with the Ecuadorian state under this
Law, without prejudice to the volume of crude oil subject to participation that corresponds to
them, when the effective monthly medium price of FOB sale of Ecuadorian oil petroleum
goes above the monthly average prices in effect at the time of the execution of the contract,
expressed in constant prices for the month of liquidation, will recognize in favour of the
Ecuadorian state a participation of at least 50% of the extraordinary income generated by the
difference in price. For purposes of this Article, extraordinary revenues shall be understood
to mean the difference in the above-described price, multiplied by the number of barrels
produced.

The price of crude oil as of the date of the contract used as a reference for calculation of the
difference shall be adjusted, considering the Consumer Price Index of the United States of

America, published by the Central Bank of Ecuador.”

Finally, the Interim Provision of Law 42 reads as follows:

“CM 41.

145.

146.

a

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

-28 -

“As of the date this Law goes into effect, and until the corresponding Regulations to the Law
Amending the Hydrocarbons Law are issued, the minimum percentage of State participation
in the extraordinary revenues shall apply, that is, 50%, established in Article 2 of this
Amending Law.”

The Claimant is of the view that Law 42 and its Implementing Regulations, “in effect unilaterally
amended the participation percentages,” despite the fact that Clause 15.2 of the Contract expressly
provides that “any amendments to participation contracts require mutual agreement of the
parties.”'” Claimant thus alleges that Ecuador breached its obligations under the Contract, in
particular Clause 8.1.'°'

The aim of Law 42 and its Implementing Regulations was to affect the economic conditions of the
contracts in order “to maintain the economic equilibrium of the relationship between the investor
and the government.”'” The Claimant disagrees with that attempt by Ecuador and challenges its
conformity with Ecuador’s obligations under the Participation Contract. The Tribunal has no doubt
that the dispute concerning the participation percentages in the share of the produced crude oil
qualifies as an “economic dispute relating to th[e] Participation Contract” in the sense of Annex
XVI.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that it has competence over the Claimant’s contract claims based
on the allegations that Ecuador has breached its obligations under the Block 21 Participation
Contract.

Jurisdiction ratione materiae under the Block 7 Participation Contract

The Respondents have taken an ambiguous position with regard to the Tribunal’s competence over
contract claims relating to the Block 7 Participation Contract.

They have not raised any objection to the jurisdiction rationae materiae under the Block 7
Participation Contract in their Objection filed on 17 July 2009. That jurisdiction was not
challenged. No relief is being sought by Ecuador when summarizing the relief sought from the
Tribunal in paragraph 106 of the Objections to Jurisdiction.'

The objection appears for the first time in the Respondents’ Reply on Jurisdiction, filed on 17
November 2009. The Respondents request the Tribunal to declare that it “has no subject-matter
jurisdiction over the claims advanced by Perenco purportedly under the Block 7 and Block 21
Participation Contracts.”'* No separate chapter is devoted to a more detailed argument against
such jurisdiction under the Block 7 Participation Contract, in contrast to arguments against the
subject-matter jurisdiction under the Block 21 Participation Contract claims.'°*

The issue of the jurisdiction under the Block 7 Participation Contract is mentioned just en passant,
in six sentences, when discussing the alleged lack of jurisdiction under the Block 21 Participation
Contract. The Respondents state the following:

“While the parties to [the Block 21] contract expressly excluded [legal] matters from the
scope of their agreement to arbitrate, their failure to do so in the Block 7 Participation

109 CM § 146.

11 OM § 142.

‘2 Law 42, Preamble, para. 6.
3 FROJ § 106

18 RRI 242.

105 Td. at Ff] 82-118.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

-29-

Contract is of no consequence. The parties simply could not contract out of Ecuadorian law
concerning arbitrability. The objection to jurisdiction is, therefore, pressed in relation to
Perenco’s Block 7 contract claims as well.”'°°

And then they add:

“There is plainly no prejudice to Perenco in the objection being raised now in relation to
Block 7 as well. In any event, the Tribunal is required of its own motion, to establish its
jurisdiction pursuant to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 41. That
jurisdiction is manifestly absent in so far as Perenco purports to agitate (sic) the validity,
either as a matter of Ecuadorian constitutional law or civil law, of the enactment of Law 42
and the promulgation of the Implementing Regulations.”'”

The Claimant in its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction states that “Respondents’ objection to jurisdiction
over Perenco’s Block 7 Contract claims is untimely.”! It refers to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1)
which requires that any objection to jurisdiction shall be made as early as possible. But the
Claimant also states that “[iJn this arbitration Perenco does not contest the Ecuadorian
“constitutionality or legality” of Law 42 and its implementing regulations. Rather, Perenco
contends that even if Law 42 and the implementing regulations were enacted in a manner permitted
by Ecuadorian law, they nevertheless breached the Participation Contracts.”"”

When presenting its jurisdictional objections during the hearing, Counsel for the Respondents
stated that “Ecuador and Petroecuador challenge the jurisdiction of [the] Tribunal over almost all of
[Perenco’s] claims. In fact, all of them with one exception.”'"°

It seems that the “one exception” encompasses Perenco’s claims under the Block 7 Participation
Contract. When Counsel, at the end of his general presentation, outlined the way and the subject-
matter his colleagues would cover in their presentation, no mention was made of jurisdiction over
claims brought under the Block 7 Participation Contract, in contrast to explicit mentioning of
claims brought under the Block 21 Participation Contract.'"'

Nevertheless, another Counsel for Ecuador briefly “revived” the objection to jurisdiction ratione
materiae under the Block 7 Participation Contract when he stated that “to the extent that Perenco is
contesting...either the constitutionality or the legality of Law 42 and its implementing decrees, we
object to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ... /t/his objection pertains to both ... the Block 7 Participation
Contract and the Block 21 Participation Contract".

The Tribunal notes that the Respondents raised the issue relating to its competence under the Block
7 Participation Contract rather late. Under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, not only
any objection that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not
within the competence of the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible; the Rule states that “a
party shall file the objection ... no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of
the counter-memorial ... unless the facts on which the objection is based are unknown to the party
at that time.”

16 RRJ ¢ 89; emphasis added
°” RRJ 90, footnote omitted.
18 CR 67.

CRY 63.

Tr. Day 1, 11: 3-5; emphi
"Tr. Day 1, 4: 5-6.

"2 Tr. Day 1, 89-90: 24-06; emphasis added

added.

 

157.

158.

159.

So

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

-30-

No new fact was relied on by the Respondents when they extended their original objection to the
jurisdiction ratione materiae to the Block 21 Contract claims to the Block 7 Contract claims as well
“to the extent that Perenco is contesting either the constitutionality or legality of Law 42.”

The Tribunal notes the Claimant’s statement that it “does not contest the Ecuadorian
“constitutionality or legality” of Law 42 and its implementing regulations.”''?

In view of the above, it seems that the issue raised by the Respondents, if it were to be construed as
an objection, has become moot.

The relevant arbitration clause in the Block 7 Participation Contract, clause 20.3, reads as follows:

“Notwithstanding the above, from the date the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other Countries (“the Convention”), signed by
Ecuador, as a State member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
on January 15, 1986 and published in the Official Journal No. 386 of March 3, 1986, is
approved by the Ecuadorian Congress, the Parties shall submit the controversies or
differences arising out or related to the performance of this Contract to the jurisdiction and
competence of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) to be
determined and resolved under the above referenced Convention.”

Perenco claims that Ecuador breached its obligations under the Block 7 Participation Contract.''*
These claims concern “differences arising out or related to the performance of [the Block 7
Participation] Contract.” They thus fall within the jurisdiction of the Centre and competence of this
Tribunal.

3. Jurisdiction Rationae Personae over Petroecuador

The Respondents next object that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the claims asserted
by Perenco against Petroecuador. The Respondents have advanced two arguments in this respect.
They assert that Petroecuador has not been designated to ICSID as it must be in accordance with
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention before it can be considered to have consented to this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. They also assert that because Petroecuador is not a party to either the Block
7 or Block 21 Participation Contracts, it never consented to arbitration pursuant to the Contracts’
arbitration clauses. The Tribunal will start with the latter assertion.

A. Petroecuador’s Role under the Participation Contracts

(i) Position of the Respondents

The Respondents contend that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over Petroecuador. Their first
argument is that Petroecuador is a representative of Ecuador and that therefore it is not a party to
the Participation Contracts. Respondents rely primarily on the sentence “the Ecuadorian State,
through Petroecuador” In the Participation Contracts. In addition, the Respondents maintain that
jurisdiction against Petroecuador should fail since the Claimant has not formulated any valid claims
against Petroecuador.

Participation Contracts clearly define the parties as Ecuador and the Contractor
The Respondents contend that Petroecuador is not and legally cannot be a party to the Block 7 and

Block 21 Participation Contracts, and consequently cannot be subject to arbitration. The Contracts

"SCR 63.
™4 OM § 142.

165.

166.

167.

a

168.

169.

-31-

clearly indicate that the two parties to the Contracts are the Contractor and Ecuador. Clause 1 of
both the Block 7 and 21 Contracts, entitled “Appearances of the participation contract,” state that
“the following Parties have appeared to execute this Contract: The Ecuadorian State, through
Petroecuador, on the one hand,” and the contractor on the other. Clauses 3.3.22 of Block 7 Contract
and 3.3.25 of Block 21 Contract define the “Parties” to be “The Ecuadorian State, through
Petroecuador, and the Contractor.” Clause 3.3.32 of Block 21 Contract defining Petroecuador, says
it “represents the Ecuadorian state.” Finally, the arbitration clauses in both the Block 7 and 21
Contracts state that it is the “Parties” who are subject to arbitration.

According to the Respondents, Petroecuador’s status as representative to the Ecuadorian State for
purposes of the Contracts is fully consistent with the Ecuadorian legal framework on hydrocarbons.
Article 12-A of the Hydrocarbons Law sets forth the model for participation contracts for the
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons, as “such contracts executed by the State, through
PETROECUADOR[.]” Article 2 of the Regulations implementing Law 44 amending the
Hydrocarbons Law states that “the parties to the contract are the Ecuadorian State, represented by
PETROECUADOR, as contracting party, and the contractor lawfully established in the country that
was awarded the contract.” Finally, both the bases for the Seventh Bidding Round and the
Proforma Contract for the Seventh Bidding Round employ the same “through PETROECUADOR”
language to describe the parties.

The Respondents assert that the language used in the Contracts and the legal framework is clear:
“To]n any reading of the clause, the word “through” indicates that Petroecuador acts as agent for the
Ecuadorian State.”''* The original Spanish term, “por intermedio de,” “anticipates the existence of
a principal on whose behalf another acts as intermediary.”'”° Since the text of the Contracts is clear,
“the adjudicator need not go any further; it must apply the clear words of the contract.”!"7

Petroecuador’s functions under the Contracts are consistent with those of a representative

By its establishing legislation, Petroecuador is the instrument of the State designed to develop the
oil sector in Ecuador. Because it is entrusted with representing the State in contracts for the
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons, it has “been endowed with certain powers and
functions in relation to the performance of participation contracts on behalf of Ecuador.”''*
However, as an administrative entity acting in furtherance of its administrative functions in relation
to a contract, Petroecuador does not become a contracting party.

First, because oil is the State’s inalienable and imprescriptible property under the Ecuadorian
Constitution, only the State can, pursuant to Ecuadorian law, agree to give a portion of the oil
produced to private contractors. Perenco’s arguments would lead to the conclusion that the State’s
right to sell hydrocarbons has been transferred to Petroecuador, which is impossible under
Ecuadorian law.

Second, Petroecuador’s role in the Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts is fully consistent
with the representative status it was given under the Ecuadorian legal framework for hydrocarbons.
Petroecuador’s role under the Contracts is to receive the State’s participation on behalf of the State.
Petroecuador receives no economic benefit from the Contracts’ performance, and its rights are
limited to being kept informed of and inspecting performance of the Contractors’ technical and
economic and contractual activities.

"S RRJG 139.
"Ne RRIG 144.
"7 RRIG 178.
"SRRIGI7L.

170.

171.

172.

173.

a

174.

-32-

In this regard, none of Petroecuador’s “obligations” on which Perenco relies as evidence of
Petroecuador’s party status render Petroecuador a party. For example, clause 5.2.6 of the Block 21
Participation Contract “merely restates some of Petroecuador’s duties and functions pursuant to
Article 59 to 62 of the Hydrocarbons Law concerning the transportation of hydrocarbons for and on
behalf of the State.”''? Other clauses are simply provisions by which Petroecuador assists in
facilitating performance of the essential obligations of the Contracts. Still other clauses related to
the execution of ancillary contracts and amendments or transfers, but these activities are not
incompatible with the status of agent, they are likewise executed on behalf of the state, and require
approval and oversight. Finally, the dispute resolution clauses refer only to the parties, not to
Petroecuador as well.

Third, Petroecuador’s conduct in negotiating and performing under the Contracts has not
transformed its status into that of a party. Perenco hasn’t shown that Petroecuador either accepts
performance on its own behalf or that it performs obligations as principal. Petroecuador’s role
during the Contracts’ negotiations was limited to executing the Contracts, once they had been
approved by CEL, on behalf of the State. CEL played the central role by calling the bidding rounds,
receiving and evaluating bids, awarding participation contracts and negotiating participation
contracts. In contrast, Petroecuador was only designated to “execute” the Contracts on behalf of the
State.

Fourth, despite Perenco’s assertions to the contrary, Petroecuador’s prior conduct in relation to
other contracts is irrelevant to whether it was a party to the Block 7 and 21 Contracts. Furthermore,
in the Repsol'*® and Occidental I'*' cases cited by Perenco, it simply was not debated whether
Petroecuador was a party to the contracts at issue. In Repsol, the key issue concerned whether the
dispute arose out of a services contract or the participation contract. Because Petroecuador
ultimately consented to ICSID arbitration, the Annulment Committee did not have to consider
which contract applied and consequently who the proper parties were. No contract claims were
advanced in Occidental I.

Finally, the Respondents assert that Perenco does not actually have any dispute against
Petroecuador. Even if Petroecuador could be considered as a party to the Contracts, Perenco has
made no allegation that Petroecuador has breached any of those obligations. Without a claim that
actually implicates Petroecuador, this Tribunal cannot take jurisdiction over Petroecuador.

(ii) Position of the Claimant

The Claimant presents several arguments which tend to illustrate that Petroecuador is a party to the
Participation Contracts. First, the Claimant submits that the wording of the Contracts makes clear
that Petroecuador is a principal as well as an agent of Ecuador. Second, the Claimant contends that
Petroecuador’s participation in the negotiation of the Contracts demonstrates that Petroecuador
intended to be a party to the Contracts. Third, the Claimant argues that Petroecuador’s involvement
in the performance of the Contracts shows that Petroecuador is an independent party to the
Contracts. In particular, the Claimant emphasises that Petroecuador had a distinct juridical
personality from Ecuador, its own patrimony, and operational autonomy to execute specific rights
and obligations. Fourth, the Claimant maintains that Petroecuador never contested being a party to
similar contracts in other ICSID arbitrations.

"RRIG 152.

129 Repsol YPF Ecuador v. Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Decision on the
Application for Annulment of January 8, 2007.

"2! Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. the Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL Arbitration Case No. UN
3467, Final Award of July, 1 2004.

175.

176.

177.

178.

-33-
Petroecuador has the rights and obligations of a party to the Contracts

First, Perenco asserts that Petroecuador is a party under the Contracts because it has rights and
obligations under the Contracts. Under Ecuadorian law, the intention of the contracting parties shall
prevail over the literal sense of the words. Because the Contracts indicate that Petroecuador intends
to be bound by its rights and obligations under the Contracts, Petroecuador is to be considered a
“party” to the contract under Ecuadorian law. Clauses 5.6.1 of both Contracts state that

“The Contractor assumes full responsibility towards the Ecuadorian State and
Petroecuador with respect to the obligations assumed under the terms of [the]
Contract; the Ecuadorian State and Petroecuador likewise assume full
responsibility for their contractual obligations.”

According to Perenco, “[a] plain reading of this clause leads to the unavoidable conclusion that the
Contractor should expect to have mutual contractual obligations with both the Ecuadorian State
and Petroecuador.”'”*

Second, many other provisions of the Contracts spell out particular rights and obligations for
Petroecuador, with some provisions requiring Petroecuador and the Contractor to act together in
relation to the State. In a section entitled “Petroecuador’s obligations,” the Contracts itemize
specific obligations of Petroecuador, including the requirement to enter into “any additional and
modifying contracts provided for in the law on Hydrocarbons, the Bid Documents and this present
Contract;” to take “any actions that are necessary, in coordination with the Contractor ... to
transport the hydrocarbons produced in the Contract Area;” and to protect the Contractor’s interests
by “[nJotify[ing] the Contractor of the receipt of any claim or legal action which could have an
impact on the rights of the Contractor” and “[p]rovid[ing] reasonable security conditions required
to complete the operations described in [the] Contract.” According to Perenco, these obligations
would be meaningless if the Contract could not demand performance of them by Petroecuador.

Third, the Contracts themselves provide evidence that Petroecuador is to be considered a party for
disputes concerning the Contracts. In Clause 20.2.1 of the Block 7 Contract, Petroecuador waives
its ordinary jurisdiction in favour of arbitration before the Arbitration Center of the Quito Chamber
of Commerce. Clause 20.2.20 of the Block 21 Contract provides that in the event that Ecuador or
Petroecuador enter into an international agreement providing for arbitration, they shall abide by it.
Petroecuador’s obligations under these provisions “would be meaningless if it were not intended to
be a party to such an arbitration.”'”? Furthermore, Paragraph 4 of Annex XVI of the Block 21
Contract contemplates the possibility of Petroecuador’s designation to ICSID. Perenco asserts that
“it’s impossible to see how the respondents can claim on the one hand that it is perfectly clear that
Petroecuador was never a party to the contracts, and was not bound by the arbitration agreement
under those contracts, and on the other hand maintain that it is also perfectly clear that the parties in
paragraph 4 [of Annex XVI] recorded an understanding that Petroecuador necessarily, as a party to
the Contract, was still to be designated under Article 25(1).7!4

Finally, the phrase “through Petroecuador” as it is used in the Contracts does not relieve
Petroecuador of its contractual obligations and party status. First, simply using the preposition
“through” is not enough to establish an agency relationship. Rather, the term reflects “a delegation
of certain State prerogatives to Petroecuador, which is charged with carrying them out in its own
name and under its responsibility.”'*° Second, there is no reason that Petroecuador cannot be
considered as both a representative of the State and a party to the Contracts. It fulfils both of these

CCM 492.
"3 CCM 497.
Tr. Day 1, 200: 11.
®5. CCM 4117.

179.

180.

181.

S

Ss

-34-

roles because it carries out state policy and state activities, but does so in its own name and for its
own account. Law 45 confirms this by both making Petroecuador a depository of the exclusive
rights upon the Ecuadorian state and providing Petroecuador with its own juridical personality.

Petroecuador’s course of conduct with respect to the Block 7 and 21 Contracts
demonstrates its status as a party

Perenco asserts that from the time of the Contracts’ negotiations, Petroecuador has conducted itself
as a party to the Block 7 and Block 21 Contracts. Petroecuador played a central role in the
negotiations of both Contracts, which were held between the Consortium of contractors on one side
and Petroecuador’s negotiating team on the other.

Petroecuador has also made and received performance concerning other economic and commercial
aspects of the Contracts. Petroecuador calculated the crude production according to the Contracts’
participation percentages, made monthly fiscalization and liquidation reports, and received the
State’s percentage of the oil production directly from Perenco. In addition, Petroecuador has
authorized the returns of bonds as specified under the Contracts, has consented to the disclosure of
confidential information concerning the Contracts, and received Perenco’s invocation of force
majeure in 2006, as required by the Contracts. Finally, since the passage of Law 42, “Petroecuador
has employed its independent juridical personality to issue the coactiva notices that became the
basis for seizing Perenco’s crude in defiance of the Tribunal’s provision measures order.”'”°

Petroecuador has acted like a party with respect to arbitrations concerning other participation
contracts. In Repsol, Petroecuador was the sole respondent in a contract dispute arising from
another block contract. Far from objecting to the tribunal’s jurisdiction, Petroecuador “exploited
the full benefits of the ICSID Convention by bringing an annulment proceeding after an award was
issued in Repsol’s favour.” 7 Similarly, in the Occidental J arbitration, which concerned a contract
that had identical “por intermedio” language, Ecuador did not contest Petroecuador’s status as a
party to the contract. Professor Aguilar, who submitted an expert report for the Occidental
proceedings, concluded in that report that “[iJn accordance with the HCL, these contracts
[participation contracts] are executed by the state company [Petroecuador]. “Consequently this
company [Petroecuador] and the private contractor are the contracting parties.”'"* Ecuador has also
not objected to the inclusion of other Ecuadorian agencies with similar rights and responsibilities as
Petroecuador in other ICSID proceedings. In the Noble Energy Inc. and Machala Power" case,
Ecuador did not object to the inclusion of the agency CONELEC, an agency with very similar
rights and responsibilities to Petroecuador. Notably, Ecuador did not argue that Consejo Nacional
de Electricidad (CONELEC) was merely a representative of the State on the contract in dispute.

6 CCM § 112.
®7CCM § 125.
"8 Tr. Day 2, 118:16.

"2° Noble Energy Inc. and MachalaPower Cia. Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Consejo Nacional de Electricidad, \CSID
Case No. ARB/05/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of March 5, 2008.

182.

183.

a

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

oo

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

-35-

(iii) Analysis of the Tribunal

The Tribunal will address the issue whether Petroecuador is a party to the Contracts before
deciding on the effect of the lack of valid claims against Petroecuador.

The wording of the Participation Contracts defining the Parties to the Contracts

Clauses 3.3.22 and 3.3.25 of the Participation Contracts for Block 7 & Block 21 define the
“Parties” to the Contracts as “the Ecuadorian State, through Petroecuador, and the Contractor.”

The wording makes clear that three entities were involved in the performance of the Contracts.
However, the issue is whether these three entities are all independent parties to the Contracts.

The Tribunal notes that the use of the commas combined with the conjunctive “and” suggests that
the Contracts were entered into only by two parties.

Furthermore, the use of the word “through”, which is the English translation of the original Spanish
wording “por intermedio de” used in the Contracts, also suggests that one of the entities, i.e. the
Ecuadorian State, was represented by another entity, i.e. Petroecuador.

The Tribunal is confident that Perenco, Ecuador and Petroecuador all understood that the sentence
“through Petroecuador” was intended to create an agency or representative relationship between
Ecuador and Petroecuador. Such explanation becomes undisputable in light of Clause 3.3.32 of the
Participation Contract for Block 21 which specifies that “PETROECUADOR” “represents the
Ecuadorian State.”

Absent express or unequivocal reference to the contrary, an agent or representative cannot be
regarded as an independent party to a contract. Therefore, unless it is proven that Petroecuador
could act independently from Ecuador’s instruction, on its own initiative and for its own benefit,
Petroecuador cannot be considered a party to the Participation Contracts.

Nevertheless, the Claimant contends that the circumstances demonstrate that, in parallel to its
mission as agent, Petroecuador also acted as an independent party to the Participation Contracts.

Petroecuador’s participation in the contractual negotiations

The Claimant submits that Petroecuador’s participation in the negotiation of the Contracts is
evidence that Petroecuador is a party to the Contracts. The Respondents deny Petroecuador’s
involvement in the negotiations of the Contracts in any other capacity than as a representative of
the Ecuadorian State.

Whether or not the Claimant is right in characterising Petroecuador as a participant in the
negotiations in its own capacity, the issue is whether such involvement is sufficient to conclude that
Petroecuador acted as an independent party.

The Tribunal notes that a State can legitimately choose to conduct the negotiation of a contract, to
which it will become a party, through its State ministries or through another representative. A
State’s decision to negotiate the Participation Contracts through an agent is particularly expedient
when the same agent is also in charge of the performance of the contracts.

In the present case, since Petroecuador was to perform the Participation Contracts on behalf of and
for the benefit of Ecuador, it made sense for Petroecuador also to participate and represent Ecuador
during the negotiation of the Contracts.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

S

200.

201.

202.

203.

-36-

The Claimant nevertheless seems to suggest that Petroecuador was not representing Ecuador when
it participated in the negotiation of the Contracts. However, the Claimant did not produce evidence
that Petroecuador acted outside of its mission as a representative of the State or decided to take part
in the negotiation on its own initiative and for its own benefit.

Even if the Claimant had produced evidence that Petroecuador was involved in the negotiation of
the Contracts as an independent entity, such involvement would in itself be insufficient to conclude
that Petroecuador is a party to the Contracts. Petroecuador could have negotiated the Contracts
independently with the purpose of becoming a party, but in the end, Perenco and Ecuador have
chosen another route with Petroecuador being simply an agent of Ecuador.

The Tribunal accepts that such state of affairs, i.e. Petroecuador’s participation in the negotiation of
the Contracts, could eventually be an element leading toward the conclusion that Petroecuador was
a party to the Contracts; however, such element would need to be corroborated by further evidence.
As the Tribunal will now conclude, this was not the case.

Petroecuador’s distinct juridical personality

The Claimant argues that Petroecuador’s distinct juridical personality from Ecuador is further
evidence that Petroecuador was considered an independent party to the Participation Contracts. The
Claimant’s expert asserts that Petroecuador was created by the State with a juridical personality and
its own patrimony, to be a depository of the exclusive rights conferred by law upon the Ecuadorian
State.” The Claimant argues that such juridical autonomy is not consistent with a role confined
merely to that of an agent.

The Tribunal finds no basis in the Claimant’s reasoning. It is correct to say that an independent
party to a contract is necessarily an entity with a juridical personality distinct from the other
contract entities. However, it is incorrect to make the opposite assumption, i.e. that an entity is a
party to a contract because it has juridical independence. Juridical independence can fulfil other
objectives. For instance, and contrary to the Claimant’s position, distinct juridical personality is
also a prerequisite for an entity to enter an agency relationship as agent of the principal.

In the Tribunal’s view, the fact that Petroecuador has a juridical personality distinct from Ecuador
does not demonstrate that Petroecuador is a party to the Participation Contracts, nor does it prove
or deny the agency relationship between Ecuador and Petroecuador. Petroecuador’s juridical
personality is no more than the evidence of Petroecuador’s legal existence.

Petroecuador’s own patrimony and the alleged transfer of State prerogatives

The Tribunal is of the view that the fact that Petroecuador was provided with its own patrimony is
insufficient evidence that Petroecuador was a party to the Participation Contracts per se.

It is incorrect to assume that an entity involved in the performance of a contract is necessarily a
party to the contract because it possesses and uses its own patrimony.

Petroecuador’s possession of its own patrimony simply confirms that Petroecuador is a person
distinct from Ecuador and has its own assets. However, it does not prove that Petroecuador
performs the Participation Contracts as an independent entity for its own benefit.

Furthermore, nothing forbids an agent to utilize its own assets to execute its principal’s
instructions. Petroecuador could use its own patrimony when performing the Contracts in its
position of representative of Ecuador without making it an independent party to the Contracts.

39 Second Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose of 15 September 2009 4%] 36- 35.

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

-37-

The Claimant also contends that Ecuador transferred certain State prerogatives to Petroecuador,
and that by doing so, they both intended to make Petroecuador an independent party to the
Participation Contracts.

The Tribunal finds again that the Claimant is wrong in making such assumption. The Respondents
have cautiously submitted that pursuant to the Ecuadorian Constitution oil was the State’s
“inalienable and imprescriptible” property, and that therefore Petroecuador intervenes exclusively
as a representative of the State in hydrocarbon matters.'*! As a result, it is proper to assume that
Petroecuador’s assets were not transferred to but delegated to Petroecuador. It is quite
understandable that an agent which has permission to manage the principal’s assets be granted
custody of the principal’s assets.

In any event, whether or not Petroecuador’s powers were inalienable State prerogatives, no
evidence shows that Petroecuador was to carry them out on its own name and for its own benefit.

The only inference that the Tribunal can draw from the circumstances is that Ecuador intended to
provide Petroecuador with some considerable assets and powers to manage Ecuador’s oil affairs.
However, this does not demonstrate an intention that Petroecuador act as an independent entity and
for its own benefit when performing the Contracts.

Petroecuador’s autonomy

This is clearly the best characteristic fitting the Claimant’s argument. An independent party to a
contract has generally complete autonomy in the conduct of its action when performing a contract.
In contrast, a representative is usually constrained by the principal’s directions.

However, there can be significant variations in the degree of constraint arising out of the principal’s
instructions. An agent who received precise instructions from the principal can still be granted
large powers to execute its mission without being dependent on the principal. In this sense, an
agent can enjoy some autonomy so long as it complies with the principal’s instructions to manage
the principal’s affairs. In the Tribunal’s view, Petroecuador had to comply with specific
instructions since it had to fulfil numerous obligations on behalf of the State. But Petroecuador was
also granted significant powers to execute the mission commanded by Ecuador. Such powers had
as their objective the giving to Petroecuador of some autonomy in the performance of the
Contracts. This does not mean that Petroecuador was acting independently, on its own initiative
and for its own benefit. Nothing shows that Petroecuador’s autonomy was exercised outside of the
representative relationship. Petroecuador had still to comply with Ecuador’s instructions and
execute the Contracts for Ecuador’s benefit.

The Tribunal notes that Petroecuador’s obedience to Ecuador’s instructions is reflected by
Petroecuador’s implementation of Law 42. If, as Claimant contends, Petroecuador enjoyed so much
autonomy that it made Petroecuador a party to the Contracts, Petroecuador did not have to comply
with Law 42 which allegedly modified the Contracts. In the Tribunal’s view, Petroecuador’s
compliance with Ecuador’s instruction to implement Law 42 is evidence that Petroecuador never
reached the level of autonomy that would make it an independent party to the Contracts.

8! Second Expert Report of Juan Pablo Aguilar Andrade of 17 November 2009 {ff 82, 85.

211.

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

-38-

Petroecuador’s rights and obligations

Claimant submits that Petroecuador was a party to the Participation Contracts because
Petroecuador assumed various rights and obligations distinct from those of Ecuador.

In this respect, Claimant emphasizes that Clause 2.10 of the Block 7 Contract provides that
“Petroecuador and the contractor have proceeded to negotiate the terms and other conditions of
the contractual modification.” With the same purpose, Claimant points out Clauses 5.2 of the
Block 7 and 21 Contracts which both provide that “/iJn addition to the other obligations stipulated
in this contract, Petroecuador agrees to ...” Other clauses such as Clauses 5.4 of the Blocks 7 and
21 Contracts also address the “Rights of Petroecuador” and the benefits to which “Petroecuador
shall be entitled to.” In Clause 5.6.1 of both Contracts, the contractor assumes full responsibility in
respect of Petroecuador and the State regarding obligations assumed under the contract, while the
latter two “assume full responsibility for their contractual obligations.”

For its part, the Respondent argues that the “essential” obligations and rights derived from the
contracts are borne by the contractor and the Ecuadorian State, while the obligations for
Petroecuador are “incidental or secondary” because they merely concern technical, managerial or
executory functions that are related to the primary purposes of the Contracts.'**

The provisions above make clear that the parties intended Petroecuador to have various rights and
obligations. However, this does not automatically make Petroecuador a party to the Contracts.
None of these provisions provide that Petroecuador is, in the words of the Respondents’ expert
witness, “the entity upon whom the legal effect of the transaction fall,” in terms of liability.’

The Tribunal is satisfied that these provisions, when read in combination with the sentence
“Ecuador, through Petroecuador,” plainly show that Petroecuador, as an agent, acquires rights and
agrees to fulfill the obligations falling upon Ecuador. Since the representative relationship was set
out clearly at the beginning of the Contracts, there was no need to repeat in each provision that
“Ecuador, through Petroecuador, agreed to perform...” or that “Ecuador, through Petroecuador,
shall be entitled to...”

In the Tribunal’s view, since Petroecuador was expected to perform the Contracts as an agent of the
State, Ecuador and Perenco had to provide Petroecuador with explicit rights and obligations for the
specific purpose of conducting business on behalf and for the benefit of Ecuador. This did not
affect the representative relationship, provided that the legal consequences of such rights and
obligations ultimately affected Ecuador’s patrimony.

For Petroecuador to be considered an independent party to the Participation Contracts, Claimant
must have produced clear evidence that Petroecuador assumed rights and obligations for its own
benefit or which fell outside of the scope of Ecuador’s instructions. The Tribunal was not provided
with such evidence.

On the contrary, the Participation Contracts suggest that Petroecuador assumed distinct rights and
obligations pursuant to an agency relationship. For instance, Clauses 5.4.1, with identical wording
in both Contracts, provide that Petroecuador is to “receive the State’s Participation on behalf of the
State” from the production of crude oil. Such wording is unambiguous. Petroecuador was to
administer and supervise contract performance on behalf of the State without receiving any
economic benefit.

'2 Second Expert Report of Hernan Pérez Loose of 15 September 2009 17.
'3 Second Expert Report of Luis Sergio Parraguez Ruiz of 17 November 2009 44 28-33.
' First Expert Report of Luis Sergio Parraguez Ruiz of 3 July 2009 4 42.

219.

So

220.

221.

222.

223.

224,

225.

226.

-39-

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Petroecuador undertook some rights and obligations, not in its
own interest, but rather as representative of the Ecuadorian State and in furtherance of the State’s
interests. In this respect, Petroecuador cannot be considered as a party to the Participation
Contracts.

Petroecuador’s involvement as a party in other ICSID proceedings

According to the Claimant, the fact that Petroecuador acted as a party to similar contracts in other
ICSID proceedings is indisputable evidence that Petroecuador is a party to the Participation
Contracts. Claimant submits that in Repsol, Petroecuador was the sole respondent in a contractual
dispute arising out of the participation contract for Block 16. In Occidental 1, the Claimant also
submits that Ecuador has taken the position that Petroecuador was a party to the Block 15
participation contract.

In the Tribunal’s view, whether Petroecuador was a party to similar participation contracts in other
cases cannot be considered for the purpose of establishing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the present
Arbitration.

In the Repsol and Occidental I cases, the arbitrations directed against Petroecuador were based on
contract claims. Those contracts, albeit similar to the Participation Contracts, are not the subject of
this arbitration which involves different circumstances. The Tribunal does not deem it appropriate
to decide whether it has jurisdiction by interpreting other contracts which are not related to this
arbitration.

In other words, whatever position Petroecuador may have taken in other proceedings, this cannot
possibly confer jurisdiction on this Tribunal. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that Petroecuador’s prior
conduct is irrelevant and, in any event, does not indicate an assumption by Petroecuador of
obligations as principal which would make it an independent party to the Participation Contracts.

Claimant’s lack of valid claims against Petroecuador

After careful review of the Memorial on the Merits submitted by Claimant on 10 April 2009, the
Tribunal was not able to identify any specific claims against Petroecuador.

As a recurrent pattern, Claimant articulated claims against “the Respondents.” Claimant
occasionally referred to Petroecuador, however when the claims were formulated towards a
specific entity, claims were directed against the State, Ecuador.

In the Tribunal’s view, the paramount claim made by the Claimant is based on the enactment of
Law 42 on 21 April 2006 which modified the State’s participation in oil prices revenues. In support
of its claim, Claimant also mentioned other various measures taken by Ecuador. For instance, the
Claimant referred to:

¢ the Government’s issuance of Decree 1583 and 1672 on 23 June and 11 July 2006
respectively;

e the Ministry of Energy and Mines’ notification of Perenco dated 6 July 2006 which
determined the prices in effect for the purposes of calculating the new participation;

e the letter from the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum to Perenco dated 23 December 2008
which instructed Perenco to appoint a negotiation team for the reversion of Block 7 and
to assign a negotiating team to early termination of Block 21;

e the Minister’s announcement on 21 January 2009 that sought termination of the
Participation Contracts;

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

- 40 -

e the Ministry of Mines and Petroleum’s letter dated 19 March 2009 ordering the
preliminary re-liquidation of amounts allegedly being owed under Law 42; and

e the President’s instruction reported on 14 February 2009 which requested that coercive
measures be taken against Perenco.

. Neither the enactment of Law 42 nor any of the subsequent actions which seem to form the basis of
Claimant’s claims were acts of Petroecuador. They were actions taken by Ecuador. As an
independent entity, Petroecuador is not responsible for acts performed by another entity, i.e.
Ecuador.

. The Claimant articulated for the first time a clear claim against Petroecuador at the hearing. The
Claimant submitted that “Petroecuador violated a number of its obligations under the contracts,
including by seizing Perenco’s share in production, and refusing to apply a correction factor to the
participation formula after the enactment of Law 42.”'*°

. Two factors show that Petroecuador was obliged to implement Law 42. First, as representative of
Ecuador, Petroecuador had the legal duty to comply with Ecuador’s instructions. Second, as a
juridical person of the Ecuadorian State, Petroecuador also had the obligation to comply with
applicable State laws. In the Tribunal’s view, Petroecuador cannot reasonably be held liable for
following Ecuador’s instructions and complying with Ecuador’s mandatory laws and regulations.

. The Tribunal is comforted in this conclusion because it can see nothing in Claimant’s pleadings to
suggest that there would be any claim against Petroecuador for acts other than those in connection
with Law 42 and associated Decrees and actions, and thus there is no claim that could be brought
against Petroecuador in implementing Law 42.

. In the light of all the above, the Tribunal holds that it has no jurisdiction against Petroecuador.
B. Designation of Petroecuador to ICSID

. In light of the conclusion above, there is no need for the Tribunal to consider the Respondents’
assertion that Petroecuador has not been designated to ICSID under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention.

4. Jurisdiction to Enjoin the Respondent’s from Applying Law 42
A. Position of the Respondents

. In its Request for Arbitration, Perenco requested as part of its prayer for relief that the Tribunal in
its award “[o]rder Ecuador to declare null and void the HCL Amendment as applied to Perenco.”'**
In the Claimant’s Memorial, the Tribunal is requested that it enjoin the Respondents from
“collecting any Law 42 assessments they claim are currently due and owing in connection with the
Contracts” and from “applying Law 42 and its implementing regulations to the Contracts in the
future.”'*’ The Respondents assert that to the extent Perenco still seeks to obtain an order enjoining
Ecuador from enforcing Law 42, they object to this request for the following reasons. First, this
Tribunal has no jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention or the Treaty to enjoin Ecuador from
applying Law 42. It is a basic principle under international law that tribunals may not set aside
national legislation unless this power has been expressly conferred upon them. Instead, tribunals
“can only declare that a domestic legal act is contrary to international law and order the State to

5 Tr. Day 1, p. 190:18-23.
RA § 42(c).
"57 CM § 170(b) and (c).

234,

235.

236.

237.

238.

-41-
render its domestic law in compliance with international law by means of its own choice.”'**
(emphasis added)

Second, Perenco’s request to be exempted from Law 42 would force Ecuador to impose a
discriminatory and unequal treatment towards other companies, which is impermissible under both
Ecuadorian and international law. Third, Law 42 was validly enacted and was subsequently
declared constitutional by Ecuador’s highest constitutional court. Fourth, while Perenco asserts that
this Tribunal has already ruled on the availability of injunctive relief in its Provisional Measures
Decision, this issue is not in fact res judicata. The Tribunal’s holding that provisional measures
may “restrain a State from enforcing a law pending final resolution of the dispute on the merits”
was limited to the context of the provisional measures and does not have the effect of permanently
enjoining Ecuador from applying Law 42.

B. Position of the Claimant

Perenco maintains that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to award restitution in the form of an order
enjoining Ecuador from applying Law 42 to the Participation Contracts and from enforcing Law 42
levies. First, Perenco is not seeking to wholly invalidate Law 42, but merely to restrain Ecuador
from enforcing Law 42 against it. Second, this issue is now res judicata, as it was already squarely
addressed by the Provisional Measures Decision, which provided that “[w]hile the enactment of a
law by a sovereign State, upheld as constitutional in that State, is a matter of importance, it cannot
be conclusive or preclude the Tribunal from exercise of its power to grant provisional measures”
that can “thus restrain a State from enforcing a law.”'”

  

Third, relief in the form of restituting the existing legal regime is preferred under international law.
Other tribunals, including the tribunal in Micula v. Romania", have ordered or contemplated
measures enjoining the enforcement of domestic laws, even where the applicable BIT did not
explicitly permit restitution. While courts may have limited ability to enforce their own judgments,
this does not detract from their ability to rule the measures illegal and award restitution.

C. Analysis of the Tribunal

The Tribunal is of the view that all this debate in which the Parties have engaged is premature. It
does not properly belong to the jurisdictional phase of the proceeding, the purpose of which is to
determine whether the ICSID has jurisdiction and the Tribunal has competence over the merits of
the case brought before it. The jurisdiction of the ICSID and the competence of the Tribunal are
based on the consent of the parties to the dispute. The remedies are not. What remedies are
available, in case the Tribunal after having previously satisfied itself that it has competence comes
to the conclusion that the Respondent has breached its obligations, is an issue of law governed by
legal rules applicable to the dispute.

The Tribunal notes that the ICSID Convention contains no specific provision on the remedies
which it can order (award). Certainly, it can impose a pecuniary obligation on the Respondent as
Article 54 of the Convention implies when it provides that “[e]ach Contracting State shall
recognize an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary
obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in

8 FROJ 459.
3° DMD 4 49-51.

9 Joan Micula, Viorel Micula, S.C. European Food S.A., S.C. Starmill S.R.L. and S.C. Multipack S.R.L. v. Romania,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of September 24, 2008, {4]166-168.

239.

240.

241.

Ss

Ss

-42-

that State.” If a treaty, as the BIT’! in the present case, does not provide for specific remedies in
case of its breach, it is the general (customary) international law of State Responsibility which
comes into play. For a breach of a contractual obligation, the law governing the contract will have
to be looked at when determining the appropriate remedy.

Under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal “shall be the judge of its own
competence.” Once its competence over the merits is established, such competence covers the issue
of available remedies as well; as the International Court of Justice observed, “[i]n general,
jurisdiction to determine the merits of a dispute entails jurisdiction to determine reparation.”'”
However, the issue of available remedies is certainly not “a preliminary question” in the sense of
Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Accordingly, the Tribunal does not consider necessary, nor appropriate, to decide at this stage of
the proceeding, what remedies might be available in case it concludes that the Respondent has
breached its obligations. The Tribunal simply takes note of the arguments of the Parties, and will
revert to the issue of remedies, if and when necessary, taking into account any further views on this
point the Parties may offer.

V. COSTS

Having concluded that the Tribunal has competence over the contract claims of Perenco against the
Republic of Ecuador, and having postponed its decision on the competence over the treaty claims,
the Tribunal reserves all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and of the
Parties for their legal representation for subsequent decision.

‘4! The fair and adequate compensation to be paid to the investors in case of expropriation or nationalization of their
investments under Article 6(1) of the BIT is not to be construed as a remedy for an unlawful act but is a primary
obligation the fulfilment of which is one of the conditions for any expropriation or nationalization measure to be lawful.

‘2 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua, Nicaragua v. United States of America, C.J. Reports
1986, p. 142, para. 283. The Court also stated in other cases that “[w]here jurisdiction exists over a dispute on a particular
matter, no separate basis for jurisdiction is required by the Court to consider the remedies a party has requested for the
breach of the obligation.” LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America), 1.C.J. Reports 2001, p. 466, para. 48; also
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America), 1.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 33, para. 34.

      

 

 
  

-43-

VI. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

242. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides:

1.

to defer its decision on its competence over Claimant’s Treaty claims to
the merits phase of the proceeding;

that it has competence ratione materiae over the Claimant’s contract
claims under the Block 7 and Block 21 Participation Contracts;

that it has no competence over Petroecuador;

that in view of the Tribunal’s request for the submission of any relevant
travaux préparatoires of the Treaty in the possession of the other
Contracting Party, as well as for further evidence on the issue of the
Perrodo heirs’ relationship to the Claimant, such material must be
submitted prior to the filing of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial so
as to allow the Respondent sufficient time to address such material in
its pleading. The Parties are directed to jointly approach the responsible
French authorities and request the disclosure of any relevant travaux
préparatoires of the Treaty should they exist;

that any such travaux préparatoires shall be filed no later than
1 August 2011;

that the Claimant shall file any additional evidence pertaining to the
Perrodo heirs’ relationship to the Claimant no later than 1 August 2011;

that to enable the Tribunal to be in a position to decide all claims
should it resolve the remaining objection in the Claimant’s favour, the
Parties shall address both the merits of the Claimant’s contract claims
and its Treaty claims in their pleadings.

[signed]
Judge Peter Tomka
President of the Tribunal

[signed] [signed]
Mr. Neil Kaplan, C.B.E., Q.C., S.B.S. Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.
Arbitrator Arbitrator

