PCA Case No. 2012-06
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE XIII OF THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
OF CANADA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS FOR THE RECIPROCAL
PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS, SIGNED ON 29 MAY 1996

-and-

THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW
ARBITRATION RULES AS ADOPTED IN 1976

-between-
PETER A. ALLARD
(“Claimant”)
-and-

THE GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS

(“Respondent,” and together with Claimant, the “Parties’’)

 

Award on Jurisdiction

 

13 June 2014

Tribunal

Dr. Gavan Griffith QC (President)
Professor Andrew Newcombe
Professor W. Michael Reisman

GLOSSAR

'Y OF DEFINED TERMS / LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Barbados the Government of Barbados

BIT the Agreement between the Government of Canada and the
Government of Barbados for the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments

BVI British Virgin Islands

Claimant Mr. Peter A. Allard

EMP Environmental Management Plan

Exchange Control the Exchange Control Authority of Barbados

Authority or ECA

FET fair and equitable treatment

First Certificate a share certificate of GHNSI submitted by the Claimant with his
Memorial on Jurisdiction, Exhibit C-127

GHBSI Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary Inc.

GHBVI a corporation allegedly created by the Claimant under the laws of
British Virgin Islands

GHNSI Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary Inc.

 

Haberman Report(s)
Objections

Expert Reports of Mr. Philip Haberman
three jurisdictional objections made by the Respondent in its
submission of 24 May 2013

 

 

 

 

PCA the Permanent Court of Arbitration
Respond the Government of Barbados
Sanctuary a bird sanctuary and nature reserve within the 240 acres of wetlands

and green space that comprise the former Graeme Hall Plantation
on the south coast of Barbados

 

Second Certificate

a share certificate of GHNSI submitted by the Claimant with his
of Claim, Exhibit C-11

 

 

 

 

 

 

UNCITRAL Rules the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law as adopted in 1976
2003 Plan Amended National Physical Development Plan of 2003

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I INTRODUCTION. 1
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 3
IV. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AND RELIEF REQUESTED...
A. OBJECTION (1): WHETHER THE SANCTUARY QUALIFIES AS AN “INVESTMENT” ....sc00ee 8
The Respondent’s ar 8
The Claimant’s ar 10
The Tribunal’s findings. 11
B. OBJECTION (2): WHETHER THE CLAIMANT OWNS THE SANCTUARY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF BARBADC
Issue 1: The Respondent’s ar 15
Issue 1: The Claimant’s ar 17
Issue 2: The Respondent’s ar 18
Issue 2: The Claimant’s ar 19
The Tribunal’s findings on issues 1 and 2...
Issue 1: Ownership 20
Issue 2: Excha Control Issue. 22
OBJECTION (3): LIMITATION 24
The Respondent’s ar 25
The Claimant’s ar 27
The Tribunal’s findings. 28

DECISION

 

INTRODUCTION

The Claimant is Mr. Peter A. Allard, a retired attorney and businessman (“Mr. Allard” or
“Claimant”) with Canadian nationality, represented in this arbitration by Mr. Robert Wisner and
Mr. Jeffrey Levine of McMillan LLP, Barristers and Solicitors, Brookfield Place, Suite 4400,
Bay Wellington Tower, 181 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2T3, Canada, and by Mr. M.
Tariq Khan of Khan Chambers, Chancery House, Bridgetown, Barbados.

The Respondent in this arbitration is the Government of Barbados (‘“Barbados” or
“Respondent”), represented in this arbitration by Mr. Robert Volterra, Mr. Graham Coop,
Mr. Bernhard Maier, and Ms. Jessica Pineda of Volterra Fietta, 1 Fitzroy Square, London
WIT SHE, England.

The claims arise under the Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government
of Barbados for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments dated 29 May 1996
(the “BIT”)! concerning Mr. Allard’s investment of C$18.8 million in the acquisition and
development of an eco-tourism site in Barbados (“Sanctuary”).? The claims are that the
Respondent has “failed to take reasonable and necessary environmental protection measures
and, through its organs and agents, has directly contributed to the contamination of the
Claimant’s eco-tourism site, thereby destroying the value of his investment”,* and that these
“actions and omissions violate Barbados’ international obligations to Canadian investors’”*

under the BIT.
Article XIII of the BIT provides:

(1) _ Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a measure taken or not taken by the
former Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has
incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach, shall, to the
extent possible, be settled amicably between them.

 

(2) _ If a dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six months from the
date on which it was initiated, it may be submitted by the investor to arbitration in
accordance with paragraph (4). For the purposes of this paragraph, a dispute is
considered to be initiated when the investor of one Contracting Party has delivered
notice in writing to the other Contracting Party alleging that a measure taken or not

The Canada-Barbados BIT entered into force on 17 January 1997; Exhibit C-1.

Statement of Claim, {] 153.
Notice of Arbitration, { 2.
Notice of Arbitration, { 2.

I.

 

taken by the latter Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the
investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

(4) The dispute may, at the election of the investor concerned, be submitted to
arbitration under:

(c) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 May 2010, the Claimant delivered a Notice of Arbitration to the Respondent pursuant to
Article XII(4)(c) of the BIT and invoking the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law as adopted in 1976 (“UNCITRAL Rules”).

The Claimant appointed Professor Andrew Newcombe as arbitrator on 24 November 2011. The
Respondent appointed Professor W. Michael Reisman as arbitrator on 5 January 2012.
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC was appointed Presiding Arbitrator on 14 March 2012.

On 22 May 2012, the Tribunal and the Parties signed Terms of Appointment, which, among
other matters, designated the Permanent Court of Arbitration (the “PCA”) as registry for

the proceedings.

Following a procedural hearing convened in New York on 7 June 2012, the Tribunal issued its

Procedural Order No. 1 dated 26 June 2012.

On 18 December 2012, the Claimant filed his Statement of Claim followed by the exchange of

pleadings between the Parties.

On 24 May 2013, the Respondent requested bifurcation of the proceedings to determine three

jurisdictional objections (“the objections”).

Following exchanges of submissions between the Parties, on 10 June 2013 the Tribunal granted
the Respondent’s request for bifurcation and the preliminary determination of the objections.

Thereafter pleadings were exchanged on the objections issues as follows:

12 September 2013, Claimant’s Memorial

7 November 2013, Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

3 January 2014, Claimant’s Reply

3 February 2014, Respondent’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

il.

5

Between 16 December 2013 and 13 January 2014, the Tribunal made orders in respect of the
production to, and inspection by, the Respondent and its forensic experts of documents,

including share certificates, requested of the Claimant by the Respondent.

An exchange of forensic experts’ reports on 31 January 2014 was followed by the experts’ joint-

report filed 6 February 2014.
Hearings on the objections were held in New York over the period 18 to 21 February 2014.
The Parties were represented as follows:

Claimant

Robert Wisner
Jeffrey Levine
McMillan LLP

Tariq Khan
Khan Chambers

Respondent
Robert Volterra
Graham Coop
Bernhard Maier
Jessica Pineda
Volterra Fietta

Adriel Brathwaite QC
Attorney General and Minister of Home Affairs, Government of Barbados

Corlita Babb-Schaefer
Principal Crown Counsel, Attorney General’s Chambers, Barbados

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

This part briefly summarizes the facts and contentions of the Parties on the objections.
However, in making this determination, the Tribunal has had regard to the entirety of the
pleadings, documents, exhibits, transcripts, submissions, citations of law and decisions made by

and between the Parties.

In October 1996, the Claimant incorporated a Barbadian company, Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary

Inc., later renamed Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary Inc. (“GHNSI”),> to acquire 34.24 acres of

Allard Statement, {| 8.

20.

21.

22.

wetlands to establish a bird sanctuary and nature reserve, within some 240 acres of wetlands and

open space that comprised the former Graeme Hall Plantation on the south coast of Barbados.°

The chain of ownership of the Sanctuary is a disputed fact in these proceedings. The Claimant
claims ownership within the terms of the BIT in the circumstances he was, and remains, the
President and a director of GHNSI’ as a wholly owned subsidiary of Graeme Hall (B.V.L),
(“GHBVI”), a British Virgin Islands company incorporated in 1996, and of which the Claimant

was, and remains, the sole shareholder, President, and a director.’

Although the Barbados 1986 National Development Plan had designated a “buffer zone” around
the perimeter of the Sanctuary for recreational and agricultural use, in 2003 the Respondent
issued a proposed Amended Plan (the 2003 Plan) proposing the division of the buffer zone by
designating the area adjacent to the Sanctuary for predominantly residential use and the outer

area as an urban corridor.

In 2007, the 2003 Plan was enacted by the Barbadian Parliament to come into force on

15 April 2008.”

A sluice gate located at the end of the canal that bisects the Graeme Hall wetlands was long
intended both to regulate water levels and to control the exchange of water to and from the
sea.'” It is common ground that in the event the sluice gate is closed or inoperable the regulation
of water levels and tidal flow in and out of the wetlands and the sea is inhibited and the integrity

of the Sanctuary is thereby liable to be adversely affected.

Environmental drainage issues arising from the inappropriate operation of the sluice gate were
known to the Parties before the opening of the Sanctuary,'' and were noted in the Claimant's

1999 Environmental Management Plan (“EMP”) and Amended EMP in 2000.'? Indeed, the

  

Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 9; Allard Statement, {| 7; Certificate of Incorporation, Exhibit C-9.
Statement of Claim, {{ 11.
GHBVI Certificate of Incorporation, dated 18 October 1996, Exhibit C-126.

Statutory Instruments Supplement No. 14, Supplement to Official Gazette No. 31 dated 7 April 2008, Exhibit
C-76.

Heaslet Statement, {{ 10.

Statement of Claim, {{{[ 39-40; Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary Environmental Management Plan, Exhibit C-43;
Amended Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary Environmental Management Plan dated April 2000, Exhibit C-44;
Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Cummins dated 13 June 2013, { 25.

Statement of Claim, {{ 41.

Claimant was required to submit an Amended EMP to address in greater detail the potential

. . 3
drainage issues."

In 2005, a failure at the South Coast Sewerage Treatment Plant operated by the Barbados Water
Authority resulted in a discharge of raw sewage that seriously contaminated the Sanctuary.'*
According to the Claimant, the negative effects of this pollution were exacerbated by the sluice
gate not preventing water flow between the swamp and the sea.'° Tests conducted by GHNSI’s
experts at the time confirmed heavy bacterial growths in the water leading to stresses to the

ecological systems of the wetlands.'°

The Claimant maintains that such events and functions concerning drainage issues and
deficiencies in the operations of the sluice gate led to the serious degradation of the water and
swamp areas within the Sanctuary. This, together with the elimination of the buffer zone under
the 2003 Plan, especially upon its implementation, has both caused and aggravated continuing
damage to the Sanctuary’s environment and operations to the point of its destruction as a viable
environmental facility. These developments and events collectively led to the postponement of
completion of a visitors’ centre adjacent to the Sanctuary and also to other consequential
damages to the Sanctuary project to the extent that by June 2007 the Claimant contemplated
abandoning the Sanctuary as a viable environmental facility, and explored the possibility of a
sale of the Sanctuary.'’ As no sale eventuated, the Claimant thereafter decided to permanently

close the Sanctuary on 29 October 2008.'*

In summary, the Claimant claims that the Respondent’s actions and omissions as particularized
in his memorials and evid t hed the R dent’s explicit obligati under Article

XIII of the BIT:
(1) to provide fair and equitable treatment;

(2) to provide full protection and security; and

Witness Statement of Mr. Mark Cummins dated 13 June 2013, { 25.

 

Master Plan for the Graeme Hall Ecosystem authored by the Coastal Zone Management Unit in the Ministry
of Energy and the Environment, September 2007, Chapter 3, Exhibit C-72, p. 2.

Statement of Claim, {| 72-74.
Statement of Claim, (71.

Statement of Claim, {{] 86-88; Sales advertisement dated 5 June 2007, and email correspondence from S.
Heaslet to the International Herald Tribune dated 5 June 2007, Exhibit C-77; Allard Statement, {| 67.

GHNSI Press Release dated 29 October 2008, Exhibit C-78.

26.

19

20

(3) not to expropriate an investment without compensation.

Further, the Claimant claims that the Respondent violated a principle of customary international
law prohibiting a host country from permitting the use of its territory in such a manner as to

cause injury to the property of a foreign investor.

Apart from Article XIII issues for dispute in the merits phase, a principal provision of the BIT
for consideration or objection is Article I(f) and its definition of an “investment” for purposes of

protection under the substantive sections of the BIT defining “investment” as:

any kind of asset owned or controlled either directly, or indirectly through an
investor of a third State, by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of
the other Contracting Party in accordance with the latter's laws and, in particular,
though not exclusively, includes:

i. movable and immovable property and any related property rights, such as
mortgages, liens or pledges;

 

ii, shares, stock, bonds and debentures or any other form of participation in a
company, business enterprise or joint venture;

 

iii, money, claims to money, and claims to performance under contract having a
financial value;

iv. goodwill;
v. intellectual property rights;
vi. rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake any economic and
commercial activity, including any rights to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit
natural resources.
but does not mean real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, not acquired
in the expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other business
purposes.”

Article XII(3) of the BIT, also provides for a limitation period:

An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1) to arbitration in
accordance with paragraph (4) only if:

(d) not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the investor first
acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and
knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.””

Canada-Barbados BIT, Exhibit C-1.

Canada-Barbados BIT, Exhibit C-1.

IV.

27.

28.

29.

30.

JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AND RELIEF REQUESTED

The Respondent requests as a dispositive award that the Tribunal:

@

Q)

@)

Declare that the Claimant has failed to prove his ownership or control of the
Sanctuary at any relevant date and that the Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction
ratione personae and ratione materiae;

Declare that the Claimant did not acquire the Sanctuary in the expectation or use it
for the purpose of economic benefit or other business purposes and that the
Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae; and

Declare that the Claimant’s claims in relation to the Respondent’s purported
breaches of the BIT fall outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis
because at the date when these proceedings were initiated (21 May 2010), more
than three years had elapsed after the Claimant first acquired or should have
acquired knowledge of the alleged breaches (and any consequential loss or
damage) on which these claims are based;

with final orders for dismissal of the claim, with costs.?!

In answer, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue an award rejecting the Respondent’s

objections, with costs, to be followed by the merits phase of the proceedings.

As the Parties accept that apart from compliance with Article I(f) the Claimant otherwise

qualifies as an “investor”, the objections for determination are:

@)

(2)

GB)

Whether the Sanctuary qualifies as an “investment” by the Claimant within Article

1(f); and if so,

Whether at the relevant times the Claimant owned or controlled the investment in

accordance with Article 1(f); and also

Whether the Claimant’s claim is within time under Article XIII(3) of the BIT (set

out in paragraph 26 above).

In this determination of the objections the Tribunal accepts the general approach as to onus

expressed by the Phoenix Action case, namely that “if jurisdiction rests on the existence of

certain facts, they have to be proven at the jurisdictional stage”, but, nonetheless, that where

2! Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 112; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {{ 107.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

disputed facts are intermingled with merits issues, as a matter of discretion, the determination of

contested jurisdictional objections, may be held over to the merits phase.”

Objection (1): Whether the Sanctuary Qualifies as an “Investment”
The Respondent’s arguments

Article 1(f) explicitly excludes the Sanctuary from the ambit of the BIT’s protection, as the
Claimant did not expect or intend to use, and did not use, the Sanctuary “for the purpose of
economic benefit or other business purposes”. Hence the Claimant’s “investment” is excluded
from the protections of the BIT, and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione materiae over the

. . «93
Claimant’s claim.”

The terms of the exclusion to Article 1(f), interpreted and applied in accordance with their
ordinary meaning and context,” require, inter alia, an element of profit and purpose,° as is
established by the expert report of Mr. Philip Haberman, an experienced accountant familiar

with concepts of commercial profit.

To broaden the scope of the BIT to include not-for-profit ventures and not-for-profit enterprises
“artificially commingles the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae with its jurisdiction
ratione materiae”.**
Contemporaneous statements by the Claimant and persons on his behalf repeatedly disclaim any
motivation and purposes, original and continuing, by Mr. Allard to develop the Sanctuary for
profit making or any other business purposes. Mr. Allard’s motivations and intentions in this
regard admittedly were exclusively altruistic for the non-commercial purposes of protecting and

preserving the environment of the Sanctuary for public purposes.

In particular, the Respondent relies upon:””

Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award of 15 April 2009, { 61.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 35.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 88.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 89-90, referring to Black’s Law Dictionary 226 (9th ed. 2009), Exhibit
RLA-24 and Third Expert Report of Mr. Haberman dated 6 November 2013.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 83.

 

Other cited statements include: (1) on one occasion, the Claimant proclaimed that he has “great affection and
regard for the people of Barbados, and the Sanctuary effort has always been a philanthropic mission”.
Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary Press Release “Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary in Barbados to Close” October

a

A statement in the Claimant’s Statement of Claim, that “Mr. Allard believed that by
purchasing a part of the wetlands, developing them to showcase their unique
attributes and protecting the eco-system, he would be able to preserve an important
part of the environmental heritage of Barbados”;”*

(2) A statement repeated in the Claimant’s submissions, evidence, and expert reports, to
the effect that “[t]he purpose of [the Claimant’s] investment was to create a
financially self-sustaining enterprise that would be able to conserve the
environmental heritage of Barbados in perpetuity”;””

(3) A letter from the Claimant to the Respondent’s former deputy prime minister, Dame
Billie Miller, in which the Claimant stated: “While I firmly believe that this project
should be made to financially ‘stand on its own feet’ (i.e. sustainability), I want to
assure the government that my prime motivation is the preservation of Graeme Hall
as there are many daily opportunities for me to invest in projects with minimal risk,

good security and government procedures already in place”;*”

(4

A letter from the Claimant to the Respondent’s former prime minister, stating that the
“the nature of [GHNSI’s] charitable and technical contributions to Government is by
design” and that “[t]he conservation of Graeme Hall Swamp’s historic and
environmentally sensitive lands is fundamentally a nonprofit endeavor, and not
consistent with high revenue tourism or other commercial activities”;!

(5) A comment by Mr. Harry Roberts, the former general manager of GHNSI, admitting
that money was not a consideration for the Sanctuary;

6

An article by Mr. Heaslet suggesting that the Sanctuary had no interest in making
money;** and

 

29, 2008, Exhibit C-78; (2) Mr. Heaslet, the Claimant’s representative, in a newspaper article dated
1 July 2007 confirmed that: “Philanthropically speaking, we respect the sovereign responsibility of Barbados
for its environmental legacy, and generally disagree with those who seek to transfer the responsibility for
preserving the Barbados environment to private, for-profit interests”. Heaslet, “Profit not all that Matters”,
1 July 2007, Sunday Sun, Exhibit R-8; and (3) following an open day on 1 December 2008, the Claimant’s
general manager Harry Roberts told the Daily Nation newspaper explicitly that money was not a
consideration: “I am glad to see these high numbers [of visitors on the open day]. We saw close to 10 000
people passing through today, and money is not important. The fact that Barbadians can come here with their
children and witness something extraordinary makes all the difference”. Aimey Phillippe, “Thousands turn
up at the Sanctuary again”, 2 December 2008, Daily Nation, Exhibit R-10.

 

 

   

 

Statement of Claim, { 14. A similar statement cited by the Respondent reads: “The motivation [for the
Claimant's endeavors] is simple. Private investment combined with a conservation ethic can permanently
preserve the last mangrove and sedge swamp on the island of Barbados and be supported by its international
conservation, research and education facility”. Private Ownership Justification, y authored by S. Heaslet,
26 January 2001, Exhibit C-64, cited in Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 42.

 

 

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 43, referring to Notice of Dispute, 8 September
2009, 7, Exhibit C-2; Expert Report of Howard N. Rosen and Chris Milburn of FTI Consulting Inc., dated
13 December 2012, { 3.4; Correspondence from Peter Allard to Denis Lowe, MP re RAMSAR Convention
dated 30 November 2009, p. 2, | Al., Exhibit C-86. See also Letter from the Claimant to The Right
Honourable David Thompson, dated 15 October 2008, p. 3, Exhibit R-7, in which the Claimant emphasized

the Sanctuary’s “goal of self-sustainability”.
Letter from Mr. Allard to the Hon. Billie Miller, 19 July 1995, Exhibit C-30.

Letter from Mr. Allard to the Hon. Owen Arthur, | April 2005, p. 6, Exhibit R-11.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, 33, referring to Supplemental Allard Statement, 13.

Heaslet, “Profit not all that Matters”, | July 2007, Sunday Sun, Exhibit R-8.

36.

37.

38.

(7) An online video entitled “Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary — Barbados,” explaining

that “money earned from visitor operations helps pay for environmental management

of the 30 acre wetland within the Sanctuary”.“*
In summary, the Claimant has failed to establish that the Sanctuary project was established for
anything other than for philanthropic or public benefit purposes related to the preservation of
the environment;** and most certainly not for the purpose of deriving an economic benefit to the

requisite level of being directed to derive a commercial profit or for other business purposes.

The Claimant’s arguments

Mr. Allard’s investment in the Sanctuary project falls within the meaning of

we ” 3
investment” because:*°

(1) — His business plans and financial projections for the Sanctuary contemplated (at least) a

modest surplus;
(2) He expected that the Sanctuary would generate an economic return;*
(3) The Sanctuary was registered as a for-profit business corporation; and

(4) | The Sanctuary in fact operated as a for-profit business.

A broad meaning of “investment” is supported by the fact that under the BIT, any “enterprise”
established under Canadian law may be an “investment,” regardless of its “for profit” status or
otherwise. This is consistent with the BIT’s objective of strengthening “the development of
economic cooperation” between Canada and Barbados, including “the promotion of sustainable
development that is sensitive to environmental concerns”.”” Indeed, an investment in a non-

profit enterprise may fall within the scope of the BIT’s protections.”°

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, | 46, referring to Video entitled “Graeme Hall Nature Sanctuary — Barbados”
uploaded 17 September 2010, Exhibit R-26.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{ 77-78.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 60-61.

Allard Statement, | 18; GHNSI Amended Business Plan, 15 September 2003, Exhibit C-23; GHNSI
Financial Projections for the year ending December 31, 2000, Exhibit C-22. The Respondent also cited
Exhibits C-22 and C-23 in its Request on Bifurcation, {¥{ 37-38.

 

Allard Statement, [ 12; Supplemental Allard Statement, { 9.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, {9{ 58-59; Claimant’s Observations on Request for Bifurcation, {{{ 37-39; Reply on
Jurisdiction, 135.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 59; Reply on Jurisdiction, {| 135.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

2

Further, as the exception has two limbs contrasting the purpose of “economic benefit” under the
first with “other business purpose” under the second, the alternative of the second limb of the
exception embracing “business purposes” includes objectives beyond mere economic benefit

under the first limb."

In focusing upon profit maximization or a projected rate of return, as by Mr. Haberman’s
evidence, the Respondent imports requirements as to a profitable purpose that are not found in

the text of the BIT.”

Even if profits are not paid to the shareholder as dividends, GHNSI’s surpluses may still be

regarded as generated for economic benefit or for a business purpose.

The Tribunal’s findings

The Tribunal’s analysis of the Respondent’s objections is driven by Article 1(f) of the BIT, (set
out in paragraph 26 above), interpreted as need be by reference to, and in accordance with,

Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which provides:

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to
the text, including its preamble and annexes: (a) any agreement relating to the treaty which
was made between all the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty; (b) any
instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the
treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

 

In summary, it is for the Tribunal itself to construe the terms of Article 1(f) in accordance with

their ordinary meaning within the context, and in the light, of the BIT’s “object and purpose.”

Plainly, the principal definitions of “investment” under Article 1(f) — “any kind of asset” — in
their ordinary meaning suffice to include the Claimant’s investment in the Sanctuary, both as to
the real estate and also as to the cash advances made for the Sanctuary’s operations, unless such
matters fall within the final exception, namely if those assets were “not acquired in the

expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other business purposes”.

For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal holds that the Claimant satisfies the criteria in (i)
“acquired in the expectation . . . of economic benefit” and therefore the Claimant’s assets do not

fall within the exception in Article 1(f). Although the Claimant seemed to enjoy wearing the

Memorial on Jurisdiction, 57. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, {{{ 130-134; Hearing transcript, pp. 632-633.

Reply on Jurisdiction, {[ 128, 131.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

public mantle of a philanthropist, the preponderance of objective indicators shows clearly that

he was not creating a not-for-profit corporation.

In making its determination whether assets were “acquired in the expectation ... of economic
benefit”, the reference point for the first element (the Claimant’s expectations) remains
subjective and personal to Mr. Allard’s actual expectations and intentions as may be ascertained
at the time of the acquisition of the investment. The enquiry is not whether this Tribunal, or
some other rational investor, would, or may have been, of the same disposition in acquiring the
asset. In contrast, the enquiry with respect to “used” focuses on the actual use of the asset and
requires an objective enquiry into whether the assets in question were used for economic benefit

or other business purposes.

In engaging in the analysis the Tribunal is not assisted by Mr. Haberman’s views and opinions
as to the meaning or content of economic benefit framed by reference to conventional
risk/return analysis as reflected by Canadian bond rates or some other objective measures of
financial return. It may be assumed that few, if any, Canadian investors would have been
minded to invest offshore in Barbados in a “soft” venture such as that constituted by Mr. Allard
establishing the Sanctuary in 1996. However, for his own reasons and motivations, Mr. Allard
elected to do so, and the issue of characterization for determination by the Tribunal remains
whether the peculiar corporate structure adopted for holding the assets falls within the definition

of “investment” with Article 1(f), and is not excluded by the exception.

As to the general issue of onus: on one view, not advanced by the Parties, as an exclusion to the
principal definitions, the Respondent carries the onus to establish that the exception applies.
However, as in any event the Tribunal concludes that it is in a position to make a determinative

finding, the Tribunal finds it unnecessary to express a view on onus.

On balance, and despite the matters of first impression to the contrary arising from the
Respondent’s references to factual indicia, noted in paragraph 35 above, mostly sourced to the
Claimant’s own statements and materials, the conclusion of the Tribunal is that the funds for the
purchase of the real estate constituting the Sanctuary, and thereafter making loans for its

operations were made by Mr. Allard “for the purpose of economic benefit”.

In this regard, it suffices for the Tribunal to refer to the following matters establishing

this conclusion —

£

@

Q)

@)

(4)

G)

(6)

GHBSI was formed in 1996 as a for-profit corporation under Barbadian law.**

GHBVI was incorporated as a British Virgin Islands (“BVI”) company at the same
time to serve as a holding company, a common structure for foreign investors to
limit their tax exposures in their home jurisdiction.‘ This structure would be

unnecessary were the venture intended to be non-profit-making.

The letter from the Claimant to the Barbados Minister of Finance dated 26

February 1996, requests a waiver of tax on dividends (and also tax exemptions).”°

The Claimant’s successive business plans from 1998 contemplated an emerging

surplus and even repayment of capital advances, albeit with a low rate of return.“°

The Claimant’s later offers to transfer as a gift part of the Sanctuary lands, but to
retain the commercial and income generating parts,*” presumably was intended to

retain future income.

The Claimant’s unchallenged statements in evidence that he had an expectation of

getting his money back:

PRESIDENT GRIFFITH: Mr. Allard, as I understand your evidence, you
intended that you should derive income to provide for operating expenses
going forward; is that right?

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir. And then some.

 

PRESIDENT GRIFFITH: And then do I understand that you intended any
surplus income will be put into reserves to enable the long-range operation of
the Sanctuary when it became as you referred to somewhere an endeavour of
your estate?

THE WITNESS: To improve--to improve the asset, yes.

PRESIDENT GRIFFITH: Yes. Now, did you intend that you would be, as
part of that process of generating return, be repaid all or any part of the 35
million you referred to in Paragraph 3 of this letter?

THE WITNESS: That I intend to be part of it?
PRESIDENT GRIFFITH: Did you intend to get your money back?
THE WITNESS: Over time, yes.**

Allard Statement, {| 8; Certificate of Incorporation, Exhibit C-9.

Hearing transcript, p. 213, line 25 — p. 214, line 12.

Letter from Joseph Ward to the Right Hon. Owen Arthur, Minister of Finance, dated 26 February 1996,

Exhibit C-32.

GHNSI Amended Business Plan, 15 September 2003, Exhibit C-23; GHNSI financial projections for the year
ending 31 December 2000, Exhibit C-22.

Hearing transcript, p. 651, lines 6-25, referring to Hearing transcript, p. 381, line 23 — p. 383, line 3.

51.

52.

Followed by an exchange with the Respondent’s counsel:

Is it your testimony that you cannot be self-sustaining without having more
money come in than goes out?”

   

“Well, your self-sustainment has to be involved in a
that has to involve reserves and monies coming forward for the next
ar.” I questioned: “Those are revenues, though, isn’t it? Not profit. Self-
sustaining doesn't require profit, does it?” So, my question to you is: Are you
not talking about revenue and instead of profit and that self-sustaining might
require revenues meeting expenditures, even possibly capital reserves, but it
doesn't require a profit per se to be self-sustaining? That’s my question.

 

 
     

   

A. Not per se, but that was--that was our goal, was profit.”

The somewhat ambivalent language embracing benefaction and philanthropy expressed by the
Claimant and his advisors and other staff during the course of formation and operations of the
Sanctuary project invoked by the Respondent is not perceived by the Tribunal to be
determinative as to the findings to be made as to the original intentions and continuing
motivations of Mr. Allard. Notwithstanding that the Tribunal might not be inclined to have
formed the same expectations as to future profit or repayments of investments, the
contemporaneous indicia are sufficiently confirmed by Mr. Allard’s evidence to the Tribunal, as
to what were his intentions at that time. However unreasonable it may now appear to the
Tribunal following the failure of the Sanctuary project, the Tribunal accepts that those
expectations of an eventual profit were honestly held by Mr. Allard when establishing the
Sanctuary in 1996 and thereafter, notwithstanding that during the Sanctuary’s establishment and
operations factors of profit were considered secondary and in the background to his principal

motivations of environmental and public purposes.

The BIT does not require any quantification of economic benefit, let alone one measured against
an estimate of a rational return as may be sought by a disinterested investor. Mr. Allard was a
committed environmentalist.©’ It suffices to find that the exception to Article 1(f) is not made
because the Claimant’s contemporaneous expectations were, and remained, that in the long run
the Sanctuary would pay a return on, or even eventually repay, the monies committed for the
Sanctuary project. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant acquired the Sanctuary “in
the expectation . . . of economic benefit”. In light of this determination, it is unnecessary for the
Tribunal to determine whether the Sanctuary was actually used for the purpose of economic

benefit during its operations. Further, it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to determine the

 

48

49

50

Hearing transcript, p. 276, lines 9-25.
Hearing transcript, p. 277, lines 1-25.
Allard Statement, {J 10-12.

53.

54.

meaning of “other business purpose” and whether such purpose requires profit-making over and

above the making of revenues to allow operations to be self-sustaining.

Objection (2): Whether the Claimant Owns the Sanctuary in Accordance with the Laws of
Barbados

The Respondent raises two issues, namely that:

(1) The Claimant has not established that he owns GHNSI (and the Sanctuary) through
GHBVI; and

(2) The Claimant does not own GHNSI through GHBVI “in accordance with

Barbadian law”.

This second issue raises also significant issues of non-compliance with Barbados exchange

control laws.

Issue 1: The Respondent’s arguments

The Claimant has not established that he owns the Sanctuary, directly or indirectly, in
accordance with Article 1(f). There are many inconsistencies in the Claimant’s documents and
evidence, individually and taken together, to support adverse findings of proof of the Claimant’ s

purported corporate ownership chain through GHNSI and GHBVI.

The authenticity of the share certificate in GHNSI dated 17 October 1996 submitted by the
Claimant with his Statement of Claim (the “first certificate”) as proof to substantiate GHBVI’s
ownership of GHNSI is challenged. The first certificate bears only the Claimant’s signature as
“Director” with a blank space for the Secretary’s signature and also is unsealed.*' And, as
GHNSI was not incorporated until 18 October 1996, one day after the date of the first
certificate, GHNSI could not have issued any shares to GHBVI on the day prior to its
incorporation.** Further, the name change to GHNSI took place only five years later on 18

December 2001.** The first certificate should be rejected as “a fraudulent concoction conjured

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 33, citing By-Law No. 1 of Graeme Hall Bird

Sanctuary Inc. enacted October 17, 1996, Exhibit C-139.
Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 25.

Statement of Claim, { 11. The Claimant's witness, Mr. Trevor Carmichael admits that “[t]here is a
di in name ”; Witness of Mr. Carmichael QC dated 10 S 2013,
12.

55.

56.

57.

58.

up ex post facto by the Claimant to manufacture the Tribunal’s jurisdiction where it would not

otherwise have existed”.

The later share certificate submitted with the Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction (the “second
certificate”) both sealed and bearing the Secretary’s signatures, and otherwise identical to the
first certificate, also excites suspicion of recent concoction. The correspondence between the
Parties and the witness statement of Sir Trevor Carmichael support inferences and conclusions
that Sir Trevor signed the completed the second certificate only after the deficiencies of the first

certificate were exposed in the pleadings.*°

It is inconsequential that Barbadian laws allow pre-incorporation agreements in written
contracts entered into by a person in the name of or on behalf of a company to be incorporated,
as the share certificates do not constitute a written contract and do not qualify for this

exception.”°

The issues adverse to the validity and effect of the share certificates are not merely “technical
issues . . . of no import”.”’ The Claimant has used the corporate names GHNSI and GHBSI

958

“completely interchangeably””’ and, at the least, has failed to adduce credible evidence of his

indirect ownership or control of either company.

In summary, the Claimant’s production of the two share certificates and of other documentation
and evidence and explanations falls short of proof of ownership. As Sir Trevor Carmichael
conceded, it is possible there was never any issue or transfer of shares in 1996 as is now sought
to be evidenced by the first certificate.” The record suggests that the Claimant did not decide
until 2005 to constitute GHBVI as the sole shareholder of GHNSI, and only then constructed
the ownership documents of retrospective effect. At the least, the chain of ownership is

not established.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 24.
See, e.g., Carmichael Statement, {| 6-7.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 10, relying on Section 16 of the Companies Act CAP 308 of the Laws
of Barbados, Exhibit C-131.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 56, citing Memorial on Jurisdiction, Heading I.C and { 48.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 49.

Hearing transcript, p. 479, line 21 - p. 481, line 19.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

60

Issue 1: The Claimant’s arguments

The Sanctuary is an investment owned or controlled by Mr. Allard through the corporate

chain of:

(1) GHNSI having bought and taken transfer title to the lands of the Sanctuary;
(2) asa wholly-owned subsidiary of GHBVI; and
(3) of which the Claimant is the owner.

Any inconsistencies in the name of GHBVI (Limited or Inc.) are inconsequential. The
description and title Limited and Inc. are inter-changeable when referring to a British Virgin

Islands’ corporate entity.”

The Claimant has presented contemporaneous evidence from the original incorporations in 1996
comprising: GHBSI’s Certificate of Incorporation, 16 October 1996; GHBVI’s Certificate of
Incorporation, 18 October 1996; and also GHBVI list of directors (including the Claimant), and
GHBVI’s Share Certificate, issuing shares to the Claimant, both dated 23 October 1996."!

That GHBVI had not been incorporated when GHNSI issued the first certificate is
inconsequential. The formal requirements concerning validation of pre-incorporation contracts
do not vitiate the unchallenged circumstances of share issuance and sole ownership, where, as
here, none of the parties to the investment takes any issue as to the invalidity of deficiencies in
form. In any event, the laws of the British Virgin Islands apply to determine GHBVI’s
contractual rights, and these laws recognize that a BVI company may elect to adopt any pre-

incorporation transactions within a reasonable time after its incorporation.

The second certificate is prima facie evidence of GHBVI’s title to GHNSI’s shares under
Barbadian law. In the absence of any rebutting evidence, GHBVI’s legal ownership, and Mr.
Allard’s indirect ownership, of the investment in GHNSI is established. Other filed documents
and direct evidence of witnesses, including Mr. Allard himself, also confirm Mr. Allard’s

indirect ownership of GHNSI.”

Claimant’s Observations on Request for Bifurcation, { 18, referring to Request, | 21; Share Certificate of
GHNSI, Exhibit C-11.

Claimant’s Opening Statement at the Hearing, presentation slide 4.

Section 69 of the International Business Companies Act CAP 291 of the Laws of the British Virgin Islands,
Exhibit C-132.

See, e.g., Allard Statement, {{{[ 6-9; Allard Supplemental Statement, {| 5-11.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

As the BIT allows an investor to bring a claim based on either “ownership” or “control” of an

investment, the Claimant’s legal “ownership” of GHNSI is not determinative to jurisdiction.

Here there is no challenge to Mr. Allard’s control of the company. No entity except GHNSI and
GHBVI has ever claimed any interest in the Sanctuary. It is Mr. Allard who has funded the
acquisition and the development and operations of the Sanctuary and conducted its affairs

through these corporate entities, and who is the “owner” of the investments.

The Claimant’s cash advances for the Sanctuary’s development and operations are proven by
the bank statements and the witness statement of the Claimant’s assistant and bookkeeper. The

making of these loans by Mr. Allard directly to the Sanctuary project are unchallenged.

Issue 2: The Respondent’s arguments

Under Section 13.2 of the 1984 (Barbados) Companies Regulations, a share certificate must be
co-signed by the secretary or an assistant secretary holding office at the time of signing. As the
first certificate does not contain such a signature and is not sealed by the company it was not

issued in accordance with Barbadian laws and is invalid.

The expert evidence of Mr. Griffith establishes that the second certificate also is invalid under
Barbadian law because it issued in the name of a company which did not exist at the time of the
alleged signature; it is signed by a person who did not hold the office of secretary at the time of
signature; and it does not comply with the requisite formalities for the issuance of a

replacement certificate.

In addition, Mr. Griffith’s evidence establishes that the undated shareholders’ resolution
(appointing Sir Trevor Carmichael to the Board of GHNSI) cannot serve as evidence of share
ownership under Barbadian law. Under Barbadian law, the production of a resolution by the
board such as that submitted by the Claimant cannot stand on its own as evidence of

share ownership.”

The Respondent further argues that under the 1976 Exchange Control Act, a Barbadian person
or entity may not issue any security to a non-Barbadian person or entity without seeking the
prior approval of the Exchange Control Authority of Barbados (the “Exchange Control

Authority” or “ECA”). Any such transaction performed without the Exchange Control

First Legal Expert Opinion of Mr. Michael Griffith dated 6 November 2013, { 10.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

Authority’s prior approval is void. The Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to Sir
Trevor Carmichael’s admission at the hearing that ECA approval is necessary. Since the
Claimant has failed to provide any evidence that any issuance of shares in GHNSI to GHBVI
was approved by the Exchange Control Authority, any such transfer was void under Barbadian
law.°’ Consequently, the Claimant has failed to prove that he owned or controlled an investment

in the territory of the Respondent in accordance with the Respondent's laws.

Issue 2: The Claimant’s arguments

The Respondent does not prove any Barbadian law that establishes a mandatory requirement

that a particular form be used let alone that to be valid a share certificate has to be sealed.”

The second certificate bearing the signatures of Mr. Allard as the sole director, Sir Trevor
Carmichael as secretary, and sealed by the company is complete and regular, and suffices to
prove ownership. There is no regulatory requirement that a lost, or assumed lost, share

certificate be formally cancelled.

In any event, the first and second certificates essentially are the same document, with additions
to the second certificate made as part of routine regularization of corporate records, a practice

consistent with the relevant corporate laws and practice in Barbados.

The fact that some of the documents underlying the investment contain technical deficiencies in
form with the respect to an investment plainly made by Mr. Allard, and no other person, is not a
ground to exclude his investment from protection as unproven. Technical issues with respect to
the documentation supporting Mr. Allard’s ownership or control of the Sanctuary are

inconsequential and not decisive.

It is the Claimant’s position that non-compliance with the Exchange Control Act of Barbados
does not void ownership. According to the Claimant, section 11 of the Exchange Control Act
does not provide, as the Respondent contends, that securities issued without permission of the

proper authority are void ab initio. Rather, this provision serves to ensure that foreign

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 53, referring to First Legal Expert Opinion of Mr. Michael Griffith
dated 6 November 2013, Section I.

Hearing transcript, p. 471, lines 13-18.

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 54. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {ff 31-32.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 55.

Claimant's Observations on Request for Bifurcation, {| 27-28.

76.

77.

78.

79.

10

n

investment records are kept.”

None of the cases relied upon by the Respondent were decided by
a Barbadian court. The Claimant argues that as a matter of international law, the Respondent
must show that the Claimant has breached a fundamental principle of Barbadian law to render
the rights of ownership void ab initio, which it has not done. Finally, the Respondent’s
argument based on the Exchange Control Act is untimely in the Claimant’s view, according to
Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Rules, which requires that jurisdictional objections be raised no

later than the filing of the Statement of Defense.’!

The Tribunal’s findings on issues I and 2

Issue 1: Ownership

 

The R di hall both the authenticity of the d 's presented by the Claimant to

substantiate his ownership as well as their effectiveness.

In this regard, the Parties contest what the Claimant has to establish to prove ownership. The
Claimant asserts that it is sufficient for him to make a prima facie showing in relation to his
ownership of the shares in GHBVI, and, through it, of GHNSI. In contrast, the Respondent
demands strict and convincing proofs of legal ownership under Barbadian corporation laws

and regulations.

Admittedly, there is very little contemporaneous evidence from 1996 to substantiate the chain of
certified share ownership under the first certificate. In particular, there is no documentary record
to confirm the assumptions made, or the process by which Sir Trevor’s staff reconstructed the
corporate documents during 2005 and 2006. Sir Trevor has no personal knowledge. Moreover,
the documents produced, explained as intended to replace certificates and records assumed to
have been in existence, but lost, are not at all consistent (e.g., they used the name of a company,

GHNSI, that did not exist at the time).

The explanations given by Sir Trevor are limited to surmise and conjecture that there was
complete original documentation that had been mislaid. There is no evidence to establish these
facts. Sir Trevor explained that, under the somewhat loose standards of corporate compliance

and practice in Barbados, it is common enough for corporate custodians, such as his firm, to

Reply on Jurisdiction, ‘| 87-88.

Reply on Jurisdiction, | 99-104.

20

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

n

B

remedy retrospectively emerging deficiencies, particularly where, as here, a sole shareholder

and owner undoubtedly is the proprietor and owner of corporate entities.”

The Tribunal accepts that much of the corporate documentary history remains conflicting and
based on mere assumptions of prior regularity and assumed gap-filling. The records of corporate
structure, the issuance of shares, and for the constitution of the board of directors and of
shareholders are incomplete. It is unlikely that any board meetings were convened beyond the
circulation of purported minutes. And the evidence and explanations of Sir Trevor comprise a
loose amalgam of assumption as to what had, or, as more likely, should have, occurred in the

two attorneys’ offices to put corporate records, including share certificates, into order.

Nonetheless, in the Tribunal’s opinion, the Claimant’s stated intentions and the evidence of
actions taken by Mr. Allard’s attorneys go to confirm the direct links between the two corporate
entities and Mr. Allard’s ultimate ownership. The only asset of GHBVI was its ownership of
GHNSI, as a shell BVI company, created as the holding company for the Sanctuary, as a tax

efficient vehicle for the Claimant to make his investment in the Sanctuary project.

At the least, there is no reason to find that the first or second share certificates are fraudulent or
have been deliberately withheld from the Tribunal, or that the replacement copies were created

in anticipation of this arbitration.

As noted above, the Tribunal also accepts the Claimant’s argument in the alternative that even if
the Tribunal were to find that the contemporaneous documents to fall short of demonstrating
ownership from 1996, the Claimant undoubtedly owned the Sanctuary through his shareholding

in GHBVI by 2005 when the corporate documents were regularized.

Although it was contended by the Respondent before the Tribunal that under Barbadian law,
upon a company’s incorporation, no shares need to be issued for the company lawfully to
exist,” as a matter of principle the Tribunal cannot accept that, under either Barbadian or BVI
laws, a private company may exist as an ownerless entity. Here, the Tribunal does not have any
evidence as to the issuance or transfer of subscriber’s shares, but in the absence of evidence to
the contrary the Tribunal concludes that GHBVI was the owner of the shares of GHNSI or, at
least, was entitled to call for a transfer of those shares. In either case, GHBVI’s ownership of
GHNSI is sufficiently established. The question of who owns the shares in GHBVI begets of

but one answer: namely Mr. Allard. It is undisputed that GHNSI owns the Sanctuary. Hence, the

Carmichael Statement, {J 10-13.

Hearing transcript, p. 698, lines 7-10.

21

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

4

5

Tribunal recognizes that as a Canadian investor it was Mr. Allard who made the investment

within Article 1 of the BIT, which he owned and controlled indirectly through GHBVI.

In any event, Mr. Allard directly made successive loans to fund the operations of the Sanctuary
project to the extent of some C$18.8 million.” The Tribunal accepts that these loans separately

may constitute a direct investment by the Claimant within the terms of the BIT.

Issue 2: Exchange Control Issue

The Tribunal refers to its conclusion above that the Claimant has satisfied his burden of
showing that he meets the Treaty’s requirements in terms of ownership and control of the
Sanctuary at the appropriate times. What remains to be decided is whether the failure to obtain
permission from the Exchange Control Authority for the share issuance between GHNSI and

GHBVI deprives this Tribunal of jurisdiction.

The Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s submission that the Respondent’s argument with respect to
the Exchange Control Act is untimely. The Respondent’s first pleading in the bifurcated
jurisdictional phase was its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of 7 November 2013. In this
pleading, Respondent elaborated on its argument that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction based on
the Claimant’s non-compliance with Respondent’s law.” The original plea as to lack of
jurisdiction based on non-compliance with law had been made in the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for Bifurcation of 24 May 2013. Article 21(3) of the
UNCITRAL Rules does not require that every single jurisdictional argument be raised in the
Statement of Defense, only that the plea of lack of jurisdiction be made. The Respondent raised
the issue of non-conformity with the Exchange Control Act in its Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s shares in GHNSI were not owned or controlled “in
accordance with the latter’s laws” because any issue of shares by GHNSI to GHBVI required
prior approval of the Exchange Control Authority and that any transaction performed without

approval is void.

The Tribunal has been presented with conflicting authorities on the effect of the issuance of

securities without the Exchange Control Authority’s permission. The Respondent’s expert, Mr.

Statement of Claim, {[ 153.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {J 31-33.

22

90.

91.

92.

Griffith, relying on a number of Commonwealth cases, opines that the share issue is invalid.”
The Claimant relies on the 2011 decision of the Barbadian Court of Appeal in King’s Beach
Hotels Limited v. Johanna Kesmin Marks” and academic commentary, * which it submits
confirms that the modern approach to the interpretation of exchange control legislation is that

any contravention does affect the validity of the underlying transaction.

The question of whether the Claimant’s investment was owned or controlled in accordance with
Barbadian law for the purposes Article 1(f) raises two separate issues: (i) the effect of GHNSI’s
issuance of securities to GHNSI without the Exchange Control Authority’s permission; and (ii)
the more general question of the effect of the Claimant’s failure to ensure that the GHNSI’s

share issuance was “in accordance” with the Exchange Control Act.

With respect to (i), it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to make a determinative finding whether
the issuance of shares in GHNSI to GHBVI was void under Barbadian law for failure to obtain
the approval of the Exchange Control Authority. First, whatever view is taken with respect to
the Claimant’s ownership of GHNSI through GHBVI (whether the issuance of shares was void
or not under Barbadian law), it is established that the Claimant in fact controlled GHNSI and the
Sanctuary.”’ Indeed, Barbadian government officials appear to have consistently acted as if the
Claimant controlled the Sanctuary. Other than the question of Exchange Control Authority
approval, there does not appear to be any Barbadian law that prohibits Mr. Allard from
acquiring, owning, controlling or operating the Sanctuary in the manner that he did. The
Respondent has not suggested that there are any other mandatory requirements under Barbadian
law that would restrict Mr. Allard’s ability to control GHNSI and the Sanctuary. Second, as held
above at paragraph 85, Mr. Allard directly made successive loans to fund the operations of the

80

Sanctuary to the extent of some C$18.8 million." The Tribunal accepts that these loans

separately constitute a direct investment by the Claimant within the terms of the BIT.

With respect to (ii), the Tribunal recognizes that Barbados has a legitimate interest in tracking

and regulating monies being remitted into its territory. However, there is no basis for finding

First Legal Expert Opinion by Mr. Michael Griffith dated 6 November 2013, {{f{ 12-28 and Second Legal

Expert Opinion by Mr. Michael Griffith dated 3 February 2014, {ff 21-36.

Kings Beach Hotels Limited v. Marks, Civil Appeal No. 23 of 2006, issued 11 February 2011, {] 4, Exhibit
CLA-31.

Kodilinye and Kodilinye, Commonwealth Caribbean Contract Law, (New York: Routledge, 2014), p. 187,
Exhibit CLA-30.

Statement of Claim, {{{[ 13-92 and accompanying exhibits and witness statements.

Statement of Claim, {[ 153.

23

93.

94,

95.

96.

81

that GHNSI’s issuance of shares to GHBVI is offensive to public policy or tainted with
criminality. Further, nothing in the Exchange Control Act appears to prevent the Authority from
granting an approval with retrospective effect. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant applied for
exchange control approval for loans to GHNSI in 2008 and that the Exchange Control Authority
wrote to the Claimant’s accountant in 29 August 2008 seeking further information.*! As of the

date of the hearing, the Exchange Control Authority had not granted its approval.

Although the corporate documentary history remains conflicting and incomplete, the Tribunal is
satisfied that Mr Allard made an investment in good faith in the Sanctuary. There is no evidence
of any misconduct by the Claimant in making the investment. The Claimant did not attempt to
conceal his investment in the Sanctuary. The record in these proceedings includes
correspondence between Mr. Allard and his advisors and senior government officials regarding

Mr. Allard’s investment in the Sanctuary.**

In the particular circumstances of this case, the Tribunal is of the view that non-compliance with
the Exchange Control Act should be characterized as an inadvertent and technical breach of
local law that does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction. The non-compliance at issue in this

case does not involve the breach of fundamental legal principles of Barbados.**

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Claimant owns and controls assets in accordance with
the laws of Barbados and that these assets constitute investments for the purposes of Article

\(f).
Objection (3): Limitation

The objection is that under Article XIII (set out in paragraph 26 above) the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction ratione temporis since the claim of 21 May 2010 was more than three years after the
Claimant acquired, or should have acquired, knowledge of his claims, and thereby the claim is

time barred.

Central Bank of Barbados Exchange Control Act Form FI stamped 5 June 2008, Exhibit C-135.

> Statement of Claim, {| 22-35; Correspondence at Exhibits C-30 to C-36 and C-55.

83

LESI, S.p.A. and Astaldi $.p.A. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction dated 12 July 2006, at para. 83(3).

24

8

The Respondent’s arguments

NAFTA cases (Grand River v. USA“ and Mondev v. USA**) confirm that a limitation period

similar to the one in Article XIII(3)(d) contains two cumulative requirements, namely:
(1) Constructive notice of the alleged breach; and
(2) Constructive notice that a claimant has incurred loss or damage.

On any view, the Claimant was aware of the constitutive elements for his claims before

21 May 2007.%°

Zoning issue. The Claimant first learned of a possible reclassification of the lands in the buffer
zone when the proposed amendments to the 1986 plan were announced in 2003.*’ The 2003
Plan was officially approved by ministerial decree on 19 October 2006 and at the very least the
Claimant must have by then become aware of the changed planning policy.** Further, public
meetings were held in 1998 and 1999 to enable potentially affected stakeholders to comment on
the proposals, which also were published in the Official Gazette in May 1998.
As on any view, the Claimant must be taken to have had constructive notice of the legislative
changes before 2007.’ To fix the limitation period under Article XIII(3)(d) to the later time of
the issuance of statutory instrument (2008 No.16),”! in the words of the Grand River tribunal,

would “render the limitations provisions ineffective”.°

Grand River Enterprises Six Nations Ltd. v. United States of America (Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction), UNCITRAL, 20 July 2006, {{ 73.

Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (Award), ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/99/2,
11 October 2002, {{ 87.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, ‘| 61-62.
Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 70, referring to Statement of Claim, {{ 82.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 74; $.1. 2006, Notice of Approval by the Minister of
the Barbados Physical Development Plan as amended in 2003, Exhibit R-13. See also Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, { 97; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {ff 85-89.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 71, referring to Advertisement published in The
Advocate and The Nation newspapers giving Notice of Physical Development Plan for Barbados, dated 20
May 1998, Exhibit R-12, p.1.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{] 72-73.

According to the Claimant, the 2003 Plan did not come into operation until the issuance of the statutory
instrument on 15 April 2008. See Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 85.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 101, referring to Grand River Enterprises Six Nations Ltd. v. United
States of America (Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction), UNCITRAL, 20 July 2006, { 81.

 

25

100. Sluice gate issue. The Claimant was aware of environmental damage arising from the sluice

gate issue before 21 May 2007: At all times he had notice that the sluice gate and other pre-
existing risk factors might negatively affect the wetlands. Letters from April 2000 noted
continuing concerns about the “deficient operation of the sluice gate”. Later letters from the
Claimant’s consultant, Mr. Heaslet, to both the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public
Works and the Chief Environmental Health Officer in the Ministry of Health of Barbados
between 2004 and 2005 explicitly addressed the sluice gates issue by “urgently requesting
assistance for interim sealing of the sluice gate in the drainage canal” and warning of “warm
stagnant [water] conditions [that] may cause a catastrophic decline of fish”. *
On any view, any claim pertaining to the 2005 sewage spill must be “excluded from the ambit

of the BIT”.”°

101. It is untenable to contend that continuing actions by reference to zoning and sluice gate issues

may in themselves constitute breaches of legal obligation, and thus renew the limitation period
each day that they occur.” Reliance upon the rules of general international law as well as on
Article 14(2) of the International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility in this

regard ignores the principle /ex specialis derogat legi generali.*

102. Plainly, the UPS v. Canada decision” on which the Claimant relies misapplies the relevant law

2

100

and ignores the purpose of the limitation period.'°’ The UPS case concerned very specific

measures implemented by the host country; whilst here, the Claimant has not identified any

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 86, referring to Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary
Environmental Management Plan, 11 November 1998, Exhibit C-43, p. 2, which confirms that the Sanctuary
as early as 11 November 1998 had “been subjected to considerable human induced stress and severe
damage”.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {[ 67, referring to Statement of Claim, {| 137(b). See
also Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 68, referring to Letter from Stuart Heaslet to the
Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public Works dated 25 March 2004, Exhibit C-49.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 66, referring to Letter from Stuart Heaslet to the
Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public Works, 12 January 2004, Exhibit C-48; Letter from Stuart
Heaslet to the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public Works, 25 March 2004, Exhibit C-49; Letter
from Stuart Heaslet to the Chief Environmental Health Officer in the Ministry of Health, 14 April 2004, pp.1-
2, Exhibit C-50; Letter from Stuart Heaslet to the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public Works dated
31 January 2005, Exhibit C-52.

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 85.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 103, referring to Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 70.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 104-105.

United Parcel Service of America, Inc. v. Canada (Award on the Merits), UNCITRAL, 24 May 2007, { 28,
cited in Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 89.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 106-107.

26

specific conduct on the part of the Respondent to support his allegations of a continued breach
of the substantive protection provisions under the BIT within the period allowed by Article
XI1(3)(d).'! Further, the Trail Smelter Case (U.S. v. Canada) cited by the Claimant'” concerns
a State-to-State dispute in relation to hazardous effects of transboundary damage and is “highly

remote, legally and factually, from the present dispute.”"”*

The Claimant’s arguments

103. While various documents gave earlier notice of the proposed changes to land use, the limitation

period does not start to run until the measure is adopted.’ The Respondent may have elected
not to implement the 2003 Plan.'°° The fact that the Claimant knew that something might occur,
did not engage the limitation period.'° As the 2003 Plan was not formally adopted until 15
April 2008 upon the issuance of the statutory instrument (2008 No. 16), in 2009, claims based

upon its adoption must fall within the three-year limitation period.'"”

104. As to the sluice gate issues, the Claimant only became aware of the Government’s refusal to

protect the Sanctuary in June 2007.'* The claims for mismanagement of the sluice gate is for

lack of due diligence by the host State!”

and could only arise when the lack of due diligence
became known to Mr. Allard, and not merely when the environmental difficulties were

anticipated as likely to rise or first perceived.'"°

105. As soon as Mr. Allard became aware of a possible breach of the BIT, he took steps to mitigate

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

resulting damage first by listing the Sanctuary for sale in June 2007, and then by closing it.'"'

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {{{] 102-104.

Trail Smelter Case (U.S. v. Canada), 3 R. Int’l Arb. Awards 1905, Exhibit CLA-15.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 108.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 66, referring to Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 38-41.
Reply on Jurisdiction, | 144.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 67; Claimant’s Observations on Request for Bifurcation, {| 52; Reply on
Jurisdiction, {{{ 160-165, citing Ethyl v. Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998, and
Pope & Talbot v. Canada, UNCITRAL, Preliminary Award, 24 February 2000.

Memarial on Jurisdiction, {| 66; Reply on Jurisdiction, {| 143-146.

Claimant’s Observations on Request for Bifurcation, {| 54; Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 68; Reply on
Jurisdiction, { 148.

Claimant's Observations on Request for Bifurcation, { 55; Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 69.
Claimant's Observations on Request for Bifurcation, { 55; Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 69.

Reply on Jurisdiction, | 155.

27

106. Alternatively, the failure of the Respondent to operate the sluice gate in a responsible manner or

to exercise due diligence in the enforcement of its environmental laws constitutes a continuing
breach of legal obligations under the BIT, which renews the limitation period each day that it

occurs.'”? The limitation period only begins to run when the breaches cease.

107. Principles under Canadian and English law that limitation periods renew each day that a

continuing violation of a legal obligation occurs must be given special weight given that the BIT
came into force soon after the entry into force of the NAFTA, and is based on the same model
used for all of Canada’s post-NAFTA bilateral investment treaties.''’ The UPS and the Trail
Smelter Case (U.S. v. Canada) decisions are persuasive.''' The UPS Tribunal considered the
identical language of NAFTA, Article 1116, with respect to the three-year limitation period and
held that “continuing courses of conduct constitute continuing breaches of legal obligation and
renew the limitation period accordingly”.''’ The decisions relied upon by the Respondent
address the issue of whether the limitation period in the NAFTA could be suspended or
prolonged, not the date on which the limitation period began to run.''® The Trail Smelter
confirms that State responsibility is triggered when environmental damage is the result of the

failure of a State to take action.'!”

The Tribunal’s findings

108. Despite being on notice of its potential to cause damage, the Tribunal accepts that prior to the

2003 Plan’s final adoption no damage may be said to have arisen. Without presently deciding
whether its adoption constituted a breach of the BIT as claimed, and whether the Claimant has
incurred any damage as a result, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant nonetheless could not

bring a claim premised on the 2003’s Plan before its formal adoption.

109. The language of the BIT does not give much guidance to the Tribunal on the continuous breach

and timing issue.

Claimant’s Observations on Request for Bifurcation, {{ 56, Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 70, citing United
Parcel Service of America v. Government of Canada, Award on the Merits (24 May 2007), UNCITRAL
Rules, NAFTA Chapter Eleven, para. 28; Draft ILC Articles of Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, with commentaries, 2001, Exhibit CLA-1, Article 14(3) and Commentary citing Trail
Smelter, p. 1905. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, { 147.

Reply on Jurisdiction, {{{] 166-172.

Reply on Jurisdiction, {J 174-183.

Reply on Jurisdiction, | 175, citing UPS v. Canada, | 28.

  

Reply on Jurisdiction, { 177.
Reply on Jurisdiction, { 183.

28

110. The original GHBSI Environmental Management Plan, and its 2000 Amended Environmental
Management Plan referenced the sluice gate as a potential problem.''* The Claimant focuses on
the Respondent’s promise to manage and to take responsibility for resolving those problems. In
his Statement of Claim, the Claimant alleges a marked change over time in the Respondent’s

commitment and approach.'!”

111. The Tribunal regards the sluice gate issue as pleaded as giving rise to challenging issues for
decision as it is premised on claims of continuing breach. Although Mr. Allard knew about the
potential defects of the sluice gate, the claim now is that the breach arose from the

Government’s lack of due diligence to carry out the necessary repairs.

112. In the result, the Tribunal confirms its jurisdiction ratione temporis in respect of the claims
relating to the 2003 Amended Plan. However, it is inclined to regard the limitation issue for the
sluice gate claims as impleading issues intertwined with those that will arise for determination
under the merits phase. In the result, and even if it is plainly framed to side-step an obvious
limitation defense, the Tribunal cannot at this phase of a bifurcation hearing on objections

dismiss the pleading as untenable.

113. In all circumstances, the Tribunal defers and holds over the sluice gate aspect of objection (3)

for further consideration and determination on the merits phase.

"8 Graeme Hall Bird Sanctuary Environmental Management Plan, Exhibits C-43; Amended Graeme Hall Bird
Sanctuary Environmental Management Plan dated April 2000, Exhibit C-44. Letter from Roger Sweeney to
Chief Town Planner dated 24 October 2000, Exhibit C-68.

"Statement of Claim, {ff 138-140.

29

DECISION

The objections set out in para 29 above are answered —
Objections (1) and (2)

Yes.
Objection (3)

Partly Yes, with the ‘sluice gate’ issue held over to the merits phase.

COSTS reserved to final costs orders.

frched bom

MICHAEL REISMAN

ANDREW NEWCOMBE

Ep.

GAVAN GRIFFITH

DATED 13 June 2014

30

DECLARATION BY PROFESSOR REISMAN

Mr. Allard does not provide a model of how to initiate a direct foreign investment and he encounters a
number of jurisdictional problems under a technical analysis of the BIT. Along with key employees,
he indulged in presenting himself as a philanthropist, yet was, by all of the objective indicators
specified in paragraph 50 of the award, pursuing, from the outset, a business that met the requirements
of BIT Article 1(f), (Whether, by holding out to be a philanthropist, he may have secured concessions
that would otherwise not have been forthcoming is not a jurisdictional question.) He also failed, inter
alia, to comply timeously with currency exchange requirements. In some of these and other technical

non-compliances, he may have been less than well-served by some of his various legal counselors.

Yet, although Mr. Allard encounters jurisdictional problems with some of the technical requirements
of the BIT, there is no indication in the record that he engaged in any effort to mislead, even less to
defraud the Government or to gain an unlawful advantage by means of the various technical non-
compliances. Nor did the Government seem to have reason to entertain any question as to the bona

fides of his activities. For those reasons, I think the Tribunal is correct in being generous with respect

MICHAEL REISMAN

31

