INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star
v.

Kingdom of Norway

(ICSID Case No. ARB/20/11)

 

DECISION ON BIFURCATION AND OTHER MATTERS

Members of the Tribunal
Sir Christopher Greenwood, GBE, CMG, QC, President of the Tribunal
The Honourable L. Yves Fortier, CC, OQ, QC, Arbitrator
Professor Donald M. McRae, CC, ONZM, FRSC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Leah Waithira Njoroge

 

12 October 2020

Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star v. Kingdom of Norway
(ICSID Case No. ARB/20/11)

 

Decision on Bifurcation and Other Matters
Background

The present Decision addresses various matters raised by the Parties in correspondence
preceding, and in oral submissions during, the first session of the Tribunal on 28 September
2020. It should be read together with Procedural Order No. 1. The Tribunal has issued the
Decision separately and in addition to the Procedural Order to enable a fuller explanation
of the reasons for some of the rulings which it has made on matters on which the Parties
expressed sharply divided views.

The present proceedings are brought by Mr. Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star (“the
Claimants”) against the Kingdom of Norway (“the Respondent”) under the terms of the
Washington Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID Convention”) and the Agreement between the
Government of the Kingdom of Norway and the Government of the Republic of Latvia on
the Mutual Protection of Investments, 1992 (“the BIT”).

Request concerning Bifurcation

The Claimants request that either the Tribunal order bifurcation of the proceedings now or
else decide that it will not order bifurcation, should the Respondent so request, after the
Respondent has filed any jurisdictional objections it may make. The Claimants maintain
that a decision at this stage is necessary in order to ensure that the proceedings are
conducted expeditiously and maintain that this is particularly important as they are a small
enterprise without the resources available to the Respondent.

In that connection, the Claimants contend that the Respondent has been on notice of the
existence of the dispute since March 2019. On 8 March 2019, the Claimants sent the
Respondent a detailed letter, accompanied by forty-five exhibits outlining their allegations
of violation of the BIT. Moreover, the Claimants maintain that the Request for Arbitration
filed on 18 March 2020 gives the Respondent sufficient detail regarding the claim to enable
it to decide whether or not it wishes to raise jurisdictional objections and to formulate those
objections.

The Respondent opposes this request. It argues, first, that the Tribunal has no power to
imake such a decision. According to the Respondent, the Tribunal lacks power to decide
on bifurcation at the present stage of the proceedings, due to the provisions of Article 41
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the relevant parts of which read as follows:

()) Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the
competence of the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A party
shall file the objection with the Secretary-General no later than the
expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial

Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star v. Kingdom of Norway
(ICSID Case No. ARB/20/11)

 

Tl.

Decision on Bifurcation and Other Matters

(3) Upon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the
Tribunal may decide to suspend the proceedings on the merits. ...

Secondly, the Respondent maintains that, even if the Tribunal has the power to decide at
this stage whether or not the proceedings should be bifurcated, it should not exercise that
power. According to the Respondent, it has already assisted in the expeditious conduct of
the proceedings ensuring, for example, that the Tribunal was constituted in significantly
less time than has been the average in investment cases. The Respondent also contends
that the purpose of bifurcation is to ensure the most efficient conduct of the proceedings
and that it will not be possible for the Tribunal to make a judgment on that question until
it has seen the jurisdictional objections in question. Nor can the Respondent make a proper
assessment of what jurisdictional objections it might make until it has seen a full pleading
of the Claimants’ case.

The Tribunal has serious doubts about whether it has the power to make an order of the
kind sought by the Claimants at the present stage of the proceedings. Article 41(1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules gives a respondent the right to raise jurisdictional objections at
any time up to the date of filing of the counter-memorial. Moreover, Article 41(3) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules confers on a tribunal the power to suspend the proceedings “upon
the raising of a formal objection”. To date there has been no formal objection to
jurisdiction and the date for filing the counter-memorial has not even been determined.

Moreover, even if — in principle — the Tribunal possesses the power to determine at the
present stage whether or not the proceedings should be bifurcated, it considers that the
situation is not such as to warrant the exercise of that power. Without knowing what
jurisdictional objections — if any — are being advanced, it is impossible for the Tribunal to
make a sensible assessment of whether bifurcation would facilitate or hinder the effective
and expeditions conduct of the proceedings. The Claimants’ request is therefore rejected.

While the Tribunal is sympathetic to the point made by the Claimants regarding the concern
of a small business that it not face unduly protracted proceedings, the Tribunal considers
that the more appropriate way of meeting that concern is to set a schedule which is as tight
as due process will allow. In that context, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent has
already proposed that it should make any request for bifurcation within four weeks of the
receipt of the Memorial. The Tribunal has therefore enshrined such a requirement within
the timetable annexed to Procedural Order No. 1.

The Tribunal also takes the view that the time limit for filing the Memorial should be
shorter than the 210 days proposed by the Respondent. Given the detail already contained
in the Request for Arbitration, the Tribunal considers that 150 days from the date of
Procedural Order No. 1 is sufficient.

Examination of Witnesses and Experts

The Parties agreed that fact witnesses should not be permitted in the hearing room prior to
their own testimony. They also agreed that there should be an exception for witnesses who

Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star v. Kingdom of Norway
(ICSID Case No. ARB/20/11)

 

Decision on Bifurcation and Other Matters

are themselves parties and, by logical extension, officers, officials or employees of the
Second Claimant or the Respondent if their presence was necessary to enable counsel to
receive instructions. They disagreed, however, regarding a proposal from the Claimants
that “associates or partners” of a party should similarly be permitted to be present prior to
their own testimony. At the initial session, it became clear that this difference related to
the right of Mr. Kirill Levanidov to be present in the hearing prior to testifying.

According to paragraph 27 et seq. of the Request for Arbitration, Mr. Levanidov is a cousin
and business partner of the First Claimant. Mr. Levanidov is a United States national and
cannot therefore be a claimant in his own right under the BIT. Nor, it appears, is he an
officer or employee of the Second Claimant. The Tribunal therefore has difficulty seeing
how his presence in the hearing room could be necessary to enable counsel for the
Claimants to receive instructions. Accordingly, the Claimants’ proposal is, for the time
being, rejected and paragraph 18.5 of Procedural Order No. 1 has been drafted in terms
which would exclude Mr. Levanidov.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal is open to reconsidering this matter if the Claimants, within
twenty working days of the receipt of this Order, clarify the precise status of Mr. Levanidov
and explain why his presence prior to testifying is necessary.

Confidentiality

The Parties also differed on whether there should be a separate confidentiality order and
on what that order, or the relevant parts of Procedural Order No. 1, should contain.

The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to deal with confidentiality in a separate order
and has therefore set out the confidentiality provisions in paragraph 23 of Procedural Order
No. 1.

The Tribunal has taken note of the Claimants’ concerns regarding business secrets but
considers that their proposal to create two categories of “confidential information” and
“restricted access information” is unnecessary and inappropriate. It does not accept that
there should be a category of information which may be disclosed only to counsel and not
to those instructing them. It also considers that the Respondent may have its own concermms
regarding confidentiality provisions in Norwegian law.

The Tribunal has endeavoured, in paragraph 23 of Procedural Order No. 1, to strike a
proper balance between the different concerns of the Parties. It draws attention in particular
to the provisions of paragraphs 23.6 and 23.7, which make clear that confidential
information is to be disclosed only to officials, officers and employees of the Second
Claimant or the Respondent if disclosure is necessary for the purposes of the proceedings
and that confidential information thus disclosed may not be used for any purpose other than
the conduct of the present proceedings.

The Tribunal expects the Parties to co-operate in resolving any differences between them
regarding whether or not information is properly designated as confidential and not to

4

Peteris Pildegovics and SIA North Star v. Kingdom of Norway
(ICSID Case No. ARB/20/11)
Decision on Bifurcation and Other Matters

 

trouble the Tribunal with those differences unless they cannot be thus resolved.

19. The Tribunal also draws attention to paragraph 23.8. The Tribunal does not exclude the
possibility that a Party might be required by law to disclose confidential information
received during the course of the proceedings to a court or other body, including for reasons
not directly connected with the present proceedings. The Tribunal considers that it would
not be appropriate to lay down at this stage a general rule either permitting or forbidding
such disclosure. However, should a Party consider that it has such an obligation, it should
first inform the Tribunal which will then rule on the matter after hearing the other Party.

V. Production of Documents

20. The Claimants request that the Tribunal provide for a round of document disclosure on
jurisdictional matters in the event of bifurcation.

21. The Tribunal is sympathetic to the Claimants’ proposal that there should be such a round
provided that it is strictly confined to documents relevant to jurisdiction. To avoid over-
complication of Annex B to Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal has not laid down a
separate timetable for such a round. Instead it will be determined if and when a decision
to bifurcate is made.

For and on behalf of the Tribunal,
[signed]

Sir Christopher Greenwood
President of the Tribunal
Date: 12 October 2020

