INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

PHILIP MORRIS BRANDS SARL,
PHILIP MORRIS PRODUCTS S.A.
and
ABAL HERMANOS S.A.
(THE CLAIMANTS)

and

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
(THE RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7)

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Piero Bernardini, President
Mr. Gary Born, Arbitrator
Prof. James Crawford, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein

Date of dispatch to the parties: July 2, 2013

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov
Ms. Marinn Carlson

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Mr. James Mendenhall
SIDLEY AUSTIN LLP
1501 K Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005
United States

and

Mr. Daniel M. Price
Daniel M. Price PLLC
1401 I Street, NW, Suite 1120,
Washington, D.C. 20005
and

Dr. Veijo Heiskanen

Ms. Noradéle Radjai and
Mr. Samuel Moss
LALIVE

Rue de la Mairie 35

1207 Geneva
Switzerland

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Luis Almagro Lemes
Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores
Calle Colonia 1206, 6to. Piso
Montevideo

Uruguay

and

Dr. Diego Canepa Baccino
Prosecretaria de la Republica
Plaza Independencia 710
C.P. 11.000

Torre Ejecutiva Pisos 11
Montevideo

Uruguay

and

Dr. Jorge Venegas

Ministro de Salud Publica

18 de julio 1892, Piso 2
Montevideo

Uruguay

and

Embassy of Uruguay

1913 I (Eye) Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006

and

Mr. Paul Reichler

Mr. Ronald Goodman

Foley Hoag LLP

1875 K Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006

INDEX

 

Page
TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS. 3
T. THE DISPUTE ...0.... 2. occ ccc cece cece eee cece cee ebeeeeeeeseeeeeneeeeseeeeeeeanee 4
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY... ........00....ccccceeeeee ee eeeeee eee e ee eeeeeeeeeneeeeeteeeaeeseeeeeae ed 6
Il. © RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONG..........0....::0ccceeeeeeeeseeeeeeeee ee eeeeeteeeeeeeeeeenae 8

IV. THE RESPONDENT'S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

A. First Objection: the Claimants Have Not Satisfied Jurisdictional Requirements.

 

1. Arguments of the Respondent
2. Arguments of the Claimant:
3. Findings of the Tribunal....

 
 

B. Second Objection: Article 2 of the BIT Excludes Public Health Measures from the Scope
of the Protection Afforded Investors
1. Arguments of the Respondent
2. Arguments of the Claimant:
3. Findings of the Tribunal ...

50

 

 

C. Third Objection: The Claimants’ Activities in Uruguay Are not an "Investment" Within the
Meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
1. Arguments of the Respondent. ............. 00.00. .cc cece eee cece cece e eee e eee eee ee eee e eee eggs 59
2. Arguments of the Claimant: ..60
3. Findings of the Tribunal ... -.63

 

 

V. THE CLAIMANTS’ DENIAL OF JUSTICE CLAIM

 

 

 

1. Arguments of the Claimants 69
2. Ar of the Respondent 70
3. Findings of the Tribunal 71
VI. DISPOSITIF 16

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Centre

Counter-memorial

Exh C-
Exh CLA-
Exh R-
Exh RL-
fn.

Ic)

ICSID Convention

Memorial

MEN clause
MPH

RFA

Rejoinder
Reply
VCLT

The BIT

Transcript Day[#], [page:line]

The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes established under the ICSID Convention

The Claimants’ Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, filed on 23
January 2012

The Claimants’ Exhibits

The Claimants’ Legal Authorities
The Respondent’s Exhibits

The Respondent’s Legal Authorities
footnote

The International Court of Justice

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, Washington D.C., 1965

The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, filed on 24
September 2011

Most-Favored Nation clause
Uruguayan Ministry of Public Health

The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, filed on 19 February
2010

The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, filed on 20 July 2012
The Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, filed on 20 April 2012
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969

Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Oriental
Republic of Uruguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection
of Investments of 7 October 1998, entered into force on 22 April
1991

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction
Day One: 5 February 2013
Day Two: 6 February 2013

L

THE DISPUTE

FTR Holding S.A. (“FTR”), Philip Morris Products S.A. (“PMP”) and Abal
Hermanos S.A. (“Abal’), together with FTR, PMP, “Philip Morris” (or “the
Claimants”), filed a Request for Arbitration on 19 February 2010 (the “RFA”) to
institute arbitration proceedings against the Oriental Republic of Uruguay
(‘Uruguay” or “the Respondent’). The proceedings were initiated in accordance
with Article 36 of the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States dated 18 March 1965 (the “ICSID
Convention”) and Article 10 of (including Ad Article 10 of the Protocol to) the
Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Oriental Republic of
Uruguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments dated 7
October 1988 (the “Switzerland-Uruguay BIT” or “the BIT”). The BIT entered
into force on 22 April 1991, as provided by its Article 12.

FTR and PMP are sociétés anonymes organized under the laws of Switzerland,
with registered office in Neuchatel, Switzerland. FTR was incorporated on 14
December 1924 and registered in the Commercial Register of Neuchatel on 15
January 1943. PMP was incorporated on 22 December 1988 and registered in the
Commercial Register of Neuchatel on the same date. Abal is a sociedad anénima
organized under the laws of Uruguay and has its registered office in Montevideo,
Uruguay. FTR was the direct owner of 100% of Abal. By letter of 5 October 2010
the Claimants informed the Centre that Philip Morris Brands Sarl replaced FTR
Holding S.A. as one of the Claimants in this case and requested that the caption of
the case be amended accordingly. Philip Morris Brands Sarl (“PMB”) is a Société
a responsibilité limitée organized under the laws of Switzerland, with registered

office in Neuchatel, Switzerland. PMB is now the direct owner of 100% of Abal.

PMP was the owner of the “Marlboro”, “Fiesta”, “L&M” and “Philip Morris”
trademarks which it licensed to Abal. By letter of 17 March 2011, the Claimants
informed the Centre that the trademark for Marlboro, Philip Morris and Fiesta
were transferred to PMB as of | January 2011, to be then licensed to Philip Morris
Global Brands, sublicensed to PMP and sub-sublicensed to Abal. Abal produces
and sells the “Marlboro”, “Fiesta”, “L&M”, “Philip Morris”, “Casino”, and

4

“Premier” brands of cigarettes in Uruguay; it owns the “Casino”, “Premier” and

associated trademarks.

The Claimants’ claims arise out of the enactment by the Uruguayan Ministry of
Public Health (the “MPH”) of Ordinance 514 dated 18 August 2008 (“Ordinance
514”) and the enactment by the President of Uruguay of Decree 287/009 dated 15
June 2009 (“Decree 287/009”). On 1 September 2009, Ordinance 466 was
enacted by the MPH (“Ordinance 466”), allegedly perpetuating the “single
presentation” requirements of Ordinance 514 and restating the 80% health

warning requirement in Decree 287/009.

Article 1 of Ordinance 514 mandates graphic images (“pictograms”) that purport
to illustrate the adverse health effects of smoking reflected in the text warnings.
According to the Claimants, many of these pictograms are not designed to warn of
the actual health effects of smoking; rather they are highly shocking images that
are designed specifically to invoke emotions of repulsion and disgust, even horror.
Thus, it is said, the effective function of the pictograms is to undermine and
indeed destroy the good will associated with Abal’s and PMP’s legally protected

trademarks, and not to promote legitimate health policies.

Article 3 of Ordinance 514 requires each cigarette brand to have a “single
presentation” and prohibits different packaging or presentations for cigarettes sold
under a given brand. Until the enactment of Ordinance 514, Abal sold multiple
product varieties under each of its brands (for example, “Marlboro Red”,
“Marlboro Gold”, “Marlboro Blue” and “Marlboro Green (Fresh Mint)’). The
Claimants allege that Article 3 has forced Abal to cease selling all but one of
those product varieties under each brand that it owns or licenses and that sales of
these now forbidden products represented a significant portion of Abal’s total

sales.

I.

11.

Decree 287/009 imposes an increase in the size of health warnings on cigarette
packages from 50% to 80 per cent of the surface of the front and back of the
package. According to the Claimants, the 80 per cent health warning coverage
requirement wrongfully limits Abal’s right to use its legally protected trademarks

and prevents Abal from displaying them in their proper form.

The Claimants allege that Ordinance 514 has caused a decrease in Abal’s sales,
notably because Abal has been forced to discontinue a number of its product
varieties. It has also caused a deprivation of PMP’s and Abal’s intellectual
property rights and a substantial reduction in the value of Abal as a company. As
a result, it is alleged that the Claimants have already sustained, and will continue

to sustain, substantial losses.

The Claimants claim that the mandatory pictograms under Article 1 of Ordinance
514 to illustrate the adverse effect of smoking, the single presentation requirement
in Article 3 of Ordinance 514 and the 80% health warning requirement imposed
by Decree 287/009 constitute breaches of the Respondent’s obligations under
Articles 3(1), 3(2), 5 and 11 of the BIT, entitling the Claimants to compensation

under the BIT and international law.

The Respondent has denied the Claimants’ allegations and has requested that the

Claimants’ claims be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

According to the RFA, the dispute arose out of the Claimants’ investment in
Uruguay. The Claimants allege that Uruguay violated their rights under the BIT in

connection with that investment.

On 26 March 2010, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and in
accordance with Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”), ICSID’s
Secretary-General registered the RFA and the proceeding was instituted on the

same date.

The method for the constitution of the Tribunal was agreed upon by the Parties,
pursuant to which the Tribunal would be comprised of three arbitrators, with each
Party appointing one arbitrator and the third arbitrator to be appointed by the two
Party-appointed arbitrators. In the absence of an agreement between the two Party-
appointed arbitrators, the Secretary-General would appoint the third presiding

arbitrator.

On 1 September 2010, the Claimants appointed Mr. Gary Born, a US national, as
arbitrator. Mr. Born accepted his appointment on 3 September 2010. On 24
September 2010, the Respondent appointed Prof. James Crawford, an Australian
national, as arbitrator. Prof. Crawford accepted his appointment on 1 October
2010. Mr. Born and Prof. Crawford could not reach an agreement as to the third
presiding arbitrator. Accordingly, it fell upon ICSID’s Secretary-General to
appoint the President of the Tribunal. On 9 March 2011, the Secretary-General
appointed Prof. Piero Bernardini, an Italian national, as President of the Tribunal.

Professor Bernardini accepted his appointment on 15 March 2011.

On 15 March 2011, the Tribunal was constituted. Its members are: Prof. Piero
Bernardini (Italian), President of the Tribunal; Mr. Gary Born (U.S.), Arbitrator;
Prof. James Crawford (Australian), Arbitrator. Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein was

appointed by ICSID’s Secretary-General as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 25 May 2011, the Tribunal held its first session by telephone conference. A
procedural calendar was established for the proceedings on jurisdiction. The

Minutes of the First Session were transmitted to the Parties.

On 31 August 2011, as agreed by the Parties, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order

No. | for the Protection of Confidential Information.

Pursuant to the agreed upon schedule of pleadings, the Respondent filed the
Memorial on 24 September 2011, the Claimants filed the Counter-memorial on 23
January 2012, the Respondent filed the Reply on 20 April 2012 and the Claimants
filed the Rejoinder on 20 July 2012.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s direction of 14 December 2012, the Parties agreed on
15 January 2013 on the schedule of the hearing on jurisdiction. The schedule was

accepted by the Tribunal.

20. The hearing on jurisdiction was held on 5 and 6 February 2013, at the

International Chamber of Commerce in Paris. Present at the hearing were:

- for the Tribunal: Prof. Piero Bernardini, President; Mr. Gary Born and Prof.

James Crawford, arbitrators; Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Secretary of the

Tribunal;
- for the Claimants:

Mr. Daniel M. Price
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Mr. James Mendenhall
Ms. Mika Morse

Mr. Andrew Blandford
Mr. Carlos Brandes

Mr. JB Simko

Mr. John Fraser

Mr. Matias Cikato

Ms. Anne Edward

Dr. Carlos E. Delpiazzo

- for the Respondent:

Mr. Paul S. Reichler

Dr. Ronald E.M. Goodman

Dr. Eduardo Jiménez de Aréchaga
Mrs. Christina Beharry

Mr. Yuri Parkhomenko

Dr. Constantinos Salonidis

Mr. Yoni Bard

Mrs. Irene Okais

Ms. Angelica Villagran

Dr. Diego Canepa Baccino

Dr. Carlos Mata

Dr. Daniel Hugo Martins

Daniel M. Price PLLC
Sidley Austin LLP
Sidley Austin LLP
Sidley Austin LLP
Sidley Austin LLP
Guyer & Regules
Philip Morris
Philip Morris
Philip Morris
Philip Morris
Expert

Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Attorney at Law
Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Foley Hoag LLP
Deputy Secretary
Presidency of the Republic of Uruguay

Director of Legal Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Expert

21. The Parties agreed on corrections to the hearing transcript by letter of 25 February

2013 enclosing jointly agreed corrections.

RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

22. According to Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal is the judge of the

Centre’s jurisdiction and its own competence. In order to determine the existence

of the Centre’s jurisdiction and its competence in the present case, the Tribunal

must decide whether the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention and
the BIT have been satisfied. In reaching such decision, the Tribunal must apply
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, Articles 1 and 10 of the Switzerland-
Uruguay BIT and Ad Articles 9 and 10 of the Protocol to the BIT.

23. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention sets forth the criteria for ICSID’s jurisdiction
and provides in relevant part:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State... and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent,
no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) [omitted]

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the
parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration
and any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.

24. Article 1 of the BIT defines as follows certain relevant terms:

(1) The term “investor” refers with regard to either Contracting Party to

(a) natural persons who, according to the law of that Contracting Party,

are considered to be its nationals;

(b) legal entities, including companies, corporations, business
associations and other organisations, which are constituted or
otherwise duly organized under the law of the Contracting Party and
have their seat in the territory of that same Contracting Party;
legal entities established under the law of any country which are,
directly or indirectly, controlled by nationals of that Contracting Party.
(2) The term “investment” shall include every kind of assets and particularly:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem,

such as charges on real estate, mortgages, liens, pledges;

(b) shares, certificates or other kinds of participation in companies;

(c) money claims and any entitlement of economic value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property rights (such as patents of inventions,
utility models, industrial designs or models, trade or service marks,
trade names, indications of source or appellation of origin), know-how
and good-will;
concessions under public law, including concessions to search for,
extract or exploit natural resources as well as all other rights given by
law, by contract or by decision of a public entity in accordance with
the law.

(c

(e

25. Article 10 of the BIT sets forth provisions governing the disputes between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party that may be
submitted to international arbitration. In pertinent part, it reads:

(1) Disputes with respect to investments within the meaning of this
Agreement between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably
between the parties concerned.

If a dispute within the meaning of paragraph (1) cannot be settled
within a period of six months after it was raised, the dispute shall,
upon request of either party to the dispute, be submitted to the
competent courts of the Contracting Party in the territory of which
the investment has been made. If within a period of 18 months after
the proceedings have been instituted no judgment has been passed,
the investor concerned may appeal to an arbitral tribunal which
decides on the dispute in all its aspects.

(2

26. Ad Articles 9 and 10 of the Protocol to the BIT read as follows:

Judgment of the competent courts in the sense of Article 9, paragraph (8)
and Article 10, paragraph (2) means for the Oriental Republic of
Uruguay a judicial decision in a one and only instance.

Ad Article 10 of the Protocol to the BIT reads as follows:

In the event of both Contracting Parties having become members of the
Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, disputes with respect to
investments between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party shall, at the request of the investor, be submitted
according to the provisions of the aforementioned Convention to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

27. The jurisdiction of the Centre and the Tribunal’s competence depend first and
foremost on the consent of the Parties.’ The Tribunal shall exercise jurisdiction
over all disputes that fall within the scope of the Parties’ consent as long as the
dispute satisfies the requirements of the ICSID Convention and the relevant

provisions of the BIT.

28. Based on Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, Articles 1 and 10 of the BIT, Ad
Articles 9 and 10 of the Protocol to the BIT, this Tribunal has jurisdiction over the

present dispute if the following conditions are met: (1) a condition ratione

' Report of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the
Convention, stating that “[c]onsent of the parties is the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre”, 1 ICSID
Reports, para. 23.

10

personae: the Claimants are all investors of one Contracting Party and Uruguay is
another Contracting Party; (2) a condition ratione materiae: the dispute must be a
legal dispute arising directly out of an investment made by the Claimants in the
territory of the other Contracting Party; (3) a condition ratione voluntatis: the
parties to the dispute have consented that the dispute be settled through ICSID
arbitration. While no objections have been raised by the Respondent regarding
jurisdiction ratione personae, it has objected that since the other conditions have
not been met, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the case. Before examining

the Respondent’s objections, two preliminary matters must first be addressed.

29. Regarding burden of proof, it is commonly accepted that at the jurisdictional stage
the facts as alleged by the claimant have to be accepted when, if proven, they
would constitute a breach of the relevant treaty.” However, if jurisdiction rests on
the satisfaction of certain conditions, such as the existence of an “investment” and
of the parties’ consent, the Tribunal must apply the standard rule of onus of proof
actori incumbit probatio*, except that any party asserting a fact shall have to

prove it.*

30. Regarding the law governing the determination of jurisdiction, the Tribunal
adheres to the predominant opinion that this issue is to be decided according to

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the applicable rules of the relevant treaty and

? Regarding facts that have to be provisionally accepted for jurisdictional purposes reference may be made to
Saipem v. Bangladesh Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007,
stating as follows (at para. 91):
“The Tribunal’s task is to determine the meaning and scope of the provisions upon which [the claimant] relies to
assert jurisdiction and to assess whether the facts alleged by [the claimant] fall within those provisions or would
be capable, if proven, of constituting breaches of the treaty obligations involved. In performing this task, the
Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning and scope of the relevant
BIT provisions and to the a: ent whether the facts alleged may constitute breaches of these provisions. In
doing so, the Tribunal will assess whether [the claimant's] case is reasonably arguable on its face. If the result is
affirmative, jurisdiction will be established but the existence of breaches will remain to be litigated on the
merits.”
* SOABI v. Senegal, Award, 25 February 1988, para. 9,23, AAPL v. Sri Lanka, Award, 27 June 1990, para. 56;
Tradex v. Albania, Award, 29 April 1999, paras 73-75; Middle East Cement v. Egypt, Award, 12 April 2002,
paras 88-91; Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, Award, 16 September 2003, paras 19.1, 19.4; CSOB v. Slovakia,
Award, 29 December 2004, paras 225-226; Noble Ventures v. Romania, Award, 12 October 2005, para. 100;
Salini v. Jordan, Award, 31 January 2006, paras 70-75; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Award, 26 July 2007, paras
121, 122. See also Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals,
1987, paras 327-331.
+ Feldman v. Mexico, Award, 16 December 2002, para. 117; Soufraki v. UAE, Award, 7 July 2004, paras 58,81;
Thunderbird v. Mexico Award, 26 January 2006, para. 95; Saipem v. Bangladesh, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21
March 2007, para 83. See also the ICJ in: Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua
(Nicaragua v. United States of America), Judgment, 26 November 1984, ICJ Reports 1984, p. 437, para. 101;
Case concerning Avena and other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States), Judgment, 31 March 2004, ICJ
Reports 2004, p. 41, paras 55-57. See also Article 27(1) of the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

11

 
 

  

the applicable rules and principles of international law, Article 42(1) of the ICSID

Convention governing only the merits of the case.*

IV. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

31.

32.

33.

A. First Objection: The Clai Have Not Satisfied Jurisdictional Requirements

1. Arguments of the Respondent

According to the Respondent, requirements prescribed by Article 10, including
the domestic litigation requirement, are jurisdictional pre-conditions that have to
be satisfied in order for the Tribunal to have the authority to hear this case. This is
evident from the form of words used by which international arbitration was

intended to be a forum of last resort only if justice is not served in the host State.

The requirements of Article 10 are stated in terms of obligatory steps, each to be
complied with before the next step may be taken. First, disputes “shall” as far as
possible be settled amicably under Article 10(1) and only “if” the dispute cannot
be so settled within six months, it “shall” be submitted to the competent court of
the host State under Article 10(2). Then, but only “if” no judgment has been
passed within 18 months, the investor may appeal to an arbitral tribunal under the

same Article 10(2).

The choice of words is deliberate. The term “if’ combined with the mandatory
“shall” introduces cumulative conditions that must all be satisfied before resort
may be had to arbitration. Article 9(8) of the BIT underscores the fact that
domestic litigation is an indispensable pre-condition by specifying that an arbitral
tribunal “may only” render an award if it finds that a domestic judgment breaches
the BIT. The conditions stated in Article 10 define the scope of the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction ratione voluntatis, non-compliance negating jurisdiction.

5 Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, A Commentary (2 edn, 2009), Article 25, para. 578, stating that
“[t]ribunals have held consistently that questions of jurisdiction are not subject to Art. 42 which governs the law
applicable to the merits of the case”, referring in this regard to various ICSID decisions on jurisdiction. Article
42(1) provides as follows:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable”.

12

34.

35.

36.

37.

The history of the BIT’s negotiation and ratification shows that Uruguay deemed
domestic litigation requirement to be a critical element of the BIT and an
important limitation on the consent to international arbitration. The Senate
Committee on International Affairs, when recommending the adoption of the BIT,
in a Report dated 9 August 1990 explained that Article 10 establishes a procedure
requiring that only after an unsuccessful attempt to the amicable settlement and
the referral to the competent domestic court could the dispute be submitted to an

arbitral tribunal.®

Consent being the cornerstone of ICSID jurisdiction, any limitations on consent
contained in a BIT constitute limitations on the scope of the tribunal’s
jurisdiction. International jurisprudence, both from the ICJ and other ICSID
tribunals, confirms that procedural preconditions like those under Article 10 limit

States’ consent to jurisdiction.

In the case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New
Application 2002)’, the ICJ held that where the applicable preconditions had not
been met, the treaty could not provide jurisdiction. The Court made clear that
examination of such conditions “relates to its jurisdiction and not to the
admissibility of the application’.* Accordingly, the Court did not accept

jurisdiction due to the failure to comply with the pertinent conditions.’

ICSID tribunals have applied the same rules regarding the six-month waiting
period. In Enron v. Argentina, the relevant BIT required the parties to initially
seek a resolution of the dispute through consultation and negotiation, this

requirement being, in the tribunal’s view, “very much a jurisdictional one. A

® Memorial, para 54, referring to the Report of the Senate Committee on International Affairs (9 August 1990) in
Minutes of the Uruguayan Senate Sessions (4 September 1990), p. 42 (R-S).

’ Case Concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application, 2002) (Democratic
Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Judgment on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 3 February 2006, I.C.J. Reports
2006, para. 88 (RL-48).

8 Tbid., para. 88.

° Tbid., para. 126.

13

38.

39.

40.

failure to comply with that requirement would result in a determination of lack of

jurisdiction”."°

ICSID tribunals have held that the requirement of litigation is a jurisdictional
condition. In Wintershall v. Argentina the tribunal held that this requirement “is
an essential preliminary step to the institution of ICSID arbitration under the
Argentina-Germany BIT; it constitutes an integral part of the “standing offer”
(“consent”) of the Host State that must be accepted on the same terms by every
individual investor who seeks recourse (ultimately) to ICSID arbitration. ...The
requirement of recourse to local courts.... is fundamentally a jurisdictional

oan

clause”.

The Claimants made no effort to comply with the domestic litigation requirement,
as is evident from the fact that they did not pursue the special statutory
mechanism designed by Uruguayan law exclusively for the resolution of BIT
disputes. The Claimants chose rather to bring before the Uruguayan courts only
matters of Uruguayan municipal law, declining to raise any claims under the BIT
in those proceedings. Even on the Claimants’ theory, the 18 months had not run

before the arbitration began.

The special procedure created in Uruguay for the litigation of BIT claims is set
forth in Law 16,110 of 25 April 1990. As explained by the Respondent’s expert
Dr. Daniel Hugo Martins, the first article of Law 16,110 “ratifies” Uruguay’s
bilateral investment treaty with Germany.’ The remainder of that Law creates a
specific mechanism, of a general character, for the resolution of investor-State
disputes arising under any bilateral investment treaty, the competent courts being
the Tribunal de lo Contencioso Administrativo (“TCA”) and the Tribunales de

Apelacion en lo Civil.

'° Enron Corp and Ponderosa Assets v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January
2004, para. 88. Similarly, Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del
Ecuador, ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction, 2 June 2010, para. 315; Murphy Exploration and Production Co. Int'l
v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Decision on Jurisdiction, 15 December 2010, para .151.

"' Wintershall v. Argentina, Award, 8 December 2008, para. 114. The same was held by the tribunal in
Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, Award, 21 June 2011, paras 79-94.

" Dr. Daniel Hugo Martins’ Expert Report attached to the Reply, para. 18.

14

41. Under Law 16,110, a claimant must express with precision that its claims are
based on the norms established under a BIT, identifying the BIT claims with
particularity. Once the Uruguayan court has rendered its decision, no domestic
appeal is available, any secondary recourse being to international arbitration. The
Law establishes a series of expedited deadlines that are shorter than those
applicable in conventional domestic proceedings so as to facilitate the rendering
of a judgment within the 18-month period provided by a number of Uruguay’s

BITs, including the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT.

42. The Claimants nowhere suggest that they invoked Law 16,110. They rather
chose not to submit this BIT dispute to the Uruguayan courts by pursuing
ordinary actions against Uruguay’s tobacco regulations in the TCA, raising
purely municipal law disputes alleging breaches of Uruguayan administrative
and constitutional norms, arguing that the challenged regulations should be

annulled on those grounds.

43. Disputes arising under Uruguayan domestic law and under the BIT are different,
however; they cannot be conflated. The alleged BIT violations were mentioned
by the Claimants only to indicate that they reserved the right to present that
dispute later, in a different forum. However, under Article 10 of the BIT the
same BIT dispute, involving the same BIT issues, will be presented before both
the domestic court and the arbitral tribunal. Article 9(8) of the BIT confirms that
the arbitral tribunal may be called upon only to rule on the same dispute

submitted to the domestic court.

44. The critical distinction between treaty and non-treaty claims is well established
in investor-State jurisprudence. As stated by the Annulment Committee in
Vivendi v. Argentina, “a treaty cause of action is not the same as a contractual
cause of action, it requires a clear showing of conduct which is in the

circumstances contrary to the relevant treaty standard”.'* There can be no
opportunity to rule upon the international obligations guaranteed in the BIT

before disputes concerning the scope of those obligations are submitted to

8 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, I\CSID Decision on Annulment,
3 July 2001, para. 113.
15

arbitration if the domestic courts are never presented with the international
claims in the first place. That this was the intent of Article 10 is confirmed by
the travaux préparatoires of the BIT'* in view of Uruguay’s insistence on the
preference for local courts to rule on its international legal obligations in the first

instance.

45. The Claimants’ contention that the requirement of Article 10 is a matter of
admissibility which can be satisfied after arbitration has begun, even if accepted
(which is not), fails since their case would still be at least 18 months short of
becoming admissible. As held by another tribunal, “At the time of commencing
dispute resolution under the treaty, the investor can only deny or accept the offer
to arbitrate but cannot vary its terms”.'° There is no ambiguity in the mandatory
character of the prior submission of the dispute to the decision of the competent
court of the host State. It is not simply a question of timing, but it is instead a
critical substantive requirement that is a key condition going to the heart of the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

46. Jurisdiction must exist at the moment of instituting legal proceedings. The
Claimants suggest that it is enough to create jurisdiction that the 18-month
period has since run even if such period has not ended when the arbitration
began. The ICJ has allegedly applied this rule “with some flexibility”, as
asserted by the Claimants’ expert, Professor Schreuer, citing three cases from the
ICJ’s jurisprudence. Such cases are of little consequence since, in its judgment
on jurisdiction in the Georgia v. Russia case'*, the Court denied jurisdiction
because of Georgia’s failure to meet a jurisdictional pre-condition before
initiating litigation. The failure in this case to satisfy the requirement of prior
recourse to local courts deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction even if the 18-

month clock could now be deemed to have expired.

47. It is the Claimants’ contention that the MFN clause in Article 3(2) of the BIT

allows them to dispense with the Article 10(2) requirements by applying BITs

4 Supra, para. 34.
'S ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL Award on Jurisdiction, 10
February 2012, para. 272.
'° Georgia v. Russia, 1CJ Judgment, 1 April 2011, para. 130.
16

that contain more favourable dispute resolution clauses. They cite two other
BITs that do not require prior resort to domestic courts for 18 months before

instituting international arbitration, Uruguay’s BITs with Canada and Australia.

48. Article 3(2) (referred to by the Respondent, with emphasis added by it) provides:

Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment within its
territory of the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party. This
treatment shall not be less favourable than that granted by each Contracting
Party to investments made within its territory by its own investors, or than that
granted by each Contracting Party to the investments made within its territory
by investors of the most favoured nation, if the latter treatment is more
favourable.

The ordinary meaning of this language confirms that this clause is confined to
fair and equitable treatment and does not allow the Claimants to escape the

jurisdictional requirements of Article 10(2).

49. As explained by the ILC Commentary on the Draft Articles on Most-Favoured
Nation Clauses, pursuant to the eiusdem generis rule “the clause can only
operate in regard to the subject matter which the two States had in mind when
they inserted the clause in their treaty” and it “can attract the rights conferred by
other treaties (or unilateral acts) only in regard to the same matter or class of
matters”.'’ The principle of contemporaneity proves that Article 3(2) does not
apply to dispute settlement. When the BIT was concluded nearly 25 years ago,
the Contracting Parties could not have reasonably envisaged that it might apply
to dispute settlement. The BIT was signed 12 years before the Maffezini tribunal
for the very first time applied an MFN clause to establish jurisdiction where it

did not otherwise exist.'*

50. In stark contrast to the wording of broad MEN clauses in other BITs, Article 3(2)

limits the scope of the MEN clause to fair and equitable treatment. Other treaties

219

accord MFN treatment to “all matters subject to the agreement’”"’ or to matters

20

that are specifically mentioned.” These differences demonstrate that the drafters

'T Memorial, para. 69.
'S Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000, 5 ICSID
Reports, para.396.
'® Argentina-Spain BIT dated 3 October 1991, Article IV.2. See Maffezini v. Spain, cit., para. 60.
?° Argentina-Germany BIT dated 4 September 1991, Article 3.
17

51.

52.

53.

of treaties know how to provide for broad or narrow application of MFN

treatment as fits the circumstances.

Investment arbitration tribunals have held that an MEFN clause cannot
incorporate by reference dispute settlement provisions unless the clause clearly
and unambiguously indicates that the contracting parties intended this effect.”
The MEN clause of the Uruguay-Switzerland BIT does not “clearly and
unambiguously” indicate that it should be interpreted to replace one means of
settlement with another.” Unlike the MEN clause in other cases, the MFN clause
of the BIT in the present case does not apply to “all matters governed by the

treaty” so that it cannot be extended to dispute resolution.”

Differential treatment regarding dispute resolution may not necessarily equal
less favourable treatment. Whether certain provisions are more or less
favourable cannot depend on the subjective perception of the individual investor
but rather on an objective determination based on a comparison of the provisions
of the two treaties “as a whole and not part-by-part”.** A comparison with the
BITs with Australia and Canada shows that the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT is
more favourable as to the dispute settlement clause since it gives the Claimants

“two bites at the apple”, not just one.**

As the tribunal in Renta 4 v. The Russian Federation held, “the attribution to
Subparagraph 3 of sophisticated implications simply cannot dislodge the
qualifying adjectives “fair and equitable” in Subparagraph | [and] even less can
it undermine the unambiguous reference in Subparagraph 2 to “treatment
referred to in paragraph 1 above”.*° The same applies to the Claimants’ reference
to Article 3(3)-(4) of the BIT and the implications they seek to draw therefrom.

The importance of the “expressio unius” principle is overstated by the

2! Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, para. 223;
Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. The Russian Federation, Award, 21 April 2006, para. 181;
Wintershall v. Argentina, cit., para. 17;  Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004, paras 118-119; Telenor Mobile
Communications A.S. v. The Republic of Hungary, Award, 13 September 2006, paras 89-95.

» Wintershall v. Argentina, cit., para. 167.

3 Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, cit., para. 103.
* ICS v. Argentina, cit., para. 320.

°5 Thid., paras 323-324.
?6 Renta 4, S.V.S.A. v. The Russian Federation, Award on Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009, para. 117.

18

Claimants. As shown by Articles 5(2) and 7 of the BIT, when the Contracting

Parties deemed it appropriate to grant MFN treatment, they did so explicitly.

54. As noted by another tribunal, the content of the substantive standard of “fair and
equitable treatment” as applied in international law does not encompass the
procedural issues of access to international arbitration. Even if such access may
be more favourable to investors than lack of access, “this does not mean that

failure to give access to such a tribunal is unfair or inequitable”.”’

x

Arguments of the Claimants

55. According to the Claimants, Uruguay’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
are premised on the incorrect assumption that the prerequisites for arbitration set
forth in Article 10 of the BIT have not been satisfied. On the contrary, with
respect to each of the measures that gave rise to the dispute, the Claimants
sought to reach an amicable resolution with the Government for at least six
months and have litigated their dispute in local courts for at least 18 months. The
fact that some procedural steps were not taken prior to the registration of the

RFA does not deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction.

56. The term “appeal” in Article 10(2) does not imply that the Claimants may only
resort to arbitration to appeal an adverse domestic court decision. This would be
contrary to the plain meaning of that provision which permits the Claimants to
submit their dispute to arbitration if no decision has been rendered in domestic
courts within 18 months. In the context, “to appeal” means “to petition, to resort

to”. The above interpretation is clear from the English text, and even clearer in
the Spanish version of the BIT, which states “[s]i dentro de un plazo de 18
(dieciocho) meses . . . no se dictara sentencia, el inversor involucrado podrda
recurrir a un Tribunal Arbitral.” The verb “recurrir’ confirms that the BIT
drafters did not mean “appeal” in the sense of bringing a judgment to a higher
authority for review. In the context, “recurrir’ means, as the English “appeal”,

“to petition, to resort to.”

27 Thid., para. 154.
19

57. Regarding Ordinance 514, the six-month consultation period began on 18
September 2008 with the filing of administrative opposition and expired on 18
March 2009, while the 18-month litigation period began on 9 June 2009 when an
annulment action was filed before the TCA and expired on 9 December 2010, no

decision having been issued by the TCA during that time.

58. On behalf of the Claimants, Abal sent letters to the MPH on 23 and 24
September and on 26 December 2008 and on 3 February 2009, objecting to
Ordinance 514. The filing of an administrative opposition on 18 September 2008
did not constitute a submission to a “competent court” within the meaning of
Article 10 but merely the continuation of the effort to reach an amicable
settlement. In a supplemental submission with the MPH of 7 November 2008
Abal gave express notice that Ordinance 514 violated the Claimants’ rights

under the BIT.

59. The six-month consultation period ended on 18 March 2009, six months after the
filing of the administrative opposition, or at the latest on 7 May 2009, six

months after the filing of the supplemental submission.

60. The Claimants waited until 9 June 2009 to submit their dispute to the TCA
seeking annulment of Ordinance 514 based on the “single presentation”
requirement being a new restriction of Law 18.256 and Decree 284 and a
violation of the Claimants’ rights under the BIT. The 18-month litigation period
before the local courts ended on 9 December 2010. The TCA issued a decision
on 14 June 2011, i.e. only 24 months after domestic litigation had been initiated

and six months after expiry of the 18-month period.*

6l. The TCA’s decision of 14 June 2011 rejected Abal’s annulment request relying
on arguments and evidence presented in the different proceedings initiated by
British American Tobacco (“BAT”). Requested for a clarification, the TCA
declared on 29 September 2011 that “the so-called contradictions are not
important nor do they justify the revision of the decision”. Since the facts and
arguments presented by BAT are vastly different from those presented by Abal

*8 The TCA Decision 509 on Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 514, 14 June 2011(C-053).
20

and since TCA’s decision is final and unappealable, the Claimants have no
recourse against that decision. Even if the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have
not complied with the BIT’s procedural requirements, the Claimants should be
permitted to raise a denial of justice claim in this arbitration, as to which the

Tribunal has jurisdiction.

62. Regarding Decree 287, the six-month consultation began on 5 June 2009, even
before the issuance of the Decree on 25 June 2009, with a letter sent by Abal on
behalf of the Philip Morris group of companies to the MPH, objecting to the new
requirement that the size of health warnings had to increase from 50% of the
surface area of tobacco package to 90%. The letter indicated that this was in

breach of the Claimants’ rights under the BIT.

63. The Government ignored the objections and, without consultation, issued Decree
287 on 25 June 2009, increasing to 80% the surface area of the health warning.
Abal filed an administrative opposition to the Decree on 16 July 2009 and a
supplemental brief on 6 November 2009. The six months expired on 5 December
2009, over two months before the RFA was filed. The 150-day period for the
MPH to address the Claimants’ opposition expired on 13 December 2009,

without any response.

64. The Claimants waited until 22 March 2010 to initiate domestic litigation by
filing an action before the TCA seeking annulment of Decree 287, asserting
rights on behalf of the Philip Morris group of companies under the BIT. The 18-
month litigation period expired on 22 September 2011, but the decision was not
issued by the TCA until 28 August 2012”, i.e. eleven months later. The RFA
had been filed on 19 February 2010 and registered on 26 March 2010.

65. Ordinance 466 continued the requirements of Ordinance 514 and Decree 287.
The consultation and litigation steps undertaken by the Claimants with respect to
the latter therefore fulfilled the procedural requirements for the Claimants’
challenge of Ordinance 466. In any event, the six-month consultation period

began on 11 September 2009, when the Claimants filed an administrative

* The TCA Decision 512 on Abal’s Request for Annulment of Decree 287, dated 28 August 2012 (C-116).
21

66.

67.

68.

opposition to Ordinance 466, and it expired on 11 March 2010. The 18-month
litigation period began on 20 April 2010 when an annulment action was filed
before the TCA and expired on 20 October 2011. The decision was issued by the

TCA on 22 November 2011, i.e. one month later.*°

The Respondent argues that even if Abal has met certain of the requirements of
Article 10, the other Claimants have not. The Respondent overlooks the fact that
Abal was wholly owned by FTR and now is wholly owned by Philip Morris
Brands and that the brands Abal sells in Uruguay are owned or licensed by Abal
or PMP. Any dispute involving Abal and its products necessarily involves the
other Claimants. Further, throughout the discussions with the Government and
the administrative and judicial proceedings, Abal made it clear that it was

speaking on behalf also of its parents and affiliates.

According to the Respondent, the fact that the Claimants were not in compliance
with the domestic litigation requirement as of the date of registration of the RFA
is fatal to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The Respondent misconstrues the steps in
Article 10 as preclusive jurisdictional prerequisites rather than procedural
requirements. A lengthy line of jurisprudence supports the Claimants’ position
that procedural steps, such as notification requirements, waiting periods and
domestic litigation requirements, are not conditions for the vesting of
jurisdiction. Such procedural steps pertain, not to jurisdiction, but to the
admissibility of the dispute, or to procedural conduct related to the claim.”
Given that all procedural prerequisites have been met, dismissal of the claims
would serve no purpose as the Claimants could resubmit the dispute to

arbitration.

In the cases Uruguay cites in support of its position, the claimants never made
any attempt to comply with negotiation or domestic litigation requirements. In

contrast, in this case, the Claimants have complied with the BIT requirements as

°° The TCA Decision 970 on Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 466, dated 22 November 2011 (C-114).
5! In the Counter-memorial the Claimants cite to the following cases (at para. 86):

Hochtief AG v. Argentina Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 October 2011 (“Hochtief’), paras 90, 91 (CLA-
032); Telefonica S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 May
2006, (“Telefonica”), para. 93 (RL-77); TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Award, 19
December 2008 (“TSA”), para. 112 (CLA-064).

22

69.

70.

71.

to all steps, the passage of time having rendered moot the fact that the RFA was
registered before the end of the 18-month domestic litigation period. Uruguay
has not contested that there is jurisdiction ratione materiae, ratione personae
and ratione temporis. As explained by Professor Schreuer in his legal opinion,
“requirements additional to those of Article 25 [of the ICSID Convention],
contained in an instrument of consent would generally be related to

admissibility”.

Most decisions have concluded that the six-month consultation period is not a
jurisdictional requirement and that in any case it can be rendered moot or
dispensed with if pursuit of consultation would be futile. Tribunals have
recognized that procedural prerequisites cannot be applied mechanically in
situations where dismissing the case would have no effect other than to delay the
proceedings and force the parties to incur additional costs.” Declining
jurisdiction in the present case would be an unduly formalistic decision, at odds

with the spirit and rationale of the dispute settlement provisions of the BIT.

According to the Respondent, the Claimants were required to have litigated their
BIT claims before the TCA, not claims under Uruguay’s domestic law. There is

no basis for the Respondent’s position.

The “dispute” that must be submitted to litigation before the competent domestic
court is defined by Article 10(1) as relating to an investment, not as a dispute
limited to claims of a violation of the BIT. Since either party may submit the
“dispute” to local courts, it would make no sense if the dispute were limited to
BIT claims, there being no basis for Uruguay to submit to local courts a BIT
claim against an investor. Furthermore, under Articles 9(8) and 10(2) the BIT
allows the investor to submit to arbitration “‘all aspects” of the dispute, which
must be understood to mean both domestic and international law claims related

to the same subject matter. There is no exhaustion requirement under Article 10,

* Tn the Counter-memorial the Claimants cite to the following cases (at para. 92):

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision of the Tribunal on Objection
to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003 (“SGS v. Pakistan”), para. 184 (CLA-059) ; Ethyl Corp. v. Government of
Canada, Award on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998 (“Ethyl”), para 75 (CLA-029) ; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve
Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, paras 99-100 (CLA-

23

72.

723.

74.

the investor having only to wait to see whether a judgment is passed by the local

court within 18 months before resorting to arbitration.

According to the Respondent, even if the TCA were the proper court for hearing
their claims, the Claimants should have invoked the procedures set forth in Law
16,110, which provides for the submission of the BIT claims to the TCA. The
Claimants note at the outset that neither the government defendant nor the TCA
at any point indicated that the Claimants should have invoked Law 16,110. As
stated by Professor Schreuer in his legal opinion, either Uruguay knew about the
special procedure under Law 16,110 but refrained from pointing it out to the
Claimants, in which case it did not act in good faith, or it was not aware of the
special procedure under Law 16,110, in which case it would be highly unusual to
hold a foreign investor to a procedural error of which the host State was not

aware.

Due to changes in Uruguay’s Constitution, critical parts of Law 16,110 are no
longer operational so that it can no longer allow a single and unappealable
decision for annulment and damages. This is contrary to the BIT’s requirement
that the investor seek a “judicial decision in a one and only instance”, which the
Respondent has interpreted to mean a proceeding that could simultaneously hear
damages and annulment claims. The Claimants complied with the requirements
of Article 10 by submitting their dispute to the TCA and seeking annulment.
They were not required to invoke the procedures of Law 16,110, the BIT saying

nothing about the applicable domestic procedures.

As stated by the Claimants’ expert Dr. Carlos E. Delpiazzo, the Uruguayan
constitutional reform of 1997 implicitly abrogated Law 16,110 by prohibiting
the simultaneous hearing of annulment and damage claims, which was the
objective of Law 16,110. According to the Respondent’s expert, Dr. Daniel
Hugo Martins, the constitutional change “does not imply the repeal of Law
16,110”. However, this position is directly contradicted by Dr. Daniel Hugo
Martins’ previous publications stating that actions for damages must now “be
filed before the jurisdiction as established by law”, which in his opinion was no
longer the TCA.
24

75. On the basis of the foregoing, it is clear that it is no longer possible to raise BIT
claims in a single, non-appealable court proceeding in Uruguay under Law
16,110 or otherwise. Consequently, if, as the Respondent contends, Law 16,110
was necessary in order to allow investors to submit their disputes to a court
capable of rendering a “judicial decision in a one and only instance”, then the
Respondent itself has undermined that process and rendered it a nullity. This dire
result, however, only occurs if one accepts the Respondent’s flawed argument

that Law 16,110 was necessary to implement the BIT.**

76. Requiring investors to use Law 16,110 would effectively preclude investor-State
arbitration, since the relevant procedure would have resulted in a decision by the
TCA within 90 days, therefore before the 18 months had elapsed. As the
legislative history indicates, Law 16,110 was designed for a category of BITs,
like the Germany-Uruguay BIT, differing from the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT.
For the first category of BITs, the use of the procedure in Law 16,110 would not
preclude access to international arbitration once the TCA has issued its decision.

This is not the case for the other category of BITs, like the instant BIT.

77. Should the Tribunal find that the Claimants have not satisfied the domestic
litigation requirement of the BIT, the MFN clause of Article 3(2) allows the
Claimants to rely on other BITs that do not contain similar restrictions. Uruguay
has in fact entered into other investment treaties that allow investors to submit a
dispute directly to arbitration, such as Uruguay’s BITs with Canada and

Australia.

78. As held by other investment treaty tribunals, the ability to initiate arbitration
without submitting the dispute to domestic courts is “more favourable” to
investors than not having such a right. Under Article 312 of the Uruguayan
Constitution, the TCA only has jurisdiction to annul an administrative act but not
to award monetary compensation, one of the remedies sought by the Claimants

in this case. To obtain this remedy would have required filing another action

* Rejoinder, para. 96.
25

79.

80.

81.

82.

before a different court, the multiple level of jurisdiction being clearly less

favorable to investors than arbitration.

According to the Respondent, having “two bites at the apple”, one before
domestic courts and one before an arbitral tribunal, is more favorable. Under the
present BIT, should the domestic court render a judgment within 18 months the
investor would be precluded from resorting to arbitration, so that there could not
be two bites at the apple but just one. This is less favorable than to allow the
investor to choose either domestic litigation or arbitration or both. Under the
Canadian BIT, the choice of when and whether to proceed to arbitration is
entirely that of the investor. Under the Australian BIT, the presence of a fork-in-
the-road provision allows investors to have direct access to arbitration if they so
choose. Both situations are more favorable than the one under the Switzerland-

Uruguay BIT.

As held by other tribunals, the “treatment” guaranteed by the MFN clause is not
limited to substantive treatment, as asserted by the Respondent, but extends to
procedures for the settlement of investment disputes. Dispute settlement is an
important part of the treatment a State gives to an investor and there is no textual
basis to exclude it from the scope of the MFN clause. Further, even if the
treatment so guaranteed were limited to “fair and equitable treatment”, as argued

by the Respondent, the MEN clause would still be to the Claimants’ advantage.

Whether “this treatment” refers to “treatment” or only to “fair and equitable
treatment” is unclear. Other tribunals have held that MEN provisions with a
similar construction are not limited to “fair and equitable treatment”. If the
Respondent’s view that this treatment refers to “fair and equitable treatment”
were correct, the exceptions to the MFN clause in Articles 3(3) and 3(4),
regarding respectively free trade agreements and double taxation or other

taxation agreements, would be nonsensical.

“Fair and equitable treatment” is an international law concept that is not
applicable to a State's treatment of its own investors. It is an obligation owed by

a State to “foreign” investors. Therefore, as Professor Schreuer opines, the only

26

83.

84.

85.

86.

interpretation that gives the second sentence of Article 3(2) a meaning is to
interpret the phrase “the treatment” as referring to treatment generally and not

fair and equitable treatment.

In the absence of language to the contrary, the BIT’s guarantee of “most favored
nation treatment” should be read to extend to more favorable dispute settlement
provisions. As held by other investment treaty tribunals, the dispute settlement
provisions are at the core of the BIT’s protections, the MFN clause making no
distinction between substantive and procedural rights. A long line of cases
consistently supports the position that MFN treatment extends to dispute

settlement.

In order to deny the applicability of the MFN clause to dispute settlement,
Uruguay invokes the ejusdem generis principle and argues that the clause does
not expressly state that it applies to “all matters” covered by the BIT. Neither of

these contentions has merit.

Under the ejusdem generis principle, an MEN clause “attracts matters belonging
to the same category of subject as that to which the clause itself relates”. This
was central to the reasoning of the Ambatielos and Maffezini decisions, which
were seminal. As noted in Maffezini, Ambatielos “accepted the extension of the
clause to questions concerning the administration of justice and found it
compatible with the ejusdem generis rule”. The subject matter of the third-party
treaty was found to be the same as that of the basic treaty, namely the protection
of foreign investments or the promotion of trade, both including access to

dispute settlement.

It is not necessary for the MEN provision to state explicitly that it covers dispute
settlement. The latter is not listed in Articles 3(3) and 3(4) of the BIT as one of
the limited exceptions to the MEN obligation and there is no basis to impose
new exceptions that the parties themselves did not include. The “all matters”
language is considered evidence of the parties’ intentions regarding the scope of

the MEN clause, but it is not a necessary prerequisite to a finding that the clause

27

87.

88.

89.

90.

extends to dispute settlement. As the tribunal held in Maffezini, where no such

express provision is included this does not end the inquiry.

As noted by other investment treaty tribunals, the exceptions to MFN treatment
for certain preferential agreements show that the parties considered which issues
should not benefit from the MFN protection. Since dispute settlement was not
included among such exceptions, under the rule “expressio unius est exclusio

alterius”, the MEN provision extends to dispute settlement.

The MEN clause’s extension to the 18-month domestic litigation requirement
does not raise the policy concerns identified by Maffezini and other tribunals.
Uruguay has not argued that any such concerns are applicable in this case, and
for good reasons. Article 10(2) of the BIT does not require a final and non-
appealable decision but only that no decision has been rendered after 18 months.
The Claimants are not trying to use the MFN clause to switch arbitration forums
or to introduce the type of radical jurisdictional change that Maffezini found
problematic and that led the Plama tribunal to reject extension of the MFN

clause to dispute settlement.

Even if the MFN clause were limited to “fair and equitable treatment”, it
nevertheless extends to dispute settlement, as held in Maffezini. The principles of
ejusdem generis and expressio unius would still apply in situations where the
MEN clause is linked to “fair and equitable treatment”. Fair and equitable
treatment includes investors’ procedural rights, such as access to international
arbitration for the protection of their rights. Uruguay’s grant of more favorable
international arbitration terms in other treaties is a “more favorable” form of fair

and equitable treatment.

Relying on the alleged principle of contemporaneity, the Respondent argues that,
because it could not have known at the time of negotiating the BIT with
Switzerland that tribunals would interpret the MFN clause to apply to dispute
settlement, such a clause cannot be interpreted in that manner. There is no basis
for applying the alleged principle which, under the VCLT, may only be a

supplementary means of interpretation when the ordinary meaning and context

28

criteria leave the meaning ambiguous, which is not the case here. Further,
Uruguay was fully aware that the MFN standard applied to dispute settlement at
the time it approved the BIT, as shown by contemporaneous statements by the
Uruguayan legislature indicating that Uruguay expected the MFN clause to

apply to dispute settlement.

3. Findings of the Tribunal

91. The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ submissions, which have been

summarized above. It now proceeds to discuss them in turn.

(i) The six-month settlement attempt requirement

92. In its written submissions, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have not
satisfied the mandatory preconditions to raise disputes under the BIT. The
reference made in this context to the first two paragraphs of Article 10 of the
BIT makes it clear that when referring to mandatory preconditions in the plural
the Respondent means both the six-month requirement to make efforts to

amicably settle the dispute and the 18-month domestic litigation requirement.**

93. Regarding the six-month requirement, the Respondent states that “Neither FTR
Holding S.A. nor its replacement Claimant, Philip Morris Brand Sarl, ever
attempted to raise any aspect of the present dispute with Uruguay, let alone
negotiate an amicable solution, prior to the filing of the RFA”.* Even if the
Respondent emphasizes primarily the Claimants’ alleged failure to comply with
the 18-month domestic litigation requirement, the 6-month requirement must

also be addressed.

94. Under Article 10(1) of the BIT, “Disputes with respect to investments... shall, as
far as possible, be settled amicably between the parties concerned”. The
Respondent has not argued that no dispute had yet arisen with the Claimants, but

only that the latter had failed to make efforts to amicably settle the same. The

* Memorial, para. 38.
* Tbid., fn. 60 (emphasis in the original text).
29

Tribunal notes in this regard that Article 10(1) applies to both Parties, not only to

the Claimants.

95. The Claimants have convincingly shown that they have complied with the six-

month requirement before these proceedings were instituted.**

No reply having
been received from the Respondent to the initial correspondence during the six-
month period, as well as thereafter on occasion of the administrative oppositions
filed against the various measures, the Claimants initiated litigation before the
local courts seeking the annulment of such measures. It is true that some letters
were sent and administrative oppositions filed by Abal alone. But the latter’s
actions were aimed at removing the effects of the measures to the extent they
limited the marketing of tobacco in Uruguay by all of the Claimants. Due to the
identity of positions and interests involved, Abal’s actions were to the benefit
also of the other Claimants. Documents in the evidentiary record show that Abal

acted in some cases expressly on behalf also of the other Claimants.”

96. Further, at the hearing, the Respondent’s counsel conceded that Uruguay had no
complaint regarding the Claimants’ satisfaction of the 6-month requirement. In
reply to the President’s question in this regard, Mr. Reichler stated: “Happily I
can give you a very short answer to your question, Mr. President; the answer is,

yes, they satisfied the six-month requirement”.**

97. In the light of the foregoing, the Respondent’s objection that the Claimants

failed to satisfy the six-month negotiation requirement is rejected.

(ii) The 18-month domestic litigation requirement
98. The Respondent also contends that the Claimants have failed to satisfy the 18-
month domestic litigation requirement of Article 10(2) on the following

grounds:

*© Supra, paras 57-59 as to Ordinance 514; paras 62-63 as to Decree 287; para. 65 as to Ordinance 466.
57 See the letter sent by Abal to the MPH on 5 June 2009 (C-018) and Grounds for the Administrative Appeal against
Ordinance 514 of 7 November 2008 (C-036).
** Transcript, Day One, page 78, lines 3-6.
30

a) The Claimants failed to litigate their treaty dispute in Uruguayan courts”,
b) Even if they had submitted the dispute to Uruguayan courts, the Claimants

were required to litigate for 18 months before initiating arbitration.””

99. According to the Respondent, jurisdiction is wanting on either of these grounds
or both of them.“' In opposition, the Claimants contend that they satisfied this
requirement by filing with the TCA a request for annulment of each of the three
measures enacted by the Respondent on which their claims are founded (the

“Requests for Annulment’).

1. The first ground of the First Objection.

100. The first ground cited by the Respondent to deny jurisdiction raises the question
whether the Claimants were required to litigate their “treaty” dispute in
Uruguayan courts to satisfy the 18-month requirement. To properly address this
question, resort must be had to the meaning of the term “dispute” under Article
10 of the BIT. In this regard, reference must be made to Article 10(1), which
provides that “Disputes with respect to investments within the meaning of this
Agreement between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably between the parties
concerned”. Account must also be taken of the other provisions of Article 10
referring to “disputes”. The Parties disagree as to the meaning to be ascribed to

“disputes with respect to investments”.

101. The Respondent claims that it is not sufficient to submit to the Uruguayan courts

a dispute concerning violations of Uruguayan constitutional or administrative
law in order to “fulfill the conditions of Article 10”.” In its view, what must be
submitted to the Uruguayan courts is “the actual dispute arising under the
BIT”.* According to the Respondent, this interpretation is confirmed by the
sequence of steps established by the various provisions of Article 10 through
which it claims that a dispute must proceed before arriving to international
arbitration.

* Reply, para. 75.

+ Thid., para. 76.

“' Transcript, Day One, page 14, lines 10-25.

” Transcript, Day One, page 15, lines 22-24.
4 Reply, para. 27

 

31

102. The Respondent argues that, for these provisions to make sense, the dispute to be
submitted to international arbitration must be the same dispute that has been
presented to Uruguayan courts, not a different dispute involving different
issues.“ This interpretation finds support in the term “appeal” in Article 10(2),

which would suggest that one and the same dispute will be heard in the first

instance by the domestic courts and then by the arbitral tribunal.*°

103. According to the Claimants, the ordinary meaning and the context of the phrase
“disputes with respect to investments within the meaning of this Agreement”
indicate that it refers to the subject matter at issue, not to particular legal claims,
much less to claims for breach of the BIT. The Claimants refer in this regard, on
the one hand, to other BITs signed by Uruguay that expressly define “disputes”
to mean disputes arising out of breach of the BIT or international law“°, and, on
the other hand, to arbitral decisions and awards holding that the general term
“disputes with respect to investments” may well cover both domestic and treaty

claims pertaining to the subject matter at issue.*”

104. Clearly, by alleging violation of Uruguayan municipal law before the local
courts, the Claimants would not have submitted a dispute over breach of the BIT
to the Uruguayan courts. In addition to submitting Uruguayan municipal law
claims, however, the Claimants’ Requests for Annulment filed with the TCA

included an “Assertion and Reservation of Rights”.** In each case, the Claimants

+ Thid., para. 30
45 Thid., para. 31.
4© Rejoinder, para. 36, citing Uruguay BITs with Canada, Chile, the United States and Venezuela.
47 Rejoinder, para. 39, citing CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, paras 109-11: Lucchetti
v. Peru, Award, 7 February 2005, para. 50; ATA Construction v. Jordan, Award, 10 May 2010, paras 99-103;
SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, paras 130-135.
48 Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 514 before the TCA dated 9 June 2009 (C-041), at Chapter VII (“The
‘single presentation’ clause of the Ordinance also constitutes a breach of the rights of Abal and its parent companies,
and other companies belonging to the Philip Morris group of companies, under applicable bilateral investment treaties,
including, without limitation, the Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Uruguay on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, approved by law No. 16.176, dated 30 March 1991, ... Without
prejudice to the above, and in order to preserve all their right, Abal on its own behalf and on behalf of its parent
companies and other companies belonging to the Philip Morris group of companies hereby explicitly asserts its own and
their rights under the treaties mentioned above.”); Abal’s Request for Annulment of Decree 287 before the TCA dated
22 March 2010 (C-049) , at Chapter V (“The 80-80 requirement also constitutes a breach of the rights of ABAL and its
parent companies, and other companies belonging to the Philip Morris group of companies, under applicable bilateral
investment treaties, including, without limitation, the Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of
Uruguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, approved by law No. 16.176, dated 30 March
1991,. ... Without prejudice to the above, and in order to preserve all their rights, ABAL on its own behalf and on

32

 

 

included both an “assertion” of their BIT rights and a reservation of rights to
pursue those claims in international arbitration. Moreover, in at least one case,
the TCA also ruled expressly on such claims under the BIT (apparently rejecting
them). Regardless how the TCA’s conclusions regarding these claims are
characterized, the Tribunal considers that the TCA was made fully aware of the
Claimants’ BIT claims in the context of Article 10(2)’s domestic litigation

requirement.

105. In any event, even if the Claimants had not submitted their claims under the BIT
to the Uruguayan courts, the Tribunal concludes that they had no obligation to
do so under the BIT. The question is whether for purposes of the domestic
litigation requirement under Article 10(2), the dispute brought before the
Uruguayan courts must be the same as the dispute brought in arbitration. The

Tribunal does not believe so.

106. The Respondent’s argument that the sequence of steps under Article 10 for a
dispute to arrive at international arbitration implies that the dispute must
necessarily be the same in every step is certainly worthy of consideration. In the
Tribunal’s view, however, this argument, and more generally the Respondent’s
position regarding the meaning of “disputes with respect to investments” under
Article 10, must yield to the ordinary meaning to be given to this phrase in its
context and in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT, in accordance with

Article 31 of the VCLT.”

 

behalf of its parent companies and other companies belonging to the Philip Morris group of companies hereby explicitly
asserts its own and their rights under the treaties mentioned above.”); Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 466
before the TCA dated 20 April 2010 (C-050) , at Chapter VI (“The challenged Pictogram created and imposed by the
Ordinance also constitutes a breach of the rights of ABAL and its parent companies, and other companies belonging to
the Philip Morris group of companies, under applicable bilateral investment treaties, including, without limitation, the
Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Uruguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection
of Investments, approved by law No. 16.176, dated 30 March 1991,. Without prejudice to the above, and in order to
preserve all their right, ABAL on its own behalf and on behalf of its parent companies and other companies belonging
to the Philip Morris group of companies hereby explicitly asserts its own and their rights under the treaties mentioned
above.”).

* The TCA Decision 512 on Abal’s Request for Annulment of Decree 287, dated 28 August 2012, under VIII (C-116).
°° VCLT, Article 31 (General rule of interpretation):

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of

the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection with the
conclusion of the treaty;

 

 

33

107. In the Tribunal’s view, the ordinary meaning of the phrase “disputes with respect
to investments” is broad and includes any kind of disputes where the subject
matter is an “investment” as this term is defined by the BIT. The words “within
the meaning of this Agreement”, appearing after the phrase in question in Article
10(1), clearly refer in the context to “investments” as defined by Article 1(2) of
the BIT, not to “disputes”. The Respondent acknowledges that this phrase, as
used in Article 10 of the BIT, is “broader than comparable clauses in other BITs
and that its reach extends beyond treaty-based disputes”, to include investment

contract disputes not involving treaty breach, but not domestic law claims.*!

108. Disputes concerning alleged breaches of the BIT and disputes regarding
domestic law claims may well both fall within the scope of the reference in
Article 10(1) to “Disputes with respect to investments”. A line of investment
treaty decisions draws a distinction between the broad meaning of the wording
in other bilateral investment treaties that are similar to Article 10 in the BIT,”
and the narrower meaning of the wording in still other treaties, including treaties
concluded by Uruguay, referring to “disputes relating to a claim for breach of
the treaty” or to “an investment dispute” (defined as including also an alleged

breach of rights conferred by the treaty) or similar wording.**

 

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and
accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.
3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of
its provision:
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties
regarding its interpretation;
(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.
4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.
*! Transcript, Day One, page 11, lines 8-15; 19-25; page 12, lines 1-3.
*? Ex multis: Salini v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, para. 61, referring to Article 8 of the
Italy-Morocco BIT mentioning “tous les différends ou divergences... concernant un investissement”; Vivendi v.
Argentina, Decision on Annulment, cit., para. 55, referring to Article 8 of the BIT between France and Argentina
mentioning “any dispute relating to investments made under this Agreement”; SGS v. Philippines, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, para. 15, referring to Article VIII(2) of the BIT between Switzerland and The
Philippines mentioning “disputes with respect to investments”; Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and
Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A and the Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 December 2012, para.
112, referring to Article X (1) of the Argentine-Spain BIT ing “disputes.. in with i
within the meaning of this Agreement”. An exception to this uniform interpretation is in the SGS v. Pakistan
Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, holding that the phrase “disputes with respect to investments” in
Article 9 of the Switzerland-Pakistan BIT was “merely descriptive” and that “pure contractual claims were not
covered by this clause” (para. 161).
* Many BITs concluded by Uruguay following the conclusion of the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT refer in the same
context to disputes relating to claims for breach of the treaty:

34

 

 

109. The reference in the last series of treaties to claims based on the alleged breaches
of the treaty is clearly different from the wording of Article 10(1) of the
Switzerland-Uruguay BIT and of provisions of other treaties concluded by
Uruguay. As the tribunal said in SGS v. Philippines, “if the State Parties to the
BIT had wanted to limit investor-State arbitration to claims concerning breaches
of the substantive standards contained in the BIT, they would have said so
expressly, using similar language”. The Tribunal shares the view expressed by
other tribunals that the definition of disputes as “relating to investments within
the meaning of this Agreement”, or “relating to investments made under this

Agreement”,

, or “in connection with investments within the meaning of this
Agreement””, “does not use a narrower formulation, requiring that the investor’s
claim allege a breach of the BIT itself...; it is sufficient that the dispute relate to

an investment made under the BIT”*’.

110. The interpretation of the meaning of “disputes with respect to investments”
under Article 10 is confirmed by the other interpretative rule provided by Article
31 VCLT, namely, the context. As noted by the ad hoc committee in Vivendi v.
Argentina,* in the same context, a broad formulation of “dispute” like that in
Article 10(1) of the BIT may be contrasted with the State-to-State dispute
settlement provision of Article 9(1) of the BIT which refers to “disputes...
regarding the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement”.
The definition of “disputes” in the latter case is deliberately narrow, in contrast

to the expansive language of Article 10(2), clearly indicating in the Tribunal’s

 

Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the United States of America concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment, 14 November 1991, entered into force on 20 October 1994;
Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on 29 October 1997, entered into force on 2 June 1999, Art.
XII; Acuerdo entre la Reptiblica de Chile y la Reptiblica Oriental del Uruguay Para la Promocién y Proteccién
Reciproca de las Inversiones, signed on 26 October 1995, entered into force on 22 April 1999, Art. 8; Treaty
between the United States of America and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed on 4 November 2005, entered into force on | November 2006, Art.
24; Acuerdo entre el Gobierno de la Republica Oriental del Uruguay y el Gobierno de la Reptiblica de Venezuela
para la Promocién y la Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones, signed on 20 May 1997, entered into force on 18
January 2002, Art. 9.
* Cit., supra, fn. 52, para. 138.
*5 As in the France-Argentina BIT in the Vivendi v. Argentina case (supra, fn. 52).
*° As in the Argentina-Spain BIT on which the Teinver v. Argentina case was based (ibidem).
57 Vivendi v. Argentina, cit., para 55. This holding is endorsed by the tribunal in Teinver v. Argentina, cit., para.
112.
** Cit., para. 55.

35

view that an investor could satisfy Article 10(2) by submitting a domestic law
claim to the Uruguayan courts, provided that it was based on substantially
similar facts and subject matter as the BIT claim subsequently submitted by the

investor to arbitration.

111. Articles 9(8) and 10(2) of the BIT support the conclusion that the term
“disputes” under Article 10(1) embraces either domestic law claims or BIT
claims. Both provisions contemplate that, should the dispute be submitted to
arbitration following the domestic court litigation, the arbitral tribunal shall
decide on the dispute “in all its aspects”. Article 10(2) provides that failing a
decision by the domestic court within 18 months, the investor may “appeal to an
arbitral tribunal which decides on the dispute in all its aspects”. As already
noted, “appeal” in the context means “resort to”, without necessarily implying,
as contended by the Respondent, that the dispute must be the same. The words
“in all its aspects” must have a meaning according to the principle that all treaty
provision must have an “effet utile”. Such meaning cannot but be that once the
dispute reaches the level of an arbitral tribunal, be it a State-to-State dispute or
the investor-State dispute, “in all its aspects” regarding the latter dispute must
refer to issues of both domestic and international law. Should Article 10(2)
apply, this contextual aspect confirms that, following consideration of domestic
law claims by the Uruguayan courts, the investor-State tribunal shall be

competent to deal also with international law claims.”

112. The Tribunal notes that the remedy sought by the Claimants from the TCA was
appropriate since had the annulment of the three measures issued by the
Respondent been granted that would have answered the Claimants’ claims,

under both domestic and international law, including the BIT.

113. In the light of all the foregoing the Tribunal concludes that by submitting their
domestic law claims through the Requests for Annulment filed with the TCA to
the Uruguayan courts the Claimants satisfied the domestic litigation requirement
under Article 10(2) of the BIT. The term “disputes”, as used in Article 10(2), is

to be interpreted broadly as concerning the subject matter and facts at issue and

* As opined by Professor Schreuer, Second Legal Opinion, para. 21.
36

© Tn thi

 

114.

115.

116.

not as limited to particular legal claims, including specifically BIT claims. The
dispute before domestic courts under Article 10(2) does not need to have the
same legal basis or cause of action as the dispute brought in the subsequent
arbitration, provided that both disputes involve substantially similar facts and

relate to investments as this term is defined by the BIT.

Finally, even if the Requests for Annulment were filed by Abal, the latter clearly
acted in the interest also of the other Claimants considering that it is wholly-
owned by Philip Morris Brands and the brands Abal sells in Uruguay are sub-

licensed from PMP.

(iii) Applicability of Law 16,110.

The Respondent’s first ground for objecting to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
involves the further question whether the Claimants have satisfied the 18-month
requirement by addressing their domestic claims to the “competent courts” of
Uruguay. The Respondent has not disputed that the TCA is the competent court
for the annulment of administrative acts, this being the object of the Claimants’
Requests for Annulment.” The Respondent contends rather that the Claimants
should have followed the special procedure established by Law 16,110 of 7 May
1990", which they concededly did not do.™

The Tribunal notes at the outset that the reference to Law 16,110 was made by
the Respondent for the first time only in the Reply, i.e., more than two years
after the RFA was filed and eight months after the filing of the Memorial. At the
hearing, the Respondent argued that it waited until the Reply to invoke the
Claimants’ failure to comply with Law 16,110 due to the fact that in the RFA

“they relied exclusively on the MEN clause”.® This is hardly consistent with the

regard, the reference made by the Respondent to cases dealing with the effect of the fork-in-the-road
n jurisdiction depending whether the dispute before a domestic court is or not the same as the dispute in
arbitration is inapposite in this context.

Supra, para. 3.

© Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 514 before the TCA dated 9 June 2009 (C-041); Abal’s Request
for Annulment of Decree 287 before the TCA dated 22 March 2012 (C-049); Abal’s Request for Annulment of
dinance 466 before the TCA dated 20 April 2010 (C-050).

Uruguayan Law 16,110 of 7 May 1990 (RL-83).

“ Transcript, Day One, page 9, lines 5-17.

°5 Transcript, Day One, page 72, lines 19-23.

37

117.

118.

importance given by the Respondent to the application of Law 16,110 and of all

elements that were at its disposal to timely raise this issue.

Neither the TCA nor the Respondent called the Claimants’ attention to the
alleged need to apply the special procedure of Law 16,110 following the filing
by the Claimants of the Requests for Annulment of Ordinance 514, Decree 287
and Ordinance 466. This, despite the fact that the notification to the Respondent
of the RFA had made known the existence of BIT claims and that under each of
the Requests for Annulment the Claimants had reserved the right to bring and

pursue claims under various treaties, including the BIT.“

The Respondent was
therefore in a position immediately to react by calling the Claimants’ attention to

any need to comply with the procedure of Law 16,110.

Whether the Respondent itself overlooked the existence of the special law or
took the view that the law was inapplicable in the instant case, it is difficult for
the Tribunal to accept the critical remarks addressed to the Claimants in this
arbitration for having brought their claims before the TCA based on procedural
tules of general application rather than in accordance with the special procedure
of Law 16,110. If it were mandatory for the Claimants to seek relief under Law
16,110, the Respondent’s failure to so advise the Claimants would itself not
escape criticism and could, if necessary for a decision, provide the basis for a
finding against the Respondent. Moreover, in the Tribunal’s view, the
Respondent’s objection that the Claimants should have used the special
procedure under Law 16,110 would be belated in view of the timely filing of
jurisdictional objections required by Rule 41(1) of the Arbitration Rules.”
Nonetheless, the Tribunal, in view of the duty to satisfy itself that it has

jurisdiction to hear the case, notes the following.

% See “Assertion and Reservation of Rights” under the various Requests for Annulment (C-041, Chapter VII; C-049,
Chapter V; C-050, Chapter VI).

®7 Rule 41(1) provides: “Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre
or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A party shall file
the objection with the Secretary-General no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-
memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing of the rejoinder-unless the facts on which the
objection is based are unknown to the party at that time”.

®8 AIG v. Kazakhstan, Award, 7 October 2003, para. 9.2: “It [the “as early as possible” filing requirement] cannot be
read as coercive”.

38

119. The Claimants have alleged that Law 16,110 applies only to treaties having the
same characteristics as the Treaty on Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of
Investments signed by the Respondent with the Federal Republic of Germany on
4 May 1987 and approved by Article 1 of Law 16,110 (the “Germany-Uruguay
Treaty’). In the Tribunal’s view, this limited application of Law 16,110 is not
warranted in the light of Article 3 of Law 16,110 that unambiguously states that
all disputes arising under treaties ratified by Uruguay “shall be subject to the
procedure established in the following articles”. In the absence of any
exceptions, this statement cannot but refer also to the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT.
The procedure that had to be followed pursuant to Article 3 is then described by
Articles 4 and 9 of Law 16,110.

120. Article 4 states in pertinent part:

The procedure to be followed shall be that established below:
A) The Tribunales de Apelaciones en lo Civil (Courts of Civil Appeal) shall
have the competency to hear these proceedings

Article 9 states:

Annulment and reparatory actions of a contentious-administrative nature, which
are presented under the Treaties to which the present law refers, shall be subject
to the decision of the Tribunal de lo Contencioso Administrativo, following the
procedure provided for in the foregoing articles.

121. As explained by the Respondent’s legal expert, Dr. Martins, “All lawsuits
against the State must be filed with the Tribunales de Apelaciones en lo Civil,
except for “annulment and reparatory actions of a contentious-administrative
nature”, which take place before the TCA, pursuant to Article 9 of Law

16,110”.

122. The Claimants have not filed with the TCA a dispute arising under the
Switzerland-Uruguay BIT pursuant to the special procedure of Law 16,110. This
Law was also not applied by the TCA in the proceedings before it, even if, as
shown by certain parts of the TCA’s decisions regarding the Requests for
Annulment which refer to and rely upon the BIT, the court was made aware of

the existence of BIT claims by the Claimants and, as discussed above, in fact

° Dr. Daniel Hugo Martins’ Expert Report annexed to the Reply, para. 22.
39

rejected them.”

No reference was made by the TCA on that occasion to Law
16,110 regarding the procedure that should have been applied. Instead, the
Parties accepted that the TCA was the competent court: their debate has focused
rather on the question whether that court continued to be competent, as in the
past, not only for annulment claims but also for damages claims following the

constitutional reform of 1997.

123. The Claimants’ position is that, by submitting the dispute to the TCA under the
procedure of general application limited to the annulment of the three measures
enacted by the Respondent, they fulfilled the requirements of Article 10 and Ad
Article 9 and 10 of the Protocol to the BIT since, on the one hand, they were not
bound to submit a dispute by reference to the BIT and, on the other hand, the
TCA’s decisions are not appealable to any other authority. Thus, according to
the Claimants, by submitting the dispute to the TCA the condition of a decision

71

“in a one and only instance”’' was satisfied since this phrase does not

 

“necessarily mean annulment and damages combined”. The Respondent
contends in opposition that the Claimants should have submitted to the TCA the
dispute regarding both annulment and damages in accordance with Law 16,110,

since in this arbitration they are seeking both annulment and damages.

124. The question whether the TCA is competent to rule on damages claims, as well
as other claims for relief, following the Uruguayan constitutional reform of
1997, has lost some of its importance in view of the Tribunal’s decision that Law
16,110 is inapplicable to the Claimants’ filings with the TCA. However, since
this question may still be of interest in the frame of the TCA’s competence under
the procedure of general application and the unappealable character of its

decisions, it is briefly examined below.

125. Under the older version of Article 312 of the Uruguayan Constitution, actions

for damages could only be raised after actions for annulment, the TCA being the

” Notably, in its Decision of 28 August 2012 rejecting the Claimants’ Request for Annulment of Decree 287 (C-116),
the TCA has made reference to the plaintiff's allegation of the violation of the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT stating that
“the investments of the Swiss company are not affected” by the Decree and that “Regulating matters of Public Health is
outside of the rules on investment protection”. This passage of the TCA’s Decision was referred to by the Claimants at
the hearing: Transcript, Day One , p. 170, lines 11-22.

7! Transcript, Day One, page 176, lines 12-16.

” Transcript, Day One, page 169, lines 10-14.

40

only jurisdiction, separate from the Judicial Branch, for hearing lawsuits seeking
the annulment of final administrative acts issued by any State body. The new
version of Article 312, following the constitutional reform of 1997, provided for
the possibility of choosing between an annulment action and damages action,
establishing that in the case of opting for annulment, “if there is a judgment of
annulment an action for damages may later be filed with the corresponding

court”.

126. In his Expert Report, Dr. Martins, the Respondent’s legal expert, opines that the
provisions of Law 16,110 allowing the TCA to hear annulment and damages
claims simultaneously, are compatible with the new Constitution, because the
reference in Article 312 to “the jurisdiction provided by the law” is a reference
to the TCA.™ According to the Claimants, this position contradicts Dr. Martins’
previous publications, not mentioned in his c.v. submitted in this proceeding,
where he concluded: “However, Article 312 as amended says that actions for
damages may be filed in the jurisdiction stipulated by the law, and here the law
appears to grant jurisdiction to the Judicial Branch but could not grant to the
Tribunal de lo Contencioso Administrativo because, in my opinion, the [TCA]
has a closed jurisdiction; in other words, its jurisdiction is expressly established
in the text of the Constitution... it would appear that we can deduce that when
the text provides “shall be filed before the jurisdiction as established by the law”

the [TCA] is not included”.

127. According to Dr. Delpiazzo, the Claimants’ legal expert, the 1997 Uruguayan
constitutional reform meant that “art. 312 provides for an option between
damages and annulment which excludes the possibility of bringing both actions
simultaneously. Accordingly, any provision establishing the possibility of
bringing both proceedings simultaneously would contradict the Constitution”.”
According to Dr. Delpiazzo, “This means that said provision [of Law No.
16,110] on the one hand grants the TCA jurisdiction in compensatory reparation

matters and on the other, it allows for the consolidation of the annulment and

 

Expert Report, paras 14-15.
™ Dr. Martins’ Expert Report, para. 22.

* Dr, Daniel Hugo Martins, Algunos Aspectos del reparatorio patrimonial, in Reflexiones sobre la Reforma
Constitucional del 1996, 1998, para. 130,134 (CLA-097).

7 Dr. Delpiazzo’s Expert Opinion, para. 3.2.1 (CWS-03).

41

damages claims in a single proceeding, which is manifestly inconsistent with
supervening constitutional reform’.” According to other Uruguayan legal
scholars, the constitutional reform eliminated the possibility of expanding the
TCA’s jurisdiction to damages claims simply through a law, such as Law

16,110.

128. Dr. Delpiazzo’s opinion coincides with the opinion that Dr. Martins had
expressed in his doctrinal writing prior to this arbitration. Having to choose
between two diverging opinions by distinguished experts of Uruguayan law, the
Tribunal is inclined to give more weight to Dr. Delpiazzo’s opinion in light of
the weight of scholarly commentary and the wording of the revised version of
Article 312 of the Constitution. The new provision states that in case of
annulment by the TCA “an action for damages may later be filed with the
corresponding court”. The reference to a “later” filing of the damages action
“with the corresponding court” points rather to a separate proceeding before a
court other than the TCA. The two experts agreed at the hearing that annulment

and damages are two separate proceedings.”

129. The Tribunal does not need to pursue the matter further considering its previous
holding that the Claimants have satisfied the 18-month domestic litigation
requirement by filing with the TCA the Requests for Annulment”. In light of
these considerations, the Tribunal holds further that the TCA’s decisions satisfy
the requirement of “‘a judicial decision in a one and only instance”, as required
by Ad Articles 9 and 10 of the Protocol to the BIT, since such decisions are not

appealable before any other judicial authority in Uruguay.”

2. The second ground of the First Objection.

7 Tbidem, para. 3.3.1.
”8 Dr. Martins, replying to the President’s question: “Yes. First, there is an annulment decision with reservations for
repairs and subsequently the interested party can initiate an action for repairs” (Transcript, Day One, page 300, lines 4-
7). Dr. Delpiazzo: “If it [the TCA] can only annul or confirm, then it cannot issue a ruling calling for reparations to be
given... for a damage case to be heard that means it has to be heard in a different jurisdiction” (Transcript, Day One,
page 327, lines 6-11).
” Supra, para. 99.
* The decisions by the TCA are not subject to appeal... its rulings are not subject to review by any other Tribunal”
(Dr. Delpiazzo, Transcript, Day One, page 315, lines 4-9).

42

130.

13

1.

132.

13

13

8! Supra
© Supra
8 Supra
Supra

3.

4.

, para.
, para.
, para.
, para.

The other ground of the Respondent’s contention regarding the Claimants’
failure to satisfy the 18-month domestic litigation requirement rests on the fact
that the Claimants initiated this arbitration before the 18-month domestic
litigation period prescribed by Article 10(2) had expired. This is not disputed by

the Claimants.

The Parties agree that, in accordance with Rule 6 of the Institution Rules, this
proceeding was instituted on 26 March 2010.*' The Parties also agree that no
decisions by the Uruguayan courts intervened within the 18-month period

prescribed by Article 10(2) of the BIT.

The decision regarding the Request for Annulment of Ordinance 514 was
rendered by the TCA on 14 June 2011, i.e., 24 months after the RFA had been
filed on 9 June 2009.” The decision regarding the Request for Annulment of
Ordinance 466 was rendered by the TCA on 22 November 2011, i.e., nineteen
months after the Request for Annulment had been filed on 20 April 2010. The
decision regarding the Request for Annulment of Decree 287 was rendered by
the TCA on 28 August 2012, i.e., twenty-nine months after the RFA had been

filed on 22 March 2010.“ All these requests were rejected.

The Respondent contends that the 18-month litigation requirement is a
jurisdictional requirement and that failure to satisfy the same by the date this
arbitration was instituted deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear the case.
The Claimants assert in opposition that the requirement in question is merely
directory and procedural, not mandatory and jurisdictional, and that the Tribunal
is not deprived of jurisdiction if, as in the instant case, the requirement is not

satisfied on the date of institution of the arbitration, but is satisfied thereafter.
In support of their respective positions, each of the Parties relies on a line of

investment treaty decisions on jurisdiction that, on various grounds, have denied

or, respectively, asserted the jurisdictional character of the domestic litigation

43

requirement under the relevant treaty. The Tribunal has carefully considered the
jurisdictional decisions referred to by the Parties. It notes that many such
decisions are based either on language of the relevant treaty provision, or on
factual circumstances, that differ from those in the present case.* It notes further
that these decisions evidence the large extent to which this area of investment
treaty law remains in the process of developing a jurisprudence constante, due to
the variety of qualifications given to the requirement in question and the

resulting discrepancies in reasoning and conclusions.

135. As to the cases relied on by the Claimants, the following may be observed. In
Hochtief, the tribunal preferred not to make a decision regarding the character of
the 18-month domestic litigation requirement by proceeding to examine the
applicability of the MFN clause of the Germany-Argentina treaty.*’ In
Telefonica, the tribunal held that the 18-month domestic litigation requirement
“is best qualified as a temporary bar to the initiation of arbitration. The objection
is therefore technically an exception of inadmissibility...”, making reference in
this regard to Art. 44 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility.’ The Tribunal
notes that the relevant provision of the applicable Spain-Argentina treaty differs
in one significant respect from Article 10(2) of the BIT. Art. X.3(a) of the treaty
permits either party to defer the dispute to an international arbitral tribunal not
only “when there is no decision on the merits after eighteen months following
the beginning of the process under point 2 of this article” (“cuando no exista una
decision sobre el fondo después de transcurridos dieciocho meses contados a
partir de la iniciacion del proceso previsto por el apartado 2 de este articulo”)

but also when “the timely issuance of such decision exists but the dispute

85 For example, in Burlignton v. Ecuador, the claimant had never given notice of the dispute and therefore had not tried
to reach a settlement (Decision on Jurisdiction dated 2 June 2010, paras 312-318); in Murphy v. Ecuador the tribunal
found that it was not possible for a dispute to have arisen in the absence of a prior allegation of a treaty breach (Award
dated 15 December 2010, para.104).See on these two case, Schreuer, First Legal Opinion attached to the Memorial,
paras 31-32.
*7 Supra, para. 67.
88 Hochtief, para. 55: “The Tribunal does not need to decide the point because the Claimant has raised another
argument, based on the MFN provision in BIT Article 3. That argument was the main focus of the parties’
pleadings, and is a sufficient basis for the Tribunal’s decision”. Only later on, at para. 91, when examining the
applicability of the MFN clause, the tribunal appears to consider the requirement in question as part of “the
prescribed procedures for accessing that [the tribunal's] jurisdiction”.
* The LL.C. uses the term “Admissibility of claims” as title of Art. 44 of its Articles on State Responsibility.
According to this article: “The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if: (b) The claim is one to which the
tule of exhaustion of local remedies applies and any available and effective local remedy has not been
exhausted”.

44

136.

137.

between the parties continues” (“cuando existe tal decisién pero la controversia
subsiste entre las partes”). The reference to Art. 44 of the ILC Articles is
inapposite in that the issue in this case was not one of exhaustion of local

remedies.

In TSA, the tribunal indicated that Article 10(2) of the Netherlands-Argentina
treaty “has some resemblance with Article 26 of the ICSID Convention which
provides that a Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local
administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration
under the Convention”.®’ Having noted that when the ICSID proceedings were
initiated only three months out of the prescribed 18 month time period remained,
and that it would have been “most unlikely that a decision by a court giving TSA
satisfaction could have been obtained before the expiry of the eighteen
months”,” the tribunal concluded “that it could be highly formalistic now to
reject the case on the ground of the failure to observe the formalities of Article
10(3) of the BIT, since a rejection on such ground would in no way prevent TSA
from immediately instituting new ICSID proceedings on the same matter”.*! No
position was expressed by the tribunal regarding the characterization of the

domestic litigation requirement.

The Tribunal disagrees with the position expressed by some tribunals, and
echoed by the Claimants, which would disregard the domestic litigation
requirement is “nonsensical”,” since, allegedly, the domestic court would not be
in a position to render a decision within the time-limit prescribed by the
applicable treaty.’ The Tribunal also considers that a finding that domestic
litigation would be “futile” must be approached with care and circumspection.
Except where this conclusion is justified in the factual circumstances of the
particular case, the domestic litigation requirement may not be ignored or
dispensed with as futile in view of its paramount importance for the host State.

Its purpose is to offer the State an opportunity to redress alleged violations of the

* TSA, para. 110.

 Tbid., para. 111.

° Tbid., para. 112.

°° The latter is the expression used in Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, para. 224.

°} As shown by the time taken to issue its various decisions (supra, paras 57, 61 and 62), the TCA might have
rendered a decision on each of the Requests for Annulment within the 18-month period.

45

investor’s rights under the relevant treaty before the latter may pursue claims in

international arbitration.

138. Whether the domestic litigation requirement relates to jurisdiction or, rather, to
admissibility or procedure depends on the interpretation of Article 10 of the BIT,

based on the interpretative rules of the VCLT.“*

139. The sequence of steps to be followed by the Claimants under Articles 10(1) and
(2) before resorting to international arbitration is of importance for the purpose
of this analysis. Each such step is clearly indicated as part of a binding sequence,

as evidenced by the word “shall” before each step as follows:

(i) initially, a dispute “shall” as far as possible be settled amicably between
the parties;
(ii) “if? there is no settlement within six months after the dispute was

raised, the dispute “shall”, as a second step, be submitted to the competent
Uruguayan courts;

(iii) “if? within 18 months after institution of the proceeding before the
domestic courts “no judgment has been passed”, the investor may as a final step
resort to international arbitration.

Obviously, Article 10 is based on the premise of the binding character of steps
(i) and (ii) which the investor must comply with if it wishes (“may”) to resort to
step (iii). In the Tribunal’s view, this is true regardless how Article 10(2)’s terms

are characterized (i.e., as jurisdictional, admissibility or procedural).

140. The ordinary meaning of the terms used for the two steps (i) and (ii), which are
preliminary to the institution of international arbitration, is clearly indicative of
the binding character of each step in the sequence. That is apparent from the use
of the term “shall” which is unmistakably mandatory and from the obvious
intention of Switzerland and Uruguay that these procedures be complied with,

not ignored.

°* Supra, para. 106.
46

141. The position in international law generally is stated by the ICJ. In Georgia v.
Russia, the Court explained the legal character of procedural preconditions as
follows:

“To the extent that the procedural requirements of [a dispute settlement clause]

may be conditions, they must be conditions precedent to the seisin of the court

even when the term is not qualified by a temporal element”.”

The Court referred to the “fundamental principle of consent” * as stated in the
Armed Activities case in the following terms:

“[The Court’s] jurisdiction is based on the consent of the parties and is
confined to the extent accepted by them...When that consent is expressed in a
compromissory clause in an international agreement, any conditions to which
such consent is subject must be regarded as constituting the limits thereon. The
court accordingly considers that the examination of such conditions relates to
its jurisdiction and not to the admissibility of the application...”.””

142. In the present case, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to characterize
the 18-month domestic litigation requirement as pertaining to jurisdiction or to
admissibility. Even if that requirement were considered as pertaining to
admissibility, its compulsory character would be evident. This conclusion is
confirmed by the object and purpose of the requirement in question which is
aimed at offering the host State the opportunity to redress the violations of the
BIT alleged by the investor. The objective pursued by the Respondent when
negotiating the domestic litigation requirement was made clear during the
Uruguayan Parliamentary debate leading to the approval of the BIT.” The
Claimants do not dispute that this was the Respondent’s objective when

providing for this requirement in the BIT.

143. The Claimants’ actions before the TCA sought annulment of the administrative

measures that are claimed in this arbitration to be in breach of the BIT. Had the

 

°° Case Concerning A of the ic Ci on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Judgment on Preliminary Objections, | April 2011, para. 130
(RL-47).

°° Thid., para. 131.

°7 Case Concerning Armed Activities in the Territory of the Congo, cit. (supra, para. 33).

°* See the Respondent's statement in that regard at the hearing: “The record shows that Article 10 was proposed
by Uruguay which insisted that disputes between investors and contractors [sic] would continue to be submitted
to review by the competent national courts. As shown in slide 24, it was Uruguay’s firm position that disputes of
this type should be handled through a contentious administrative process before the competent judicial body”
(Transcript, Day One, page 52, lines 14-21.). See also the Report of the Senate Committee on International
Affairs (9 August 1990) in Minutes of Uruguayan Senate Sessions, No. 48, vol. 332 (4 September 1990), p. 42
(R-5).

 

 

47

TCA granted the Claimants’ requests within the prescribed 18-month period, or
even thereafter, by annulling the measures in question, the Claimants’ claims in
this arbitration would have lost their legal grounds. The object and purpose of
the domestic litigation requirement under Article 10(2) would thus have been

met.”

144. The domestic litigation requirement had not been satisfied at the time this
arbitration was instituted.'” The present case differs from the other cases where

jurisdiction has been denied due to the absence either of a dispute expressed in

1

legal terms!”' or of any actions by the investor to address its claims to the

domestic court before resorting to arbitration. !°? Nonetheless, even if the
requirement were regarded as jurisdictional, the Tribunal concludes that it could
be, and was, satisfied by actions occurring after the date the arbitration was
instituted. The Tribunal notes that the ICJ’s decisions show that the rule that

events subsequent to the institution of legal proceedings are to be disregarded for

103

jurisdictional purposes" has not prevented that Court from accepting

jurisdiction where requirements for jurisdiction that were not met at the time of
instituting the proceedings were met subsequently (at least where they occurred

before the date on which a decision on jurisdiction is to be taken).

145. As held by the ICJ,

“it is not apparent why the arguments based on the sound administration of
justice, which underpin the Mavrommatis case jurisprudence, cannot also have
a bearing in a case such as the present one. It would not be in the interest of
justice to oblige the Applicant, if it wishes to pursue its claims, to initiate fresh
proceedings. It is preferable except in special circumstances, to conclude that

the condition has, from that point on, been fully met”.

°° The tribunal in Teinver v. Argentina, referring to the domestic litigation and the arbitration as having the same
subject matter, states: “the goal of both suits is to make the Claimants... whole for the economic loss suffered as
a result of the nationalization” (cit., para. 132).

100 Supra, para. 131.

* As in the case of Burlington v. Ecuador, fn. 85.

As in the case of Wintershall v. Argentina, leading to the dismissal of the case for lack of jurisdiction.

Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium),
Judgment, 14 February 2002, ICJ Reports 2002, para. 26: “The Court recalls that, according to its settled
jurisprudence, its jurisdiction must be determined at the time that the act instituting proceedings was filed. Thus,
if the Court has jurisdiction on the date the case is referred to it, it continues to do so regardless of subsequent
events”.

"4 Case Concerning Application of the Cc ion on the Prevention and Punish of the Crime of Genocide
(Croatia v. Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 18 November 2008, ICJ Reports 2008, pp. 441-442, para.

102
103

 

48

In the Mavrommatis case the Permanent Court of International Justice had
found that jurisdictional requirements which were not satisfied at the time of
instituting legal proceedings could be met subsequently. The Court stated:

“Even if the grounds on which the institution of proceedings was based were
defective for the reason stated, this would not be an adequate reason for the
dismissal of the applicant’s suit. The Court, whose jurisdiction is international,
is not bound to attach to matters of form the same degree of importance which
they might possess in municipal law. Even, therefore, if the application were
premature because the Treaty of Lausanne had not yet been ratified, this

circumstance would now be covered by the subsequent deposit of the necessary

ratifications”. '°°

The Tribunal agrees with and accepts this reasoning. It also notes that the same
reasoning applies regardless how Article 10(2)’s domestic litigation
requirement is characterized. Whether regarded as jurisdictional, admissibility
or procedural, the considerations identified in the Mavrommatis case apply

fully.

146. During oral argument, in response to a question from the Tribunal, Counsel for
the Claimants accepted that had the TCA given a decision (either way) within
18 months, the proceedings before the Tribunal would have been (or, if they
had already started, would have become) inadmissible.'°° The Tribunal agrees.
A party commencing proceedings prior to the date set out in a domestic
litigation requirement of a BIT takes the risk of its claims failing if the
condition in question is satisfied within the time limit laid down. This gives
domestic courts the opportunity to adjudge the matter if they can do so in the
time available. But that did not happen here, where no judgment was rendered

by the TCA within the 18 month time period.

147. Nor does the Tribunal have to decide between the position taken by the
International Court in Croatia v Serbia and the position taken by Judge
Abraham, dissenting, in that case. In Croatia v Serbia, Judge Abraham
expressed the view that the Mavrommatis principle cannot be applied if it is no
longer possible to recommence the proceedings (because of supervening

changes in jurisdictional provisions, for example) at the time when the decision

'°5 Mavrommatis Palestine Concession case, Judgment No. 2, 30 August 1924, PCI, Series A, No. 2, p. 34.
'°6 Transcript, Day Two, p. 463, lines 14-19.
49

is taken.” In the present case, the BIT remains in force and it would be
perfectly possible for the Claimants to commence these same proceedings on
the day after a decision by this Tribunal is handed down, a situation where
dismissal of the Claimants’ claims would merely multiply costs and procedures

to no use.

148. Relying on the ICJ’s jurisprudence, the Tribunal comes to the same conclusion
as the tribunal in Teinver v. Argentina, namely that “the core objective of this
requirement, to give local courts the opportunity to consider the disputed
matters, has been met. To require Claimants to start over and re-file this
arbitration now that their 18 months have been met would be a waste of time
and resources”.'** That is true however Article 10(2)’s domestic litigation
requirement is characterized. In view of the filing by the Claimants of domestic
proceedings before the Uruguayan court prior to the initiation of this
proceeding, the Claimants have satisfied the terms and objective of the
domestic litigation requirement under Article 10(2) of the BIT. This is the case
even where the Uruguayan court’s decisions were rendered after the expiry of

the 18-month period set by Article 10(2), but before the Tribunal rules on its

jurisdiction.

149. In the light of all the foregoing, the Tribunal dismisses the First Objection to its
jurisdiction.

150. In view of the above conclusion, there is no need to examine whether based on

the most favored nation clause in Article 3(2) of the BIT the Claimants could
have relied on the allegedly more favorable dispute resolution clause contained
in treaties concluded by Uruguay with third States in order to dispense with the

18-month domestic litigation requirement.

B. Second Objection: Article 2 of the BIT Excludes Public Health Measures from
the Scope of the Protections Afforded Investors.

 

'T Case C ing A of the C ion on the Prevention and I of the Crime of Genocide
(Croatia v. Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 18 November 2008, ICJ Reports 2008, p. 540, para. 51.
"8 Teinver v. Argentina, cit., para. 135.

50

151.

152.

153.

154.

1. Arguments of the Respondent

According to the Respondent, Article 2 of the BIT excludes the measures the
Claimants attack from the scope of the BIT’s protection to investors and their
investments. Article 2(1) states in relevant part:

“The Contracting Parties recognize each other’s right not to allow economic
activities for reasons of public security and order, public health or morality, as
well as activities which by law are reserved to their own investors”.

The Respondent argues that the emphatic affirmation of Uruguay’s and
Switzerland’s mutual sovereign rights to effect regulations in the interest of
public health can only be understood as excluding “economic activities for
reasons of ... public health...” from the scope of the BIT and thus the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Article 2 must be interpreted so as to give it a meaning
rather than to deprive it of meaning and the only plausible meaning is that it
was intended to exclude public health measures from the scope of the BIT

protection.

The provision in question comes after a prior sentence of Article 2 expressing
the Parties’ reciprocal obligations to promote and admit investments. This
structure of the clause can only mean that the Parties’ obligation to promote
and admit investments gives way to each State’s right to prohibit certain
activities for the listed reasons. Since this categorical affirmation of the Parties’
“right” not to permit certain economic activities comes before any of the
investor’s rights are listed, this means that the first enunciated right modifies
the latter’s enunciated right. Thus, Article 2 precludes the existence of a
“dispute” within the meaning of the BIT when a Contracting State has acted for

the reasons stated by that Article.

There is a critical difference between the obligation to promote and that to
admit investments, which is the fact that the obligation to promote applies
throughout the life-cycle of an investment, covering also investments already
made. Therefore, contrary to Claimants’ contention, Article 2 is not limited to
the pre-admission phase, the obligation to promote extending beyond this

phase. Abal was itself a beneficiary of Uruguay’ s National Interests Promotion

51

and Protection Law 16,906 of 1997 being granted a “generous package” of tax

exemptions and credits.

155. Under the Uruguayan Constitution, public health is a primordial right and
supreme good (“bien supremo’), meaning that it is not negotiable. As a bien
supremo, public health matters are above other sovereign powers and
obligations. In view of the supreme duty owed its people in matters of public
health, Uruguay could not agree to bestow rights to foreign investors
conflicting with this duty, thus carving out from the BIT’s protection any
actions it might need to take for reasons of public health, even if they restrict

investors’ economic rights.

156. Article 2 of the BIT is different from other BITs provisions regarding “non-
precluded measures”. The latter only make clear that the treaty applies but that
nothing elsewhere in the treaty should be read to hinder necessary measures
from being taken. On the contrary, Article 2 leaves the exercise of the State’s
tight to prohibit certain economic activities for reasons of public health as
entirely outside the scope of the BIT or its dispute resolution mechanism.
Further, Article 2 does not require that the excluded measures be “necessary”
for the designated policy goal, in contrast with precluded measures. This is
confirmed by the ICJ’s reasoning in the Nicaragua v. United States case,
holding that since Article XXI of the 1956 Treaty between the two States
speaks simply of “necessary” measures it did not remove the interpretation and
application of that Article from the Court’s jurisdiction to determine whether

the measures taken by a State fall within the exception.'”

157. The three measures challenged by the Claimants were taken by Uruguay for
reasons of public health, against a background of persistent tobacco control
efforts dating back to the 1970s. Such efforts intensified in the 2000s due to the
staggering impact of tobacco consumption on public health. Despite
educational and regulatory efforts, between 1998 and 2005 the percentage of
smokers among adult population remained steady at 32% while particularly

alarming was the percentage of adolescents who smoked, 23%, one of the

' Memorial, paras 123-126.
52

highest rates in Latin America. These high rates of tobacco consumption
among the population were rightly considered to constitute a public health

crisis.

158. To better educate the public, especially adolescents, about the consequences of
smoking, the Government adopted the three measures challenged by the
Claimants. Ordinance 514, adopted on 18 August 2008 and in force as of 14
February 2009, required, as the first measure, all cigarette packages to include
graphic pictograms illustrating the effects of smoking on human health, in
addition to textual warnings. As set forth in the Preamble, Ordinance 514 was
promulgated because “it is the duty of the State to legislate in all matters
regarding public health and hygiene”, consistent with Article 44 of the
Constitution, the Organic Law on Public Health of 12 January 1934 and the
World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
ratified on 16 July 2004. The public health reasons for these measures are

evident.

159. The other measure required by Ordinance 514, criticized by the Claimants, is a
single presentation, forbidding descriptive elements creating the false

impression that a certain tobacco product is less harmful than another.

160. As found by a United States federal court in United States v. Philip Morris,'°
tobacco companies knew that the risks of lung cancer, other debilitating
diseases and premature death were just as high for smokers of “light” and “low

tar” cigarettes than for smokers of “regulars”. The Court sanctioned the
cigarette companies, including Philip Morris, for their deceptive “light”

descriptors, that remained banned.

161. That is what more than 70 States proceeded to do by banning for reasons of
public health the sale of tobacco products labeled as “light”, “low tar”, “mild”
or other similarly deceptive descriptors. Article 3 of Ordinance 514 implements
Law 18,256 of 2008, reiterating the prohibition on deceptive terms and other

descriptive elements, such as colors, numbers or letters creating a false

"° Memorial, para. 141.
53

162.

163.

164.

impression that one tobacco product is less harmful than another. There can be

no doubt that it was adopted for reasons of public health.

The third measure challenged by the Claimants is the requirement of Decree
287/009, enacted in June 2009, that the size of mandatory health warnings on
tobacco products be increased from 50% to 80% of the front and back of each
pack. The public health reasons for the adoption of Decree 287/009 are evident,
the Preamble to the Decree citing the same public health justification as the
Preamble to Ordinance 514, invoking Article 11 of the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control requiring, inter alia, that warnings and
messages “be 50% or more of the principal display areas...”. Decree 287/009
was issued six months after the unanimous adoption of the Framework
Convention Guidelines for Article 11, establishing that health warning and

messages should cover “as much of the principal display area as possible”.

. Arguments of the Claimants

According to the Claimants, Article 2 of the BIT is not applicable because it
covers admission and does not affect investments already admitted, including
those made by the Claimants. Article 2 states:

Promotion, admission

(1) Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party and admit such
investments in accordance with its law. The Contracting Parties recognize
each other’s right not to allow economic activities for reason of public
security and order, public health or morality, as well as activities which by
law are reserved to their own investors.

(2) When a Contracting Party shall have admitted, according to its law, an
investment on its territory, it shall grant the necessary permits in connection
with such an investment and with the carrying out of licensing agreements
and contracts for technical, commercial or administrative assistance. Each
contracting party shall, whenever needed, endeavor to issue the necessary
authorizations concerning the activities of consultants and other qualified
persons of foreign nationality.

 

As is clear from the title and its plain language, this provision applies only

prior to the time an investment is being made, not thereafter. Uruguay’s

reading of the second sentence of Article 2(1) to extend the scope of the
54

165.

166.

3.

provision to the post-establishment stage of an investment would lead to absurd
results. The host State could, after an investment has been made, declare it
reserved to its own investors and throw out all existing investors of the other
Party in the sector. The terms “admit” (used in the first sentence) and “allow”
(used in the second sentence) are synonymous. They both relate to the same
issue. Thus, Article 2(1) pertains to the admission of an investment while

Article 2(2) relates to the post-admission phase.

Uruguay has welcomed and admitted the Claimants’ investment, granting Abal
a generous package of tax exemptions and credits in furtherance of Abal’s
plans to make a capital investment to upgrade the machinery in the local
factory. None of the measures at issue in this dispute pertains to the admission
of investments. Article 2 is inapplicable in this context. Once the investment
has been admitted, Article 2 does not exempt the State from any obligation
pertaining to that investment. Article 2 contains no exceptions to the BIT’s
post-admission investor rights, therefore it does not foreclose the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims that the measures at issue violate

Uruguay’s obligations under the BIT.

The Claimants do not contest Uruguay’s right to adopt non-discriminatory,
legitimate regulation to protect public health. Whether the measures at issue are
legitimate public health measures that comply with the BIT is a matter for the
merits, not a matter of jurisdiction. The fact that Uruguay’s Constitution
obliges the Government to adopt public health measures has no bearing on
whether the Respondent has breached its obligations under the BIT. As stated
in Article 3 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, the characterization of
an act of State as internationally wrongful is governed by international law,
such characterization being not affected by the same act being lawful under

domestic law.

Findings of the Tribunal

55

167. It is the Respondent’s contention that measures taken by the State for public
health purposes fall outside the scope of the BIT. It relies in that regard on
Article 2(1) of the BIT which states:

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party and admit such
investments in accordance with its law. The Contracting Parties recognize
each other’s right not to allow economic activities for reasons of public
security and order, public health or morality, as well as activities which by
law are reserved to their own investors.

As indicated by its title, “Promotion, admission”,''’ Article 2 deals with two

different concepts, promotion and admission of investments.

168. Consistent with the Preamble of the BIT, “promotion” of investments refers to
the Contracting States’ duty to create the conditions for the flowing of
investments by nationals of one State into the territory of the other State. To
that effect, the Preamble stresses the Contracting States’ intent “to create
favourable conditions for capital investments in both States” while at the same
time “Recognizing the need to protect investments by nationals and companies
of both States with the aim to foster the economic prosperity of both States”.
Accordingly, “promotion” is a continuing duty that the Contracting States have
accepted in order to foster investments both by creating favourable conditions
for their flowing into each other’s territory and, once investments have been
made, by ensuring their protection and by granting the necessary permits and

authorizations concerning the activities to be carried out by investors.'*

169. As the ordinary meaning of the word indicates, “admission” is the act by which
each State, having verified the conformity of the proposed investments with

internal legislation,”

allows them to be made in its territory, thus accepting
that they are protected investments for purposes of the BIT. Thus, Article 2(2)
relates to the post-admission stage, as made clear by its initial words: “When a
Contracting Party shall have admitted, according to its law, an investment on

its territory,...” .

"! Article 2 is reproduced in its entirety supra, para. 163.
"? Article 2(2) deals with this continuing promotion of the investments once they have been admitted.
56

170. The reference in Article 2(1) to “public health” as one of the reasons by which
economic activities may not be allowed by the host State points to the stage of
admission of the investments, therefore to the pre-establishment stage, as
clearly shown by the context. The reference in question is made immediately
after providing for each State’s duty to admit investments, as an exception to
such duty for reasons, including of public health, characterized by the
importance of the public interest involved.'* Admission and acceptance,
including the exception for reasons of public health, refer both to the pre-
establishment stage. The Respondent accepts that the obligation to admit
investments is limited to the pre-establishment stage' and that the right to
admit is the same as the right to regulate whether to “allow [investments] to

enter”.!"5

171. It is not true that, as asserted by the Respondent, “The only plausible meaning
that can be given to the language of this Article is that it was intended to
exclude public health measures from the scope of the protections the BIT
affords investors”.''* Uruguay might exclude the admission of investments
under the BIT for reasons of public health in two different ways, either (i) by
providing for such exclusion in its internal legislation so that a proposed
investments would not be admitted as being not “in accordance with its law”
under Article 2(1), or (ii) by availing itself of the possibility under Article
25(4) of the ICSID Convention to notify the Centre that it would not consider
submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre disputes relating to public health.'"”
In no other case could any such exclusion apply to investments that have
already been admitted under the BIT, which is the case so far as the Claimants
are concerned.

"3 Article 2(1) states, in pertinent part, that “The Contracting Parties recognize each other’s right not to allow
economic activities for reasons of public security and order, public health or morality, as well as activities which
by law are reserved to their own investors”

"4 Reply, para. 185: “Among the critical differences between the obligations to promote and to admit
investments is the fact that the obligation to promote investments applies throughout the life-cycle of an
investment”.

"5 Th the Memorial, para. 109, the Respondent accepts that the ordinary meaning of “to admit” is “to allow to
enter”.

"6 Memorial, para. 108.

"7 ICSID Convention, Article 25(4) provide:
“Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention or at any time
thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting States.

Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1)” (emphasis added by the Tribunal).
57

 

172. As far as is known to the Tribunal, neither of the above steps has been taken
until now by the Respondent in pursuance of its objective to exclude
investments in tobacco activities from the scope of the BIT. To the contrary,
the investments made by the Claimants were encouraged by the Respondent by
the granting in 2002 of an exemption “from all surtaxes” in connection with the
importation of certain types of cigarette manufacturing equipment and of a
credit for the Value-Added Tax included in the acquisition of materials used
for works contemplated by the project submitted by Abal on behalf of the

Claimants. '*

173. The Resolution of the President of the Republic, after stating that the project
submitted by ABAL HNOS “complies with Article 11 of Law 16,906 of
January 7, 1998,” resolves “To declare that the activity of the investment
project submitted by ABAL HNOS S.A. is hereby promoted, with respect to
the manufacturing, marketing and distribution of cigarettes and tobacco”. The
Declaration confirms, on the one hand, that, as distinct from the “admission” of
investments, “promotion” is not limited to the pre-establishment stage, and, on
the other hand, that, still in 2002, the Respondent, despite intensified efforts

119

allegedly made already at the time to fight tobacco consumption,” encouraged

the Claimants’ tobacco activities by promoting the related investments.

174. The Tribunal concludes that Article 2(1) does not create an exception to the
BIT’s substantive obligations with respect to investments that have already
been admitted in accordance with Uruguayan law. It is true, as the Claimants
accept, that this does not prevent Uruguay, in the exercise of its sovereign
power, from regulating harmful products in order to protect public health after
investments in the field have been admitted. But Article 2(1) is concerned
solely with admission, although it is subject to the subsequent regulation of
investments in ways consistent with the BIT. Whether the regulations here are

in conformity with the BIT is thus an issue for the merits.

"8 Declaration of Promoted Activity for Investment Project of ABAL HNOS dated 14 March 2002, paras 1-3 (C-029).
"° Memorial, para. 127; supra, para. 157.
58

175.

C. Third Objection: The Claimants’ Acti

176.

177.

178.

179.

In the light of the foregoing considerations, the Second Objection to the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction is dismissed.

  

ities in Uruguay are not an “Investment”

Within the Meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention

1.

Arguments of the Respondent

According to the Respondent, in the absence of a definition of “investment” in
the ICSID Convention, jurisprudence and legal authority have accepted that the
term has an objective meaning which must be satisfied for the purpose of
ICSID jurisdiction. This meaning sets the limits within which the States’

bilateral definition under a treaty must be interpreted.

The Claimants’ interests in Uruguay do not constitute a protected investment
since not only do they fail to make any contribution to the Country’s
development, but they actively prevent and interfere with such development.
The Claimants’ concern about post-hoc evaluation is at odds with other ICSID
tribunals that have examined investors’ contributions to the economic
development of host States with little difficulty. The huge costs the Claimants’

activities impose on Uruguay are obvious to any reasonable observer.

Under the “Salini test”, one of the objective criteria to be satisfied is that the
economic activity must contribute positively and significantly to the economic
development of the host State. Economic development is at the core of the
foreign investment regime and is the paramount objective of the ICSID

Convention, as shown also by its Preamble.

The Salini interpretation has been confirmed by subsequent tribunals and
scholarly commentary. The requirement of contribution to the economic
development of the host State is emphasized by the Preamble of the ICSID
Convention which refers to “the need for international cooperation for
economic development and the role of private international investment
therein”. Reference to the “economic development process” and to the fact that

59

180.

181.

182.

183.

an adequate flow of capital may “substantially contribute to the development of
the country” as the object and purpose of the BIT is made by its Preamble. An
indication of the significant nature of the contribution to the host State’s

economic development is whether the activity serves the public interest.

The Salini test logically requires that if the investor’s activities or interests
create an overall negative effect on economic development, such as the
Claimants’ interests, this would not meet the definition of investments
protected by the ICSID Convention. The Claimants’ activities have harmed and
continue to harm Uruguay’s economic development, still less do they serve the

State’s public interest.

The negative impact of the consumption of tobacco products on the State’s
development has been confirmed by authoritative specialized international
institutions, including the OECD, the World Bank and the WHO. In Uruguay,
more than 5,000 people die each year from smoking-related illness. The
estimated direct health costs of smokers in Uruguay amount approximately to

US$ 150 million per year.

The “net contributions” to the economic development made by the Claimants’
interests and activities in Uruguay has been overwhelmingly negative. Based
on the Claimants’ own inflated estimate, their combined contributions total
around US $ 29 million per year, more than offset just by the direct health care
costs of US $ 30 million (a small share of Uruguay total costs imposed by the
Claimants’ tobacco products). For these reasons, the Claimants’ interests and
activities are not “investments” in the sense of the ICSID Convention. The
jurisdiction of the Centre may not extend to disputes arising in connection with

such activities and interests.

Arguments of the Claimants

According to the Claimants, Uruguay’s assertion that the Claimants do not own
in “investment” in Uruguay is factually and legally incorrect. The Claimants

have several investments falling within the definition of investment under
60

Article 1(2) of the BIT which are covered by Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. Specifically, the Claimants’ investments include manufacturing
facilities (Article 1(2)(a)), shares in Abal (Article 1(2)(b)), rights to royalty
payments (Article 1(2)(c)) and trademarks (Article 1(2)(d)).

184. The ICSID Convention does not define “investment”. The fixed definition that
Uruguay attempts to impose is contrary to the intention of the drafters of the
ICSID Convention to provide the greatest flexibility to the scope of the
Contracting States’ consent to arbitration. Even if there may be an outer limit
to what can be considered an investment under the ICSID Convention, this
does not necessitate the mandatory application of tribunal-created criteria as
jurisdictional pre-requisites. Uruguay’s argument that the Claimants’ activities
in Uruguay are not “investments” rests entirely on a controversial, tribunal-
created criterion for identifying an investment that has no basis in the plain

meaning of the term either in the BIT or in the ICSID Convention.

185. The Salini criteria are not jurisdictional requirements. Most of the tribunals that
have examined these criteria have used them as typical characteristics rather
than as jurisdictional requirements. Specifically, the criterion of the
contribution to the economic development of the host State is inappropriate
because it has no basis in the BIT, leads to a troubling post hoc analysis of the
investment and is highly subjective. In any case, the Claimants’ investments

have as a matter of fact contributed to the economic development of Uruguay.

186. It is in keeping with the plain meaning of Article 25 and the purpose of the
ICSID Convention to defer to the State parties’ intent, as expressed in the
relevant treaty, as to what constitutes an investment. It is reasonable for the
Tribunal in this case to defer to the Contracting Parties’ definition of

investment as set forth in the BIT.

187. As explained by the tribunal in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, the Salini “criteria
are not fixed or mandatory as a matter of law”.'”° They are problematic to the
extent they provide for a fixed and inflexible test which may contradict

°° Biwater Sauff v. Tanzania, Award, 24 July 2008, paras 323 ff.
61

individual agreements, as expressed in bilateral investment treaties. Other
decisions have declined to apply the Salini criteria, holding that they should not
create a limit which neither the ICSID Convention nor the State parties to a
specific treaty intended to create.'*! These criteria should not play a role in the
Tribunal’s analysis of whether an investment exists, much less to serve as a

jurisdictional requirement.

188. In particular, the contribution-to-development criterion requires a post-hoc
examination of the economic, financial and/or policy assessment that prompted
the Claimants’ activities which, in addition to being difficult to make, will
render uncertain whether the investment is protected until the analysis has been
performed. Further, the criterion introduces elements of subjective judgment on
the part of the arbitral tribunal, transforming it into a policy maker. If
jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention became dependent on such
retrospective analysis, the unpredictability of ICSID availability to settle given

disputes would increase.

189. The contribution-to-development criterion is in any event based on a
misunderstanding of the Preamble of the ICSID Convention. The reference to
the “need for international cooperation for economic development and the role
of private investment therein” is not evidence that contribution to economic
development is a required criterion of investment, as Uruguay claims. The
Preamble should be read as describing how the ICSID Convention will foster
economic development by achieving and maintaining a flow of foreign
investment. Further, should the Tribunal perform the Salini analysis using the
criteria as part of a flexible, pragmatic approach, it will find that the Claimants’

investments have in fact satisfied those criteria.

190. Uruguay does not contest that the Claimants have invested in Uruguayan
manufacturing facilities, shares in Abal, rights to royalty payments and
trademarks, requiring substantial technical, financial and human resources
contribution. Having maintained operations in Uruguay for more than 30 years,

1 Phoenix v. Czech Republic, Award, 15 April 2009, para. 85; Malaysian Historical Salvors v. Malaysia, Annulment
Decision, 16 April 2009, paras 76-79, Saba Fakes v. Turkey, Award, 14 July 2010, para. 111; Alpha v. Ukraine,

Award, 8 November 2010, para. 312.
62

191.

192.

193.

the Claimants easily satisfy the Salini criterion of duration of the investment.
This is not contested by Uruguay. The Claimants took a commercial risk

without any guarantee of payment by their customers.

In any event, the Claimants’ investments have made a significant contribution
to Uruguay’s economy in terms of revenues earned in Uruguay from sales of
the Claimants tobacco products, taxes paid to the Government and workers
employed in Uruguay and their salaries. From 2005 to 2010, the Claimants
paid over US$ 148 million in taxes to the Uruguayan Government and directly
employed an average of 99 people in Uruguay, paying salaries and social

security contributions of US $ 3.7 million each year.

Uruguay’s argument that the Claimants’ activities do not contribute to the
State’s economic development is inconsistent with Uruguay’s conduct of active
encouragement to the Claimants to continue to invest over the past 30 years.
Despite the knowledge of the alleged negative effects that the Respondent lists,
it actually encouraged the Claimants to expand its operations by granting Abal
a generous package of tax exemptions and credits in furtherance of Abal’s plan
to make capital investment in the Uruguayan factory to upgrade the machinery.
The Respondent’s allegations shall be addressed at the appropriate stage in

these proceedings.

Findings of the Tribunal

Inasmuch as this Tribunal is established under the ICSID Convention, its
competence and the Centre’s jurisdiction are established by the reference in
Article 25(1) to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment
between a Contracting State ... and a national of another Contracting State”.
The concept of “investment” is therefore central to the Centre’s jurisdiction

and the Tribunal’s competence “ratione materiae”.

63

12

194. The Claimants’ investments in Uruguay, as described by them,'” fall within the
definition of the term under Article 1 of the BIT. The Respondent has not
objected to the Claimants’ description of their investments but has instead
asserted that such investments do not satisfy one of the constitutive elements of

the term.

195. The Respondent contends that the term “investment” under the ICSID
Convention has an objective meaning which must be satisfied for the purposes
of the ICSID jurisdiction. Under the Salini test, to be protected, an investment
must contribute to the economic development of the host State.'* Since the
Claimants’ activities assertedly impose a huge cost on Uruguay, they do not
satisfy the above condition. Accordingly, the Centre’s jurisdiction may not
extend to disputes arising in connection with the Claimants’ activities and

interests.

196. It is generally accepted that the term “investment” under Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention was left undefined so as to leave flexibility in its
application. The fact that the term is not defined does not mean that it is not to
be interpreted based on the criteria set by Article 31 of the VCLT™. The
controversy regarding the term “investment” shown by various arbitral
decisions and doctrinal writings reveals that the meaning of the term is far from

settled.

197. According to the 1965 Report of the Executive Directors on the ICSID
Convention, “[n]o attempt was made to define the term ‘investment’ given the
essential requirement of consent by the parties, and the mechanism through
which Contracting States can make known in advance, if they so desire, the
classes of disputes which they would or would not consider submitting to the
Centre (Article 25(4))”.'* To understand this statement, it must be recalled that

the question of whether and how to define the concept of “investment” was one

'2 Supra, para. 183.
3 See, infra, para. 207.
4 Supra, para. 106.
"5 Report of the Executive Directors, supra, fn.1, nr. 27.
64

198.

199.

200.

of the most contentious issues in the negotiation process leading to the

adoption of the ICSID Convention.

The compromise eventually adopted took account both of the concern
expressed by capital exporting countries by providing a non-definition
approach, implying weak limits to the jurisdiction ratione materiae of the
Centre, and the concern expressed by capital importing countries by permitting
Contracting States “to notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes
which it would or would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the

Centre” according to Article 25(4).'°

A further aspect to be considered when interpreting the term “investment”
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is its interplay with the definition

of “investment” under the BIT.'”’

The consent of the Contracting Parties under
the BIT to the scope of “investment” is of relevance when establishing the
meaning of the term under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, although
such Parties do not have an unfettered discretion to go beyond what have been

called the “outer limits” set by the ICSID Convention.'*

To establish these “outer limits”, the concept of “investment” under Article
25(1) must be interpreted by reference first of all to “the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object
and purpose”. The notion covers a wide range of economic operations
confirming the broad scope of its application, subject to the possibility for
States to restrict the jurisdiction ratione materiae by limiting their consent

either in their investment legislation or in the applicable treaty.

6 The background of the adoption of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is described in the Ambiente
Ufficio S.p.A. and Others and the Argentine Republic Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2013, paras 448-452.
"7 Para. 22, supra, reproduces Article 1(2) of the BIT defining the term “investment”.

"8 Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes: Some Observations on Jurisdiction, 5
Columbia Journal of Transnational Law, 1966, para. 268: “Presumably, the parties’ agreement that a dispute is
“an investment dispute” will be given a great weight in any determination of the Centre’s jurisdiction, although
it would not be controlling” (emphasis added by the Tribunal). Reference to the “outer-limits” of the notion of
investment under the ICSID Convention is made by Professor Abi-Saab in his Dissenting Opinion dated October
28, 2011 in the Abaclat v. Argentina Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 August 4, 2011 (at para. 46).

65

201. The reference to the object and purpose of the treaty does not make a
significant contribution to the meaning and scope of the term “investment”.
The usual reference to the Preamble of the ICSID Convention emphasizing
“the need for international cooperation for economic development and the role
of private international investment therein” may reasonably be understood in
different ways, underlining either the contribution to the host State’s
development or the role of the private investment depending on individual
cases. The Preamble therefore does not materially advance analysis. Likewise,
the reference in the Preamble of the BIT to the “important... role of foreign
investment in the economic development process” appears too general to
permit the drawing of definitive conclusions regarding the need for the

investment to contribute to the host State’s economic development.

202. The foregoing analysis leads the Tribunal to conclude that the term
“investment” under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, when interpreted
according to its ordinary meaning in its context and in the light of the object

and purpose of the Convention, is to be given a broad meaning.

203. This meaning would in any case be subject to the outer limits of an economic
activity that would not encompass within the notion of investment, and
therefore the Centre’s jurisdiction, a single commercial transaction, such as the
mere delivery of goods against payment of the price. Within such expansive
limits, however, it is for the States’ agreement, as reflected in the present case
by the BIT, to define the scope of the “investment” that they accept to protect
by their treaty. No such limits have been laid down by the definition of

“investment” in Article 1 or otherwise in the BIT.

204. Whether the so-called Salini test relied upon by the Respondent has any
relevance in the interpretation of the concept of “investment” under Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention is very doubtful. The test finds its source in a
decision on jurisdiction issued by an ICSID tribunal in the case Salini v.
Morocco.” Assuming arbitral decisions and awards are “judicial decisions”

within the meaning of Article 38(d) of the Statute of the ICJ, which is far from

"°° Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2009, para. 52.
66

We
8° Salini

205.

206.

207.

 

being commonly accepted, this would be on condition that they have attained a
sufficient degree of publicity and are part of a “jurisprudence constante”. As
shown hereafter, there is no such a “jurisprudence constante” with respect to

acceptance of the Salini test.

As is known, the Salini test includes the following elements, as described by
the tribunal in Salini v. Morocco:

“The doctrine generally considers that investment infers: contributions, a
certain duration of performance of the contract and a participation in the risks
of the transaction. In reading the Convention’s preamble, one may add the

contribution to the economic development of the host State of the investment
+ 130

as an additional condition”.
The Salini test has received varied applications by investment treaty tribunals
and doctrinal writings.'*' In the Tribunal’s view, the four constitutive elements
of the Salini list do not constitute jurisdictional requirements to the effect that
the absence of one or the other of these elements would imply a lack of
jurisdiction. They are typical features of investments under the ICSID
Convention, not “a set of mandatory legal requirements”.'*” As such, they may
assist in identifying or excluding in extreme cases the presence of an
investment but they cannot defeat the broad and flexible concept of investment
under the ICSID Convention to the extent it is not limited by the relevant

treaty, as in the present case.

Of its constitutive elements, the most controversial one has been held by some
tribunals to be the contribution to the economic development of the host State
due to the subjective character of this element and the resulting difficulty to
ascertain its presence in a given investment.’ In order to determine whether an
investment, at the time it is made, is capable of contributing to the economic
development of the host State a tribunal would be required to conduct an ex

post facto analysis of a number of elements that, considering also the time

Morocco, cit., para. 52.
'5! The Parties’ written submissions analyze arbitral decisions and scholarly writings favouring the application of
this particular test (Memorial, paras 160-166; Reply, paras 227-253) and those criticizing it (Counter-memorial,
paras 196-198; Rejoinder, paras 250-272).

'S? Schreuer, The ICSID Convention. A Commentary, Art. 25, para. 171.

The tribunal in Phoenix v. Czech Republic, Award, 15 April 2009, referring to the contribution to the

development of the host State, states that it is “impossible to ascertain [it] — the more so as there are highly
diverging views on what constitutes development” (para. 85).

67

208.

209.

210.

elapsed, “can generate a wide spectrum of reasonable opinions”.'“ As
explained by another tribunal, “... the criterion invites a tribunal to engage in a
post hoc evaluation of the business, economic, financial and/or policy
assessments that prompted the claimant’s activities. It would not be appropriate
for such a form of second-guessing to drive a tribunal’s jurisdictional

analysis”. !*°

The Tribunal agrees in this regard with what was stated by the tribunal in Pey
Casado v. Chile:

“An investment could prove useful or not for a country without losing its
quality [as an investment]. It is true that the Preamble to the ICSID Convention
mentions contribution to the economic development of the host State.
However, this reference is presented as a consequence and not as a condition of
the investment: by protecting investments, the Convention facilitates the

development of the host State. This does not mean that the development of the

host State becomes a constitutive element of the concept of investment”. '*°

The Respondent appears to agree on a more flexible approach to the concept of

investment when stating: whether one views the Salini criteria as
mandatory jurisdictional requirements or instead adopts the “typical
characteristic approach” is, in the circumstances of the case, a distinction
without a difference”.'*’ In the Tribunal’s view, the purposes of the ICSID
Convention and the BIT, and the weight of authority, support the more flexible
approach acknowledged by the Respondent. Applying that analysis, however,
the Tribunal sees no basis for concluding that the Claimants’ long-term,
substantial activities in Uruguay do not qualify as “investments” under the BIT

and the ICSID Convention.

In the light of the above considerations, the Tribunal dismisses the Third

Objection to its Jurisdiction.

'4 Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialistic Republic of Sri Lanka, Award, 31 October 2012, para. 306.
5 Alpha v. Ukraine, cit., para. 312.

136 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, Award, 8 May 2008, para. 232.
The same conclusion was reached by the tribunal in Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, Decision on
Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 30 November 2012, para. 5.43.

'57 Reply, para. 253.

68

Vv. THE CLAIMANTS’ DENIAL OF JUSTICE CLAIM

211.

212.

213.

1.

Arguments of the Claimants

In the Counter-memorial the Claimants have indicated the intent to include in
their Memorial on the Merits an additional claim that the TCA’s decision of 29
September 2011 rejecting the request for annulment of Ordinance 514 amounts
to a denial of justice in breach of the guarantee of fair and equitable treatment
under Article 3 of the BIT.'* In the Claimants’ view, the TCA’s decision was
grossly unjust and denied their right to due process. They add that the denial of
justice claim cannot be subject to the 18-month local litigation requirement
since the TCA’s decisions are final and not subject to appeal so that there is no

local forum before which to bring such a claim.'”

In the Rejoinder,"”’ the Claimants further explained that the TCA’s decision
addressed a different plaintiff, British American Tobacco. The latter was not
party to Abal’s annulment action and had presented an entirely different set of
facts and arguments. According to the TCA, BAT had not proven the
ownership and the trademarks that, on the contrary, Abal had proven in its
case. Requested for a clarification, the TCA dismissed the objections asserting
that “the so-called contradictions are not important nor do they justify the

revision of the decision”. '*"

The denial of justice claim was addressed by the Claimants at the hearing of 5
February 2013 based on arguments that had been previously submitted.'” The
Claimants added that “Seeking redress in Uruguay’s domestic courts would not
only be futile but impossible because the TCA decisions are final and
unappealable” and that “There is nothing more that the Claimants can do to
resolve their denial of justice claim in Uruguayan courts”, so that direct access

to arbitration should be allowed “to resolve this dispute”.'’ Following a

88 Counter-memorial, fn. 46.

'® Thidem.

4 Rejoinder, para. 213.

‘I The TCA Decision 801 Rejecting Abal’s Appeal for Clarification, 29 September 2011 (C-056).
'® Transcript, Day One, pages 218-221.

"3 Thid. page 221, lines 17-24.

69

question from the Tribunal, the Claimants indicated that resorting to the six-
month notification requirement would also be futile since “the executive would

not be able to seek a revision of that decision of the TCA”.'*

214. In answer to another question by the Tribunal, the Claimants pointed out that
had they to submit the claim to a court of “one and only instance” using Law
16,110, they “would have to appear before the TCA a third time and ask them
to adjudicate a claim that the TCA itself committed a denial of justice while the
TCA jurisdiction is limited to claims for annulment of administrative acts and

nothing else”. '**

215. Regarding whether they had to go to a domestic court with the denial of justice
claim under Law 16,110, the Claimants referred also to the passage of the
Senate record of the discussion when Law 16,110 was adopted recording Dr.
Eduardo Jimenez de Aréchaga’s letter to the Chairman of the International
Affairs Committee. They summarized the content of said letter as follows:

“What he is saying here is in cases of denial of justice or delay that is
equivalent to denial of justice, this principle in no way means that the foreign
investor cannot go to arbitration. In our submission, law 16,110, if you look at
the drafting history in the Senate records, the statement of Dr. Eduardo Jimenez
de Aréchaga does not preclude the submission to arbitration of a denial of
justice claim. It does not require that the denial of justice claim be submitted
again to domestic litigation in Uruguay.”“°

216. Requested to state their position as to whether the denial of justice claim is to
be qualified as an additional claim under Article 46 of the ICSID Convention,
the Claimants confirmed that the claim in question “does squarely fall within
the ambit of Article 46 because it arises directly out of the subject matter of the

dispute”. '*’

2. Arguments of the Respondent

'4 Transcript, Day Two, page 483, lines 2-8.
'45 Thid., page 480, lines 13-20, 25; page 481, lines 1-2.
“© Thid., page 490, lines 7-25; page 492, lines 3-14
‘7 Thid., page 484, lines 3-7, 13-16.
70

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

The Respondent asserts that in advancing this claim the Claimants exalt form
over substance since “a number of tobacco companies, including Abal, all
challenged Uruguay’s actions as a matter of domestic law on identical grounds
at approximately the same time”, so that “the TCA’s reasons for rejecting their

challenge were equally applicable to all of them”.'“*

In its reply at the hearing, the Respondent noted, without however committing
the Government of Uruguay, as it indicated, that regarding the alleged futility
of addressing the denial of justice claim to the Uruguayan executive, even if
the latter could not revoke a decision by the TCA it would not be excluded that
if the Government were convinced through friendly negotiations that its
position were similar to that of the Claimants, “it is very likely that support of
the Government of Uruguay could be influential with whichever Tribunal were

hearing the matter under Law 16,110”.'”

Regarding the domestic litigation, Respondent commented at the hearing as
follows on the futility argument raised by the Claimants:

“ [ijn the event of going before a Tribunal under law 16,110, in the event there
is a negative decision in regard to their allegation or claim under the treaty for
denial of justice, then with an unfavourable decision they would also have the
right to arbitrate. That is the interpretation of the Government of Uruguay. So

there is no futility here”.'*°

At the hearing, the Respondent agreed that the Claimants’ denial of justice

claim would come within Article 46 of the ICSID Convention.'*!

Findings of the Tribunal

The Parties agree that the Claimants’ denial of justice claim falls within the
ambit of Article 46 of the ICSID Convention". Article 46 states:
Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall, if requested by a

party, determine any incidental or additional claims or counterclaims arising
directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute provided that they are within

‘48 Reply, para. 72.

'° Transcript, Day Two, page 487, lines 24-25; page 488, lines 1-8.
'50 Thid., page 489, lines 1-8.

'5! Thid., page 486, lines 17-19.

152

This agreement is recorded in the hearing transcript, supra, paras 215 and 218.

71

the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction
of the Centre.

222. Article 46 must be read in conjunction with Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules,
which states as follows:

(1) Except as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an incidental or
additional claim or counterclaim arising directly out of the subject-matter of the
dispute, provided that such ancillary claim is within the scope of the consent of
the parties and is otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre.

(2) An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later than in the
reply and a counter-claim no later than in in the counter-memorial, unless the
Tribunal, upon justification by the party presenting the ancillary claim and upon
considering any objection of the other party, authorizes the presentation of the
claim at a later stage in the proceeding.

(3) The Tribunal shall fix a time limit within which the party against which
ancillary claim is presented may file its observations thereon.

223. The Parties’ agreement regarding the applicability of Article 46 of the ICSID
Convention and, as a result, of Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules does not exempt
the Tribunal from determining whether the conditions set by these provisions are

met.

224. To meet these conditions the Claimants’ claim must:
a) be presented not later than in the reply or, if so authorized by the Tribunal
upon justification by the party presenting the claim and consideration of the other
party’s objections, if any, at a later stage;
b) arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute; and
c) be within the scope of the consent of the parties and otherwise within the

jurisdiction of the Centre.

225. Regarding the timely presentation of the claim, the Tribunal notes that it was
mentioned for the first time in the Claimants’ Counter-memorial,'* therefore in
the first written submission following the RFA. No objections have been raised

by the Respondent regarding satisfaction by the Claimants of this condition.

226. There is no doubt that the denial of justice claim arises directly out of the same

subject matter of the dispute brought before the TCA by Abal’s request for

'S3 Supra, para. 211.
72

annulment of one of the measures challenged by the Claimants, Ordinance 514.
The TCA’s decisions that, according to the Claimants, denied them justice are
both the decision rejecting the requested annulment of Ordinance 514 and the
decision rejecting the requested clarification of the latter decision.’ The

Respondent has not objected to this condition being met in the instant case.

227. Whether the denial of justice claim falls within the scope of the Parties’ consent
or otherwise within the Centre’s jurisdiction requires a closer examination of the
six-month settlement attempt and the 18-month domestic litigation of this claim

requirements, in view also of the Respondent’s remarks in that regard.

228. The discussion at the hearing centered on the question whether it would have
been futile for the Claimants, as asserted by the latter, to attempt to reach an
amicable settlement of the dispute related to this claim. According to the
Respondent, the Claimants should have proceeded to “first provide notice to the
executive... and enter into conversation”, admittedly without any power by the
executive to “revoke a decision or an order or ruling by the TCA”.'* The
Respondent’s reference being clearly to the six-month attempt for an amicable
settlement,'® the Tribunal shall deal with this issue for the sake of completeness

of the analysis.

229. The Tribunal notes initially that the dispute must be held to have arisen as a
result of the TCA’s decision dismissing the Claimants’ request for a clarification
of the previous decision rejecting the request for annulment of Ordinance 514.
The executive having no power to revoke such decision,’ there would have
been no real prospect for an amicable settlement of the dispute that had arisen. It

is di

 

cult for the Tribunal to see how an appeal by the Claimants directly to the

Government for an amicable settlement would have served any useful purpose in

'S The TCA’s decisions 509 on Abal’s Request for Annulment of Ordinance 514 dated 14 June 2011 (C-053)
and 801 Rejecting Abal’s Appeal for Clarification dated 29 September 2011 (C-056). Abal’s Appeal for
Clarification and Further Judgment for the TCA Decision on Ordinance 514 is dated 24 August 2011 (C-055).
'S5 Transcript, Day Two, page 487, lines 1-8.
'S6 No views are expressed by the Tribunal regarding whether this requirement is an element of the State’s consent to
arbitration.
'S7 As admitted by the Respondent at the hearing, “The executive cannot by itself, of course, revoke a decision or an
order or ruling by the TCA”: Transcript, Day Two, page 487, lines 6-8.

73

this particular context, nor has the Respondent offered convincing arguments to

that effect.'**

230. May the same conclusion be drawn regarding the 18-month domestic litigation
requirement? In support of their respective positions, the Parties have proposed
arguments at the hearing based on assumptions that a closer scrutiny leads to the

following remarks.

231. The Respondent has contended that in case of a negative decision by the court
under Law 16,110 regarding the claim for denial of justice the Claimants would
have the right to arbitrate so that in this case there is no futility.'° This
contention is correct only if the reference is to a decision rendered beyond the
prescribed time limit of 18 months. If, however, as the context seems to indicate,
the Respondent had in mind a decision by the TCA within said time limit, its

interpretation’

would overlook the fact that under the BIT a Uruguayan court
decision within the 18-month period, whether favourable or not to the Claimants,
would appear to preclude resort to arbitration. This appears to be the intended
meaning of Article 10(2) of the BIT when it provides that “If within a period of
18 months after the proceedings have been instituted no judgment has been
passed, the investor concerned may appeal to an arbitral tribunal, which decides
on the dispute in all its aspects”. This would mean, a contrario, that if such a

judgment intervenes within 18 months, resort to arbitration is precluded."

232. The Claimants’ contention that in case of a denial of justice claim the foreign
investor does not need to go again to domestic litigation in Uruguay but may

submit the claim to arbitration is based on the letter addressed by Eduardo

Jimenez de Aréchaga to the Chairman of the International Affairs Committee.’

However, as apparent from its text, the letter in question refers to the Germany-

'58 Supra, para. 218.
'S° Supra, para. 218.
‘6 At the hearing the Respondent stated: “That is the interpretation of the Government of Uruguay” (supra, para. 212).
‘Sl The Respondent's interpretation would be correct if the Germany-Uruguay Treaty (as to which see below in the
text) had been the applicable treaty.
'© Supra, para. 215.

74

163

Uruguay Treaty,'® the text of which was in the process of being examined by the

Senate in view of its ratification.'*

233. Article 11(2) of the Germany-Uruguay Treaty provides as follows:

“If a dispute as described in Paragraph | cannot be settled within the period of
six months counted from the date on which one of the interested parties raised
it, it shall be submitted at the request of one of the parties to the competent
courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made. As
soon as there has been a decision by the competent courts, either of the parties
may resort to an International Court of Arbitration, for the purpose of declaring
if the legal decision complies and to what extent it meets the terms of this
Treaty. If after a period of 18 (eighteen) months from bringing the legal action
there has been no pronouncement, either of the parties may resort to the
International Court of Arbitration, which in this case shall have the competence
to resolve the dispute in its entirety. This provision shall not affect Article 10”.

According to this provision, and apparently unlike Article 10(2) of the BIT,
whatever domestic court’s decision is rendered within 18 months from bringing
legal action, resort to international arbitration is open to the party dissatisfied
with such decision. The Claimants seem to have had this provision in mind when
denying the requirement to go once again to the competent court in Uruguay for

the denial of justice claim.

234. Unlike the subject matter of the dispute regarding the three measures issued by
the Respondent and challenged by the Claimants, the dispute in this case does
not concern an administrative act for the annulment of which the TCA is the
only competent court in Uruguay. As alleged by the Claimants, the denial of
justice claim arises out of the TCA’s decisions rejecting an annulment request
and the subsequent request to correct the previous decision. To go back to the
TCA to redress such decision would have been a useless, time consuming and
costly exercise, any decisions by the TCA being final and not appealable. This is
one of the circumstances of the particular case warranting a conclusion of

“futility” of the domestic litigation requirement. '*

'S The text of the Germany- Uruguay Treaty is in Exhibit RL-31.

't The agenda of the Senate Session and the text of Eduardo Jimenez de Aréchaga’ letter are in Exhibit R-75 (see
Transcript, Day Two, page 490, lines 17-18). As clearly mentioned therein, the analysis made by the letter is based on
the Germany-Uruguay Treaty, specifically “the clauses on disputes recorded in Articles X and XI of the Treaty...”.
165 Supra, para. 137.

 

75

235.

In the light of all the foregoing, the Tribunal affirms the Centre’s jurisdiction

and its competence to hear the Claimants’ claim for denial of justice.

VI. DISPOSITIF

236.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides:

a. That it has jurisdiction over the claims presented by Philip Morris Brands Sarl,
Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. as far as they are based on
alleged breaches of the Agreement on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection
of Investments concluded on 7 October 1988 between the Swiss Confederation
and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay;

b. That it has jurisdiction under Article 46 of the ICSID Convention over the
Claimants’ claim for denial of justice;

c. To make the necessary order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to
Arbitration Rule 41(4); and

d. To reserve all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the arbitral

proceedings for subsequent determination.

76

[Signed]

Piero Bernardini

President
[Signed] [Signed]
Gary Born James Crawford
Arbitrator Arbitrator

77

