PHILIPPE GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

Award. 27 November 2000

(Sole Arbitrator: Gavan Griffith QC)

L. The Parties
1.1 The Claimant is a Belgian national—

Philippe Gruslin
Rue Roberts Jones, 71
1180 Brussels, Belgium

The Claimant represented himself throughout the proceedings.
1.2 The Respondent is the State of Malaysia, whose address for the proceedings
is—

Attorney-General’s Chambers, Malaysia
Advisory and International Division
14th Floor, Bank Rakyat Building

Jalan Tangsi

50512 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

The Respondent was represented in the course of the proceedings by the Solicitor-
General of Malaysia, The Hon. Datuk Helilah Mohd Yusof, of the above address,
and by

Professor Sir Elihu Lauterpacht, CBE QC
[...]

Jan Paulsson

Avocat a la Cour

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
[.-.]

Robert Volterra
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
(...]

as counsel.

AWARD 485
2. Initiation of the Proceedings

2.1 The proceedings were instituted by the Claimant's Request dated 16 March
1999 (the Claimant’s Request), made under Rule 2 the 1cstb Rules of Procedure for
the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the Institution Rules).

2.2 The Claimant claims from the Respondent the amount of losses in the value
of his investments arising from the alleged breach by the Respondent of the terms of
an Intergovernmental Agreement (the IGA) made 22 November 1979 with the Belgo-
Luxemburg Economic Union. The claim is that the imposition by the Respondent
of exchange controls in September 1998 constitutes a breach of obligations owed
by the Respondent to the Claimant under the terms of the 1Ga.

2.3 The Claimant asserts that the Respondent has consented to the jurisdiction
of IcstD by operation of Article 10 of the GA, which provides for reference of a
dispute arising out of an investment between a contracting party and a national of
the other contracting party—

Reference to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

(1) Any dispute arising directly out of an investment, between either Contracting
Party and a national of the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be settled
amicably between the Parties to the dispute.

(2) Ifany such dispute cannot be so settled within three months of a written notifica-
tion of a sufficiently detailed claim, the dispute shall upon the request of the nationals
of either of the Contracting Parties be submitted for conciliation or arbitration to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, established by the Conven-
tion on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States, opened for signature at Washington on 18th March, 1965. For this purpose,
each Contracting Party, by this Agreement irrevocably consents in advance to submit
any such dispute to this Centre. This consent implies renunciation of the requirement
that the internal administrative or judicial resorts should be exhausted.

3. Registration of the Claimant's Request

3.1 The Claimant's Request was supplemented by the Claimant's letter of 4 May

1999.
3.2 After some correspondence between the IcsiD Secretariat and the Claimant,

on 12 May 1999 the Secretariat registered the Claimant’s Request pursuant to Rule

6 of the Institution Rules.
3.3 The icsip Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the Arbitration

Rules) are applicable to the proceedings.

4. Appointment of Arbitrator

4.1 Pursuant to Rule 2 of the Arbitration Rules, the parties agreed on 2 June
1999 that the Tribunal should comprise a sole arbitrator.

486 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

4.2 The parties also agreed that the arbitrator should be Gavan Griffith QC (the
Arbitrator) of 205 William Street, Melbourne, Australia. Pursuant to Rule 5 of the
Arbitration Rules, the Arbitrator accepted the appointment on 3 June 1999

4.3 On 9 June 1999 the Secretariat notified the parties that the Arbitrator had
accepted the appointment as sole arbitrator. Pursuant to Rule 6(1), the Tribunal
was deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have begun on that date. It
was agreed by the parties at the first session of the Tribunal on 9 August 1999 that
the Tribunal was properly constituted in accordance with the Convention and the
Arbitration Rules.

4.4 The Arbitrator signed the declaration required by Rule 6(2) and copies were
delivered to the parties on | July 1999.

4.5 Pursuant to the Arbitration Rules, the Claimant's Memorial on the merits
dated 16 June 1999 (the Claimant's Memorial) was filed on 17 June 1999.

5. 1cstp Secretariat

5.1 Ms Eloise M. Obadia was designated by the Secretary-General of the Centre
to act as Secretary of the Tribunal.

6. First Session of the Tribunal

6.1 The first session of the Tribunal was held in Washington on 9 August 1999.

6.2 The Claimant acted on his own behalf.

6.3 The Respondent was represented by Mrs Lau Bee Lan and Mr Mohamad
Bazain bin Idris, each Senior Federal Counsel of the Respondent.

6.4 Pursuant to Article 44 of the 1cstip Convention, the parties agreed that the
proceedings were to be conducted in accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect
from 26 September 1984. They also agreed that within the ambit of the Arbitration
Rules the Tribunal could make directions appropriate to ensure efficiency, economy
and fairness to the parties, including directions to ensure that the case proceeded
as quickly as possible to a final result.

6.5 Upon the Tribunal ruling that the Respondent's letters to 1cstp dated 12 and
19 July 1999 did not constitute a formal objection to jurisdiction within the terms
of Rule 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules, the Respondent filed with the Secretary a
handwritten notice of objection dated 9 August 1999 (Notice of Objection). The
Notice of Objection was accepted by the Tribunal as an objection to jurisdiction
sufficient to enliven a stay of the proceedings under Rule 41(3).

6.6 With the consent of the parties, the Tribunal made appropriate procedural
directions as are set out in the Minutes of the First Session certified by the Secretary.

6.7 On issues of confidentiality, the parties particularly agreed—

* that the statements, documents, evidence and transcripts of the proceedings
should be used for the purposes of the proceeding only;

* that if a party were uncertain whether any materials were confidential that
party could raise the issue with the other party; and

AWARD 487

* if there was any difficulty the issue could be raised with the Tribunal for
directions.

7. Further Directions

7.1. Pursuant to the directions made by the Tribunal at the first session on 9
August 1999 and further directions later made by the Tribunal, the principal plead-
ings made on the Notice of Objection were—

* Respondent's Memorial on its objections to jurisdiction dated 16 November
1999 and filed 17 November 1999 (Respondent's Memorial)

* Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the jurisdictional objection dated 27
December 1999 and filed 28 December 1999 (Claimant's Counter-Memorial)

* Respondent's Reply on its objections to jurisdiction dated 9 March 2000 and
filed 9 March 2000 (Respondent's Reply)

* Claimant's Rejoinder on the jurisdictional objection dated 27 March 2000 and
filed 29 March 2000 (Claimant's Rejoinder).

7.2 The parties also relied upon the documents annexed to their pleadings,
including the Claimant’s Memorial, and the various other documents filed before,
during and after the hearing including copies and extracts of texts, translations and
other exhibits and documents.

7.3 Pursuant to directions made by the Tribunal, on 14 August 2000 the Respon-
dent filed a short summary outline of its submissions on its objection to jurisdiction
(Respondent’s Summary) to which the Claimant responded by a summary outline
dated 18 August 2000 (Claimant’s Summary).

7.4 At the hearing in Paris on 22 August 2000 the Respondent handed up a
folder, described as a Hearing Book, containing some 19 documents and extracts
from legislation, texts and articles, to which it referred and upon which it relied
during the course of its submissions. This filing was made without objection by the
Claimant.

8. The Claim

8.1 The Claimant claims that in January 1996 he made an investment of some
US $2.3m. in securities listed on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE) through
the entity known as the Emerging Asian Markets Equity Citiportfolio (the EAMEC
portfolio) managed by Citiportfolios SA (established as a société anonyme under the
laws of Luxemburg.) The EAMEC portfolio constitutes an “Organisme de Placement
Collectif” registered in Luxemburg as a mutual fund governed by the Luxemburg
law of 30 March 1988.

8.2 The EAMEC portfolio was managed by Citiportfolios SA (the Management
Company). At the direction of the Management Company, the moneys comprising
the EAMEC portfolio were invested by and in the name of Citibank (Luxemburg) SA.

8.3 The Claimant claims that he suffered losses of the proportion of his invest-
ment in the entire EAMEC portfolio (about 52%) that was invested in KLSE listed

488 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

 

securities (the KLSE investment). This loss of the entire KLSE investment was claimed
to have arisen from exchange controls in respect to the trading of its currency im-
posed by the Respondent in early September 1998. The Claimant claims that the
: investment constituted an investment within the definitions of the IGA to the

 

 

K
extent that he was entitled directly to invoke the dispute resolution proceedings of
the IGA to recover from the Respondent the amount of his losses.

8.4 These principal claims made in the Claimant's Request and in the Claimant's
Memorial are maintained in the Claimant’s Counter-Memorial and the Claimant's
Rejoinder.

 

9. Terms of the IGA

9.1 The 1GA was made between the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium
(acting in its own name and on behalf of the Grand-Duchy of Luxemburg under
the Convention establishing the Belgo-Luxemburg Economic Union) and the
Respondent. The preamble reads—

DESIRING to create favourable conditions for greater economic co-operation between
them and in particular for investments by nationals of one Contracting Party in the
territory of the other Contracting Party;

RECOGNISING that the encouragement and reciprocal protection of such invest-
ments will be conducive to stimulating individual business initiative and increasing
prosperity in the territories of the Contracting Parties;

9.2 Other relevant provisions of the 1Ga (in addition to Article 10 set out in
para 2.3 above) are—

Article 1—Definitions
(3) The term “investment” shall comprise every kind of assets and more particularly,
though not exclusively:—
(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such as mort-
gages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar rights;
(b) shares and other types of holding;
(c) titles to money or to any performance having an economic value;
(d) copyrights, industrial property rights (such as patents for inventions, trademarks,
industrial designs), know-how, trade names and goodwill; and
(e) concessions under public law, including concessions to search for, extract or exploit
natural resources.

provided that such assets when invested:—

(i) in Malaysia, are invested in a project classified as an “approved project” by
the appropriate Ministry in Malaysia, in accordance with the legislation and
the administrative practice, based thereon;

(ii) in the Belgo-Luxemburg Economic Union, are invested under the relevant laws
and regulations.

Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect their classification
s investment, provided that such alteration is not contrary to the approval, if any,
granted in respect of the assets originally invested.

 

AWARD 489

Article 3—Protection of Investments
(1) Each Contracting Party shall, within its territory, ensure full protection to the
investments made in accordance with its legislation by nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party and shall not impair by unjustified or discriminatory measures
the use, enj extension, selling or da of such

investments.

Article 12—Application of Agreement
This Agreement shall apply to investments made in the territory of either Contracting
Party in accordance with its legislation or rules or regulations by nationals or companies:
of the other Contracting Party prior to as well as after the entry into force of this
Agreement.

10. Objection to Jurisdiction

10.1 The Notice of Objection objected to jurisdiction over the dispute under
the 1cstD Convention on grounds that were said to “include, but not necessarily be
limited to”—

(a) that the claim which is the subject matter of the dispute is not a dispute falling
within the scope of Article 10(1) of the 1Ga; and

(b) following (a), there is no consent by the Government of Malaysia to IcsiD
jurisdiction by virtue of Article 10(2) of the 1Ga;

and asserted that each of these grounds was sufficient to operate as a bar to ICsID
jurisdiction in the matter.
10.2 As is noted in para 6.5 above, under Rule 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules
the filing of the Objection to Jurisdiction suspended the proceedings on the merits.
10.3 The argument in support of the Notice of Objection made in the Respon-
dent’s Memorial was directed to the issues—

(1) that to qualify for protection an investment must be located “within the
territory” of the party whose obligation of protection is being invoked,
(the “investment in the territory issue”); and

(2) that the Claimant had not made an investment in Malaysia qualifying for
protection under the 1GA in that he was not the “owner” of the KLSE investment
and that his rights arising out of his purchase of units in the mutual fund were
no more than rights of a contractual nature against the management company
(the “no investment in the territory issue”).

10.4 The Claimant made answer to the arguments in his Counter-Memorial.

10.5 The Respondent took up the election reserved to it under para 19 of the
Minutes of the First Session, and after further directions made by the Tribunal
delivered a further pleading constituted by the Respondent's Reply 9 March
2000.

10.6 Paras 17 to 31 of the Respondent’s Reply raised a further argument to that
noted in para 10.3 above by invoking proviso (i) to Article I(3) of the 1Ga, to contend
that the investment did not satisfy the requirement of being an approved project

490 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

(the “approved project issue”). This argument was supported by the documents and
statements comprising annexures 14 to 26 to the Respondent's Reply.

10.7 Atthe hearing the Respondent's counsel conceded that the approved project
issue was a new and alternative argument made in support of the Notice of Objection.
It became common ground that a decision adverse to the Claimant on either of the
arguments would dispose of the claim.

11. Summary of Respondent’s Submissions at the Hearing

11.1 The Respondent’s Summary expresses the jurisdiction objection made in
the Notice of Objection as—

(1) The requirements laid down in Article 25(1) of the tcsip Convention for the
jurisdiction of tcstp are not met. The facts set out in the Claimant’s Memorial do not
establish that there exists a dispute arising directly out of an investment which the
parties to the present arbitration have consented to settle under the 1cstp Convention
(paras. 7-8 M/J}.

(2) Malaysia’s consent, as required in Article 25, cannot be found in the 1Ga for the
following reasons:

(a) the 1Ga applies only to investments in the territory of the Contracting Parties;

(b) the Claimant's investment was not an investment in the territory of Malaysia
because he acquired no ownership of the Malaysian assets of the rcp; and

(c) with regard to investments in the territory of Malaysia, the 1Ga applies only to
investments in “approved projects”, and portfolio investment does not fall within
this definition.

11.2 The Claimant's pleadings made substantive arguments in answer to these
objections. The Claimant also contended that for various reasons the Respondent
was not able or permitted to advance its substantive objection, and in particular
that—.

(a) the Respondent's reliance upon the terms of proviso (i) to Article 1(3) of the
IGA is inadmissible under the second sentence of Article 25(1) of the 1cstp
Convention;

(b) the Respondent's objection is inadmissible under Arbitration Rule 27;

(c) the Respondent is estopped from denying the fact that the dispute falls within
Article 10(1) of the 1GA.

12. The Course of the Hearings

12.1 The hearing on the Objection to Jurisdiction was fixed for the three days
22 to 24 August 2000.

12.2 The appearances for the Respondent at the hearings were the Hon.
Datuk Heliliah Mohd Yusof, Solicitor-General of Malaysia, Professor Sir Elihu
Lauterpacht QC, Mr Jan Paulsson and Mr Robert Volterra as counsel, assisted by
Mrs Lau Bee Lan and Dr Lee Foong Mee.

AWARD 491

12.3 The parties were allocated time for their primary submissions on the basis
of equality.

12.4 The Respondent’s submissions took the entire day 22 August. As noted
in para 7.4 above, the Respondent produced and filed a “Hearing Book” which
contained some 19 documents, at least 9 of which were new to the proceeding. A
draft for a speech made by the Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister at the time of the
1Ga in 1979 also was filed at the hearings as material relied upon by the Respondent
(Transcript, 22 August 121-8).

12.5 The Claimant completed his submissions in the moming of 23 August. It
was then agreed that the Respondent should make its reply the same afternoon,
with the Claimant making his final submissions after a short adjournment. Hence,
with their consent, each party was given such time as it sought completely to make
its primary submissions and submissions in reply over the two days of hearing. At
the conclusion of the hearing each party agreed that it had had a full and complete
opportunity to present its case on the issues of objection (Transcript, 23 August
171-2).

12.6 All matters for submission by the parties other than for costs were dis-
posed of at the hearing, save for leave being reserved to the Respondent to make
submissions in answer to an extract from Planiol, Droit Civil, Sth edn, 102-7 filed
by the Claimant. By letter 24 August 2000 the Respondent elected not to make
submissions on this issue.

12.7 In response to a request made by the Tribunal at the hearing (Transcript,
22 August 15-16), and under cover of its letter 24 August 2000, the Respondent
filed 3 bilateral investment treaties made by the Respondent that did not contain a
reference to an “approved project” requirement together with a complete copy of
UNCTAD 1999 publication on international investment agreements entitled “Scope
and Definition” extracted in the Hearing Book, Tab 16.

12.8 The only other matter reserved for post-hearing consideration was the par-
ties’ submissions on costs in the event the Respondent’s objection was upheld. The
Respondent made its written submissions by letter 7 September 2000. The Claimant
made answering submissions 10 September 2000.

12.9 For the reasons stated at the hearing and by letter to the parties 12 September
2000, the Tribunal indicated it would have no regard to the parties’ submissions
on costs unless the Respondent’s objection was upheld as determinative of the
dispute.

13. Investment in the Territory Issue

13.1 Para (1) of the Respondent’s Summary (extracted in para 11.1 above) ex-
presses the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction as a single contention that the
requirements laid down by Article 25(1) of the 1cstp Convention for the jurisdiction
of ICSID are not met. The chapeau of para (2) is an elucidation of the objection made
in para (1) rather than an alternative ground. Sub-para (2)(a), (b) and (c) go on to
particularize the reasons why it is contended that the Respondent’s consent required
by Article 25 cannot be found in the 1Ga.

492 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

13.2 As a preliminary issue of construction of the IGA, sub-para (2)(a) of the
Respondent's Summary contends that the 1GA applies only to investments made by
a national of Belgium or Luxemburg made “‘in the territory of Malaysia” (the

“investment in the territory issue’).

13.3 Paras 3 to 7 of the Respondent’s Summary picked up the arguments ad-
vanced on the investment in the territory issue in paras 9 to 12 of the Respondent's

Memorial and in paras 6 to 16 of the Respondent's Reply—

3. Under the 1Ga the Contracting Parties have undertaken commitments only in rela-
tion to investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party made in their respective
territories. This is evidenced by the following provisions of the 1GA: Preamble, Articles
2(1), 3(1), 4(1), SCL), 71) and 8 (paras. 9-11 M/J].

4. In particular, Article 3(1)—the substantive provision allegedly infringed by the
GOM according to the Claimant (para. 2, part II of the Claimant's Memorial]—contains
the territorial requirement. The Claimant’s interpretation of this provision as having two
separate parts is grammatically unsound and legally wrong. The territorial requirement
in Article 3(1) applies to both sentences of this provision [paras. 9-14 R/J].

5. In addition, Article 1(3)(i) of the 1Ga establishes that the investments in Malaysia
that are to enjoy the benefit of protection under the agreement are those made in an
“approved project”. This is evidence that the investments must be made in the territory
of Malaysia (paras. 17-18 R/J].

6. It is irrelevant that Article 10 of the 1Ga (referral of disputes to IcsiD) does not
explicitly refer to the territorial requirement. Article 10 is merely a procedural provision
which must be interpreted in the context of other provisions of the 1Ga. The territorial
requirement is implicit in Article 10 (paras. 15-16 R/J].

7. The disputes that may be referred to Icstp under Article 10 of the 1GA are only
those arising directly out of an investment made by a national of one Contracting Party
within the territory of the other.

13.4 The outline answer made in the Claimant’s Summary on the investment
the territory issue is—

8. There is no territorial requirement under Article 25(1) of the csp Convention
and under Articles 1(3), 10(1) and 10(2) of the 1Ga.

9. There is no territorial requirement either under the second guarantee provided in
Article 3(1) of the 1Ga.

in

This reflects the arguments put under part G, paras 61 to 68 of the Claimant’s

Counter-Memorial and part B, paras 16 to 21 of the Claimant’s Rejoinder.
13.5 Each party invoked reliance on the use of the noun “investment”

in

Article 25(1) of the 1csip Convention. The Claimant contends that it is imper-

missible to confine “investment” to an investment in the territory of Malaysia.

13.6 Itis clear to the Tribunal that Article 25(1) does not touch upon the definition
of “investment” for the purposes of either the Convention or the 1Ga. Article 25(1)
inter alia is directed to defining the Convention requirement for written consent
with respect to the “investment . . . which the parties to the dispute consent in writing
to submit to the Centre’’. It does not operate to define the particular investment.
That is a matter to be determined by the terms of the IGA as the document relied

upon as constituting the consent.

AWARD 493

13.7 The Claimant's primary argument on this issue was that because qualifying
words “in the territory” are joined to the noun “investment” in some provisions and
not in others, the word “investment” is to be read with no territorial requirement
unless expressly stated. The Claimant relied particularly on Article 10(1), where
the term “investment” is not limited by qualifying words, to contend that for the
purposes of Article 25(1) of the Convention “investment” there applies in its general
sense without territorial limit.

13.8 The meaning of investment in Article 10 is informed by the stated objects
of the IGA as expressed in its preamble (see para 9.1 above) by reference to the
creation of favourable conditions for greater economic co-operation for investments
by nationals of one party in the territory of the other.

13.9 Plainly this objective is carried through by the substantive articles. Article 2
reflects the preamble’s promotion of investment in the territory of one party by
nationals of the other contracting party. Article 3 deals with investments made
within the territory by nationals of the other contracting party. Each of Articles 4,
5, 7, 8 and 12 also is predicated on the same subject matter of investments by
nationals of one state party in the territory of the other party. In this context of the
definitions of Article 1, it is clear to the Tribunal that the concept of investment is to
be read as confined to the same defined subject matter of investments by nationals
of one contracting party in the territory of the other.

13.10 To this extent, Article 10(1) does no more than constitute the requisite
consent in writing by the Respondent for disputes with respect to investments
embraced by the terms of the 1GA to become subject to the IcsiD Convention. The
absence of qualifying words of limitation to the word “investment” in Article 10
itself does not broaden the class of investments included by the 1G. It follows that
in providing for the resolution of disputes within the csp Convention, Article 10
is limited to the same subject matter as the rest of the IGA, namely to investments
by nationals of one contracting party in the territory of the other.

13.11 For these reasons, in the circumstances of this dispute the Tribunal finds
that the 1Ga is limited in its application to investments by the Claimant, as a national
of Belgium, made by him in the territory of Malaysia. Any relevant consent by the
Respondent for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the Convention is confined to
investments made in its territory.

13.12 It follows that the Respondent’s alternative arguments in support of its
Notice of Objection, namely the no investment in the territory issue and the ap-
proved project issue, fall to be considered on the basis that the 1GA does require the
Claimant’s investment to be made in the territory of Malaysia.

14. No Investment in the Territory of Malaysia Issue

14.1 As noted in para 10.3 above, the no investment in the territory issue was the
principal argument advanced in the Respondent’s Memorial in support of grounds
of objection made in the Notice of Objection. It is based on the assertion that the
KLSE investment is not an investment made by the Claimant in the territory of
Malaysia.

494 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

 

14.2 The Respondent's Summary expresses its propositions on this issue—

10. It follows that the Claimant has no severable individual property rights that he
can pursue by individual action [ paras. 28-29 M/J; paras. 39 and 54 R/J].

11. This emerges from the Law of 30 March 1988 and from the contractual doc-
uments regarding Citiportfolios, ie, Management Regulations, Citiportfolios sales
prospectus, contract between the Management Company and the Depository Bank,
contract notes and bearer’s certificate [ paras. 17-26 M/J; paras 32-4, 40 R/J].

12. All this is supported by the evidence submitted by the Respondent, which

 

 

includes:

(a) Maitre Elvinger’s expert legal opinions (para. 30 M/J; para 41 R/J; Annexes |
and 7];

(b) the chapter on “opcvm”, Juris Classeur Commercial, fascicule 2238 (1996) [ paras.
49-54 and 59 R/J; Annex 9]

(c) the chapter on “Fonds Communs de Placement”; Encyclopédie Juridique Dalloz,
“Répertoire des Sociétés”, volume 3 (1992) [paras. 42-8 R/J; Annex 10];

(d) the ucrts Directive [ para. 57 R/J; Annex | attached to Annex 7];

(e) the article by Philippe Jestaz in Revue de droit civil 1980, pp. 180-3.

13. The Claimant has failed to submit any evidence that rebuts the Respondent's
arguments. In addition, he has seriously misquoted the Respondent’s pleadings as well
as mi d and mi: d the evidence ited by the Resp

14, Malaysian law supports the conclusion that the Claimant had no legal interest
in the underlying Malaysian assets of the FcP (paras. 34-40 M/J; paras. 60-2 R/J].

(ecp is an abbreviation for fonds communs de placement as the legal form of EAMEC
portfolio constituted under the Luxemburg law.)

14.3 The Claimant’s Memorial and Counter-Memorial, supplemented by his
Rejoinder, made exhaustive argument on this issue in support of the propositions
made in the Claimant’s Summary to the effect that—

 

1. Agreement of the parties that the issues of the ownership of the assets that make
up the EAMEC portfolio and of my right to exercise this cause of action be decided in
accordance with Luxembourg law, which excludes “opinions” of lawyers that are not
expressly upheld by judicial decisions.

2. The ownership of assets that make up a collective investment fund such as the
EAMEC portfolio is expressly vested in the investors (unitholders) under Luxembourg
law and under the investors’ contract with the Management Company of the portfolio,
and not in the said Management Company.

3. The said Management Company is the agent of the investors under Luxembourg
law, and under Malaysian law as well.

4. The investors (unitholders) of the EAMEC portfolio are also deemed to be the
owners of the assets that make up the portfolio under Malaysian law.

5. Shares of Malaysian companies listed on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange
(the KLSE) were bound to permanently constitute half of the EAMEC portfolio.

14.4 A further and alternative answer on this no investment in the territory issue
was advanced at the hearing by the Claimant (Transcript, 23 August S—30). The
Claimant contended that in the event that the Management Company was properly
to be regarded as the owner of the KLSE investment, Articles | 165 and 1166 of the

AWARD 495

Luxemburg Civil Code enabled him to be subrogated and to exercise, in his own
name, its rights, at least to the extent of claiming the amount of loss attributed to
his share of the EAMEC portfolio invested in such securities.

14.5 Articles 1165 and 1166 of the Luxemburg Civil Code provide—

1165. Agreements are effective only between the contracting parties; they do not prej-
udice third parties, and do not benefit them except in the situation specified in

article 1121.
1166. Nevertheless, obligees may exercise all the rights and causes of action (actions)
of their obligor, with the exception of those which are exclusively personal.

14.6 Although the Claimant had referred to Article 1165 in para 107 of his
Rejoinder, undoubtedly this alternative procedural argument was new. After some
discussion at the hearing, the Claimant relied upon these Articles as furnishing
an alternative, rather than substitute, argument entitling him to maintain his claim
under the terms of the IGA.

14.7 The Respondent did not object to the Claimant raising this argument late
in the proceedings. In answer, it filed some legal commentaries and made oral
submissions in reply on 23 August 2000 (see para 15.9 below).

15. Respondent’s Arguments at Hearing

15.1 The essence of its no investment in the territory argument was stated by
the Respondent’s counsel (Transcript, 22 August 21) to be that—

... the Claimant has made no investment in Malaysia, and has no legal relationship
with Malaysia that falls within the scope of the investment treaty.

15.2 The Respondent’s counsel also submitted that it was unlikely that the 1Ga
would have influenced any Belgian investor making direct or indirect investments
in securities listed by the KLSE (Transcript, 22 August 23-4). However, to the extent
that it may be relevant, at the time of his investment in the EAMEC portfolio in 1996
the Claimant was in the peculiar position of being completely aware of the terms
-of the IGA, upon which he had relied in his earlier claim against the Respondent
made in Icsip Case No. ARB/94/I (the First Dispute).

15.3 In any event, as a national of Belgium the Claimant is entitled to maintain
rights vested in him by the 1Ga irrespective of his awareness of its terms at the time
of the investment.

15.4 The constituting documents for the EAMEC portfolio were filed by the
Claimant as Annexes C13 and C12 and referred to at the hearing and copied in
the Hearing Book, Tabs 1 and 2. They were invoked to support the Respondent’s
proposition that under the laws of Luxemburg the Claimant had no interest as owner
in the KLSE investment.

15.5 The commentaries, articles and the two opinions of Maitre Elvinger annexed
to the pleadings or produced and tendered by the Respondent at the hearing in

496 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

support of its contentions on the no investment in the territory issue expose some of
the uncertainties in the evolution of the laws of Luxemburg to deal with mutual fund
investments. There is an obvious tension at the point where its laws seek to assimilate
civil law principles with some of the concepts of a trust. The difficulty was expressed
by counsel for the Respondent (Transcript, 22 August 183) as representing “a
struggle to work towards functional equivalents of the trust”. This is reflective of
the observations by Professor Philippe Jestaz made 20 years ago in (1980) Revue
de droit Civil 180-3, under Hearing Book, Tab 19, in his reference to the grafting
of trust laws into Luxemburg’s civil law.

15.6 The Respondent contended that under the applicable Luxemburg law the
rights of the Claimant as an investor in the EAMEC portfolio were no more than
his entitlement to have the fund administered in accordance with its constituting
documents and the Luxemburg laws applicable to it as an Fcp. It was argued that
there was no requirement for any funds to be invested in Malaysian securities,
and their investment, retention and sale was wholly a matter for the Management
Company. The Respondent asserted that unitholders’ contractual rights entitled
them to no more than the proper administration of the EAMEC portfolio, and that no
unitholder had any severable individual property right with respect to any invest-
ments made by the EAMEC portfolio, particularly the KLSE investments. It followed
that no unitholder had any severable individual property rights with respect to the
investment in securities listed by KLSE.

15.7 The parties were agreed that the characterisation of whether or not the
Claimant had made an investment in the territory of Malaysia under the terms of
the IGA was a matter to be determined by reference to the laws of Luxemburg
(Transcript, 23 August 10).

15.8 The Respondent’s supporting argument (see para 14.2 above) that Malaysian
law separately supports the conclusion that the Claimant had no legal interest in
the underlying Malaysian assets of the EAMEC portfolio would not seem to advance
the Respondent’s argument based on the Luxemburg laws.

15.9 In submissions in reply (Transcript, 23 August 116-35), the Respondent’s
counsel answered the alternative procedural arguments advanced by the Claimant
at the hearing in reliance upon Article 1166 of the Civil Code (see paras 14.4 to
14.7 above), in terms that—

(1) Article 1166 is a procedural provision that does not impact upon the substan-
tive issue for determination, namely whether the Claimant is to be regarded
within the terms of the IGA to be a national of Belgium who has invested in
the territory of Malaysia; and

(2) the provision applies only to certain, due and liquidated rights.

16. Order of Determination of Objections
16.1 At the hearing (Transcript, 22 August 178-80) the Respondent’s counsel

asked the Tribunal to determine the “approved project” issue first and requested that
if it were upheld the Tribunal should make a final award dismissing the claim without

AWARD 497

going on to consider the no investment in the territory ground. After expressing his
confidence that neither ground would be sustained, the Claimant concurred in this
approach. (Transcript, 23 August 59-61). On this agreed basis, the Tribunal will
adopt the proposed order of consideration of the alternative arguments.

16.2 It follows that if the approved project argument is upheld the Respondent
will have sufficiently made out the objection expressed in its Notice of Objection
that there has been no consent by it to the reference of the dispute within Article 25
of the 1csip Convention. The proper course then would be for the Tribunal to
make an award upholding the objection and to dismiss the claim, with final costs
orders.

17. The Approved Project Issue

17.1 The approved project issue is embraced by paras 15 to 19 in the Respondent's
Summary—

15. With regard to investments in the territory of Malaysia, Article 1(3) of the
IGA restricts the application of the IGA to those investments made in an “approved
project”.

16. With this restriction Malaysia intended to limit the encouragement and protec-
tion of foreign investment made in its territory to investment made in projects that
contributed to the manufacturing and industrial capacity of the country. Portfolio and
stock market investment, the kind of investment involved in the case at hand, does
not fall within the definition of approved project. Therefore the 1Ga does not apply
(para. 21 R/J].

17. This is supported by the evidence submitted by the Respondent on the historical
background of the 1Ga, which includes:

(a) the Malaya/US tca and its application practice (para. 22 R/J; Annexes 16-17];

(b) the Malaya/Germany IGA, its travaux préparatoires, press reports and official state-
ments and application practice [ paras. 23-5 R/J; Annexes 18-20);

(c) the Malaysia/Switzerland 1Ga and its travaux préparatoires [paras 26-7 R/J;
Annexes 24 and 25];

(d) the records of interview with Malaysian officials involved in the negotiations of
the IGA [para. 28 R/J; Annex 14);

(e) the Memorandum from the Ministry of Trade and Industry of Malaysia to the
Attorney-General’s Chambers of 11 November 1999 on the “Policy underlying the
Investment Guarantee Agreement (1GA)” [para. 28 R/J; Annex 15]; and

(f) Malaysia’s i practice regarding the limitation of p ion to i
in approved projects in 1GAs [para. 29 R/J; Annex 26].

18. The Claimant’s reference to the proceedings in 1cstp Case No. ARB/94/1 and
the related correspondence does not alter the conclusion that the 1GA does not apply
to portfolio investment, the kind of investment involved in the case at hand [paras.
30-1 R/JJ.

19. The Claimant's interpretation of the evidence submitted by the Respondent in
support of this conclusion is manifestly flawed.

 

17.2 The Claimant’s Summary made answer to the approved project argument
in terms—

498 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

6. Shares of Malaysian companies listed on the KLSE comply with proviso (i) to
Article 1(3)—aka Article 1(3)(i)—of the Investment Guarantee Agreement of
November 22, 1979 between Malaysia and Belgium/Luxembourg (the IGA) as com-
pleted by Malaysia's note ref. F28/92 of September 28, 1992 to the Belgian embassy
in Malaysia (C6).

7. The reference to the notion of “approved project’ by the Respondent in its
Reply on its Objections to Jurisdiction is inadmissible under the second sentence of
Article 25(1) of the tcstp Convention.

[0]

13. The Respondent's juri
Rule 27.

14. The Respondent is estopped from referring to the notion of “approved project”.

15. The reference by the Respondent to the notion of “approved project” is inad-
missible under Arbitration Rule 27.

is under Arb

18. 1cstp Convention, Article 25(1)

18.1 The Claimant’s Summary, para 7, asserts that the approved project issue is
inadmissible “under the second sentence of Article 25(1) of the 1cstp Convention”.
18.2 Article 25(1) provides—

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency
of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

18.3 The Claimant's argument at the hearing (Transcript, 23 August 33-6) arises
from the Claimant’s Rejoinder. It was asserted that for the purposes of the second
sentence of Article 25(1) the raising of the approved project issue in the Respon-
dent’s Reply constitutes an impermissible derogation from a prior consent to juris-
diction implicitly constituted by the last sentence of para 10 of the Respondent's
Memorial.

18.4 This contention is rejected by the Tribunal for the reason that the requisite
consent under Article 25(1) of the 1csiD Convention is the consent constituted by
the terms of the IGA itself. The formal requirement for consent by a State is not to
be derived as an inference drawn from the terms of a State’s Memorial advancing
an objection based on the absence of such consent.

19. Waiver Under Rule 27

19.1 Rule 27 of the Arbitration Rules provides—

A party which knows or should have known that a provision of the Administrative and
-Financial Regulations, of these Rules, of any other rules or agreement applicable to
the proceeding, or of an order of the Tribunal has not been complied with and which

AWARD 499

fails to state promptly its objections thereto, shall be deemed—subject to Article 45 of
the Convention—to have waived its right to object.

19.2. The Claimant's Summary, para 15, contends that the approved project issue
is inadmissible under Arbitration Rule 27. This appears to be a particular of the
general contention earlier made under para 13 that the Respondent’s entire objec-
tion is inadmissible under Arbitration Rule 27 (Claimant’s Rejoinder, Part VIC. at
p. 45)

19.3 To the same extent that the pleading in para 10 of the Respondent's
Memorial does not constitute consent for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the
Icsip Convention, the Tribunal determines that it also does not constitute a deemed
waiver of its denial of the Respondent’s consent for jurisdiction under the Icsip
Convention.

19.4 Further, as the Respondent’s Notice of Objection raised the issue of consent
at the first session on 9 August 1999, there can be no possibility of waiver on the
issue of consent arising from the failure by the Respondent to plead the approved
project argument in a timely manner in the first round of pleadings. This is a matter
of procedural criticism rather than jurisdictional objection or waiver within the term
of Article 27 of the Arbitration Rules.

19.5 The procedural position is much the same as arose upon the Claimant raising
at the hearing his new and alternative argument which was based on Articles 1165
and 1166 of the Luxemburg Civil Code (see paras 14.4 to 14.7 above). In each case
a party is not shut out for raising the new argument by reasons of waiver.

19.6 Further, the approved project argument was an issue obviously thrown up
by the terms of entire Article 1(3). It was raised in correspondence between the
Claimant and the Icstp Secretariat prior to the acceptance of the Request (Hearing
Book, Tab 18), and was particularly dealt with by the Claimant’s Request and
Claimant’s Memorial.

19.7 After hearing submissions from the parties at the hearing on 22 August, the
Tribunal indicated that if the issue of the Respondent’s consent under Article 25(1)
of the 1csip Convention were not foreclosed by reasons of waiver or estoppel the
Tribunal itself would raise the issue under Article 41(2) of the Arbitration Rules
were it not effectively raised by the Respondent (Transcript, 22 August 71-102 and
109-12). As the Tribunal finds that there was no waiver under Rule 27 and that the
Respondent is not otherwise shut out from raising the issue, the Tribunal does not
raise this issue for separate consideration under Article 41(2).

20. Estoppel on Approved Project Issue

20.1 Part [V of the Claimant’s Counter-Memorial asserts that the Respondent
is estopped from denying its consent under Article 10 of the IGA by reason of its
failure to express an objection to the notification of the claim constituted by the
Claimant’s letter 23 November 1998 (Annexure C.24 to the Claimant’s Memorial).

20.2 Whilst conceding that an estoppel may arise in international law so as to
bind a state, the Respondent’s counsel’s submission was that, as for any estoppel,
the Claimant must establish both a statement made by one party and reliance upon

500 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

it by the other party to his detriment or to the advantage of the party making it
(Transcript, 22 August 48-9). The Tribunal accepts that this is a correct state-
ment of the applicable principle, expressed in an international law context in 1990
by a Chamber of the International Court of Justice in E/ Salvador v. Honduras
(ICJ Rep. 1990, p. 118, para 63, extracted Hearing Book, Tab 9)

20.3 The matters identified in para 72 of the Claimant's Counter-Memorial can-
not constitute sufficient acts of reliance to the Claimant’s detriment for this purpose.
In any event, these contentions were raised in connection with the no investment in
the territory issue. They have no obvious relevance to the approved project issue,
which was not raised until the second round of pleadings.

20.4 The Claimant’s submissions at the hearing did not advance any basis to
find an estoppel with respect to the approved project issue such as to give particular
content to para 14 (see para 17.2 above) of the Claimant's summary. In particular,
the Claimant has not established that he acted to his detriment in reliance upon
any representation which might be constructed out of the failure of the Respondent
to plead the approved project issue at an appropriate time. Nor has he established
anything arising from the circumstances of the first dispute which may found an
estoppel against the Respondent contending that the approved project requirement
of proviso (i) of Article 1(3) is not satisfied.

20.5 For these reasons the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s argument that the
Respondent is estopped from raising the approved project issue.

21. Materials Extrinsic to the IGA

21.1 The Respondent's Summary, para 17 (see para 17.1 above), lists extrinsic
circumstances and materials adduced to support the general proposition made in
para 16 that the approved project requirement was a restriction intended to limit pro-
tection to foreign investments that contributed to the Respondent’s manufacturing
and industrial capacity.

21.2 The arguments made in paras 22 to 29 of the Respondent’s Reply are sup-
ported by the materials comprised in its Annexes 14 to 26. These constitute a variety
of factual material ranging from statements of civil servants involved in the negotia-
tions of the IGA (Annex 14) to documents with respect to the terms and operation of
this and other investment agreements made by the Respondent. Annex 25 is a copy
of the investment agreement made 1 March 1978 between the Respondent and the
Government of the Swiss Confederation which contains a definition of investment
in similar terms to Article 1(3) of the 1Ga but in terms that plainly attach the proviso
for an approved project to the entire definition of “investment”. Annex 26 to the
Respondent’s Reply lists some 24 investment agreements made by Malaysia since
1959 which contain as part of the definition of protected assets a requirement that
the investment be an approved project. It also identifies 3 investment agreements
made by Malaysia which contain no such express reference. Of temporal relevance
is the investment agreement with France made on 24 April 1975, some four years
prior to the 1GA made 22 November 1979 (a copy of which the Respondent filed
with the Tribunal after the hearing).

AWARD 501

21.3 At the hearing the Respondent also supported the proposition made in para
16 of the Respondent's Summary with an extract from UNCTAD’s 1999 publica-
tion Scope and Definition (Hearing Book, Tab 16, a complete copy of which the
Respondent filed with the Tribunal after the hearing), together with an UNCTAD
press release 29 June 2000 (Tab 17). These most recent UN publications were re-
lied upon to support the contention that the 1GA made in 1979 should be read by the
Tribunal with a background assumption that it was confined to the subject matter
of productive investment.

21.4 Even if it may be accepted that in 1979 bilateral investment agreements
made by states with a developing economy might be expected to encourage pro-
ductive foreign investment, resort to extrinsic materials of the sort invoked by the
Respondent for the purpose of colouring the meaning of the particular terms of
the IGA is of limited utility in determining whether Article 1(3) of the 1Ga by its
terms restricts the application of the entire IGA to investments made in an “approved
project”. This especially is so given that the investment agreement made with France
some 4 years earlier contained no such restriction (see para 21.2 above).

21.5 Further, itis forthe Tribunal to determine the probative value of the evidence
of the underlying factual matrix at the time the IGA was made (Arbitration Rules,
Rule 34).

21.6 The Tribunal has considered the materials from sources ranging from 1960
(Respondent’s Reply, Annex 21) to 2000 (Hearing Book, Tab 17). Its approach
is first to consider the terms of proviso (i). If its meaning is found to be clear,
the Tribunal will not reduce its reach by reference to general considerations or
assumptions derived from extrinsic sources of the sort relied upon by the Respondent
in its materials and arguments.

22. Proviso (i) of Article 1(3)

22.1 Article 1(3) of the 1Ga is set out in para 9.2 above in the same layout as in
the executed IGA. It is obvious that proviso (i) should have been justified back to the
margin, immediately under para (e), rather than aligned to its text. It is untenable
to suggest that because the proviso is indented in from the margin it is to be read
as attaching only to para (e). Proviso (i) sensibly is to be read as attaching to any
asset coming within the term of “investment”, including any of the paras (a) to (e).

22.2 As the KLSE investment is an “asset” within the terms of para (b) of Article
1(3), the relevant enquiry is to determine whether proviso (i) is satisfied to the
extent it is—

invested in a project classified as an “approved project” by the appropriate Ministry
in Malaysia, in accordance with the legislation and the administrative practice, based
thereon...

22.3 The contentions advanced in the Claimant’s Request, Memorial and plead-
ings on the objections and in his oral argument are to the effect either that the
requirement of proviso (i) is dispensed with or that in the particular circumstances

502 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

of this investment is to be regarded as satisfied under the terms of Malaysian law
and administrative practice.

22.4 A particular factual foundation for this claim arises from the terms of the
communications made between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia and
the Royal Embassy of Belgium constituted by an exchange of notes verbales of 28
August and 28 September 1992.

23. The Respondent's Note Verbale 28 September 1992

23.1 By note verbale 28 August 1992 addressed to the Respondent's Ministry
of Foreign Affairs from the Royal Embassy of Belgium in Malaysia, Belgium
sought clarification on the term “approved project” under the terms of the 1GA in
terms—

The Royal Embassy of Belgium presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign

Affairs and has the honour to refer to the Agreement between the Belgo-Luxemburg
ic Union and the G of Malaysia on and reci i

protection of investments, signed in Kuala Lumpur on November 22, 1979.

The Embassy would like to address Article 1, point 3, para (i), and seek some
clarification on the term “approved project” in the light of the Malaysian legislation
and administrative practices.

Since the conclusion of the Agreement Malaysia has known an important economic
development, in particular under the impulse of special incentive programmes for the
attraction of foreign investment, of which many of them have been introduced through
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in the beginning of the 1980s.

The policy for attracting foreign investment usely [sic] targets particular economic
goals, and the related incentives mostly become operational only after “approval of the
project”.

In the above mentioned Agreement the scope of application is meant to be the very
larger one, as determined in Article 1, point 3: “The term investment shall comprise
every kind of assets and more particular, though not exclusively, ...”. It therefore can
include foreign investments outside the promotional policies for particular sectors, and
even foreign investments which because of their substance or object have not been
marked for explicit approval procedures by the Authorities.

For the purpose of correct information towards the Belgian Business Community,
the Government of Belgium would like to obtain from the Government of Malaysia
the assertation that the term “approved project”, as referred to in Article 1, point 3,
para (i), is to be understood in the larger sense and does include foreign investment for
which the substance and or the object are not subject to explicit approval procedures.

The Royal Embassy of Belgium wishes to thank the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for
its assistance in obtaining this assertation, and avails itself of this opportunity to renew
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the assurances of its highest consideration.

23.2 The response was by a note verbale addressed to the Royal Embassy of
Belgium at Kuala Lumpur 28 September 1992 (Note Verbale) in terms—

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Malaysia presents its compliments to the Royal
Embassy of Belgium and with reference to the latter’s Note B12-90/Nr. 1095 N.V.
85 dated 28 August 1992, has the honour to inform that the term “Approved Projects”

AWARD 503

under Article |,(3)(i) of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between Malaysia and the Belgo-Luxemburg Economic Union should
be read together with Article 1(3)(a) to Article 1(3)(e). If any project undertaken does
not requires [sic] approval from the relevant designated Ministries, hence Article 1(3)(i)
is not applicable.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Malaysia avails itself of this opportunity to renew
to the Royal Embassy of Belgium the assurances of its highest consideration.

23.3 The Respondent's Reply sought to explain the position of the Nore
Verbale—

30. The Claimant has referred to a letter of 19 December 1991 from the GoM to
Mr Parra, of tcsib, and to a note of 28 September 1992 from the Gom to Belgium which
he interprets as ing the i of the “app projects” limitation to the
shares acquired in Malaysia by the Mutual Fund. This approach could only be relevant
if the Claimant were correct in his contention that he is an owner of the shares owned
by the Mutual Fund. This, of course, the Respondent denies. However, even if he were,
his interpretation of these documents is mistaken. Neither of these documents serves
to change the meaning of the proviso that appears at the end of Article 1(3) of the IGa
which excludes the protection of portfolio investment.

31. For example, the note of 28 September 1992 indicates the understanding of the
GoM of the term “approved projects” in the 1G Article 1(3)(i). The Goo then said that the
term should be read together with Article 1(3)(a) to (e) (i-e., the non-exclusive list there
given of “assets” constituting “investment”) and stated: “If any project undertaken does
not require approval from the relevant designated Ministries, [hence] Article 1(3)(i)
is not applicable”. Thus, investment in an “approved project” is a necessary condition
of being a protected investment. Only where the investment is in an approved project
is it protected. Mere investment in shares in the stock market, which can be traded
by anyone and are not connected to the development of an approved project, are not
protected. The assertion in the C-M/J that portfolio investments “are deemed to be
encompassed in the definition of the term ‘investment’ as laid down in Article 1(3)
of the 1Ga” is incorrect. The Claimant’s reference to correspondence associated with
the proceedings which he started against the GoM in 1991 is not relevant here. In that
case, the Claimant had made a direct investment in the shares of a single, specific
development project and the correspondence must be read in that light.

 

23.4 At the hearing (Transcript, 22 August 38) counsel for the Respondent sub-
mitted that these exch between Belgium and Malaysia should be regarded as
the equivalent of an exchange of letters. Indeed, counsel denigrated the Note Verbale
from the Respondent to the level of “some functionary at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs” (Transcript, 23 August 102). This is imperfectly to characterize the status
of a note verbale as a formal communication between states. The particular and
formal enquiry made by Belgium’s note verbale of 28 August 1992 was formally
answered by the Respondent on 28 September 1992. Of course, this exchange does
not effect a direct amendment to the terms of the Ga. However, at this peak level
of intercourse between states it must be regarded as an enduring and authoritative
engagement expressing to the Belgo-Luxemburg Union the manner in which the
Respondent regards and applies the terms of the IGA with regard to investments
made in its territory by nationals of the Belgo-Luxemburg Union.

504 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

23.5 Although the first sentence of the statement might have been more correctly
expressed in terms that the proviso (i) to Article 1(3) attaches to the entire definition
of investment, the Note Verbale to this extent is merely confirmatory that the proviso
(i) attaches to each of the paragraphs (a) to (e) of Article 1(3).

23.6 Itis the second sentence of the Note Verbale that gives rise to uncertainty—

If any project undertaken does not requires [sic] approval from the relevant designated
Ministries, hence Article 1(3)(i) is not applicable.

Para 31 of the Respondent’s Reply set out in para 23.3 above, makes what the
Tribunal accepts as the appropriate grammatical correction to this statement to
read—

If any project undertaken does not require approval from the relevant designated
Ministries, Article |(3)(i) is not applicable.

23.7 In the search for content, the statement is to be read as the considered
position adopted by Malaysia in response to the operative part of Belgium’s note
verbale seeking confirmation (“assertation”) that—

The term “approved project” as referred to in Article 1, point 3, para (i), is to be
understood in the larger sense and does include foreign investment for which the
substance and or the object are not subject to explicit approval procedures.

23.8 The difficulty is to give any meaning to the second sentence which assists,
rather than confounds, the sensible application of proviso (i) to a particular in-
vestment made by a national of the Belgo-Luxemburg Union. The intended reach
and application of the statement remains elusive. At the hearing the Respondent's
counsel described the Note Verbale as an “otherwise obscure reply”. Little emerged
in the ensuing discussion (Transcript, 22 August 131-56) to reduce the obscurity.

23.9 The Solicitor-General explained that the Note Verbale arose out of issues
in contention between the Claimant and the Respondent prior to the initiation of the
proceedings in the First Dispute in 1994. However, the Note Verbale is not expressed
as limited to the circumstances of that dispute. It may endure with a continuing
relevance with respect to investments by nationals of the Belgo-Luxemburg Union
in Malaysia.

23.10 Some sensible content to the second part of the Note Verbale may be
given by the suggestion by the Respondent’s counsel that it would embrace a
general “blanket” statement made by or on behalf of the Respondent with respect
to particular classes of investments (Transcript, 22 August 146-9). For example,
the Respondent might encourage investments in the IT industry by stating that all
such investments would be accepted as investments in an “approved project” for
the purposes of the 1Ga. This proposition may be accepted. However, it is noted
that such a statement would in any event seem to fall within the terms of the second
sentence of the Note Verbale as much as under the terms of the proviso itself. Further,
the Respondent did not proffer any example of any such general stipulation having
been issued by the Respondent before or after 1992.

AWARD 505

23.11 In the search for real content there is an admitted circularity in this second
sentence of the Note Verbale. In its literal reading it purports to say that proviso (i)
will not attach to a project which does not require approval from a relevant desig-
nated Ministry. If this were its effect, the approved project requirement effectively
would be abrogated for investments in a project where there was no particular
approval process, as proviso (i) would apply only to a project that required ap-
proval. However, such an operation would be a radical departure and derogation
of the entire 1Ga that by its terms clearly applies a requirement for an approved
project for each asset constituting an investment in Malaysia by a national of the
Belgo-Luxemburg Union.

23.12 The Note Verbale remains a statement that engenders rather than resolves
uncertainty as to the application of proviso (i) to Article 1(3).

23.13 Somewhat reluctantly the Tribunal is moved to accept the position pressed
by the Respondent’s counsel (Transcript, 22 August 149) that the Respondent has
not produced an interpretation of the exchange constituted by the Note Verbale
which is secure “in absolute or abstract terms”. Little more may be made of the
terms of the Note Verbale other than to admit the force of the Respondent's coun-
sel’s further submission (Transcript, 22 August 151) that in this uncertain field of
operation it is for the Claimant to establish a meaning of the Note Verbale that
supports his contentions on the approved project issue.

23.14 The Tribunal accepts that the Claimant may reasonably complain that the
Note Verbale is of uncertain effect to the circumstances of his investment. However,
it remains that, whatever was intended, it is for the Claimant to establish that the
particular assets of the EAMEC portfolio constituted by the KLSE investment fall
within the definition of Article 1(3).

23.15 On this question the Tribunal rejects the contention of the Claimant that
the Note Verbale has the effect of abrogating the requirement that proviso (i) be
satisfied with respect to the KLSE investment.

23.16 Apart from its consideration of costs issues, it may not be for the Tribunal
to comment that the Respondent usefully might either withdraw or clarify the
Note Verbale. As is manifest in the circumstances of this dispute, it is a source
of confusion rather than clarity with respect to the application of the terms of the
IGA to an investment made in Malaysia by a national of the Belgo-Luxemburg
Union.

24. Application of Proviso (i) to KLSE Investments

24.1 An investment in KLSE listed securities by a national of Belgium or
Luxemburg will fall within the broad definition of an asset constituted within para
(b) of Article 1(3) of the 1Ga. This in itself does not make the investment a protected
asset, for the investment will be entitled to protection under the 1Ga only if proviso
(i) is satisfied.

24.2 As the Tribunal has rejected the contention that the Note Verbale has the
effect of abrogating the application of proviso (i) where there is no particular law or
regulation requiring a consent for an investment in the territory of the Respondent,

506 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

the Tribunal finds that the approved project requirement does attach to the KLSE
investment.

25. ‘KLSE Listing Requirements

25.1 Inhis pleadings the Claimant anticipated the relevance of the application of
the definition of investment under Article 1(3) to the KLSE investment. In particular,
he argued, in the Claimant's Memorial, para 17 (page 3), that the term “project” is
used in the sense of activity, and that a share of corporate stock is, by definition,
an investment in the activity of the corporation. In para 20 (page 4), he relied upon
Article 7 of the KLSE Listing Manual which requires approval from the Respondent's
Capital Issues Committee (cic) before listing of any shares on the KLSE with an
investment in an approved project. It is argued that this constitutes satisfaction of
the requirements of proviso (i) (Transcript, 23 August 41-4).

25.2 The Claimant’s Memorial, Annexure C.20, is a relevant extract from the
official listing requirements, of which para 1.A.(I).(7) requires—

Approval must first be obtained from the Capital Issues Committee before listing and
quotation of any shares can be granted.

The Guidelines for the new issues of securities is Annexure C.21. It sets out the
functions of the cic as set up in June 1968 by the Minister of Finance “to ensure
the orderly development of the capital market” as becoming formally established
with the coming into force of the Securities Industry Act, 1983 on 7 July 1983.

25.3 Part II of these Guidelines confirms the role of the CIC as to ensure the
orderly development of the capital market by regulating the issue of securities by
public limited companies and/or the listing of such securities on a stock exchange.
Paras 3, 4 and 5 of the Guidelines provide—

3. In examining proposals for the issue of securities and/or listing on a stock ex-
change, the cic considers each company on its own merits, with reference to the industry
as a whole. The cic makes a financial evaluation of the securities to be offered after
taking into account the various criteria relating to the soundness and growth prospects
of the company, including the integrity and the performance of the management in
running the public listed company. Generally, the cic examines proposals, and after
paying due regard to:—

“(i) the viability of the company;

(ii) the quality and capability of the management of the company;

(iii) the suitability for listing of the company ina stock exchange where applicable; and
(iv) the interests of the public,”

may approve the proposals upon such terms and conditions as it deems fit.

4. The cic in examining proposals also ensures that Government policies and
objectives are observed by working closely with the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the
Registrar of Companies (Roc) and the Foreign Investment Committee (F1c). In consider-
ing any application which requires the issue of a prospectus, the CIc in consultation with
the Roc seeks to ensure a full disclosure of information in the prospectus as required

AWARD 507

under the Companies Act, 1965. The prospectus shall also include a reasonable forecast
of profits and dividends which the directors and the sponsoring merchant bank shall
be accountable. The cic also requires that the guidelines of the FIC be complied with
by companies undertaking acquisitions of assets or mergers and take-overs to ensure
that proposals are consistent with national interests.

5. With regard to public listed companies, they are required to seek the approval of
the cic before seeking listing and quotation of their securities on other stock exchanges.
There should also be continual disclosure to the cic in respect of any management or
business agreements entered into between the company and its foreign associated and
related companies which may result in a conflict of interest situation.

25.4 It follows that as part of the process of listing securities on the KLSE the
applicable regulatory scheme invokes the requirement that the CIC give its approval
by reference to the matters listed in para 3 of the Guidelines and with regard to the
governmental policies and objectives referred to in para 4.

25.5 Proviso (i) requires that to be a protected asset within the definition of
investment under Article 1(3) of the 1Ga there be an investment in an “approved
project”. The Claimant contends that the proviso is satisfied with respect to the
KLSE investment because the approval of the cic is an “approval” of the existing or
intended business activity of a corporation. The answer to this proposition is that
proviso (i) and the cic requirements concern different subject matters. Approval
by the cic may satisfy a governmental requirement that the business of a cor-
poration be approved by a governmental agency. But this is not the content or
subject matter of the “approved project” requirements of proviso (i). What is re-
quired is something constituting regulatory approval of a “project”, as such, and
not merely the approval at some time of the general business activities of a cor-
poration. The Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s contentions that a cic approval for a
corporation in the listing processes for the KLSE suffices to satisfy the request for
an “approved project” under the proviso. To this extent, the contention in para 31
of the Respondent’s Reply (set out in para 23.3 above) that “mere investments in
shares in the stock market, which can be traded by anyone, and are not connected
to the development of an approved project, are not protected”, is upheld by the
Tribunal.

25.6 For these reasons, it is the finding of the Tribunal that, neither on the
application of the terms of proviso (i) itself, nor as it may be informed by the
second sentence of the Note Verbale, does an investment by a national of the Belgo-
Luxemburg Union in shares of companies that are listed on the KLSE, following
approval by the cic as is required under the regulatory laws of the Respondent,
satisfy the requirements of proviso (i) as an approved project.

25.7 The finding of the Tribunal on the approved project issue is that the KLSE
investment does not satisfy the definition of investment under Article 1(3) of the IGA
merely because of the fact that it is invested in KLSE listed securities. For that reason,
it is not a protected investment within the terms of the 1Ga, including Article 10. As
there is no contention by the Claimant that the KLSE investment otherwise has been
approved as an “approved project” under the terms of proviso (i), it follows that
whether or not the Claimant himself has made the KLSE investment in the territory

508 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

of the Respondent, there is no requisite consent by the Respondent for the purposes
of the GA as is required by Article 25(1) of the 1cstb Convention.

26. Statement of Facts Found by the Tribunal

26.1 As is required by Arbitration Rule 47(1)(g), the Tribunal makes findings of
facts in this Award that the parts of the EAMEC portfolio invested in securities listed
on the KLSE, and in particular the KLSE investment, do not constitute an approved
project as is required by the terms of proviso (i) for the investment to constitute
an investment within the meaning of Article 1(3) of the tGa. The Claimant's claim
fails by reason of a want of consent by the Respondent under Article 10 of the 1Ga
and Article 25(1) of the 1cstp Convention.

26.2 Inthe circumstances of the parties’ agreement and invitation to the Tribunal
to determine the approved project issue first, the Tribunal does not determine the
issues raised and sustained in the pleadings and arguments with respect to the no
investment in the territory issue.

26.3 In reaching its decision to uphold the ‘objection made by the Respondent
in the Notice of Objection the Tribunal has exhaustively considered the entire
pleadings, contentions, arguments, submissions and documentary materials in the
proceedings, including in the Claimant’s Request and the Claimant’s Memorial and
each of the pleadings listed in para 7.1 above. The Tribunal also has considered
the entire arguments made by the parties, and has reviewed the Transcript of the
hearing.

26.4 The award of the Tribunal is to uphold the jurisdictional objection made by
the Respondent in the Notice of Objection on 9 August 1999 and to make an award
to determine the entire claim by declaring that this dispute does not fall within the
jurisdiction of the 1csip Convention.

27. Costs

27.1 As an award is to be made, Article 61 of the 1csip Convention requires
the Tribunal to decide how and by whom the expenses incurred by the parties anc
the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilitie
of the Centre shall be paid. Rule 47 of the Arbitration Rules also requires the awar:
to contain any decision of the Tribunal regarding the costs of the proceedings.

27.2 Inits submissions made by letter 7 September 2000 the Respondent claime
for its entire costs to be paid by the Claimant.

27.3 In his answering submissions on costs and his letter 10 September 2000 tt
Claimant requested orders for payment of his costs of the objection to jurisdictio
The Tribunal refers to its letter to the parties 12 September 2000, that explainc
the extent to which the Tribunal would have regard to the terms of the Claiman’
submissions on costs. It also was explained at the hearing, that in the event that t
Respondent's objection was not upheld no award would be made, and the Claiman
costs would have fallen for consideration with the entire costs of the arbitration

AWARD 509

27.4 The Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s submission that the Respondent should
be ordered to pay any of the Claimant's costs of his unsuccessful claim now dis-
missed for want of jurisdiction.

27.5 Although the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction has been upheld, there
are several considerations that militate against the Claimant being ordered to pay
the Respondent's costs.

27.6 The first relevant matter is the inequality of the position of the parties. The
Claimant conducted the proceedings in person and with particular tenacity both
to advance his claim on the merits (as expressed in his Request and Memorial)
and to make answer to the successive arguments which emerged to support the
Respondent's jurisdictional objection.

27.7 Secondly, although the Claimant’s Request and Memorial affirmatively
argued that proviso (i) of Article 1(3) was satisfied as a jurisdictional matter, the
Respondent did not raise the approved project argument until the second round of
pleadings. This was an argument which could, and should, have been advanced in the
Respondent’s Memorial in support of its Notice of Objection. There is no obvious
reason why two rounds of pleadings were required to expose the Respondent’s two
arguments on its objection.

27.8 Thirdly, the position of the Tribunal is that for costs purposes the Tribunal
should make no assumption that the Respondent would have been successful on
the no investment in the territory issue. Indeed, on the election by the Respondent
not to pursue the no investment in the territory issue to resolution unless that
was necessary to uphold the objection, the proper approach is for the Tribunal to
consider costs issues on the contrary assumption that the argument would not have
been sustained. The Claimant may reasonably argue for what a common lawyer
terms the costs thrown away.

27.9 Inits opening and closing submissions at the hearing and in its written sub-
missions for costs the Respondent asserted that the dispute was a “nuisance” claim.
The Tribunal is uncertain as to the assistance to be derived from such characteriza-
tion, particularly on costs issues. The Respondent’s counsel invoked a scenario of
disaster which would arise were investors in mutual funds individually entitled to
claim the protection of the iGa. However, it was on the invitation of the Respondent
that this issue has not been decided by the Tribunal.

27.10 From time to time the Tribunal and the Secretary have been required to
intervene to secure compliance by the Claimant to the requirements of proper form.
At the outset of his submissions (Transcript, 23 August 4) the Claimant apologized
for any offence arising from his style and prose. Nonetheless, under the persiflage
the Claimant has presented a thoroughly prepared argument through several layers
of pleadings. As a layman he has exposed the real difficulties arising from the
issuance of the Note Verbale and the application of proviso (i) of Article 1(3) of the
IGA to the circumstances of the KLSE investment.

27.11 Although the Claimant is unsuccessful on the approved project issue, and
in the result, on one view this is for the somewhat negative reason submitted by the
Respondent’s counsel (Transcript, 23 August 149 and 151) as noted in para 23.13
above.

510 GRUSLIN v. MALAYSIA

27.12 Itis the conclusion of the Tribunal that the collation of these circumstances
is recognized by the determination that each party should pay one-half of the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre and otherwise that each party pay its own expenses incurred in connection
with the proceedings.

Award

The Tribunal upholds the objection made by the Respondent in its Notice of
Objection of 9 August 1999 and declares that the claim is not a dispute falling
within the scope of Article 10(1) and that there is no consent by the Respondent
to ICSID jurisdiction under Article 10(2) of the Intergovernmental Agreement made
22 November 1979 between the Belgo-Luxemburg Economic Union and Malaysia,
or as is required under Article 25(1) of the 1csip Convention.

The claim is dismissed.

Each party shall pay its own expenses in the arbitration and one-half of the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre.

(Source: The text of the award is reproduced by permission of the Respondent
Government.]

