INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

PHILIP MORRIS BRANDS SARL,
PHILIP MORRIS PRODUCTS S.A.
AND
ABAL HERMANOS S.A.

(Claimants)

-and -

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7

 

DECISION ON RECTIFICATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Piero Bernardini, President
Mr. Gary Born
Judge James Crawford

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mairée Uran Bidegain

Date of dispatch to the Parties: September 26, 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov

Ms. Marinn Carlson

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless

Mr. James Mendenhall

Sidley Austin LLP

1501 K Street, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20005

United States of America
and

Dr. Veijo Heiskanen

Ms. Noradéle Radjai

Mr. Samuel Moss

LALIVE

Rue de la Mairie 35

1207 Geneva

Switzerland
and

Mr. Ken Reilly

Shook, Hardy & Bacon LLP

Miami Center

201 S. Biscayne Blvd., Suite 3200

Miami, FL 33131

United States of America
and

Ms. Madeleine McDonough

Shook, Hardy & Bacon LLP

1155 F Street NW, Suite 200

Washington, D.C. 20004

United States of America
and

Mr. Bill Crampton

Shook, Hardy & Bacon LLP

2555 Grand Blvd.

Kansas City, MO 64108

United States of America

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Colonia 1206, 6to. Piso
Montevideo
Uruguay
and
Dr. Jorge Basso Garrido
Minister of Public Health
18 de julio 1892, Piso 2
Montevideo
Uruguay
and
Dr. Miguel Angel Toma
Secretario de la Presidencia / Secretary of the
Presidency
Plaza Independencia 710
C.P. 11000
Montevideo
Uruguay
and
Ambassador Carlos Gianelli
Embassy of Uruguay
1913 I (Eye) Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006
United States of America
and
Mr. Paul Reichler
Mr. Lawrence Martin
Ms. Clara Brillembourg
Mr. Andrew B. Loewenstein
Foley Hoag LLP
1717 K Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006-5350
United States of America
and
Prof. Harold Hongju Koh
87 Ogden Street
New Haven, CT 06511
United States of America

I.
Il.

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION, PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND PARTIES’ POSITIONS
ANALYSIS

 

DECISION

 

INTRODUCTION, PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND PARTIES’ POSITIONS

1. On July 8, 2016, an Arbitral Tribunal composed of Professor Piero Bernardini, Judge James
Crawford and Mr. Gary Born, rendered an Award in ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, brought
by Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A., and Abal Hermanos S.A. against
the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (the “Award’’).

2. In the Award, the Tribunal dismissed all claims that Uruguay had breached the 1991
Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments and awarded Uruguay USD 7 million

in costs. The Award was accompanied by the Dissenting Opinion of Mr. Gary Born.

3. On August 11, 2016, the Claimants submitted a Request for Rectification of the Award (the
“Request’”) pursuant to Article 49(2) of the 1965 Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID
Convention”) and Rule 49 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(the “Arbitration Rules”). In the Request, the Claimants alleged that the Award should be

rectified, as it contains the following errors:

a. Listing in paragraph 56 two individuals who acted as Claimants’ quantum experts
under “Party Counsel”;!

b. Referring in paragraph 111 to cigarettes sold, and then withdrew from the Uruguayan
market as “Marlboro Light’ when the proper characterization should have been
“Marlboro Gold”; 7

c. Wrongly stating in footnote 334 that Switzerland is not a party to the TRIPS
Agreement; 3

d. Misattributing in paragraphs 266 and 269, authorship of a technical report to one of
the Claimants’ experts, when it was signed by another individual;* and

' Request,
? Request,
> Request,

NpPPPr

4+ Request,

e. Misinterpreting the Claimants’ position on two legal arguments as described in
paragraphs 197, 266, and 268.>
4. Along with a short description of each of these alleged errors, the Claimants included in the

Request a proposal regarding the desired corrections.

5. On August 12, 2016, the Acting Secretary-General registered the Request pursuant to Rule
49(2)(a) of the Arbitration Rules. On the same date, the Acting Secretary-General
transmitted a copy of the Request and of the Notice of Registration to each Member of the

Tribunal.

6. On August 15, 2016, the Tribunal invited Respondent to provide observations regarding the

Request by no later than September 2, 2016.

7. On August 19, 2016, the Respondent submitted its observations dated August 18 (the

“Response”). In the Response, the Respondent stated, inter alia, that:

a. As held by prior ICSID decisions, the rectification remedy under the ICSID Convention
is “limited in scope” to correct only clerical, arithmetical or similar errors and its
purpose is not to “reconsider the merits of issues already decided,” or to reevaluate “the
weight or credence accorded by the tribunal [...] to the claims, arguments and evidence
presented by the parties;”°

b. The Respondent does not object to the Request relating to paragraphs 56, 111, and
footnote 334, as they understand those to be “clerical or similar errors” that do not
exceed the scope of Art. 49(2);”

c. The Respondent opposes the Claimants’ rectification to paragraphs 197, 266, 268 and
269 considering that the alleged “errors” cannot be “characterized as akin to clerical or
arithmetical errors” and/or they “accurately summarize the disputing parties’ position”
or they do not represent the “Claimants’ argument in a way that could be
misconstrued.”®

8. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(3), the members of the Tribunal have agreed

that it would not be necessary for them to meet in order to consider the Request. The present

5 Request, pp. 2-3.

Response, {J 1-2 (citations omitted).
7 Response, {{ 3.
8 Response, 991 5, 8, 12.

Decision has been deliberated through several exchanges of written communications among

the members of the Tribunal.

9. In accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the present Decision constitutes

an integral part of the Award.

Il. ANALYSIS

A. Scope of Application of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention

10. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides, in relevant part, as follows:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date on
which the Award was rendered may after notice to the other party decide any
question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and shall rectify any
clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. ...

11. In addition, Article 49 of the Arbitration Rules provides, in relevant part, as follows:

1) Within 45 days after the date on which the award was rendered, either party
may request, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the Convention, a supplementary
decision on, or the rectification of, the award. Such a request shall be addressed
in writing to the Secretary-General. The request shall:

(a) identify the award to which it relates;
(b) indicate the date of the request;
(c) state in detail:

(i) any question which, in the opinion of the requesting party, the Tribunal
omitted to decide in the award; and

(ii) any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to have
rectified; and

(d) be accompanied by a fee for lodging the request.

12. The Request was made within the time-frame provided in the aforementioned provisions

and contained the necessary formal requirements. This is not in dispute.

The Parties disagree, however, as to whether all and each one of the Claimants’ individual
rectification requests falls within the scope of the rectification remedy envisaged in the

ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal notes that while the official English language version of Article 49(2) of the
ICSID Convention refers to the rectification of “any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in
the award,” the official Spanish language version provides for the rectification of “los
errores materiales, aritméticos o similares del mismo.” In addition, the third authentic text,
this being the French language version of the Convention, refers to “corriger toute erreur

matérielle contenue dans la sentence.”

The differences in the various texts of the Convention were not mentioned by either Party.
Nevertheless, because both Spanish and English were the procedural languages of this
arbitration, and both the Award and this Decision are rendered in both languages, the
Tribunal considers appropriate to examine this question, before it goes on to determine the

scope of application of ICSID Convention Article 49(2).

While the Spanish and French authentic versions referring, respectively, to “errores

materiales” and “toute erreur matérielle,’ may be considered to include a different
rectification standard than does the authentic English language text, which refers to “clerical
errors,” the Tribunal is of the view that its power should not be construed as permitting a
reassessment or re-examination of the issues decided in the Award, or of the Tribunal’s
understanding of the Parties’ respective positions on the legal questions submitted to its

scrutiny, as discussed below.

According to Article 33(4) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaty of 1969,
“Te]xcept where a particular text prevails in accordance with paragraph 1, when a
comparison of the authentic texts discloses a difference of meaning which the application
of articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best reconciles the texts, having

regard of the object and purpose of the treaty, shall be adopted.”

20.

21.

The drafting history of the ICSID Convention confirms the limited and exceptional nature
of the remedies available to the parties after an award has been rendered. As held by ICSID
itself, “[t]he choice of remedies offered by the ICSID Convention reflects a deliberate

election by the drafters of the Convention to ensure finality of awards.”

Thus, any revisions of the Award, such as the mechanism provided by Article 49(2), should

be construed in light of the principle of the finality of the award.

Past tribunals have determined that “the power of the Tribunal to rectify the Award is
limited’”!°, that Article 49(2) envisages the correction of “minor technical error[s]”!! and
that a rectification request should be denied if it constitutes “an inappropriate attempt to
revise the wording of the Decision as it concerns the Committee’s summary of the parties’

allegations, rather than to “rectify” any error within the meaning of Article 49(2).”!?

Against this background, and having considered the Claimants’ Request, as well as the
Respondent’s Response, the Tribunal has reached the present Decision in respect of the

matters raised in the Request.

° Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, 5 May 2016, 4.

1 Railroad Development Corporation (RDC) v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/Q7/23), Decision
regarding the Claimant’s Request for a Supplementary Decision and Rectification of the Award, 18 Jan. 2013, 4 46.
| Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3), Decision on
Claimant’s Request for Rectification and/or Supplementary Decision of the Award, 25 Oct. 2007, 57.

2 Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Request for Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision
concerning Annulment of the Award, 28 May 2003, 431.

5

22.

23.

24.

25.

B. The Claimants’ Rectification Requests

The Tribunal notes that Uruguay does not oppose the rectifications requested by the
Claimants relating to paragraphs 56, 111, and footnote 334.'* The Respondent objects,
however, to the rectifications to paragraphs 197, 266, 268 and 269 as requested by the
Claimants.'* The Tribunal’s finding on each of the individual prayers identified in the

Request, are discussed individually hereinafter.

a. Paragraph 56 of the Award

The Claimants explain that Messrs Dekker and Ailani work for Navigant Consulting and
“were acting as two of the ‘Claimants’ independent quantum experts” and not as ‘Party

Counsel.’”!°

As requested by the Claimants, and considering the lack of objection by the Respondent,
the error in paragraph 56 of the Award is corrected by creating a new category, labelled
“Non-testifying Experts”, and moving Messrs Stuart Dekker and Dushyant Ailani into the

new category.
Accordingly, paragraph 56 of the Award is hereby rectified to read as follows:

For the Claimants:

Party Representative:

Mr. Marc Firestone

Ms. Maria del Carmen Ord6fiez L6pez
Mr. Diego Cibils

Ms. Tiffany Steckler

Ms. Luisa Menezes

Mr. John Bails Simko

Mr. Steve Reissman

Mr. Marco Mariotti

3 Response, 3.

4 Response, 13.

'S Request, p. 1.

Party Counsel:
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Mr. James E. Mendenhall

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Ms. Marinn Carlson

Mr. Patrick Childress

Ms. Courtney Hikawa

Ms. Maria Carolina Duran

Mr. Andrew Blandford

Mr. Michael Krantz

Non-testifying Experts
Mr. Stuart Dekker

Mr. Dushyant Ailani

For the Respondent:

Party Representative:

Dr. Miguel Toma

Dr. Jorge Basso
Ambassador Carlos Gianelli
Dr. Carlos Mata Prates

Dr. Inés Da Rosa

Dr. Ver6nica Duarte

Ms. Marianela Bruno

Party Counsel:
Mr. Paul S. Reichler

Mr. Lawrence H. Martin

Ms. Clara E. Brillembourg
Professor Harold Hongju Koh
Mr. Andrew B. Loewenstein
Ms. Melinda Kuritzky

Mr. Nicholas Renzler

Mr. José Rebolledo

The following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants:

Witnesses

Mr. Chris Dilley
Mr. Nicolas Herrera

Ms. Samantha Taylor

Ms. Avery Archambo

Mr. Hisham El-Ajluni

Mr. Carlos Brandes

Mr. Ken Reilly

Ms. Madeleine McDonough
Mr. Bill Crampton

Ms. Catherine Holtkamp
Mr. Leland Smith

Ms. Christina Beharry

Mr. Yuri Parkhomenko

Dr. Constantinos Salonidis

Ms. Analia Gonzalez

Mr. Eduardo Jiménez de Aréchega
Ms. Francheska Loza

Ms. Gabriela Guillén

Ms. Nancy L6pez

Mr. Oscar Norsworthy

Ms. Anna Aviles-Alfaro

Mr. Diego Cibils

Experts

Professor Julian Villanueva Professor Jan Paulsson
Professor Alexander Chernev Mr. Brent Kaczmarek
Professor Jacob Jacoby Mr. Kiran P. Sequeira

Professor Gustavo Fischer
Professor Christopher Gibson
Professor Alejandro Abal Oliti

On behalf of the Respondent:

Witnesses:

Dr. Jorge Basso, Minister of Public Health Dr. Eduardo Bianco, Uruguayan Medical

Dr. Winston Abascal, Ministry of Public Union/Tobacco Epidemic Research Center
Health (CIET Uruguay)

Dr. Ana Lorenzo, Ministry of Public Health

Experts:

Dr. Andrea Barrios Kiibler Dr. Joel B. Cohen

Dr. Nuno Pires de Carvalho Dr. Timothy Dewhirst

Professor Nicolas Jan Schrijver Dr. David Hammond

Dr. Santiago Pereira Mr. Jeffrey A. Cohen

b. Paragraph 111 of the Award

26. The Claimants consider that paragraph 111 should be corrected because following the
enactment of the Single Presentation Regulation in 2009, Abal removed from the market
the “Marlboro Gold” and not the “Marlboro Light” variant as indicated in the Award. The

Claimants note that the descriptor “light” had already been banned since 2005.'°

27. As requested by the Claimants, and considering the lack of objection by the Respondent,
the error in paragraph 111 of the Award is corrected by deleting the word “Marlboro Light”

and including instead the word “Marlboro Gold.”

28. Accordingly, paragraph 111 of the Award is hereby rectified to read as follows:

16 Request, p. 1.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Based on Ordinance 514, tobacco companies could only market one variant for
each family brand. The tobacco companies had the discretion to pick which
variant would remain on the market. For example, for the Marlboro family
brand, Philip Morris chose Marlboro Red. Correspondingly, Marlboro Gold,
Blue and Fresh Mint were taken off the market.

c. Footnote 334 of the Award

As requested by the Claimants, and considering the lack of objection by the Respondent,
the error in footnote 334 of the Award is corrected by deletion of the sentence “Switzerland
is not a party to this Agreement, which makes its applicability to the present dispute

questionable.”

Accordingly, footnote 334 of the Award is hereby rectified to reads as follows:

334 TRIPS Agreement (AB-52), Article 16(1).

d. Paragraph 197 of the Award

The Claimants consider that attributing to them the view that “State police power does not
constitute a defense against expropriation” is an error because this was not the Claimants’

position. They request that this sentence be deleted from the Award.!7

The Tribunal considers that, unlike in the previously mentioned requests, the criteria for
rectification are not met in this instance. As the Respondent pointed out in its Response, !*
Section II(B)(4) of the Claimants’ Reply on the Merits is unambiguously titled “The Police
Powers Doctrine Does Not Excuse Respondent from Liability for Expropriating Claimants’
Investment.” Moreover, an examination of the Claimants arguments reflects that paragraph
197 is an accurate summary of the essence of the Claimants’ position regarding the police

powers doctrine.

"7 Request, p. 2.

'8 Response, 4.

33.

34.

35.

36.

As a result, the Tribunal considers, by majority, that there is no need to rectify paragraph

197 of the Award and rejects the Claimants’ request in this regard.

e. Paragraphs 266 and 269 of the Award

According to the Claimants, in paragraphs 266 and 269, the Award “misattributes
authorship” of a report entitled “Report on Trademarks with the Term ‘University/Bank”
(Exhibit AB-57) to the Claimants’ expert Gustavo Fischer. The Claimants further say that
the author of the report is Ms. Agustina Fernandez, whose signature appears at the end of

the report.!°

The Respondent objects to such rectifications, considering that in neither of these
paragraphs the Tribunal attributed authorship of that Report to Mr. Fischer. Instead,
according to the Respondent, in paragraph 266, the Tribunal only observed that Professor
Fischer “confirmed” the proposition set out in the report”? that “a trademark confers on its

owner only ‘the rights to prevent others from using a trademark or trademarks.’” Moreover,
the question of whether the report could or could not be attributed to Mr. Fischer was the
subject of testimony during the examination of Respondent’s expert Prof. Andrea Barrios,
and the Tribunal “had ample grounds on which to describe the report in the manner that it

did.”?!

The Tribunal notes that the Report, while signed by Ms. Agustina Fernandez, was
transmitted to Uruguay’s National Directorate of Industrial Property Direccién Nacional
de la Propiedad Industrial or “DNPY” for its Spanish acronym) by Prof. Gustavo Fischer
and Ms. Victoria Fox, through a cover letter under the letter head of the Uruguayan
Association of Industrial Property Agents — (Asociacién Uruguaya de Agentes de la
Propiedad Industrial o “AUDAPI” for its Spanish acronym) dated February 15, 2012, with

their respective signatures. The Tribunal’s intention was not to attribute authorship of this

1 Request, p. 2.
?° Response, { 6. See also 7.
2! Response, 8.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

report to Prof. Fischer in his personal capacity, but instead to point out that, as President of
the AUDAPI and given his role in transmitting the report, he had full knowledge of the

Report clearly endorsing its content, as shown by the text of the transmittal letter.

After careful consideration of the Claimants’ Request and of the Respondent’s Response,
the Tribunal admits the Claimants’ Rectification Requests described in paragraph 34 above

limited to paragraph 266.

Accordingly, lines 7 and seg. of paragraph 266 and footnote 341 are hereby rectified to read

as follows:

Professor Fischer, one of the Claimants’ experts, as President of the Uruguayan
Association of Industrial Property Agents (“AUDAPI”), transmitted to the
DNPI without objections, a report in which it was confirmed that a trademark
confers on its owner only “the right to prevent others from using a trademark or
trademarks that may be confused with their own.” *4!

341 A UDAPI Report on Trademarks with the Term “University/Bank,” 15 Feb. 2012, (AB-57),
p. 3. The Tribunal notes that the report was signed by Ms. Agustina Fernandez on behalf of
AUDAPI, and was transmitted to the DNPI under cover of a letter of 15 February 2012 by Prof.
Gustavo Fischer in his capacity as President of the AUDAPI and by Ms. Victoria Fox.

 

The request to rectify paragraph 269 is rejected since in this paragraph the Tribunal is only

stating what the Respondent is said to rely on.

f. Paragraphs 266 and 268

According to the Claimants, paragraphs 266 and 268 of the Award shall be rectified as
certain passages of those paragraphs suggest that the Claimants had stated that they “had an
‘absolute, inalienable right to use’ their trademarks,” which was something that they had

“never argued.”??

The Respondent objects to this rectification, stating, among others, that how the Claimants’

believe that these two passages “could be read” is “immaterial” and it results from “a

> Request, p. 3.

strained reading of the statements.” It considers moreover, that none of these explanations

“constitute a valid reason for rectification of the Award.”?>

42. By majority, the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent’s above-statements and considers that
there is no need to rectify paragraphs 266 and 268 of the Award. Accordingly, by majority,
the Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ request to modify paragraphs 266 and 268, as described

in paragraph 40 above.

C. Costs of the Proceedings

43. The Tribunal has found merit in part of the Request. Therefore, each Party shall bear the
expenses incurred by it in connection with this Decision and one-half of the Tribunal’s fees
and expenses as well as of ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses for the total amount of

USD 7,500.00.

3 Response, 11.

Ill. DECISION

44. For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal, DECIDES:

a. Paragraph 56 of the Award is rectified by the addition of a category called “Non-
testifying Experts” and the inclusion of Messrs Dekker and Ailani in that new
category;

b. Paragraph 111 of the Award is rectified by the substitution of the word “Light” for the
word “Gold;”

c. Footnote 334 of the Award is rectified by deletion of the sentence “Switzerland is not
a party to this Agreement, which makes its applicability to the present dispute
questionable.”;

d. By majority, no rectification is required in respect of paragraph 197 of the Award;

e. Paragraph 266 and footnote 341 of the Award are rectified by the incorporation of
the new texts included in paragraph 38 of this Decision;

f. By majority, no other rectification is required with respect to paragraph 266;

g. No rectification is required in respect of paragraph 269 of the Award;

h. By majority, no rectification is required in respect of paragraph 268 of the Award;

i. Each party shall bear the expenses incurred by it in connection with the present
Decision. The costs, including the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal

and ICSID administrative fees and expenses, for the total amount of USD 7,500.00,
shall be borne by the Parties in equal shares.

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Mr. Gary Born Judge James Crawford
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 09/20/2016 Date: 12.9.2016

Subject to a partial dissent

[Signed]

Prof. Piero Bernardini
President of the Tribunal
Date: 8/9/2016

