In the matter of an arbitration under the Additional Facility Rules of the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Case No ARB(AF)/07/1
BETWEEN:
(1) PIERO FORESTI
(2) IDALAURADECARLI
(3) DORA FORESTI
(4) MARIA TERESA SUARDO
(5) PAOLA SUARDO
(6) ANTONIO FORESTI
(7) LUIGI FORESTI
(8) MASSIMILIANO FORESTI
(9) FRANCA CONTI
(10) DANIELA CONTI
(11) FINSTONE srl
Claimants
AND
THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
Respondent

 

AWARD

 

THE TRIBUNAL

Professor Vaughan Lowe QC (President)
The Hon. Charles N. Brower
Mr Joseph M. Matthews

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 4 August 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3

Il. SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS.......0..0..ccccccsccccseseeeeteseeeseeeseensseeneseeneseenes 11

 

A. The challenge to jurisdiction and admissibility

 

 

 

 

1. The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility ........0...c cece ll

2. The Claimants Did Not File a Reply ....c..ccccceseececsesseeeseeeeseeeseeeseeseseeeseeseeeseeeeets 14

B. The claims on the merits 14
1. Expropriation 14

2. Fair and Equitable Treatment and National Treatment Claims...........ccsceseeeeeeee 20

C. Discontinuance 20
D. Default Award of Fees and Cost ..........sceccessessessessseseseeseeseeseesessessessnsanssnssnssnseseeneesness 21
1. The Respondent’s Application for a Default Award........ccccseecsseeseesseeeteeeeeeeee 21

2. The Claimants’ Reply. 22

TI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS |... ee ee ee eeeeeeeeeesenenesesesesesneneneneeeeenenenes 24
IV. DECISION ON DISCONTINUANCE AND COSTS. ...0.0...0.ccecescesessesseesseseseeneeneenee 32

2

3

4

5

)

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the
Centre”) received on 8 November 2006, under cover of a letter of 1 November 2006,
a request for the institution of arbitration proceedings under the Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules (“the Request”) by Piero Foresti, et al. (“the Claimants”) against the
Republic of South Africa (“South Africa” or the “Respondent”). The Request was
filed by eight Claimants including (i) five Italian nationals, members of the Foresti
family of Carrara in Italy (“the Marlin Investors”); (ii) two Italian nationals, members
of the Conti family of Carrara in Italy (“the RED Investors”); and (iii) a company,
Finstone s.a.r.l., incorporated in Luxembourg (“Finstone”).! A list describing the
nature of each Claimant, their address and, where relevant, place of incorporation,
was attached to the Request. The proceedings were brought pursuant to the provisions
of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Italian Republic for the Promotion and Protection of Investments,
signed in Rome on 9 June 1997 (the “Italy BIT”) and the Agreement between the
Republic of South Africa and the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed in Pretoria on 14 August
1998 (the “Luxembourg BIT”) (together “the BITs”).

The Request for Arbitration states that each of the individual Claimants is or was a
national of Italy and not a national of South Africa, and that Finstone was organized
and exists under the law of Luxembourg.

On 15 November 2006, the Centre confirmed its receipt of the Request and the
prescribed lodging fee pursuant to Regulation 16 of the Centre’s Administrative and
Financial Regulations for lodging notices for the institution of proceedings, and
transmitted a copy to the South African Government and the South African Embassy
in Washington D.C.

On 8 January 2007, the Secretary-General of the Centre approved access to the
Additional Facility and notified both Parties of the registration of the Request as
provided for in Article 4 of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules. Additionally
and as required by Article 5(e) of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General invited the Parties to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal in accordance
with Chapter III of those rules.

By letter of 13 March 2007, the Claimants appointed The Honorable Charles N.
Brower (a US national) as arbitrator in this proceeding. On 10 April 2007, the
Respondent appointed Mr Joseph Matthews (a US national) as arbitrator. The
Respondent by letter of 23 August 2007 and Claimants by letter of 24 August 2007,

' On 13 July 2009, the Secretary-General of ICSID approved access to the Additional Facility for three
additional Claimants, Antonio, Luigi and Massimiliano Foresti, whose joinder had been requested by the
Claimants and consented to by the Respondent. The Claimants asserted that all three additional Claimants are
or were nationals of Italy and not nationals of South Africa.

3

agreed on the appointment of Professor Vaughan Lowe QC (a British national) as
President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On 18 September 2007, the Tribunal was deemed
to be constituted and the proceedings to have begun. Pursuant to Rule 25 of ICSID’s
Administrative and Financial Regulations, the parties were notified on 28 November
2007 that Ms. Eloise Obadia, ICSID Senior Counsel, would act as Secretary of the
Arbitral Tribunal.

6) In this arbitration proceeding, Claimants have been represented by Mr Peter Leon, Mr
Kevin Williams, Mr Vladislav Movshovich, and Mr Jonathan Veeran of the law firm
of Webber Wentzel, and by Mr Toby T. Landau QC, Professor Sir Elihu Lauterpacht
CBE QC, and Dr. Guglielmo Verdirame. The Respondent has been represented by
Mr Jan Paulsson, Mr Georgios Petrochilos, Mr Jonathan Gass, and Mr Ben
Juratowitch of the law firm of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, and by Advocate
Gerrit Grobler SC, instructed by Mr Sipho Mathebula of the Office of the State
Attorney of the Republic of South Africa. The Respondent had also been represented,
until December 2009, by Advocate Seth Nthai SC. On 22 December 2009, the
Tribunal was notified that Mr Nthai had been withdrawn as a representative of South
Africa.

7) The Tribunal held its First Session with the parties on 11 December 2007 in London
(“the First Session”). The Claimants were represented at the session by Mr Mario
Marcenaro, Mr Shawn Donly, Mr Fabrizio Ponzanelli, Dr. Richard Plender QC, Dr.
Guglielmo Verdirame, Mr Peter Leon, and Mr Kevin Williams. The Respondent was
represented at that session by Mr Randall Williams, Mr Shaheed Alli, Mr Rob
Cannovo, Mr Sipho Mathebula, Mr Pieter Alberts, Advocate Seth Nthai SC, Mr I.
Sharma, Mr G. I. Mfetoane, Mr Georgios Petrochilos, Mr Jonathan Gass, Mr Nabil
Lodey, and Ms. Lisa Bingham. Ms. Eloise Obadia, Secretary of the Tribunal,
attended via video-conference on behalf of ICSID.

8) At the First Session, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted
and that they had no objections to the appointment of any of its members. It was also
agreed that the proceedings would take place in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules in force since 10 April 2006.

9) At the First Session, the Parties agreed that Article 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules
would apply to the filing of written submissions by non-disputing parties (“NDPs”).
The Parties also agreed to a procedure to be followed by the Parties and the Tribunal
with respect to any NDP seeking to file written submissions and approaching either
Party or the Tribunal. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s direction at the First Session, the
Parties on 28 March 2008 submitted to the Tribunal the Parties’ agreed text for
distribution to any potential NDP, which provided for the NDP’s information: (i) a
summary of the Claimants’ allegations; (ii) a statement of denial of all claims by the
Respondent; and (iii) a reproduction of the procedure for NDPs agreed to by the
Parties at the First Session.

10) At the First Session, the Tribunal decided that the legal seat of the arbitration would
be England and that the hearing would be held at The Hague, The Netherlands. The
Tribunal also decided that the Claimants should file a Memorial by 29 April 2008,
that the Respondent should file its Counter-Memorial by 16 September 2008, that the

Claimants should file their Reply by 14 January 2009, and that the Respondent should
file its Rejoinder by 14 May 2009.

11) By letter of 15 April 2008, the Claimants asked for an extension of the agreed
timetable. By letter of 23 April 2008, the Secretary informed the Parties of the
Tribunal’s decision to establish a new calendar pursuant to the agreement reached by
the Parties. By letter of 1 July 2008, the Tribunal fixed new time limits for the
Parties’ pleadings, including in particular the Claimants’ Memorial due by 31 July
2008.

12) On 31 July 2008, the Claimants submitted an electronic copy of their Memorial on the
Merits.

13)In their Memorial, the Claimants also submitted a request that the Respondent
consent to join three additional claimants, namely, the three children of Claimants
Piero Foresti and his wife Ida Laura De Carli (Antonio, Luigi and Massimiliano
Foresti) as additional claimants in the arbitration. The Respondent consented to the
Claimants’ request and, subsequently, on 13 July 2009, the Secretary-General of
ICSID approved access to the Additional Facility for the three additional Claimants.

14) Starting in December 2008, the Respondent requested from the Claimants the
production of certain documents. Following these requests, the Claimants produced
certain documents and refused to produce other documents. Admirably, the Parties
eventually were able to resolve all outstanding issues related to the document requests
without the aid of the Tribunal, with one exception. The one outstanding issue was
resolved by Lord Bingham, a neutral third party recommended by the Tribunal and
agreed upon by the Parties. Eventually, on 21 October 2009, and after conducting a
review of certain documents produced by the Claimants but redacted on the ground of
irrelevancy, Lord Bingham concluded that some of the Claimants’ redactions were
appropriate, but that certain other redactions should be disclosed to the Respondent
because they were, in fact, relevant and responsive to the Respondent’s document
request. The Claimants duly accepted Lord Bingham’s findings and produced the
relevant portions of the documents to the Respondent. The Tribunal thanks Lord
Bingham once again for his assistance in resolving this matter.

15) On 10 February 2009, the Tribunal confirmed a procedural calendar agreed by the
Parties, which decided, among other things, that the Respondent should file its
Counter-Memorial on 27 March 2009.

16) On 26 March 2009, the parties jointly, through counsel, agreed to a two-month stay of
proceedings commencing on 28 March 2009 and requested the Tribunal to approve a
new schedule. The joint request for stay specifically stated that the parties agreed that
any proposals for settlement or discontinuance would be communicated by one
party’s legal counsel to the other’s legal counsel.

17) On 27 March 2009, the Respondent filed its Objection to Jurisdiction and
Admissibility and a Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

18) On 30 March 2009, pursuant to the Parties’ agreement, the Tribunal issued an order
suspending the proceedings for two months until 28 May 2009, so that the Parties
might pursue settlement negotiations through counsel.

19) On 27 May 2009, the parties again jointly requested that the stay of proceedings
continue for a further three weeks. This joint request again included the agreement
that any proposals for settlement or discontinuance would be communicated by one
party’s legal counsel to the other’s legal counsel.

20) On 28 May 2009, again pursuant to the Parties’ agreement and for the purpose of
settlement negotiations to be conducted through counsel, the Tribunal extended the
stay of proceedings for an additional three weeks until 19 June 2009.

21) On 26 June 2009, pursuant to a request from the Tribunal, the Claimants confirmed
that the stay of proceedings had expired on 19 June 2009 and that, according to the
calendar previously agreed upon by the Parties and ordered by the Tribunal, the
Claimants should file their Reply to the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on 15
October 2009.

22) On 6 July 2009, the Claimants requested from the Tribunal an order staying the
proceedings for an additional three months, on the ground that the Respondent had
recently granted certain disputed new order mineral rights to the Claimants’ Operating
Companies. According to the Claimants, the grant of those rights might have had an
impact on the quantum of damages sought by the Claimants, and the Claimants
needed time to assess the extent to which the grant of the new rights (once confirmed,
executed, and registered) partially compensated the Claimants for the alleged
extinction of certain old order mineral rights by the entry into force of the Mineral and
Petroleum Resources Development Act (the “MPRDA”) on 1 May 2004.

23) The Respondent objected to any further stay of the proceedings. On 17 July 2009, the
Respondent submitted its written opposition in which it argued that the Claimants
were wrong to assert that the conversion of their “old order” rights amounted to a
settlement of any portion of the disputed BIT claims. The Respondent asserted its
belief that the arbitration proceedings had been commenced only as an attempt to put
pressure on the Department of Minerals and Energy (“DME”) (now the Department of
Mineral Resources, “DMR”) in respect of the conversion process of mining rights
under the MPRDA. The Respondent reminded the Tribunal that the Claimants had
chosen to commence this arbitration before completion of the statutory conversion
process of “old order” mining rights to “new order” mining rights under the MPRDA.
and that the Respondent had argued, both before and during the First Session in this
arbitration proceeding, that the Claimants’ claims were premature.

24) On 31 July 2009, after considering the Parties’ submissions on the matter, the
Tribunal concluded that it was possible for the Claimants’ case to be pleaded on the
facts then known, even if some doubts remained as to the precise terms or extent of
the conversions. Accordingly, the Tribunal decided that the Claimants’ request for a
further stay of the proceedings should be denied, and that the proceedings should
continue in accordance with the calendar previously agreed upon by the Parties.
However, the Tribunal noted that it would allow further pre-hearing and post-hearing
submissions on issues of quantum and liability to the extent that it became necessary

to refine pleadings in the light of newly-discovered facts concerning the details of the
conversion scheme.

25) On 17 July 2009, four NGOs, led by the Centre for Applied Legal Studies, filed a
petition for limited participation in the proceedings as NDPs. On 20 August 2009, an
additional entity, the International Commission of Jurists, also filed a petition for
participation in the proceedings as an NDP. In accordance with the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules and the procedure agreed by the Parties in the First Session, the
Tribunal solicited and considered the views of the Parties on the petitions.

26) On 21 August 2009, the Claimants sought an extension of time to file their Reply to
the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility and Counter-Memorial
on the Merits, which was due to be filed on 15 October 2009. The Respondent did
not agree to this extension. On 11 September 2009, the Tribunal granted the
Claimants a two-week extension of time until 2 November 2009.

27) Also on 11 September 2009, the Tribunal decided that the NDPs should be allowed to
file submissions, and that they should file their submissions by 21 December 2009. In
order that the NDPs might do so, the Tribunal asked that the Parties agree on and file
with the Centre by 16 November 2009: (i) redacted versions of the Memorial and
Counter-Memorial; (ii) redacted versions of legal opinions; and (iii) a list of witnesses
and experts that had provided evidence on facts and quantum (without any description
of the content of the report or statement). The Tribunal also decided on a schedule
for the Parties to file pre-hearing submissions in response to the NDPs December
submissions.

28) On 25 September 2009, the Tribunal issued a further decision on the NDP petitions.
First, the Tribunal explained the reasoning behind its 11 September decision to
require the Parties to agree on and disclose to the NDPs certain redacted documents.
The Tribunal noted that its decision in this regard was animated by two basic
principles: (1) that NDP participation is intended to enable NDPs to give useful
information and accompanying submissions to the Tribunal, but is not intended to be
a mechanism for enabling NDPs to obtain information from the Parties; and (2) where
there is NDP participation, the Tribunal must ensure that it is both effective and
compatible with the rights of the Parties and the fairness and efficiency of the arbitral
process. The Tribunal had ordered the Parties to provide the NDPs with certain
redacted documents because it had taken the view that the NDPs must be allowed
access to those papers submitted to the Tribunal by the Parties that are necessary to
enable the NDPs to focus their submissions upon the issues arising in the case and to
see what positions the Parties have taken on those issues. The calendar set by the
Tribunal for the NDP submissions and the Parties’ responses was set because of the
Tribunal’s view that the NDPs must also be given adequate opportunity to prepare
and deliver their submissions in sufficient time before the hearing for the Parties to be
able to respond to those submissions.

29) Second, the Tribunal noted that it did not, at that stage, envisage that the NDPs would
be permitted to attend or to make oral submissions at the hearing, but that it would
make a final decision on those questions after the Parties had responded to the NDP
submissions. Third, the Tribunal decided that, in view of the novelty of the NDP
procedure, after all submissions, written and oral, had been made the Tribunal would

invite the parties and the NDPs to offer brief comments on the fairness and
effectiveness of the procedures adopted for NDP participation in this case. The
Tribunal would then include a section in the award, recording views (both concordant
and divergent) on the fairness and efficacy of NDP participation in this case and on
any lessons learned from it. In the absence of consent from the Respondent to the
publication of the award, the Centre would publish excerpts of the award pursuant to
Article 53(3) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, including that section, so
that others might benefit from the experience.

30) In October 2009, Mr Mario Marcenaro, the de facto CEO of Finstone, decided to
attempt to negotiate directly with representatives of the Respondent.” According to
the unrefuted testimony of Mr Marcenaro, he approached a lawyer named Marizio
Mariano, who is one of the key players in a community organization in South Africa
called the Hellenic, Italian and Portuguese Alliance.> Mr Mariano arranged for Mr
Marcenaro to meet directly with Seth Nthai, a member of the legal team acting on
behalf of the Respondent in these proceedings.*

31) According to Mr Marcenaro’s testimony, on Saturday 10 October 2009, Mr
Marcenaro met with Mr Nthai at the law office of Mr Mariano.” Mr Mariano
introduced Mr Marcenaro and Mr Nthai to one another, and then left them alone in his
office.° According to Mr Marcenaro’s statement, Mr Nthai informed him that there
was a faction within the South African Government which wanted the matter settled
and another which wanted to pursue the matter to finality, including some in the
Government who felt strongly that the Respondent should seek costs against the
Claimants to “make a statement.”’ According to Mr Marcenaro, Mr Nthai then
solicited a bribe from Claimants, requesting that they pay him ZAR 5 million in return
for his assistance in convincing the Respondent to permit Claimants to drop the case
without paying the Respondent’s attorneys fees and costs, instead paying only their
own attorneys fees and costs and all ICSID and administrative costs.” According to
Mr Marcenaro’s testimony, he then began to secretly record the conversation with Mr
Nthai on his mobile phone.’

32) Mr Marcenaro testified that, during the meeting, Mr Nthai informed him that Mr
Nthai would be traveling to Italy later in October and Mr Marcenaro said that since
Mr Nthai was going to be in the region he should come to Carrera in Italy to see
Finstone’s and RED’s facilities.'° Mr Marcenaro could not recall whether the

? Claimants’ Reply to Respondent’s Response to Claimants’ Request for Discontinuance and Application for
Default Award, 26 Jan 2010 (the “Reply”), Exhibit C882, Witness Statement of Mario Vittorio Marcenaro, 25
Jan 2010 (“Marcenaro Statement”), paragraphs 1.1 and 7.8.

> Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.7-7.8.

4 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.9.

* Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.10.

° Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.10.

7 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.10.

* Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.11 and 7.15.

° Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.13. Mr Marcenaro also testified that he was not able to record the entire
conversation, but only “twenty minutes or so,” as this was the limit of his mobile phone’s memory. Marcenaro
Statement, paragraph 7.15.

'© Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.17.

discussion of Mr Nthai’s travels took place before or after Mr Nthai solicited the
bribe.

33) During the next few days, according to Mr Marcenaro’s statement, he informed the
principals of Claimants of Mr Nthai’s proposal and all of the Claimants rejected it.'”
Mr Marcenaro testified that he wished to tread carefully because he did not want to
make Mr Nthai angry.'* According to Mr Marcenaro’s testimony, he spoke with Mr
Nthai several times thereafter, and although he needed to turn down the bribe proposal
he did not want to make an enemy of Mr Nthai.'* Mr Marcenaro recorded twelve
conversations with Mr Nthai between 18 October 2009 and 3 November 2009.'*

34) According to Mr Marcenaro, Mr Nthai and Mr Marcenaro met at Mr Marcenaro’s
house in Johannesburg on 18 October 2009 and 20 October 2009.'° Mr Marcenaro
informed Mr Nthai that the Claimants did not agree to his proposal.'7 Mr Marcenaro
said he did not want the relationship between Mr Nthai and Mr Marcenaro or the
Claimants to go sour, but that the Claimants would not enter into a side deal with Mr
Nthai.'* At the time of the meetings in Mr Marcenaro’s home, he thought that it
would be better for Mr Nthai to hear the rejection directly from Claimants so he
agreed that when Mr Nthai was in Italy later that month he would try to arrange a
meeting between Mr Nthai and Claimants; but Claimants informed Mr Marcenaro that
they would not meet with Mr Nthai. %

35) According to Mr Marcenaro, Mr Nthai arrived in Pisa late in the evening of 28
October 2009 and Mr Marcenaro had dinner with him. Mr Marcenaro again informed
Mr Nthai that Claimants would not get involved in any “side deals” but there might be
opportunities to work together in the future.” Mr Marcenaro continued to believe that
the solicitation of the bribe by Mr Nthai should not be disclosed to the Tribunal.”!

36) Mr Marcenaro says that on Tuesday, 2 November 2009, he was told by the Claimants
that they had decided to inform their outside counsel about Mr Nthai’s “offer.”
Copies of the audio recordings of the meetings between Mr Nthai and Mr Marcenaro
at Mr Marcenaro’s house were provided to Claimants’ legal counsel, Mr Jonathan
Veeran, on that afternoon.”? Those recordings were transcribed and, on 4 November
2009, were circulated to the Claimants’ entire legal team.4

'! Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.17.

!? Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.19-7.20.

'S Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.17.

'4 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.22.

'S Reply, Exhibit C887 (recordings of conversations between Mr Marcenaro and Mr Nthai).
'© Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.25 and 7.27.
" Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.25.

'8 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.25.

'° Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.27-7.28.

2° Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.29.

2! Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.29.

2 Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.32-7.33.

? Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.34.

4 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.34.

37) According to Mr Marcenaro’s testimony, following the disclosure to the legal team,
the legal team advised the Claimants to disclose the information as soon as possible to
counsel for the Respondent and to the Tribunal.?> Mr Marcenaro felt it would be
better not to disclose the information.”° According to Mr Marcenaro’s testimony:
“Things in South Africa are complicated — you need to be mindful of the political
environment in which you are operating. From a safe distance it is easy to say that we
should have immediately informed FBD [counsel for the Respondent] and the
Tribunal about the Nthai situation, but I felt that this was going to be a bit hazardous
and personally I was not too keen to go that way. For this reason, I stayed in touch
with Nthai for the next few days and had a number of telephone calls with him. I
carried on recording some of these interactions with Nthai in order to protect myself
against any allegations that I had been at fault in any way. I informed [Shawn] Donly
that I was still in contact with Seth Nthai. Donly told me that he had also indicated to
Webber Wentzel [counsel for the Claimants] that I was still in touch with Nthai.”””

38) On 2 November 2009, the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal and the Respondent
soliciting the Respondent’s consent to discontinue the proceedings pursuant to Article
50 of the Additional Facility Rules. On 4 November 2009, the Tribunal issued an
order inviting the Respondent to state whether it opposed the Claimants’ request for
discontinuance. On 20 November 2009, the Respondent submitted a Response to
Claimants’ Request For Discontinuance and an Application For Default Award. The
20 November 2009 submission was co-signed by Adv. Seth Nthai SC.

39) According to Mr Marcenaro’s testimony, he spoke with Mr Nthai on 3 November and
4 November 2009.* Mr Marcenaro maintained throughout that Claimants should not
disclose Mr Nthai’s solicitation of a bribe in the arbitration, but ultimately he was
overruled by the Claimants who decided, on the repeated advice of external counsel,
to give lead counsel Toby Landau QC permission to inform counsel for the
Government about Nthai’s conduct.’ This was not done until 8 December 2009,°°
after the Respondent had filed the 20 November submission requested by the
Tribunal.

40) After additional submissions by each Party on the issues of discontinuation and fees,
the Tribunal and the Parties agreed that they would hold a three day hearing from 12
to 14 April 2010 to resolve these outstanding issues.

41) The hearing was held on 12 to 14 April 2010 at the Peace Palace, Permanent Court of
Arbitration, in The Hague, and conducted in English. At the hearing, the Claimants
were represented by Mr Toby Landau QC and Dr. Guglielmo Verdirame, and by Mr
Peter Leon, Mr Kevin Williams, and Mr Jonathan Veeran, all three from the law firm
of Webber Wentzel, and by Mr Mario Marcenaro and Mr Shawn Donly, both of
Finstone, and by Mr Fabrizio Ponzanelli and Ms. Franca Conti, both of RED Graniti
S.p.A. The Respondent was represented by H.E. Mr Peter Goosen, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of South Africa to the Kingdom of

?5 Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.35-7.36.
2 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.36.
27 Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.36.
?8 Marcenaro Statement, paragraphs 7.38-7.40.
°° Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.38.
*° Marcenaro Statement, paragraph 7.38.

10

The Netherlands, Ms. Aletta Mosidi, State Attorney, Office of the State Attorney, Mr
Sipho Mathebula, Attorney of Record, Office of the State Attorney, Mr Tshediso
Matona, Director-General, Department of Trade and Industry, Mr Randall Williams,
Chief Director: Trade Policy and Negotiations Department of Trade and Industry, Mr
Steven Mathate, Deputy Director: Legal, International, Trade and Investment,
Department of Trade and Industry, Mr Sandile Nogxina, Director-General, DMR, Ms.
Faith Ndzimande, Chief Director: Mineral Policy, DMR, Mr Pieter Alberts, Director:
Legal Services, DMR, Ms. Nompumelelo Gaven Deputy Director: Administration,
DMR, Mr Ken Terry, Deputy Director-General: Strategy & Operations, The
Presidency, Ms. Sibongile Sigodi, Chief Director: Legal & Executive Services, The
Presidency, Mr Sello Mabelane Director: Legal Services, The Presidency, Ms.
Rebecca Tee, Head of Legal Services, National Treasury, and by Mr Gerrit Grobler,
SC Counsel and by Mr Jan Paulsson, Mr Georgios Petrochilos, Mr Jonathan Gass, Mr
Ben Juratowitch, Ms. Alexandra van der Meulen, and Ms. Samira A frasiabi, all six of
the law firm of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP. The Secretariat was represented
by Ms. Aurélia Antonietti.

42) Transcripts of the hearing were made and were distributed to the Tribunal and the
Parties at the end of each day of the hearing.

43) On 26 April 2010, the Claimants, at the Tribunal’s request during the hearing and
with the Respondent’s subsequent consent, supplied the Tribunal with an explanation
of certain documents provided to the Tribunal during the hearing.

44) On 21 May 2010, the Respondent submitted to the Tribunal its comments on a chart
submitted to the Tribunal by the Claimants on the first day of the hearing, as well as
corrections to a timeline submitted to the Tribunal by the Respondent during the
hearing. On 28 May 2010, the Claimants provided the Tribunal with their response to
the Respondent’s 21 May letter and attachments.

45) On 17 June 2010, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they would provide the
Tribunal with updated schedules of their costs and expenses by 28 June 2010. On 28

June 2010, the Parties submitted these final documents. On 2 July 2010, the Tribunal
declared the proceeding closed pursuant to Arbitration Rule 44(1).

Il. SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

A. The challenge to jurisdiction and admissibility

1. The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility

46) The Respondent submitted its Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility and
Counter-Memorial on the Merits on 27 March 2009 (the “Counter-Memorial’”). It
raised two main objections to jurisdiction and admissibility:

11

that the BITs require a meaningful juridical entitlement over an asset, existing
under domestic law, and that the Claimants (as opposed to the Operating
Companies) do not have such an entitlement; and

2 that no exceptional circumstances entitle the Claimants to seek redress in the stead
of their indirectly held Operating Companies.

47) The Respondent noted, as background to these objections, that the Claimants
identified two types of putative investments within the meaning of the Italy BIT and
the Luxembourg BIT, and that the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and
admissibility applied to only one of those putative investments.*' Respondent noted
that the Claimants’ two putative investments include (i) the common law mineral
rights leased or owned by the Operating Companies; and (ii) the shares in those
Operating Companies indirectly owned by Claimants.” According to the
Respondent, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims, and the
Claimants have no standing to bring their claims, with respect to only the first
category of putative investments (i.e., the common law mineral rights leased or owned
by the Operating Companies).*> The Respondent emphasized that those claims
include the claims of direct and indirect expropriation of the common law mineral
rights and the failure to accord fair and equitable treatment to the common law
mineral rights, and do not include the remaining claims raised in the arbitration.**

a. The BITs require a meaningful juridical entitlement over an asset

48) The Respondent argued that the definitions of “investment” in Articles 1(1) of both
the Italy and Luxembourg BITs make clear that, as an elementary jurisdictional
requirement, the Claimants must show inter alia that the assets alleged to be
“investments” under the BITs are owned by the Claimants in a legally relevant sense
under the law governing the common law mineral rights (i.c., South African law).*°
This, Respondent contended, the Claimants cannot do.*6

49) The Respondent argued that South African law did not grant the Claimants ownership
or anything akin to it over the common law mineral rights.*’ Instead, it contended that
the relevant rights belonged to — or were vested in — the Operating Companies, or
more commonly their lessors: they were investments of those companies, not the
Claimants.** Therefore, the Respondent argued, the common law mineral rights
cannot constitute investments of the Claimants under the two BITs, and the Tribunal
accordingly lacks jurisdiction under Article 8(1) of the Italy BIT and Article 10(1) of
the Luxembourg BIT with respect to the Claimants’ claims based on the common law
mineral rights.’

>! Counter-Memorial, paragraph 66.

*? Counter-Memorial, paragraph 67, citing Memorial, paragraphs 71 and 73.
>} Counter-Memorial, paragraph 66.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraph 66.

>5 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 72 and 75.

*° Counter-Memorial, paragraph 75.

>? Counter-Memorial, paragraph 75.

** Counter-Memorial, paragraph 75.

°° Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 75 and 77.

12

50) The Respondent argued, moreover, that Article 1(3) of the Italy BIT, which provides

that “foreign subsidiaries, affiliates and branches controlled in any way” by a natural
or legal person of a Contracting Party are deemed to be investors of that Contracting
Party, does not allow the Claimants’ Operating Companies to be deemed to be Italian
investors.” In this regard, the Respondent argued that, under the Claimants’ own
construction of Article 1(3), South African entities are excluded from the scope of that
Article.*! The Respondent noted that the Claimants stated in a memorandum attached
to their Request for Arbitration that the term “foreign” in Article 1(3) “plainly means
foreign to the State in which the investment is made”, thereby including only entities
of third states.” Therefore, according to Respondent, no assets of those Operating
Companies, including the common law mineral Tights and leases, could qualify as
investments within the meaning of the Italy BIT.** Accordingly, the Respondent
argued that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over any claims based on the common law
mineral rights.“

51) As to admissibility, the Respondent argued that the Claimants, as indirect

shareholders of the Operating Companies, lack standing to bring claims based on the
common law mineral rights owned or leased by the Operating Companies.*° Citing to
the International Court of Justice’s decision in Barcelona Traction, as well as other
authorities, the Respondent argued that international law makes clear that
shareholders and the companies in which they hold shares are distinct entities, and
that assets and claims belonging to the companies do not, without more, belong to its
shareholders.” Therefore, the Respondent argued that the claims based on the
common law mineral rights are inadmissible because they have been asserted by
individuals who lack standing to bring such claims.*”

b. No exceptional circumstances entitle the Claimants to seek redress in the
stead of their indirectly held Operating Companies

52) Also with respect to standing and admissibility, the Respondent argued that, in the

past, investment-treaty tribunals have allowed shareholders to assert claims on behalf
of a locally-incorporated company’s investments in two exceptional sets of
circumstances: (i) where specific BIT provisions protect a wider range of interests
than those protected by the Italy and Luxembourg BITs; and (ii) where the claims are
based on undertakings or representations by the host state to the claimant itself as to

4° Counter-Memorial, paragraph 76.

4" Counter-Memorial, paragraph 76.

® Counter-Memorial, paragraph 76 (emphasis in the original).

4 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 76.

 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 76.

45 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 78.

4° Counter-Memorial, paragraph 79, citing Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power
Company, Limited (Belgium v Spain) (Preliminary Objections) [1964] ICJ Reports 6. See also Counter-
Memorial, paragraphs 80 and 82-85, citing, inter alia, Agrotexim and Others v Greece (App No 14807/89)

ECtHR, 26 September 1995; Asian Agricultural Products Ltd (AAPL) v The Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No ARB/87/3), 27 June 1990; BG Group Ple v The Republic of Argentina, 24
December 2007; Viadimir Berschader and Motse Berschader v The Russian Federation (SCC Case No
80/2004), 21 April 2006; CMS Gas Transmission Company v The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No
ARB/01/8) Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 25 September 2007,
respectively.

Counter-Memorial, paragraph 86.

13

treatment of local companies on which the claimant was entitled to rely.** The
Respondent argued that neither set of circumstances is extant in this case."”

2. The Claimants Did Not File a Reply

53) Although the Claimants maintained throughout these proceedings that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction over the claims and that the claims are admissible, the Claimants did
not respond directly to the Respondent’s arguments as to jurisdiction and
admissibility before seeking, on 2 November 2009, the Respondent’s consent to
discontinue the proceedings.

B. The claims on the merits

1. Expropriation

a. The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits

54) The Claimants alleged that the Respondent was in breach of the BITs’ prohibitions on
expropriation (Article 5 of both BITs) in two respects:

e By the coming into effect of the MPRDA on | May 2004, which
extinguished certain putative old order mineral rights allegedly held by
the Claimants; and

e By the coming into effect of the MPRDA, when combined with the
Mining Charter dated 13 August 2004, introducing compulsory equity
divestiture requirements with respect to the Claimants’ shares in the
Operating Companies.*”

In addition, the Claimants alleged “further or alternatively” that the Respondent’s
failure to comply with certain due process obligations constituted an independent
breach of Article 5(9) of the Italy BIT.*!

55) The Claimants argued that the MPRDA brought to an end the old order mineral law
by repealing the common law to the extent that its principles were in conflict with the
MPRDA.™ According to the Claimants, this result has been achieved by necessary
implication rather than expressly, by the introduction of the notion of state
custodianship of mineral rights on the part of the State and the conferring of extensive
new public law powers of control on the Minister which are incompatible with the
common law notion of rights to minerals.*> The Claimants argued that the
competence or right of a mineral right holder to prospect or mine as an incidence of

48 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 87-96.

# Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 87-96.
*° Memorial, paragraph 632.

*! Memorial, paragraph 650.

* Memorial, paragraph 356.

*3 Memorial, paragraph 360.

14

his ownership has been destroyed by the MPRDA in the sense that it is removed in
toto from South African law.”

56) The Claimants argued that the Mining Charter, which was concluded by the South
African Government, the South African Chamber of Mines, the National Union of
Mineworkers, and the South African Mineral Development Association following
private talks between these groups,” is an attempt to encourage greater ownership of
mining industry assets by historically disadvantaged South Africans (“HDSAs”).°°
According to the Claimants, the Mining Charter tries to achieve that end by inter alia,
requiring mining companies to achieve 26% HDSA ownership of mining assets by
2014, and publish employment equity plans directed towards achieving a baseline
40% HDSA participation in management by 2009.*” The Claimants argue that the
Mining Charter states that transactions must take place “in a transparent manner, and
for fair market value”, and that stakeholders should meet after five years to determine
what further steps, if any, need to be taken to achieve the 26% target.”

57) As to the concept of expropriation applicable in the case, the Claimants argued that
the two applicable BITs accord investors protection from “different methods and
gradations of expropriation to an extent that is significantly wider than in most other
investment disputes.”*” Specifically, the Claimants argued that the two BITs, taken
together with other BITs entered into by South Africa by virtue of the relevant MFN
clauses, provide protection from (i) direct expropriation; (ii) indirect expropriation;
(iii) measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation (“equivalent measures”);
and (iv) measures limiting, whether permanently or temporarily, investors’ rights of
ownership, possession, control or enjoyment of the investments.

58) The Claimants argued that Articles 5(1) and 5(2) of the relevant BITs specify the four
following conditions which must be met if an expropriation is to be considered
lawful:

e the expropriation must be “for public purposes or in the national interest”(Italy
BIT) or “for a public purpose related to the internal needs of the country”
(Luxembourg BIT);

e the expropriation must be on a non-discriminatory basis;

e the Host State must pay “immediate, full and effective compensation” (Italy BIT)
or “prompt, adequate and effective compensation”(Luxembourg BIT); and

e the expropriation must be undertaken “under due process of law” (Luxembourg
BIT).

The Claimants also noted that Article 5(9) of the Italy BIT contains a separate ‘due
process’ provision which provides that an investor which asserts that all or part of its
investment has been expropriated “shall have a right to prompt review by the

* Memorial, paragraph 360.
*5 Memorial, paragraph 382.
* Memorial, paragraph 388.
57 Memorial, paragraph 388.
*8 Memorial, paragraph 388.
*° Memorial, paragraph 605.
©? Memorial, paragraph 604.
°' Memorial, paragraph 623.

15

appropriate judicial or administrative authorities . . . to determine whether any such
expropriation conforms to national law principles and international law.”°

i. Unlawful expropriation of the Claimants’ “old order mineral
rights”

59) The Claimants alleged that, by reason of the MPRDA’s promulgation, the Respondent
expropriated all of the Claimants’ mineral rights, in their totality. This is so, the
Claimants argued, because upon its entry into force the MPRDA extinguished the
Claimants’ mineral rights and, at the same time, granted them “a procedural right to
apply for conversion of their ‘old order mineral rights’ into much-diminished ‘new-
order mineral rights.””* The Claimants argued that the procedural right to apply for
conversion is, if relevant at all, properly characterized as a form of procedural
compensation for the expropriation.

60) More specifically, the Claimants argued that their old order mineral rights were
unlawfully expropriated in one of three ways, depending on the particular properties
associated with the old order mineral rights. First, the Claimants alleged that the old
order mining rights associated with forty-four properties affecting twenty-one quarries
have been effectively, definitively, and directly or indirectly expropriated as of 1 May
2004 because, at the end of the conversion process, no new order right has been
granted and, thus, no compensation has been granted.®° The Claimants noted that,
with respect to the old order rights associated with some of these properties, the
Claimants had not availed themselves of the conversion process because if they had
done so they would have been required under the MPRDA to begin prospecting or
mining operations within a period of time that was not economically feasible.°

61) Second, the Claimants alleged that the old order mining rights associated with five
properties affecting four quarries have been directly expropriated as of 1 May 2004
against a measure of compensation that fails to satisfy the standards for compensation
required under the BITs.* The Claimants argued that these old order mining rights
can be said to have been expropriated against an incorrect measure of compensation
because, although the old order rights associated with these properties have been
converted into new order rights, that measure of compensation (i.¢., the value of the
new order rights) is insufficient.©? The Claimants argued that if this second group of
expropriations were not direct expropriations, then they were indirect and/or partial
expropriations and/or ‘equivalent measures’, again, taken against inadequate
compensation.”°

© Memorial, paragraph 630.
Memorial, paragraphs 633, 635 (i).
“ Memorial, paragraph 633.

5 Memorial, paragraph 635.

°° Memorial, paragraphs 645(iii), 637.
°’ Memorial, paragraph 645(iii).

8 Memorial, paragraphs 645(iv), 638.
°° Memorial, paragraphs 645(iv), 638.
™ Memorial, paragraphs 645(iv), 638.

16

62) Third, the Claimants alleged that the old order mining rights associated with fifty
properties affecting twenty-five quarries where a decision of the Respondent on
conversion was still pending, nevertheless have been directly expropriated against a
measure of compensation that is still uncertain but that, at best, will not satisfy the
standards for compensation required under the BITs.”! The Claimants argued that if
the cases in this third group of expropriations were not direct expropriations, then they
were indirect and/or partial expropriations and/or ‘equivalent measures’, again, taken
against inadequate compensation.”

63) The Claimants argued that all of the above expropriations were unlawful, not only
because there was insufficient compensation, but also because of a failure of due
B
process.

ii. Expropriation of the Claimants’ shares in the Operating
Companies

64) The Claimants argued that their shares in the Operating Companies have been
expropriated by operation of the Black Economic Empowerment (“BEE”) equity
divestiture requirements established by the twin operation of the Mining Charter and
the MPRDA.” The Claimants noted that the Mining Charter requires foreign
investors to sell 26% of their shares in relevant mining companies to HDSAs. They
also argued that, while the Mining Charter asserts that such shares are to be sold at
fair market value, the reality is that such equity divestitures cannot take place at fair
market value — even if that value is based on the diminished fair market value of the
“new order mineral rights” held by the companies.

65) The Claimants argued that this equity divestiture scheme constitutes a direct and/or
indirect and/or partial expropriation of the Claimants’ shares in the Operating
Companies, or measures of equivalent effect, with the first act of the expropriation
being the announcement of the divestiture scheme in the Mining Charter.”

66) The Claimants argued that the expropriation of their shares in the Operating
Companies is unlawful on the following grounds: (i) failure to pay compensation; (ii)
lack of due process; and (iii) discrimination.”

b. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

i. Assuming arguendo that the Claimants’ investment has been
expropriated, that expropriation is lawful

67) The Respondent argued that, assuming arguendo that Claimants have a valid claim
for expropriation of both old order mineral rights and shares in the Operating

7! Memorial, paragraphs 645(v), 639.
” Memorial, paragraphs 645(v), 639.
® Memorial, paragraph 644.
™ Memorial, paragraph 640.
75 Memorial, paragraph 641.
76 Memorial, paragraph 645.

17

Companies, the expropriation was lawful under the BITs and, therefore, Respondent
did not breach the BITs’ provisions on expropriation.”

68) The Respondent argued that, taken together, the two BITs permit the Respondent to
expropriate investments as long as that expropriation meets the four following
conditions: (i) the expropriation must be for a public purpose; (ii) the Respondent
must provide immediate or prompt compensation that is full or adequate and
effective; (iii) the expropriation must be on a non-discriminatory basis; and (iv) the
expropriation must be effected under due process of law.”

69) The Respondent argued that the alleged expropriation of old order mineral rights and
shares in the Operating Companies were undertaken for multiple and important public
purposes, and that the Claimants had conceded as much in their Memorial.”
Specifically, the Respondent explained that the MPRDA and the Mining Charter were
promulgated for the purpose, among other things, of: (i) simplifying and modernizing
an overly complex legal system; (ii) ameliorating the disenfranchisement of HDSAs
and other negative social effects caused by apartheid in general and the 1991 Mineral
Rights Act in particular; (iii) reducing the economically harmful concentration of
mineral rights and promoting the optimal exploitation of mineral resources; and (iv)
protecting the environment and the communities living in the vicinity of mining
operations.*° With respect to the 1991 Mineral Rights Act in particular, which was
repealed by the MPRDA, the Respondent argued that the 1991 Act was an instrument
that entrenched white privilege in the minerals sector, and that it clearly could not
withstand the coming to power of a democratically elected government.*!

70) The Respondent argued with respect to compensation that the obligation to provide
“immediate” or “prompt” compensation is met where: first, the state provides the
investor, without undue delay, with access to an effective mechanism for the
determination whether compensation is due and, if so, the amount required; and
second, if that mechanism determines that compensation is due, it is paid within a
short time after the amount has been fixed (and with interest, to take account of the
time-value of money).*?

71) The Respondent argued that South African law complies with these compensation
requirements because it provides an effective mechanism for the determination
whether compensation is due.** According to the Respondent, the Claimants’
Companies have knowingly and intentionally refused to use the available domestic
procedures and, therefore, the Claimants themselves are the cause of any loss they
may have suffered.**

72) The Respondent argued, with respect to the question whether the expropriation was
non-discriminatory, that the Claimants had implicitly admitted as much with respect

7” Counter-Memorial, paragraph 556.

*8 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 559-61.

” Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 562, 57-122, 561.
*° Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 562, 57-122.

*! Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 21-22, 57-122.

® Counter-Memorial, paragraph 565.

3 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 573.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 573, 576.

18

to the MPRDA.*° As to the Mining Charter, the Respondent argued that the Mining
Charter’s divestment requirements treated all investors, whether South African or
foreign in precisely the same way.*° Moreover, the Respondent argued, even if the
Mining Charter were found to treat foreign investors differently from South African
investors, the difference in treatment would fall well within the Respondent’s margin
of appreciation for determining which measures are reasonable and justifiable in
advancing critical public interests.*”

73) The Respondent argued, with respect to the due process requirement for lawful
expropriation, that both the MPRDA and the Mining Charter comply with the due
process requirements of the Italy and Luxembourg BITs.** Specifically, the
Respondent argued that the Claimants, through their Operating Companies, are
entitled within the South African legal system: (i) to pursue a claim for expropriation
both administratively and judicially; (ii) to seek judicial review of the DME’s exercise
of its powers under the MPRDA (as they have done in several instances); and/or
challenge the Constitutional validity of the MPRDA and/or the incorporation of the
Mining Charter into the MPRDA.*’ According to the Respondent, access to these
legal procedures is all that is required; due process does not entitle the Claimants to
whatever substantive outcome they might prefer, nor to an individualized hearing by
the State before the adoption by the State of a statute that has an expropriatory
effect.

ii. There was no direct or indirect expropriation of either
the old order mineral rights or the Claimants’ shares in
the operating companies

74) The Respondent argued that direct expropriation requires the complete deprivation, as
a practical matter, of all of the meaningful substantive municipal law rights enjoyed
by the investor, along with transfer of ownership and control (or at least some
essential component thereof) to a different beneficiary.”! The Respondent argued that
neither complete deprivation nor transfer of ownership can be shown in this case
because the Operating Companies have retained the same core entitlement — to
prospect for or mine granite on an exclusive basis — albeit under a different name,
notwithstanding the fact that the precise nature of the municipal regulatory measures
has changed.”

75) The Respondent argued that there was no indirect expropriation for three reasons.
First, the Respondent argued that a generally applicable and non-discriminatory
regulation, such as that in issue here, cannot be expropriatory absent a specific, prior
promise that the regulation would not be adopted.”? Second, the Respondent argued

§5 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 579.

86 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 582.

*7 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 583.

§§ Counter-Memorial, paragraph 587.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraph 587,

°° Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 588-89.
*' Counter-Memorial, paragraph 598.

* Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 609, 612.
°8 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 621-23.

19

that there can be no indirect expropriation unless the investor has been substantially

deprived of its rights in the investment.” Third, the Respondent argued that there can

be no indirect expropriation where, as here, the government action in question is a

rational and proportional means of pursuing legitimate public regulatory purposes.”°

76) The Respondent argued that the Claimants’ shares in the Operating Companies were
not directly expropriated either in fact (as it was not yet clear whether there would be
any divestiture or not) or in principle.** The Respondent compared this case to the
Svenska Management Gruppen AB v Sweden case before the European Commission
on Human Rights.”” In that case, Sweden had imposed a 20% tax on corporations and
increased social security contributions for the purpose of opening up corporate
investment to workers.** The European Commission on Human Rights dismissed
claims of expropriation as being manifestly unfounded.”? The Respondent argued
that, if there was no expropriation in the Swedish case, there could be no
expropriation here, where the Government had only attempted to open up investment,
without any additional tax or social security obligations!”

77) The Respondent made the same arguments against a finding of indirect expropriation
with respect to the Claimants’ shares in the Operating Companies as it did with
respect to the old order mineral rights.'°' In addition, the Respondent argued that
there could be no indirect expropriation of the Claimants’ shares in the Operating
Companies because, even if there was a 26% divestment (only one of many options
under the Mining Charter), the Claimants would still retain control over their
investments. °°

2. Fair and Equitable Treatment and National Treatment Claims

78) In addition to their claims for expropriation, the Claimants alleged that the MPRDA
and the Mining Charter breached the Respondent’s fair and equitable treatment and
national treatment obligations under the Italy and Luxembourg BITS.'°? The
Respondent denied the allegations;'™ and each party offered detailed arguments in
favour of their positions, in the same tenor as those detailed above with respect to
expropriation.

Cc. Discontinuance

°4 Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 635-36.
°S Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 637-38.
°© Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 659-60.
°7 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 662, citing Svenska Management Gruppen AB v Sweden (App No 11036/84)
EComHR, 2 Dec 1985.

°8 Counter-Memorial, paragraph 662.

°° Counter-Memorial, paragraph 662.

‘© Counter-Memorial, paragraph 663.

‘©! Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 664-61.
‘© Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 666-67.
13 Memorial, paragraphs 651-771.

‘© Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 668-890.

20

79) On 2 November 2009, the Claimants sought the Respondent’s consent to discontinue
the proceedings pursuant to Article 50 of the Additional Facility Rules.'°° The
Claimants argued that, although they had not been provided with full relief for their
alleged injuries, they nevertheless sought discontinuance because, pursuant to a 12
December 2008 agreement between the DMR and the Operating Companies (the
“Offset Agreement”), the Respondent had granted the Claimants’ Operating
Companies new order mineral rights without requiring the Claimants to sell 26% of
their shares to HDSAs.'® Instead, pursuant to the Offset Agreement, the Operating
Companies would be deemed to have complied with the Mining Charter by (i) making
a 21% beneficiation offset (i.e., beneficiating — processing and adding value to the
quarried stone — in South Africa 21% of the stone that it mined in South Africa); and
(ii) providing a 5% employee ownership program for employees of the Operating
Companies.'°”

80) The Claimants also asserted that they had tried to settle the case with the Respondent,
but to no avail.'°* Therefore, the Claimants argued, given that they had received
partial relief, and given the costs of the arbitration and current economic conditions, it
was now appropriate to seek discontinuance of these proceedings.”

81) The Respondent filed its Response to Claimants’ Request for Discontinuance and
Application for Default Award on 20 November 2009, in which it indicated that it did
not consent to the Claimants’ request for discontinuance; ''° and, as a consequence of
Article 50 of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, the proceedings continued.'!!

82) The Respondent argued in its Response that the Claimants had sought discontinuance
without prejudice, leaving the Claimants free to bring the same claims at a later date
and leaving all costs where they lay, and that Respondent could not agree to
discontinuance on such terms.'!? However, on 26 January, the Claimants informed
the Respondent and the Tribunal that they were willing to agree to discontinuance
with an award dismissing their claims with res judicata effect.

D. Default Award of Fees and Costs

1. The Respondent’s Application for a Default Award

83) In its Response to the Claimants’ Request for Discontinuance, the Respondent asked
the Tribunal to issue a default award, not on the merits, but only with respect to fees

'°5 Claimants’ Request for Consent to Discontinuance (the “Request), page 1.

106 Request, pages 2-3.

107 Request, pages 2-3.

18 Request, pages 10-12.

19 Request, pages 10-12.

'O Respondent’s Response to Claimants’ Request for Discontinuance and Application for Default Award (20
November 2009) (the “Response”), paragraph 1.

"1 See Additional Facility Rules, Article 50 (“If objection [to a request for consent to discontinue] is made, the
proceeding shall continue.”).

"2 Response, paragraph 5.

"3 Claimants’ Reply to Respondent’s Response to Claimants’ Request for Discontinuance and Application for
Default Award (26 Jan 2010) (the “Reply”), paragraph 13.

21

and costs.''* Therefore, in its Request, the Respondent addressed two issues: (i) the
Tribunal’s power to issue an Award or other enforceable order with respect to the
costs of the proceedings without first evaluating the merits of the case; and (ii) in the
event that the Tribunal has such a power, the Respondent’s entitlement to recover
from the Claimants all of the fees and costs the Respondent has expended in
connection with the proceedings.'!

84) With respect to the first issue, the Respondent made the following three, alternative
arguments: (i) that Article 48 of the Additional Facility rules permit the Tribunal to
issue a default award, in which it considered neither its jurisdiction nor the merits of
the case already submitted to it, but instead merely considered the question of costs;
(ii) that the Tribunal could render a default award in favour of the Respondent on the
ground of Claimants’ failure to prosecute their claims; and (iii) that the Tribunal has
inherent powers to grant an enforceable order, rather than an Award in terms of
Article 52 of the Rules, with respect only to the costs of the proceeding.''°

85) With respect to the second issue, the Respondent argued that the Respondent should
be considered to be the prevailing party, and thus entitled to an award of fees and
costs, because the Claimants did not receive anything as a result of the arbitration, but
instead merely received the same treatment as was the entitlement of every other
mining company that was subject to the process for the conversion of rights.!!7 In
addition, the Respondent argued that it was entitled to an award of fees and costs
because the Claimants had wasted the time, energy, and money of ICSID, the
Tribunal, and the Republic by bringing a claim that (i) they never intended to pursue
as pleaded, but rather had brought as a mere tactical device, (ii) could have been
adequately handled under the Respondent’s own laws and procedures, and (iii) was
not ripe.''* Finally, the Respondent also argued that, were there to be a dismissal
without prejudice, it would be fundamentally unfair to leave the costs where they
lay.

2. The Claimants’ Reply

86) In reply to the argument that Article 48 of the Additional Facility Rules permits the
Tribunal to issue a default award in which it considers only the question of costs, the
Claimants argued first, that a claimant who makes a request under Article 50 is not
automatically in default,'?° and second, that the characterization of the proceedings
that was put forward by the Respondent was unnecessarily convoluted and
fundamentally flawed, albeit a reaction to the unusual nature of the present
situation.'7!

"4 Response, paragraph 3.

"5 Response, paragraph 3.

''6 Response, paragraphs 24-35.

"7 Response, paragraphs 20-23.

"8 Response, paragraph 16.

"9 Response, paragraphs 17-18, 24-35.
120 Reply, paragraph 16.

"2! Reply, paragraph 12.

22

87) In reply to the argument that the Tribunal could render a default award in favour of
the Respondent on the ground of Claimants’ failure to prosecute their claims, the
Claimants argued that they had no objection in principle to the rendering of a default
award on this basis, albeit with prejudice, as long as any order or award (i) was
accompanied by a narrative explaining Claimants’ justification for failing to pursue
the claims,'” and (ii) followed the final grant of the Operating Companies’
prospecting and mining rights by the DMR on the basis of the Offset Agreement. '7*

88) In reply to the argument that the Tribunal has inherent powers to grant an enforceable
order with respect only to the costs of the proceeding, the Claimants argued that it is
in principle open to the Tribunal to take the view that this unusual situation is not
addressed adequately in the Rules, and for the Tribunal accordingly to exercise its
inherent powers.'**

89) In reply to the argument that the Respondent is the prevailing party, the Claimants
asserted the opposite.'*> According to the Claimants, they are the prevailing party
because their initiation of the arbitration caused the Respondent to (i) enter into the
Offset Agreement with the Claimants’ operating companies; and (ii) convert the
majority of the Operating Companies’ new order rights, by both granting and
notarially executing those rights in the period between July 2009 and October 2009.'7°

90) The Claimants rejected the argument that they had wasted the time, energy, and
money of ICSID, the Tribunal, and the Republic by bringing a claim that they never
intended to pursue as pleaded, but rather had brought as a mere tactical device.'?” The
Claimants argued that the Respondent had not pointed to any concrete evidence of an
intent on the part of Claimants to file the arbitration as a mere tactical device,'”* and
that the Respondent’s argument made no sense if, as Respondent asserted, it was clear
to Claimants from the outset that they would eventually receive what they did receive
on the timeline predicted by Respondent. pe

91) The Claimants also argued that: (i) they had always been open about their desire to
receive new order rights, rather than pursue arbitration;'*” (ii) their claims were not
vexatious, but were based on the merits and their lawyers’ assessment of Claimants’
rights under the BITs;'*! and (iii) the statements made by Richard Plender (now Mr
Justice Plender) at the First Session in December 2007 — that Claimants had already
suffered an injury, but that the amount of the loss might be abated by Government
action — was true at the time.'*? Today, the Claimants argued, the loss has been
largely abated due to the Offset Agreement and the conversion of the majority of
Claimants’ old order rights.'*>

'2 Reply, paragraphs 13-14.

23 Reply, paragraph 79(i).

4 Reply, paragraph 13.

25 Reply, paragraph 12.

26 Reply, paragraphs 24-31, 44, and 47-51.
27 Reply, paragraphs 33-35 and 63.
28 Reply, paragraph 16.

29 Reply, paragraph 63.

'0 Reply, paragraph 33.

'S! Reply, paragraph 34.

' Reply, paragraph 35.

'3 Reply, paragraph 35.

23

92) In reply to the argument that the Claimants’ claims were not ripe and could have been
adequately addressed by the procedures put in place by the Respondent, the Claimants
argued that neither of the BITs requires Claimants to exhaust domestic remedies
before approaching a Tribunal constituted under the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules,'™ and that both BITs contain a “fork-in-the-road” provision which constrains
the ability of claimants to pursue a remedy in the domestic legal system without the
risk of losing their right to advance substantially the same claim before an
international arbitral tribunal.'*°

93) The Claimants argued that their claims were ripe because they had suffered a loss in
2004, when the relevant legislation was enacted.'*°

94) The Claimants also argued that, had they exhausted the administrative process in
South Africa, they would not have received the new order rights on the terms that they
have now received them, and that after the grant of new rights their ability to obtain
effective relief from the Tribunal would have been limited. >”

95) Finally, the Claimants argued that acceptance of the Respondent’s argument would
have the effect of driving a coach and horse through the system of investment
protection.'** According to the Claimants, if the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s
arguments, States in future could devise easy “maybe tomorrow” escape routes from
their international obligations towards investors, as all they would need to do to avoid
accountability would be to leave the door open to the possibility of rectifying their
actions by an uncertain measure at an uncertain date.

3. The Parties’ Cost Submissions

96) On 28 June 2010, the Respondent filed a statement of its fees and costs up to 30 April
2010. Those costs, in EURO converted from ZAR as of 30 April 2010 at the
European Central Bank’s Euro exchange reference rate, totalled EURO 5,765,467.12.
Deducting Mr Nthai’s costs of EURO 432,320.21 from that amount, the Respondent
claimed EURO 5,333,146.91 from the Claimants as of 30 April 2010.

97) On 28 June 2010, the Claimants filed a statement of their costs and fees up to May
2010. Those costs and fees totalled EURO 4,374,200.11, as converted from ZAR as
of that date.

Il. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

98) The Tribunal is unanimous in considering that it may decide the question of costs by
an exercise of its discretion.

'4 Reply, paragraph 37(i).
'85 Reply, paragraph 37(ii).
'86 Reply, paragraph 52.

'57 Reply, paragraphs 52-55.
138 Reply, paragraph 56.

24

99) The case was initiated by the exercise by the Claimants of their rights under Article 8
of the Italy-RSA BIT and Article 10 of the Luxembourg-RSA BIT to submit their
dispute for settlement to arbitration pursuant to the Rules of the Additional Facility of
ICSID.

100)Article 58 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules (April 2006) reads as
follows:

Article 58
Cost of Proceeding

(1) Unless the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall decide how and by
whom the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, the expenses and
charges of the Secretariat and the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceeding shall be borne. The Tribunal may, to that end,
call on the Secretariat and the parties to provide it with the information it
needs in order to formulate the division of the cost of the proceeding between
the parties.

(2) The decision of the Tribunal pursuant to paragraph (1) of this Article shall
form part of the award.

101)There is no “agreement otherwise” by the parties. In particular, the Tribunal does not
consider that the agreement of the Parties that the seat of the arbitration be London
and that the /ex arbitri be English Law amounts to an agreement that Article 58 of the
Additional Facility Rules be displaced by the provision in s. 61(1) of the (English)
Arbitration Act 1996, which reads as follows:

Award of costs

61.(1) The tribunal may make an award allocating the costs of the arbitration
as between the parties, subject to any agreement of the parties.

(2) Unless the parties otherwise agree, the tribunal shall award costs on the
general principle that costs should follow the event except where it appears to
the tribunal that in the circumstances this is not appropriate in relation to the
whole or part of the costs.

102)The Tribunal notes that s. 61 is not among the mandatory provisions of the Arbitration
Act 1996: see s. 4 and Schedule 1 of the Act. Section 61 therefore applies only if and
to the extent that the Parties have not made their own arrangements by agreement.
The agreement to arbitrate under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules is such an

25

arrangement, and constitutes an agreement that displaces the general principle that
costs should follow the event by virtue of s. 61(2) of the 1996 Act.'*”

103)Moreover, the Tribunal considers that even if s. 61(2) were applicable it would not be
appropriate to apply the general principle set out in that sub-section, because this is
not a case in which the Tribunal is mandated (or even authorised) to rule upon the
merits of the claim and in which the Tribunal’s own decisions determine which parts
or elements of the claim succeed, and to what extent, and which do not. Thus, the
Tribunal does not consider that it would be bound to apply the principle that costs
should follow the event even if it were bound by s. 61 (which it is not).

104)The Tribunal therefore considers that it may and must decide the question of costs as
an exercise of discretion.

105)Article 58 of the Additional Facility Rules does not expressly limit that discretion in
any way. The Tribunal is not bound to apply any particular rule or principle in
exercising its discretion. Nonetheless, the exercise of discretion is not wholly
unconstrained. It may not be capricious or arbitrary. It must be the result of the
rational consideration of relevant factors.

106)While the Tribunal is not necessarily limited to a consideration of factors upon which
the Parties have based their arguments concerning costs, and is not bound to treat
every such factor as necessarily relevant to its decision on costs, it will generally be
appropriate to give particular consideration to factors which all the Parties agree are
relevant.

107)In this case there is no consensus as to the principles governing costs. This is,
however, in large measure due to the disagreement between the Claimants and the
Respondent concerning the characterization of the ending of the dispute. The
Claimants submit that the Respondent has given them what they wanted and that they
are therefore the successful parties. The Respondent submits that the Claimants have
abandoned their claims and are accordingly the unsuccessful parties.

108)In many contexts it would be a welcome and highly satisfactory feature of the ending
of litigation that each side regarded itself as being the winner; but where the
implication is that the other, ‘losing’ party should pay some or all of the costs of the
‘winner’, such common satisfaction may itself be a cause of discord. Such is the case
here.

109)Nonetheless, the fact that both sides placed considerable weight in their submissions
on the question of the extent to which each side had ‘succeeded’ in these proceedings
reflects at least an underlying agreement that the degree of success of each party is a
factor relevant to the decision on costs.

110)The Tribunal considers that this is correct in principle. Arbitrations such as the present
are concerned with the entitlements of the Parties: what Parties are entitled to demand,
or to refuse, and what they are not. In principle, if one Party is entitled to something
Bo See, e.g., Section 4(3) of the Act (“The parties may make ... arrangements [to vary non-mandatory
provisions of the Act] by agreeing to the application of institutional rules or providing any other means by
which a matter may be decided.”).

26

and that thing is improperly withheld, its remedy should be both what it is entitled to
and the costs which that party had to incur in order to obtain its entitlement through
the arbitration. Conversely, if one party is entitled to withhold something, and is
obliged to defend itself in arbitral proceedings against a demand for that thing, it
should not have to bear the costs of defending its right to withhold the thing.

111)In this case the Tribunal has not ruled on the questions of the extent to which the
Parties were or were not entitled to the various rights that they claimed. There cannot,
therefore, be a simple application of the principle that ‘costs follow the event’. What
the Tribunal can do, however, is define the boundaries within which ‘success’ and
‘failure’ are to be evaluated and to make its own estimate of the degree of ‘success’ of
each Party.

112)While that appraisal is possible, and indeed requested of the Tribunal by the Parties, it
must not be allowed to obscure the fact that in this case there is no real winner and no
real loser. What has happened is that during the many months over which the
arbitration has unfolded both the Claimants and the Respondent have explored ways
in which they can best fulfil their respective roles in the development of the new
economy of the Republic of South Africa; and their efforts have brought them to a
point where their interests are sufficiently closely aligned for there to be no advantage
in pursuing these arbitral proceedings any further, and every advantage in rebuilding
the relationship of trust and mutual commitment between investor and host
Government upon which economic development ultimately depends.

113)The Tribunal is willing, and has been mandated by the parties, to proceed to a
decision on the allocation of costs; but it wishes to state in the plainest possible terms
that the resolution of this dispute cannot be understood in terms of success or failure
for either side, but only in terms of the ultimate success of all parties in their struggle
to find a fair, viable structure for the future of this particular part of the South African
economy.

114)We start from the view that the question of ‘success’ is to be addressed within the
confines of the arbitration, and not within the broader context of the dispute between
the Parties. That broader context may include the pursuit of separate and different
procedures in an attempt to secure the best outcome. Typically, the parties will
continue to negotiate. In some cases they may pursue claims against insurers or
contractual guarantors. While such separate procedures might yield a result which the
Party regards as being at least as favourable as the result which it expects to obtain
from an arbitration, such a result achieved by the separate procedure is not a success
in the arbitration. Thus, a party may achieve a ‘successful’ result in the broad context
of the dispute without succeeding in its claims before the arbitral tribunal.

115)This is evident from a simple example. Investor X brings a claim in an arbitration
against State Y for $100m for an alleged expropriation of an oil concession. State Y
offers to give X a 25-year gas concession if it abandons the claim for $100m, and X
accepts the offer. X may consider the gas concession to be worth $110m, and think
that it has had a great success in its dealings with State Y — and, moreover, that it has
managed to preserve its relationship with State Y. What X cannot say, however, is
that it ‘won’ or ‘succeeded in’ the arbitration.

27

116)In the present case, some elements of the Claimants’ claim were abandoned rather
than ‘settled’; and while the new rights given to the Claimants by the Respondent may
be regarded by the Claimants as being sufficient to warrant a commercial decision not
to proceed further with this arbitration (with all its attendant costs, delays, and risks)
those rights do not rectify or even address every element of the claim. There are some
elements which the Claimants were willing to give up because the overall outcome
was sufficiently attractive to them. Those elements were, in effect, abandoned in
return for an acceptable package in respect of other elements of the claim. Had a
similar package been awarded by the Tribunal, it would have been evident that the
Tribunal had upheld some elements of the claim and dismissed other elements. The
Claimants would have succeeded partially but not wholly.

117)It is, moreover, noted that although the Parties could have agreed that the grant of new
rights by the Respondent would be dependent upon the definitive abandonment of the
claims in the arbitration, no such condition was imposed. That is not easy to reconcile
with the notion that there was a ‘settlement’ of this case. Nor is the fact that the
Claimants applied unilaterally for the discontinuance of the proceedings — an
application opposed by the Respondent. Indeed, it may also be observed that a
‘settlement’ might be expected to include an agreement on the question of costs: the
very fact that the Tribunal has this issue before it calls into question the idea that there
is an agreed settlement terminating these proceedings.

118)The Tribunal, on the basis of the present record, cannot know whether or not a causal
link in fact existed between the initiation and maintenance of the arbitration and the
grant of rights by the Respondent, which asserts that the grant would have been
forthcoming in any event as a result of the ordinary government decision-making
process. The arguments made by Claimants in their pleadings concerning the need to
see the dispute over the application of the South African legislation in the light of the
specific characteristics of the dimension granite industry are as valid in the context of
the Claimants’ negotiations with the Government as they are in the context of the
arbitration: the possibility that the Government was persuaded by and responded to
the arguments of the Claimants (who are the leaders in the South African dimension
granite industry) cannot be excluded.

119)While understanding the Claimants’ concern that they could not assume that an
agreed compromise with the Respondent would be implemented and that the
arbitration should not be definitively abandoned until the compromise was delivered
by the Respondent in a legally-binding form, the Tribunal also considers that it is not
established that the Claimants needed to wait as long as they did to inform the
Respondent of the solicitation of a bribe by one of Respondent’s senior counsel, Seth
Nthai, who continued to participate in the preparation of Respondent’s pleadings
while he was suggesting to the Claimants that he might secure the Respondent’s
agreement to settle the case without payment by the Claimants of Respondent’s costs.
Similarly, the Claimants might have been able to inform the Respondent sooner that
they were prepared to terminate the arbitration on a ‘with prejudice’ basis. The
Tribunal thinks that the Respondent’s costs (and, indeed, the Claimants’ costs) would
have been smaller if the Claimants had indicated earlier their willingness to settle on a
‘with prejudice’ basis, and if Mr Nthai’s corrupt solicitations had been promptly
disclosed. Accordingly, the Tribunal thinks it right that the Claimants should bear
responsibility for a portion of the Respondent’s costs.

 

28

120)The Respondent very correctly and wisely withdrew that element of its claim for costs
that was attributable to Mr Nthai’s work. A Tribunal cannot properly order that the
costs of a Party’s adviser who engages in the solicitation of bribes should be
recovered from the other Party.

121)The Tribunal has also considered the likely effect upon investment arbitration of
various possible approaches to the question of costs. The Tribunal considers that in
situations where an arbitration is terminated much the best course is for the Parties to
agree upon a settlement of all aspects of the claim, including costs. Failing that, the
Tribunal accepts that in principle the recovery of costs should be an element in the
calculation of the compensation due to a successful litigant who was unlawfully
deprived of its rights; and conversely, there should be no question of establishing a
system in which any and all investors can initiate claims against a host State knowing
that whether they win or lose the tribunal will order the Respondent State to pay the
investor’s costs. This case, however, falls between those two poles, and while the
Tribunal has sought to satisfy itself that the views on costs that are expressed here do
not jeopardize the fair and efficient workings of the investment arbitration regime, it
has not found broad questions of policy to be of much help in deciding exactly what
reallocation (if any) of costs should be ordered.

122)The portion of the Respondent’s expenses that the Claimants should bear is a difficult
matter to determine. One approach might be to look at expenses incurred at the
time(s) when such expenses could have been averted. The record suggests that had the
Claimants given, at the end of June 2009 when they were notified of the conversion of
some of their ‘old order’ rights into new rights, a clear indication of a willingness to
settle the case on a ‘with prejudice’ basis, at least some subsequent costs might have
been avoided. In contrast, however, preparations for the scheduled hearing appeared
to continue apace. The addition in July 2009 of the New Marlin claimants, Lord
Bingham’s scrutiny of disclosure requests in September and October 2009, and the
Claimants’ request for an extension of the deadline for the filing of their Reply are
among the indications that the Claimants intended to proceed with the arbitration.
Those indications were reversed by the Claimants’ request in their letter dated 2
November 2009 for discontinuance of the proceedings in accordance with Additional
Facility Article 50.

123)It is true that in June 2009, when invited to do so by the Claimants, the Respondent
refused to agree to a further stay of proceedings unless the Claimants paid all of the
Respondent’s costs, and that the Tribunal refused to order a further stay; on the other
hand, the Respondent had consistently maintained that the claim was not ‘ripe’ and
that the Claimants were procrastinating in a situation where the Respondent wished
only to have the matter resolved finally and without further delay. Given the delays
that had already occurred, the decision to press ahead with the arbitration despite the
Claimants’ request for a stay was reasonable, and was taken unanimously by the
Tribunal at that time.

124)The Tribunal understands that the Claimants may have feared that the promise in June
2009 of the grant of new rights might not be implemented and that it was therefore
necessary to keep the pressure on the Respondent. It also understands that the
Respondent may have taken an inflexible approach to the payment of its costs as a

29

condition of any further stay or agreed settlement. Nevertheless, the Tribunal
considers that costs could have been avoided and that the Claimants were in a position
to avoid them, but decided to keep their options open by pressing ahead (after the
Tribunal had refused a further stay) with preparations for a hearing while considering
the discontinuation of their claim. The fact that such a strategy might be rational does
not mean that it is not wasteful of costs.

125)The Claimants forcefully submitted that the Government had imposed deadlines for
applications for conversion of old to new order rights but was unprepared to answer
the questions that the Claimants regarded as essential preliminaries to the filing of
full, detailed applications. It is certainly evident from the papers that there was a
considerable delay in the formulation and announcement of detailed governmental
policies that would be applied under the BEE legislation to the dimension granite
industry. Given the momentous scale of South Africa’s social and economic reforms,
it was plainly inevitable that legal processes might be slower than those associated
with amendments to regulatory legislation in a longer-established economy. That said,
it is also understandable that the Claimants, faced with reforms of great significance
to their businesses, should be anxious and wishing fervently for a fuller engagement
on the part of the Government with the Claimants’ questions and problems and a
swifter pace of decision-making.

126)There is, however, a problem with approaching costs questions by looking at dates at
which proceedings might have been discontinued or costs might have been frozen or
minimised by some other means. It is that the outcome of that approach would be
determined by accidents of the work and billing schedules of those involved.
Moreover, some such expenses would have been incurred regardless of an earlier
disclosure of the corruption or an earlier declaration of the (wholly uncorrupt)
willingness of the Claimants to terminate the arbitration on a ‘with prejudice’ basis.
Close scrutiny of the Parties’ respective invoices, though no doubt interesting, seems
unlikely to result in insights that could lead to a precise quantification of the
allocation of costs.

127)Another approach might be to look to the proportion of the Claimants’ claims that
were ‘successful’ in the sense that the Respondent granted or conceded rights that
corresponded to the relief sought. That, however, would require the Tribunal to form a
view on the elements of the claim that might and the elements that might not have
been upheld, and on their relative values. That the Tribunal cannot do, the merits
having been withdrawn from its consideration.

128)There is another aspect of this point. The prayer for relief in paragraph 818 of the
Claimants’ Memorial is not precise or detailed. The Claimants are not criticised for
this: the basis of the claims against the Respondent is made sufficiently clear for that
stage of the proceedings. But it is the case that the pleadings do not lend themselves to
a fragmentation of claims and an allocation of costs based upon notional proportions
of successes and failures among the claims.

129)Furthermore, there is a paradox. Elements of the claim that were not addressed by the
rights granted by the Respondent — for example, the claims for compensation for the

loss of unused old order rights — might be said either (a) to be precisely the claims that

30

the Claimants needed to pursue in the arbitration if they were to be compensated at
all, or conversely (b) precisely the claims that were ‘abandoned’ when the arbitration
was terminated.

130)In broad terms, it is evident that while the Claimants may be said to have abandoned
some elements of their claim because they consider that they have received new rights
that maintain the viability of their investment in South Africa, it is also true that in the
eyes of the Claimants, they have accepted less than they had lost, and it would
compound their losses to order them to pay any part of the Respondent’s costs.

131)In these circumstances, it is unlikely that any decision on costs will derive its strength
from its commendation by both Parties, or by an uncontroversial application of some
general principle. The most that can be hoped is that the Tribunal makes as fair and
reasonable a decision as it can, based upon a principle which is itself fair and resilient.

132)On that basis the Tribunal has decided that it is a fair and reasonable exercise of its
discretion to require the Claimant to make a contribution to the costs incurred by the
Respondent. The rationale behind this view is the result of a combination of (i) the
fact that it was the Claimants who sought the discontinuance of the proceedings under
Article 50 of the Additional Facility Rules and that the Respondent opposed
discontinuance, (ii) the fact that the Claimants ultimately abandoned some of their
claims, and (iii) the view that the Claimants pressed ahead with the arbitration at a
time and in circumstances where it was in a position to avert the need for some part of
the Parties’ expenditure. This approach also reinforces the view that, while claimants
in investment arbitrations are in principle entitled to the costs necessarily incurred in
the vindication of their legal rights, they cannot expect to leave respondent States to
carry the costs of defending claims that are abandoned.

133)Having regard to the way in which the proceedings unfolded during 2009-2010, to the
fact that the Claimants explicitly sought a discontinuance of the arbitral proceedings,
and that the package that led the Claimants to discontinue the proceedings did not
cover all of the claims that they had brought, the Tribunal considers that the
Claimants should contribute to the Respondent the sum of EURO 400,000 in respect
of the fees and costs now claimed by the Respondent. In deciding this amount, the
Tribunal has taken into account the Respondent’s legal costs and associated expenses
as well as the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the Centre.

31

IV. DECISION ON DISCONTINUANCE AND COSTS
For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal has decided that:

a) the Claimants shall pay the sum of EURO 400,000 to the Respondent in respect of the fees
and costs now claimed by the Respondent; and,

b) the Claimants’ claims are dismissed with prejudice.

Made as at London, United Kingdom, in English.

 

[Signed] [Signed]
Hon. Charles Brower Joseph Matthews
Date: 28/7/10 Date: 3/08/10

(Subject to the attached concurring statement)

[Signed]

Professor Vaughan Lowe
Date: 26/07/10

32

