4A_396/2017

Order of 23 November 2017
First Civil Law Court

Federal Judge
Kiss (Mrs), presiding.

Parties

Country X,

represented by

Elliott Geisinger and Dr. Christopher Boog
and Dr. Annabelle Méckesch,

Appellant,

Vv
represented by Dr. Marc D. Veit and Michael Schneider as well as Dominik Elmiger, Respondent.

Reasons:

1.
A. (Respondent) is asserting claims against Country X (Appellant) based on the Bilateral
Investment Treaty between Country X and Country Y dated November 27, 1998 (hereinafter: BIT).

On June 3, 2015, the Respondent initiated an arbitration before the Permanent Court of Arbitration
(PCA) against the Appellant, referring to Art. 9 BIT.

The PCA Arbitration Tribunal, with its seat in Geneva, by a Decision dated June 26, 2017, found that it
had jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute.

By written submission of August 14, 2017, the Appellant filed a Civil law appeal from that Decision. By
order of August 17, 2017, the Respondent and the Arbitral tribunal were invited to submit comments on
the appeal and to state their positions regarding the Appellant's request for a stay of enforcement.

By written submission of August 29, 2017, the Respondent thereupon submitted a Request to the Court
to require the Appellant to pay security for the Respondent's potential costs within the meaning of Art.
62(2) BGG.'? By order of the Presiding Judge of August 31, 2017, the Appellant was granted leave to
comment on the Request for Security on or before September 18, 2017. By written comments of
September 18, 2017, the Appellant applied to the Court to dismiss the Request. By a written submission
of September 25, 2017, the Respondent stated that it was maintaining its Request, and on October 4,
2017, the Appellant again requested that it be dismissed.

1 Quote as Cojnutry X. v. A___, 4A_396/2017. The decision was issued in German. The full text is
available on the web site of the Federal Tribunal www.bger.ch

2 Translator's note: BGG is the German abbreviation for the Federal Statute of June 17, 2005, organizing
the Federal Tribunal, IS 173.110

2.

A party with no established domicile in Switzerland may, upon request of the opponent, be required to
pay security for costs (Art. 62(2) BGG).

2.1. The Respondent is basing its Request primarily on the Appellant's status as a foreign state; it
submits that, according to the jurisprudence of the Federal Tribunal on Art. 62(2) BGG, as a general
matter foreign states and public entities may be required to post security for costs; there is no state
treaty that would present an obstacle to requiring the Appellant to pay security for costs.

In its Response to the Request, the Appellant disputes that there is no state treaty in the present case
which would present an obstacle to imposing an obligation to pay security for costs; it states that Country
X, just as Switzerland, is a contracting state of the Hague Convention of March 1, 1954 on Civil
Procedure (SR 0.274.12; hereinafter: Hague Convention 1954), Art. 17 of which provides that no
obligation to pay security may be imposed on nationals of the Contracting States based on a lack of
domicile or residence at the place of the proceedings (in another Contracting State); pursuant to the
jurisprudence of the Swiss Federal Tribunal (BGE 77 | 42) and the writings of legal scholars, not only
nationals of the contracting states, but the convention states themselves, are entitled to invoke this
provision.

In its comments on the point, the Respondent argues, to the contrary, that as a Contracting State of the
Hague Convention, the Appellant is not entitled to rely on Art. 17 of that convention, and is specifically
not entitled to do so in the present matter. In its written submission of October 4, 2017, the Appellant
disputes this.

2.2. It is undisputed, and comports with the consistent jurisprudence of the Swiss Federal Tribunal, that
under Art. 62(2) BGG, it is generally possible for courts to impose a duty to pay security for costs not
only on natural persons or legal entities under private and public law, but such an obligation may also
be imposed on foreign states, because they have no domicile or seat within Switzerland (see e.g. Orders
4A_570/2011 of November 23, 2011; 4A_541/2009 of January 21, 2010 E. 6; 4C.380/2004 of November
30, 2004).

However, the obligation to pay security does not apply if an international treaty precludes this. Both
Switzerland and Country X are Contracting States of the Hague Convention of 1954. Art. 17 of that
convention prohibits the imposition of security for costs on nationals of one of the contracting states who
have their abode within any contracting state and who are appearing in one of the other contracting
states as a claimant or intervenor based on their status as an alien or because they have no domicile
or residence in Switzerland.

2.2.1. The Respondent disputes that it was ever the intention of the Contracting States of the Hague
Convention of July 17, 1905 on Civil Procedure (SR 0.274.11; hereinafter: Hague Convention 1905) or
of the successor convention, the Hague Convention of 1954, that the states themselves should fall within
the scope of the conventions. In saying this, it casts doubt on the jurisprudence in BGE 77 | 42 on Art.
17 of the Hague Convention of 1905, which holds that Art. 17 of the Hague Convention of 1905 exempts

not only the nationals of the Contracting States, but also exempts the Contracting States themselves
from the duty to post a bond or security.

2.2.1.1. In BGE 77 | 42 E. 4, p.49, the Swiss Federal Tribunal stated that Art. 17 of the Hague Convention
of 1905 uses the term ‘national’, which is clear in and of itself, not in contrast to the state as the
superordinate body politic, but rather it apparently considers this term to mean the legal subjects
associated with it through citizenship rights (in the case of natural persons) and by the corporate seat
(in the case of legal entities), by contrast with persons and entities which have no such ties with the
Contracting State. However, in this same sense, the state itself, to the extent that it is a legal body with

 

private rights and acts as a party of equal standing vis

 

-vis other legal persons or entities, is considered
one of its nationals. There are, the Court said, no apparent reasons why the Contracting States of the
Hague Convention should rule out the exemption from the duties of paying security, which applies
without exception to natural persons and legal entities which are their nationals, for the states
themselves. If the state initiates civil litigation abroad and thus submits to the jurisdiction of foreign
courts, just as a private individual would do, it would be entirely justified also to permit that state to avail
itself of the advantages enjoyed by a private individual in the same position. So far as legal scholarship
has dealt with this issue, it is likewise assumed that the Contracting States themselves are likewise able
to invoke Art. 17 of the Hague Convention.

2.2.1.2. In its Reply to the Request, the Respondent argues in rebuttal that this jurisprudence cannot
simply be transposed to the Hague Convention of 1954 which applies as between Switzerland and
Country X; it states that the European Convention on State Immunity of May 16, 1972 (SR 0.273.1) is
clear evidence that it was not the assumption of all of the states who were already Contracting States
of the Hague Convention of 1954 that the latter should also cover sovereign states; the Hague
Convention of 1954 was, the Appellant argues, ultimately transposed (for the signatory states) into the
Hague Convention on International Access to Justice on October 25, 1980 (SR 0.274.133), in which the
Contracting States had eliminated the ambiguities present in the Hague Convention of 1954; thus, it
argues, Art. 14 of the Hague Convention of October 25, 1980, on International Access to Justice (SR
0.274.133; hereinafter: Hague Convention of 1980), which corresponds to Art. 17 of the Hague
Convention of 1954 and which covers, inter alia, exemption from the duty to pay security for costs,
expressly includes legal entities, whereas the Contracting States themselves were not referred to; they
did not fall within the scope of the Hague Conventions.

2.2.1.3. This Court is unable to agree.

Art. 17 of the Hague Convention of 1954 corresponds (in terms of its verbatim text and contents) to the
corresponding Article 17 of the Hague Convention of 1905, and was not changed at all relative to that
provision (LEUENBERGER/UFFER-TOBLER, Kommentar zur Zivilprozessordnung des Kantons St.
Gallen, 1999, no. 3a with respect to Art. 276 of the ZPO%/SG; ANDREAS SCHULZ, in: Muinchener
Kommentar zur Zivilprozessordnung, 5" ed. 2016, no. 19 with respect to Sec. 110 ZPO). It was already
universally recognized and undisputed with respect to the Hague Convention of 1905 that the term
‘national’ under Art. 17 of the Hague Convention of 1905 covered not only the natural persons with

3 Translator’s note: ZPO is the German abbreviation for the Swiss Code of Civil Procedure

domiciliary rights in the Contracting States, but rather also legal entities under private and public law
whose seat or registered office is located in one of the Contracting States (BGE 77 | 42 E. 4b p.48).

No other conclusions can be inferred from the mere fact that the text of Art. 14 of the Hague Convention
of 1980 expressly refers also to legal entities in addition to natural persons, but not to Contracting States.
This is because the main new feature of that convention relative to the Hague Conventions of 1905 and
1954 consisted of the fact that the focus (in terms of exemption from the obligation to pay security) is
no longer on nationality but rather that the natural persons or legal entities referred to appearing in the
courts of one (of another) Contracting State have their habitual residence in a Contracting State; thus,
the Hague Conventions of 1905 and 1954 did not, for example, speak only of natural persons by contrast
with legal entities, but rather spoke in comprehensive terms of “nationals” of the Contracting States (see
SUTER/VON HOLZEN, in: Kommentar zur Schweizerischen Zivilprozessordnung [ZPO], Sutter-
Somm/Hasenbohler/Leuenberger [Eds.], 3° ed. 2016, no. 21 with respect to Art. 99 ZPO;
LEUENBERGER/UFFER-TOBLER, op cit., no. 3a with respect to Art. 276 ZPO/SG; ALFRED BUHLER,
in: Kommentar zur Aargauischen Zivilprozessordnung, Buhlmann und andere [Eds.], 2"¢ ed. 1998, no.
8(f) with respect to Sec. 105 ZPO/AG; LEUCH/MARBACH/KELLERHALS/STERCHI, Die
Zivilprozessordnung fur den Kanton Bern, 5" ed. 2000, no. 4d with respect to Art. 70 ZPO/BE). It is
unsurprising that Contracting States were not expressly exempted from the duty to pay security at the
time of the drafting of the Hague Convention of 1980, since the constellation involving a foreign state as
a party in civil litigation is not the usual case that the Contracting States may have primarily envisaged,
so that it would have been obvious to them to make express provision for such case.

The situation was entirely different at the time of concluding the Treaty on State Immunity. The subject
of that treaty was precisely the immunity of contracting states, for which reason it seems obvious that in
its drafting, the drafters availed themselves of the opportunity to provide an exemption for the
Contracting States from the duty to pay security. Thus, the Respondent cannot derive anything from the
fact that in the Convention on State Immunity, exemption of Contracting States from a duty to pay
security in court proceedings in another Contracting State was expressly codified for the first time.

In further and other respects, the same applies as the Court in BGE 77 | 42 held previously with respect
to the Hague Convention of 1905, specifically that legal scholarship (to the extent that it deals with this
issue) unanimously takes the view that Contracting States may, as well, invoke Art. 17 of the Hague
Convention of 1954; to the extent that reference is made to BGE 77 | 42, the jurisprudence contained in
that case has not been subject to any criticism whatsoever, but rather is reported in a manner which
indicates agreement and/or without further comment (see POUDRET/SANDOZ-MONOD, Commentaire
de la loi fédérale d'organisation judiciaire du 16 décembre 1943, 1992, no. 2.2 with respect to Art. 150
OG p. 103; FRANK/STRAULI/MESSMER, Kommentar zur ziircherischen Zivilprozessordnung, 3° ed.
1997, p. 12 with respect to Sec. 73 ZPO/ZH; LEUENBERGER/UFFER-TOBLER, op cit, no. 3a with
respect to Art. 276 ZPO/SG; LEUCH/MARBACH/KELLERHALS/ STERCHI, op cit, no. 4c with respect
to Art. 70 ZPO/BE; HANS ULRICH WALDER, Einfiihrung in das internationale Zivilprozessrecht der
Schweiz, 1989, p. 244 margin no. 4 and fn. 11; ADOLF F. SCHNITZER, Handbuch des internationalen
Privatrechts, Bd. Il, 4°" ed. 1958, p. 846 fn. 24 referring to confirmatory language in BGE 80 III 149 E.
4a p. 157; GEORGES BROSSET, La cautio judicatum solvi selon l'article 17 al. 1 de la Convention de

4

La Haye concernant la procédure civile et la jurisprudence du tribunal fédéral, in: Recueil de travaux,
publié a l'occasion de l'assemblée de la Société suisse des juristes, 4 Genéve, du 3 au 5 octobre 1969,
1969, p. 7-8.; MAX GULDENER, Das internationale und interkantonale Zivilprozessrecht der Schweiz,
1951, p. 16 fn. 34 [Convention of 1905]; OLAF MUTHORST, in: Kommentar zur Zivilprozessordnung,
Stein/Jonas [Eds.], Vol. 2, 23 ed., Tubingen 2016, no. 24 fn. 35 with respect to Sec. 110 ZPO;
GEIMER/SCHUTZE, in: Internationaler Rechtsverkehr in Zivil- und Handelssachen, Geimer/Schitze
[Eds.], 53'¢ supplemental loose leaf section 2017, Munich 2017, A.I.1.b, fn. 72 with respect to Art. 17
Hague Convention of 1954). The fact that, according to the Respondent’s argument, the commentary
by the Council of Europe on the Convention on State Immunity referred to application of Art. 17 of the
Hague Convention of 1954 to the Contracting States as being doubtful is unable to prevail against that.

2.2.2. The Respondent then argues that, pursuant to jurisprudence of the Federal Tribunal, a state can
only invoke the Hague Convention if it is vested with private rights and deals as an equal partner with
other parties/entities; however, it states, the present case is not dealing with a dispute under civil law as
in the case decided in BGE 77 | 42 in respect of the Hague Convention of 1905, but rather with a
question of jurisdiction under the Bilateral Investment Treaty between Country X and Country Y of
November 27, 1998, to adjudicate a claim for compensation for wrongful expropriation; Country X is
appearing in those proceedings not as an entity vested with private rights/obligations, but rather as a
sovereign state; pursuant to Art. 1 of the Hague Convention, it applies only to civil law and commercial
matters, and it is obvious that there are no such matters underlying the present proceedings.

The Respondent is likewise unsuccessful with this argument.

It is, of course, true that BGE 77 | 42 E. 4b p. 49 first states that the Hague Convention does not use
the term ‘national’ in contrast with the state as the superordinate body politic, and to the extent the state
is an entity vested with private rights and deals as an equal party with other persons or legal entities, it
itself is one of its own nationals. However, the Respondent disregards the Swiss Federal Tribunal’s
further remarks. Thus, one sees further from the cited considerations in BGE 77 | 42 that the Swiss
Federal Tribunal deems it to be justified to allow a state which initiates civil proceedings abroad and
thus submits to foreign jurisdiction just as a private individual would to enjoy the same benefits a private
individual in the same position would have, as well. If, then (as the Federal Tribunal went on to say),
any conclusion might be drawn with respect to the contentious question from a French Judgement which
was invoked by the Respondent in that case, then in any event it would only be that a state conducting
civil litigation abroad should generally be treated as a private individual, i.e. that it was also entitled to
claim for itself the same benefits as were granted to private individuals in state treaties (E. 4b p. 49-50.).
It clearly follows from this that the Federal Tribunal did not consider the question decisive whether the
foreign state was, in the underlying relationship, acting as a body vested with private rights and thus not
as a corporate entity vested with sovereign powers; it would indeed create frequent, major difficulties of
delineation to differentiate along these lines, and this should be avoided in interlocutory proceedings on
security for costs, in order not to pose a risk to expeditious disposal of the case and potentially to pre-
empt the final decision on the merits. What, rather, is decisive is whether a state is submitting in civil
proceedings to the jurisdiction of foreign courts and/or is being involved in civil proceedings before a

foreign court in which it is being treated as a private party and in which it enjoys no preferential rights at
all vis-a-vis its opponent.

This is the case in respect of the Appellant. In the present case, it was involved in an international
arbitration before an arbitral tribunal with a Swiss seat. It is pursuing a civil law appeal in civil matters
under Art. 77 BGG from the jurisdictional decision of the arbitral tribunal, based on the grounds of appeal
under Chapter 12 of the PILA* (SR 291). It is thus submitting to the jurisdiction of the courts of a foreign
state (in this case: Switzerland) just as a private party does, and may accordingly be charged with costs
just as a private party may and occupies the same legal position as private party does.

2.3. The Appellant may thus invoke Art. 17 of the Hague Convention of 1954, for which reason its
obligation to pay security for potential party costs based on its lack of a seat or domicile within
Switzerland must be left out of consideration.

3.

3.1. In its Request for Security, the Respondent further argues that security for costs in the present case
is particularly indicated because the enforcement of court judgements against the Appellant is generally
extremely difficult if not in fact impossible; the Respondent argues that the Appellant takes a view of its
immunity from enforcement as being comprehensive and is notorious for resisting acts of enforcement,
as various events cited by way of example show.

3.2. Art. 62 (2) BGG contains an exhaustive list of the grounds for security (THOMAS GEISER, in: Basler
Kommentar, Bundesgerichtsgesetz, 24 ed. 2011, no. 20 with respect to Art. 62 BGG; BERNARD
CORBOZ, in: Commentaire de la LTF, Corboz et a/ [Eds.], 24 ed. 2014, no. 31 with respect to Art. 62
BGG). As a further, alternative prerequisite to imposing a duty on a party to pay security for potential
party costs, Art. 62 (2) BGG — in addition to the lack of a fixed abode within Switzerland — solely cites to
that party's proven insolvency. According to the jurisprudence of the Swiss Federal Tribunal, proven
insolvency within the meaning of the above-referenced provision will be deemed present if loss
certificates or lien loss certificates have been issued against the party in question, if insolvency
proceedings have been opened or a composition moratorium has been requested or approved (see
BGE 111 Il 206 E. 1; GEISER, op cit no. 22 with respect to Art. 62 BGG, with citations). It is not
considered an assertion of illiquidity when a party requesting payment of security for potential litigation
costs asserts that the opponent merely lacks a willingness to pay, i.e. a willingness to comply with any
potential duty to pay party costs.

The Respondent is not asserting any illiquidity in its arguments, but rather the alleged lack of willingness
on the part of the Appellant to pay. In saying this, the Respondent fails to assert a statutory ground for

security.

4.

4 Translator's note: PILA is the most commonly-used English abbreviation for the Federal Statute on
International Private Law of December 18, 1987, RS 291.

The Request for Security should thus be dismissed.
Accordingly, the Presiding Judge orders:

1.

The Request for security for costs is dismissed.

2.

The Court will separately set a new time limit for the Respondent and the arbitral tribunal to file a Reply
to the Appeal and to comment on the Appellant's Request for a stay of enforcement

3.

This Order is being notified in writing to the parties and the arbitral tribunal, the seat of which is in
Geneva.

Lausanne, November 23, 2017

On behalf of the First Civil Courtof the
Swiss Federal Tribunal

Presiding Judge:

Kiss

