INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
PLAMA CONSORTIUM LIMITED
(CLAIMANT)
and
REPUBLIC of BULGARIA

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. Carl F. Salans, President
Mr. Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator
Mr. V.V. Veeder, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Mr. Emmanuel Gaillard Mr. Ivan Kondov
and Mr. John Savage Head of the Judicial Protection of the Ministry
Shearman & Sterling LLP of Finance of the Republic of Bulgaria

Mr. Paul D. Friedland
Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny
White & Case LLP
Mr. Lazar Tomov
Tomov & Tomov

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURE

 

A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

B. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement
of the Proceeding

Cc. Written and Oral Procedure

IL. BACKGROUND FACTS

TI. THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ON JURISDICTION

A. The Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction

B. The Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

 

C. The Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction oc eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
D. The Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction oc coccccceseseseseseee
E. The Hearing on 20 and 21 September 2004
1. The Respondent's Arguments ooo eccccccsceesessessessecsecsessessesseeeee
2. The Claimant's Arguments ss cccsssssssesssssseeeeeeesttennsssseeeeeees
F. Post-Hearing
1, The Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission esses
2. The Claimant's Post-Hearing Submission

3. The Respondent's Post-Hearing Reply

Iv. EXAMINATION OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. The Energy Charter Treaty

1. Qualifying Definitions

2. The Claimant's "Consent"

 

 

 

 

19

23

26

26

28

31

32

 

E.

F.

The Respondent's "Consent"

 

The Tribunal's Conditional Conclusion on Article 26 ECT

 

Article 17 ECT nn cssseeessssssesesnssceeessesseseesneseeeeneesseeene 44
Article 17 as a Jurisdictional Issue ooo esssssssssseeeeeeeetsteeneeeee 45
Article 17 as an Issue on the Merits ooo sesscssssessseeeeeesstesnsseee 48
Burden and Standard of Proof _ _ 52

 

Article 17(1) Second Limb: "No Substantial Business Activities” 53

Article 17(1) First Limb: "Own or Control" 54
Mr, Vaart ity as seseesssssseseessseesesesesseeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeteneeetenttetteeettettes 54
Summary on the Energy Charter Treaty ooo sssssssssssssssssesseeee 57

The Respondent's Request that the Arbitral Proceedings

Be

ded 58

Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal under

The Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT nee 59
Misrepresentation ooo cccccccccecececesesesesesesesesesseseveverststsestseseeteeseseee 72
Registration by ICSID of the Request for Arbitration 73
Costs 74

 

THE DECISION 75

PROCEDURE
A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

By letter of 24 December 2002, Plama Consortium Limited ("Plama" or "the
Claimant"), a Cypriot company, filed a request for arbitration with the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID" or "the Centre") against the
Republic of Bulgaria ("Bulgaria" or "the Respondent"). The request invoked the
ICSID arbitration provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty ("ECT") and the most
favored nation ("MFN") provision of a bilateral investment treaty ("BIT") entered into
in 1987 between the Government of the Republic of Cyprus and the Government of
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, the Agreement on Mutual Encouragement and
Protection of Investments ("the BIT"), which would import into the BIT the ICSID

arbitration provisions of other BITs entered into by Bulgaria.

The Centre, on 14 January 2003, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the "ICSID
Institution Rules") acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day
transmitted a copy to the Republic of Bulgaria and to the Bulgarian Embassy in
Washington, D.C.

There ensued exchanges of correspondence between the parties and the Acting
Secretary General of ICSID concerning the jurisdiction of ICSID over the Request
made by the Claimant and its registerability under Article 36(3) of the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States

("the ICSID Convention") and ICSID Institution Rules 6 and 7.

On 17 April 2003, the Claimant filed a Supplement to Request for Arbitration dated
6 April 2003. The Centre acknowledged receipt of the Supplement to Request for
Arbitration, on 17 April 2003, and on the same day transmitted a copy to the Republic

of Bulgaria and to the Bulgarian Embassy in Washington, D.C.

On 12 June 2003, Professor Emmanuel Gaillard and Mr. John Savage of the law firm,
Sherman & Sterling LLP, informed the Centre that they had been retained as new

counsel for the Claimant, replacing Mr. Christian Nordtomme.

Upon requests from both parties, the Centre deferred registration. A further
postponement of registration was finally sought by the Respondent on 12 August 2003,
but was opposed by the Claimant.

The request as supplemented was registered by the Centre on 19 August 2003,
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, and on the same day the Acting
Secretary-General, in accordance with ICSID Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of

the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon

as possible.
B. Constitution of the Arbitral_Tribunal_and_Commencement_of_the
Proceeding

On 20 August 2003, the Respondent informed the Centre that it had retained as
counsel in the proceeding Mr. Paul D. Friedland, Mmes. Carolyn B. Lamm and Abby
Cohen Smutny of the law firm, White & Case LLP. By a letter of 25 March 2004, the
Respondent further indicated having retained Mr. Lazar Tomov of the law firm,

Tomov & Tomov.

Following the registration of the request for arbitration by the Centre, the parties
agreed on a three-member Tribunal. The parties agreed that each would appoint an
arbitrator and that the third arbitrator, who would be the president of the Tribunal,
would be appointed by agreement of the parties. The parties agreed that if they failed
to agree on the presiding arbitrator, the Centre would appoint the President of the

Arbitral Tribunal.

The Claimant appointed Mr. Albert Jan van den Berg, a national of the Netherlands, IT
Tower — 9" Floor, 480, Avenue Louise, Bte 9, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium, and the
Respondent appointed Mr. V. V. Veeder, a national of the United Kingdom, Essex
Court Chambers, 24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3EG, England.

In the absence of agreement by the parties regarding the appointment of a President,
the Centre, after consultation with the parties as far as possible, appointed directly as
President of the Tribunal, Mr. Carl F. Salans, a national of the United-States, 9 rue

Boissy d'Anglas, 75008 Paris, France.

All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre by a letter of 10
February 2004, informed the parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, and that the
proceeding was deemed to have commenced on that day, pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the
ICSID's Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings ("the ICSID Arbitration
Rules"). The parties were further informed that Ms. Aurélia Antonietti, counsel at

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

Cc. Written and Oral Procedure

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), after consulting with the parties and
the Centre, the Tribunal scheduled a first session, in Paris for 25 March 2004. The
parties, by a joint letter of 19 March 2004, communicated to the Tribunal the
agreements they had reached on procedural matters identified in the provisional
agenda for the first session, which had been sent to them by the Tribunal’s Secretary.
In that letter, the parties notified the Tribunal that the Respondent intended to raise
objections to jurisdiction, which the Tribunal would be required to rule on before
proceeding to the merits of the case in accordance with Article 41 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. The parties in the same letter informed the Tribunal that they had

not reached an agreement on the procedural schedule.

At the first session of the Tribunal held in Paris on 25 March 2004, the parties
reiterated their agreement on the points communicated to the Tribunal in their joint
letter of 19 March 2004, and the remainder of the procedural issues on the agenda for
the session were discussed and agreed. All the conclusions were reflected in the
written minutes of the session, signed by the President and the Secretary of the
Tribunal and provided to the parties, as well as all Members of the Tribunal. It was
agreed that the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction would be treated as a
preliminary question. A schedule for the filing of memorials and for the holding of a

hearing on jurisdiction in Paris on 20 and 21 September 2004, was agreed.

Pursuant to the agreed schedule, the Respondent filed a Memorial on Jurisdiction on
26 May 2004. The Claimant submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 25
June 2004. This was followed, on 26 July 2004, by a Reply on Jurisdiction from the
Respondent. The Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 26 August 2004, was
received by the Centre on 30 August 2004.

20.

On 26 July 2004, the Respondent submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal a request for the
production of documents by the Claimant. By letter dated 6 August 2004, the
Claimant opposed that request. After considering the views of the parties, the Arbitral
Tribunal, on 11 August 2004, issued an Order directing the Claimant to produce all
documents falling within the categories listed in the Order, no later than with the filing
of its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. The Claimant filed certain documents with its 26
August 2004 Rejoinder. Further to a request for extension made on 17 August 2004,
which was accepted by the Respondent, the Claimant submitted to the Respondent,
under cover of a letter dated 6 September 2004, documents pursuant to the Tribunal's
Order. The Claimant made an additional production of documents by letter dated 13

September 2004.

A hearing on the preliminary questions was held in Paris on 20 and 21 September
2004, during which Messrs. Emmanuel Gaillard and John Savage addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant and Mr. Paul D. Friedland, Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm,
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny and Mr. Jonathan Hamilton addressed the Tribunal on behalf
of the Respondent. One witness, Mr. Jean-Christophe Vautrin, testified for the

Claimant.

Following the September 2004 hearing, the parties filed submissions relating to the
documents produced pursuant to the Tribunal's Order of 11 August 2004 as well as to

costs.
BACKGROUND FACTS

According to the Request for Arbitration, the Claimant -- then known as Trammel
Investment Limited -- purchased from EuroEnergy Holding OOD (hereafter, "EEH")
all of EEH's 49,837,849 shares of Plama AD, which later changed its name to Nova
Plama AD ("Nova Plama"), a Bulgarian company which owned an oil refinery in
Bulgaria, representing 96.78% of Nova Plama's capital. The share purchase agreement
was concluded on 18 September 1998. The transfer of shares took place on

18 December 1998.

The refinery's key industrial asset was a lubricants manufacturing unit which processes
base-oils produced by the refinery into a wide range of industrial and consumer

lubricants which were used as raw materials for lubricants at the refinery or by third

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

party blenders. Nova Plama also has its own power plant with a capacity for sales of

excess electric power to the local grid.

The Claimant alleges that the Bulgarian government, the national legislative and
judicial authorities and other public authorities and agencies deliberately created
numerous grave problems for Nova Plama and/or refused or unreasonably delayed the
adoption of adequate corrective measures. These actions and omissions, according to
the Claimant, caused and are still causing material damage to the operations of the
refinery and have had, and are still having, a direct negative impact on the reputations
and market values of the respective Plama group companies. Bulgaria's actions and/or
omissions violate the ECT, to which both Bulgaria and Cyprus are parties,’ and the
BIT. The Claimant seeks an award of damages for breaches of the treaties and

compensation for expropriation.

The Energy Charter Treaty is a multilateral convention whose purpose, according to
Article 2 of the Treaty, is to establish a legal framework in order to promote long-term
cooperation in the energy sector. In Part III of the Treaty, Contracting States
undertake the obligation to accord to the Investments of Investors (as those terms are
defined in the Treaty) of other Contracting States "fair and equitable treatment" and
"the most constant protection and security". By Article 17 of the Treaty, which is
found in Part III, Contracting States reserve the right to deny the advantages of Part III
to a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control that entity and if
that entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in
which it is organized. Article 26, Part V, of the Treaty is devoted to dispute resolution
and provides, inter alia, the right of Investors to resort to arbitration pursuant to the

ICSID Convention.

The Respondent, in the first instance, argues that the claims made by the Claimant fall

outside the jurisdiction of ICSID.

Bulgaria ratified the ICSID Convention on 13 May 2001. Cyprus did so on
25 November 1996.

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

' Bulgaria ratified the ECT on 15 November 1996 and Cyprus, on 16 January 1998.

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or
any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing
to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no

party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

26. Because they are referred to repeatedly in the parties' submissions and in this Decision,
the texts of certain provisions of the ECT and the BIT as well as of the Vienna

Convention on the Law of Treaties are set forth at this point.

ECT

 

Article 17 — Non-Application of Part IIP in Certain Ci
Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this Part to:

(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control such

 

entity and if that entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of the

Contracting Party in which it is organized, ...

(2) an Investment, if the denying Contracting Party establishes that such
Investment is an Investment of an Investor of a third state with as to which the

denying Contracting Party:
(a) does not maintain a diplomatic relationship; or
(b) adopts or maintains measures that:
(i) prohibit transactions with Investors of that state; or

(ii) would be violated or circumvented if the benefits of this Part

were accorded to Investors of that state or to their Investments.

Part III of the ECT provides for the treatment to be accorded by the Contracting Parties to investments covered
by the Treaty in their territory.

Article 26 — Settlement_of Disputes Between An Investor and_a Contractin:

 

Party.

(1) Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another

Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of the

former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under

Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably.

(2) If such disputes can not be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on which either

party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the Investor party to the

dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party

party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute

settlement procedure; or

(c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each Contracting Party

hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of a dispute to

. ee “ye
inte: ar or l

this Article.

(4) In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute for resolution

under subparagraph (2)(c), the Investor shall further provide its consent in

writing for the dispute to be submitted to:

(a)(i) The International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes,
established pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States opened for
signature at Washington, 18 March 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the
"ICSID Convention"), if the Contracting Party of the Investor and the

in accord with the provisions of

Contracting Party party to the dispute are both parties to the ICSID

Convention;

(b) a sole arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International

Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as "UNCITRAL"); or

(c) an arbitral proceeding under the Arbitration Institute of the

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

(6) A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in

dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and principles of

international law.
THE BIT
Article 3

1. Each Contracting Party shall apply to the investments in its territory by
investors of the other Contracting Party a treatment which is not less

favorable than that accorded to investments by investors of third states.

Article 4

4.1 The legality of the expropriation shall be checked at the request of the

concerned investor through the regular administrative and legal procedure of

the contracting party that had taken the expropriation steps. In cases of

dispute with regard to the amount of the compensation, which disputes were
not settled in an administrative order, the concerned investor and the legal
representatives of the other Contracting Party shall hold consultations for
fixing this value. If within 3 months after the beginning of the consultations

no agreement is reached, the amount of the compensation at the request of the

concerned investor shall be checked either in a legal regular procedure of the
Contracting Party which had taken the measure on expropriation or by an

international "Ad hoc" Arbitration Court.

4.2 The International Court of Arbitration mentioned in paragraph 4.1 of the
Article 4 shall be established on a case-by-case basis. Each Contracting
Party shall designate one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators agree upon a
national of the third state to be a Chairman... If the appointments are not

made within the time period specified above, and if no other arrangement is

agreed, either Contracting Party may request the Chairman of the Court of

Arbitration to the Chamber of Commerce in Stockholm to make the necessary

appointments...

4.3 The arbitration procedure is determined by the Arbitration Court itself,
by applying the arbitration regulations of the U.N. Commission for
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) of 15" December 1976.

THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES

Article 31 General rule of interpretation

A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the

ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in

the light of its object and purpose.

The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall

comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the

parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection

with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an

instrument related to the treaty.

There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

Til.

27.

28.

29.

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the

interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which

establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

() any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations

between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the

parties so intended.
Article 32 Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in
order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or

to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:
(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ON JURISDICTION

The Claimant argues in the Request for Arbitration that the Respondent has consented
to ICSID arbitration of disputes regarding investments such as that made by PCL in
Nova Plama by virtue of its ratification of the ECT as well as by virtue of the Most
Favored Nation (“MFN”) clause of the BIT.

A. The Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction

On 26 May 2004, the Respondent filed a Memorial on Jurisdiction whose principal

arguments are summarized in paragraphs 29 to 39 hereafter.

The Respondent argues that the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction must be established by

reference to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which requires the consent in

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

14

writing of the parties to the dispute to submit to ICSID disputes arising directly out of

an investment between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State.

The Respondent contends that its consent to submit disputes to ICSID arbitration
under Article 26 (1) ECT is expressly limited to disputes concerning an alleged breach
of an obligation arising under Part III of the ECT. Part III contains Article 17, which
reserves to a Contracting Party the right to deny the advantages of that Part to "a legal
entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control such entity and if that
entity has no substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in

which it is organized".

Promptly upon receiving the Claimant's Request for Arbitration on 24 December 2002,
the Respondent, in a letter to ICSID dated 18 February 2003, exercised its right in
accordance with Article 17(1) ECT to deny the advantages of the ECT to the Claimant,
citing the lack of evidence as to ownership and control. It did so on the basis that the
Claimant is a "mailbox company" which has no substantial business activities in the
Republic of Cyprus, where it is incorporated; and it has failed to establish that it is

owned or controlled by nationals of an ECT Contracting State.

Since, the Respondent says, it has denied and continues to deny to the Claimant the
protections afforded by Article 17(1) ECT, Bulgaria's consent to submit disputes as to
alleged breaches of ECT obligations does not provide a basis for jurisdiction in this

case.

It is the contention of the Respondent that when, on the basis of Article 17(1), a
Contracting Party rightfully denies the advantages of Part III to a legal entity, the ECT
does not apply to the circumstances of that entity. Consequently, there can be no
corresponding breach of any ECT Part III obligation. The entity's posture vis-a-vis the
ECT is akin to a legal entity from a non-ECT State, which could not avail itself of

Part III of the treaty.

On the basis of the evidence which it has been able to find, and which has been
produced to it by the Claimant, the Respondent concludes that it is at best unclear
whether an ECT national owned or was in control of the Claimant over the period of
time relevant to its claims, as from its incorporation until after Bulgaria raised its

Article 17(1) objection. The Respondent asserts that a Mr. Timothy O'Neill, a

35.

36.

37.

15

Canadian national, and a Bahamian company, Dolsamex International S.A.
("Dolsamex"), hold the bearer shares of PCL, that 1000 shares of the Claimant have
been owned indirectly by unknown non-residents of Cyprus from 2 September 1998,
to the present, that from 1 March 2001 until today a further 4000 shares in the
Claimant have been held by another non-ECT mailbox company and that as from
incorporation until after Bulgaria raised its objection under Article 17(1) ECT the
directors of the Claimant were either mere nominees or non-ECT nationals, making it
uncertain whether an ECT national was in control during the time period relevant to its

claims.

Turning to the BIT between Cyprus and Bulgaria, it is the Respondent's contention that
it did not consent by virtue of the MFN clause of that treaty to submit claims presented

by the Claimant to ICSID arbitration.

Citing Article 4 of the International Law Commission's Final Draft Articles on Most
Favored Nation Clauses, the Respondent says that an MFN obligation applies only "in
an agreed sphere of relations" (the ejusdem generis rule). The rule provides that MFN
treatment can be claimed only within the framework set by the clause and relates only
to the subject matter for which the clause has been stipulated. Bulgaria's treaty
practice and the context of the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT demonstrate that Bulgaria did not
consider the terms of its consent to international arbitration to be encompassed in its
agreements to extend MFN treatment. Consequently, the 1987 Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT
provides investors only limited access to international arbitration subject to restrictive
terms. BITs concluded by Bulgaria following the collapse of communism reflect
fundamental changes in Bulgaria's public policy and in the applicable legal regime
which do not inform the object and purpose or context of its earlier BITs, such as that

with Cyprus.

The Respondent concludes that the MFN provision of the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT cannot
be interpreted as providing consent to submit a dispute under that treaty to ICSID
arbitration. It summarizes its three basic arguments. First, that absent express
evidence otherwise, an MFN provision cannot create a basis for jurisdiction where
none exists in the basic treaty. Second, that the subject matter of the MFN provision in
the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT does not encompass dispute resolution. Third, that even if

dispute resolution is deemed to fall within the subject matter of the treatment

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

16

contemplated by the BIT, the Claimant cannot invoke MFN treatment to override

fundamental policy considerations reflected in the BIT's provisions.

Finally, the Respondent argues that ICSID's Secretary General did not register the
Claimant's request for ICSID arbitration of its dispute as to the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT
but only as to the ECT, compelling the conclusion that the dispute is outside ICSID's

jurisdiction with respect to the BIT.

For all the reasons set forth in its memorial on Jurisdiction, the Respondent asks that
the Claimant’s claims be dismissed in their entirety. The Respondent also requests the
Tribunal to order the Claimant to compensate it for all the costs and expenses of this

proceeding.
B. The Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

The Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 25 June 2004. It claims
that Bulgaria has consented in Article 26 ECT to submit the present dispute to ICSID
arbitration or, in the alternative, through operation of the MFN clause in the Bulgaria-
Cyprus BIT. The Claimant's principal arguments are summarized in paragraphs 41 - 53

below.

With respect to the ECT, the Claimant's position is that the Respondent's reliance on
Article 17(1) to deny the Claimant the advantages of Part III of the ECT is not a true
objection to jurisdiction but rather is a defense on the merits - a denial by the
Respondent of the benefits of Part III, which would not affect Bulgaria's offer of (or
consent to) arbitration, which is found in Part V of the ECT. The Claimant argues that
from the moment it alleges a breach by Bulgaria of its obligations under Part III of the
ECT, those allegations become an acceptance of Bulgaria's offer of arbitration under

Article 26(3) ECT.

The Claimant goes on to say that even though Bulgaria's objection based on Article
17(1) is not an issue of jurisdiction, the Claimant is prepared to have the Arbitral

Tribunal decide on that objection as part of the preliminary phase of the arbitration.

The Claimant argues that any valid denial of Part III benefits by Bulgaria would only
affect benefits otherwise applicable after the date of denial. Article 17(1) ECT

44.

4S.

46.

47.

17

constitutes a reservation by each Contracting Party of a right to deny the advantages of
Part III but does not constitute a denial of the benefits in itself. That right, to become
effective, must be expressly exercised, and once exercised, cannot take effect
retroactively. The Claimant contends that the Respondent's purported exercise of the
denial of Part III benefits to the Claimant only occurred on 18 February 2003, when its
Ministry of Finance sent a letter to ICSID stating that the application of the ECT to the

Claimant "shall be denied".

In any event, the Claimant says, Article 17(1) ECT cannot apply in this case because
the conditions for its application do not exist. These conditions are that the investor
company must be owned or controlled by citizens or nationals of a state not party to
the ECT and that the investor must have no substantial business activities in the area of
the Contracting State in which it is organized. According to the Claimant, the burden
is on Bulgaria, the party relying on Article 17(1), to show that the two conditions of

application are satisfied.

The Claimant contends that it has been owned and controlled from the date of
investment to the present time by Mr. Jean-Christophe Vautrin, a national of France,
which is a contracting party to the ECT. This ownership and control is described by

the Claimant as set forth in paragraphs 46 - 49 below.

PCL was incorporated in Cyprus on 2 September 1998 under the name Trammel
Investments, Ltd. It changed its name to Plama Consortium Limited on 24 September
1998. PCL has an authorized share capital of 5000 shares. On 2 September 1998, 500
shares were issued to Mediterranean Link (Nominees) Ltd. ("MedLink Nominees")
and 500 shares to Mediterranean Link (Trustees) Ltd. ("Medlink Trustees"), both
purportedly acting as nominees of a Cyprus non-resident beneficiary, Plama Holding

Limited ("PHL").

PHL has an authorized capital of 5000 shares. On 13 September 1998, it issued 500
shares to MedLink Nominees and 100 shares to MedLink Trustees, both purportedly
acting as nominees of a Cyprus non-resident beneficiary, EMU Investments Limited
("EMU"). A further 400 shares of PHL were issued to MedLink Trustees as nominee
of a Cyprus non-resident beneficiary, Norwegian Oil Trading ("NOT"). On 26

October 1998, 400 shares of PHL were transferred from MedLink Trustees as nominee

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

18

of NOT to MedLink Trustees as nominee of EMU. From that date, EMU has been the

sole beneficial owner of PHL.

On 1 March 2001, PCL issued its remaining 4000 shares to EMU. From
1 March 2001, EMU has been the immediate majority shareholder of PCL, with PHL
retaining, through MedLink Nominees and MedLink Trustees, 1000 shares or twenty

percent of PCL's shares.

EMU was incorporated in the British Virgin Islands on 21 August 1997. On that date,
the Board of Directors issued 60 bearer shares. In the autumn of 1998, when EMU
became the sole shareholder of PHL, Mr. Jean-Christophe Vautrin was the owner of
EMU's entire issued share capital, which means that through EMU’s ownership of the
shares of PHL and PCL, Mr. Vautrin was and is the sole beneficial owner of PCL.
The 60 bearer share certificates of EMU were initially in the possession of
Mr. Vautrin. From June or July 1999 to February 2004, these shares were held for the
exclusive benefit of Mr. Vautrin by Mr. Per Christian Nordtomme, a Norwegian
lawyer. Since February 2004, he has held 30 of these bearer shares for the benefit of
Mr. Vautrin; and Mr. Tom Eivind Haug, another Norwegian lawyer, has held 30 bearer

shares of EMU for Mr. Vautrin's benefit since 12 February 2004.

As for the Dolsamex/O'Neill claim to ownership of PCL's shares, the Claimant argues
that they were mere "chargees" with a lien on those shares, which could not give rise
to a legal or beneficial right of ownership over the shares. While they were able to
obtain possession of PCL's share certificates through court actions in Switzerland,
there has been no transfer of either legal or beneficial ownership of the shares to Mr.
O'Neill, Dolsamex or Mr. O'Neill's Bulgarian associates. Moreover, any rights as
chargees or otherwise they may have would attach to only 1000, or twenty percent of
PCL's shares owned by PHL which were held in escrow to secure royalty payments
under certain agreements made by the parties, since, on 1 March 2001, PCL had issued

4000 shares directly to EMU.

With respect to the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, it is the position of the Claimant that
Bulgaria consented to ICSID arbitration of this dispute by virtue of the MFN clause of
that treaty. The Claimant argues that the MFN clause must be construed as extending

to more favorable dispute settlement mechanisms than those in the Bulgaria-Cyprus

52.

53.

54.

19

BIT which are contained in other investment treaties concluded by Bulgaria.

Bulgaria's objections on the basis of policy and otherwise are irrelevant and

misguided.

Finally, the Claimant says that the registration by ICSID of its Request for Arbitration

can have no effect on the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. Rule 6 of the Institution

Rules does not allow for the partial registration of a request, and, therefore, the

Claimant's Request must be deemed to have been registered in its entirety.

In its request for relief, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to make a decision:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)
(vy)

Cc.

dismissing Bulgaria's objections to jurisdiction, and retaining jurisdiction over

the claims raised by PCL in this arbitration;

in the event that it finds the conditions of application of Article 17(1) ECT to
be fulfilled in this case, declaring that Bulgaria's exercise of its right under
Article 17(1) ECT shall only operate to deny PCL the advantages of Part III of
the ECT after the date of such exercise, and that (a) PCL therefore benefited
from the advantages of Part III of the ECT prior to such date, and (b) the
pursuit by PCL of claims in respect of breaches by Bulgaria of the obligations
(or advantages) owed to PCL under Part III of the ECT prior to such date is
therefore unaffected by Bulgaria's exercise of its right to deny PCL Part III

advantages;

ordering Bulgaria to pay the full costs incurred by PCL in resisting Bulgaria's
objections to jurisdiction, including the fees and expenses of the Centre, the

arbitrators and PCL's legal counsel.
granting PCL any other relief that the Tribunal shall deem appropriate; and
proceeding to hear the merits of PCL's claims.

The Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction

On 26 July 2004, the Respondent filed a Reply on Jurisdiction. Its principal arguments

are summarized below in paragraphs 55-68 below.

55.

56.

57.

58.

20

The Respondent states first that in the terms of Article 17(1) ECT, PCL has never had
any substantial business activity in Cyprus. As for the tests of ownership or control in

Article 17(1), the Respondent states that it has assembled evidence that:

(i) a consortium of foreign investors, including a Swiss company, André & Cie
("André"), and the Norwegian company, NOT, (Switzerland and Norway not
being parties to the ECT), was responsible for the purchase of Nova Plama in

late 1998;

(ii) to the extent that Mr. Vautrin was involved in the solicitation and supervision
of the investment in Nova Plama in his 1998-2001 contacts with the
Respondent, he was at all times presented and identified as acting, not on his

own behalf, but as a representative of André;

(iii) The Claimant has been directly owned and controlled by entities and
individuals from non-ECT States, including the Bahamas, the British Virgin

Islands and Norway.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant is asking the Tribunal to ignore the
documented role of all these entities in favor of the undocumented role of one French
national whose name does not appear on any publicly available corporate records of
ownership (in terms of shareholding) or control (in terms of directors) of PCL until

June 2003, well after Bulgaria first raised its Article 17(1) ECT objection.

The Respondent says that the Claimant also is asking the Tribunal to ignore the fact
that, when the Claimant made its original investment, it concluded contracts with third
parties (O'Neill/Dolsamex) granting security interests over the shares in PCL; that
events leading those third parties to seek to exercise their security interests occurred;
that the Claimant took steps to frustrate those parties from exercising their rights; and
that litigation is now proceeding in several courts regarding the legal consequences of

these events.

The Respondent argues that consistent with ECT Understanding N° 3, the Claimant
bears the burden of proof under Article 17 ECT. Even if the Respondent initially had
the burden of proving the justification for the denial of Article 17(1) ECT benefits,

59.

60.

61.

62.

21

given the above evidence, the burden of proof has shifted to the party which is in

exclusive control of the relevant evidence, i.e., the Claimant.

In addition, the fact that issues central to the ownership and control of PCL are subject
to litigation in Switzerland (and possibly other jurisdictions as well), in regard to a
dispute that pre-dates this arbitration, makes a determination by this Tribunal as to
ownership unworkable because this Tribunal's decisions cannot bind all the parties to

the wider dispute about ownership and control of the Claimant.

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has failed to produce credible evidence
demonstrating that Mr. Vautrin has ever been its ultimate owner. Nor has it produced
such evidence regarding Mr. Vautrin's control over the non-ECT entities which have
exercised control over the Claimant. The fact that the Claimant has refused to produce
relevant evidence uniquely in its control is a sufficient basis to conclude that
Mr. Vautrin's unsworn, unsupported assertions regarding ownership and control cannot

be sustained.

The Respondent goes on to allege that there is substantial evidence that André and
NOT and other entities have owned or controlled the Claimant and that the consent of
the Republic of Bulgaria to sell Nova Plama was predicated on the fact that these two
companies were the purchasers, i.e., that PCL was a consortium of André and NOT.
During the negotiation of that sale, Mr. Vautrin represented himself to the Bulgarian
authorities not as an investor on his own behalf but as a representative of André.
Should material misrepresentation be found, the investment must be deemed to have
been solicited and pursued in violation of Bulgarian law, with the consequence that the

protections of the ECT and the BIT would not apply.

The Respondent repeats the argument contained in its Memorial on Jurisdiction that
the rights of ownership and control of the Claimant are held by Mr. Timothy O'Neill
and Dolsamex International, S.A. The rights of Dolsamex are effectively those of an
owner, not a mere "chargee". The issuance in March 2001 of 4000 shares in PCL to
EMU was an attempt by the Claimant to dilute PHL's shareholding in PCL and was
wrongful. In light of the contracts involving those parties and related disputes pending
in Swiss courts, the Respondent says the Claimant cannot prove and the Tribunal

cannot find that there is an adequate degree of certainty regarding Mr. Vautrin's

63.

64.

65.

66.

22

asserted ownership and control of the Claimant and, accordingly, should sustain the
Respondent's objection to jurisdiction. As an alternative, in light of the fact that
Mr. Vautrin's ownership and control of the Claimant are sub judice in Switzerland, the
Tribunal should stay the arbitration until the litigation has been definitively resolved.
Otherwise, the Respondent will be exposed to the risk that multiple claims may be
commenced by competing owners claiming to be acting for the Claimant and that,
should an award be issued in the Claimant's favor, the Respondent will pay an award

to an entity with no legal entitlement to act for the company.

The Respondent contends that Mr. O'Neill and Dolsamex have had contractual rights
under a Throughput Agreement and Deed of Charge to control the Claimant since the
Claimant's alleged initial investment and that Mr. Vautrin's claim to ownership and
control of the Claimant cannot be quieted while disputes with Mr. O'Neill and

Dolsamex remain unresolved.

In answer to the Claimant's argument that Article 17(1) ECT constitutes a reservation
which permits a Contracting State to exercise the right to deny benefits to certain
investors, which denial, to be effective, must be exercised, the Respondent says that
Article 17 is not a reservation. Rather Article 17 contains substantive provisions of the
treaty which qualify, limit or narrow the scope of the Contracting Parties’ Part III
obligations. Where the conditions in Article 17(1) are met, ECT Contracting Parties
have no Part III obligations. A Contracting Party need not take any further step to

realize its right to deny.

The Respondent argues that it has only consented in Article 26 ECT to submit a
defined class of disputes to ICSID arbitration, i.e., one concerning an alleged breach of
an obligation under Part III. The Claimant cannot allege a breach of an obligation of

Bulgaria under Part III because Bulgaria owes no Part III obligations to the Claimant.

With respect to the MFN clause in the Bulgaria-~Cyprus BIT, Bulgaria demonstrated in
its Memorial that the MFN clause in the BIT cannot support jurisdiction in this case.
That is because (a) the MFN provision in this case does not encompass dispute
resolution and (b) the MFN provision cannot transform the consent given by Bulgaria
under other treaties to submit other disputes to ICSID arbitration into consent to

submit disputes under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT to ICSID arbitration. The terms of the

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

23

MEN provision, interpreted in accordance with their ordinary meaning, in their
context, and in light of the BIT's object and purpose, show the Respondent did not

consent to the ICSID arbitration of the disputes in issue in the present case.

The Respondent reiterates its argument that the registration of this case by ICSID
shows that the Request for Arbitration was registered only with respect to the ECT, not

the BIT.

Finally, the Respondent sets forth its request for relief in identical terms to those in its

Memorial on Jurisdiction.

D. The Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

The Claimant filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 26 August 2004. The principal

arguments made in the Rejoinder are summarized below in paragraphs 70 — 80 below.

With respect to Article 17(1) ECT, the Claimant says that ECT Part III does not
include the Treaty's investor/state dispute resolution provisions which are found in Part
V, Article 26, and, therefore, does not affect either the parties' consent to ICSID
jurisdiction or ICSID's jurisdiction more generally. The Respondent's objection,
consequently, is not an objection to jurisdiction but a defense to the merits of the

Claimant's claims.

In any event, argues the Claimant, Article 17 ECT can only operate to allow the
Respondent to deny advantages or benefits otherwise available after the date of the
exercise of the right to deny those benefits; and Article 17 does not apply at all
because the Claimant is owned and controlled by an ECT national and has been since

it invested in Bulgaria in 1998.

It cannot be, according to the Claimant, that Article 17 ECT operates automatically to
deny benefits under Part III to investors falling within its ambit because, if that were
the case, Article 17 would be no more than an "exception" or exclusion clause which,

unlike Article 24 ECT, it is not.

The Claimant argues that to interpret Article 17(1) ECT as requiring a Contracting
State to exercise its option to deny rights to certain investors would not be burdensome

to the Contracting State. If it is deemed important enough that various categories of

74.

75.

76.

24

investors within the scope of Article 17 be denied the benefits of the ECT, it is open to
such State to declare this upon its accession to the ECT and thereby exercise its right

to deny such benefits from the outset.

The Claimant accepts that it does not conduct substantial business activities in Cyprus.
However, as to the ownership of PCL, the Claimant states that the British Virgin
Islands company, EMU, which owns PHL and PCL, issued bearer shares, that Mr.
Vautrin is able to produce the bearer shares in question, and that it is in the nature of
such shares that their presentation is sufficient prima facie proof of ownership at the
present time. With regard to ownership and possession of the shares in the past, the
Claimant relies on personal testimony of himself, nominees, agents and others that
Mr. Vautrin was in actual physical or constructive possession of the shares at all
material times. Unless the Respondent is able to produce evidence casting doubt on
Mr. Vautrin's possession of those shares at the relevant times, no further proof of
previous ownership is necessary to discharge the Claimant's prime facie burden of

proof.

The Claimant admits that at the time of its purchase of Nova Plama certain of
Bulgaria's representatives were unaware that Mr. Vautrin was the ultimate owner of
the Claimant. But Mr. Vautrin, the Claimant or others made no misrepresentations as
to the Claimant's ownership. The Respondent appeared largely indifferent as to the

identity of the Claimant's ultimate owner.

Regarding the claims by Dolsamex and Mr. O'Neill to ownership or control of PCL,
the Claimant denies (a) that they have had a contractual right to control the Claimant
since the date of the Claimant's incorporation; (b) that the Throughput Agreement and
Deed of Charge granted Dolsamex absolute ownership and control rights over the
Claimant and not those of a mere "chargee"; (c) that Mr. O'Neill's physical possession
of PCL share certificates is prima facie evidence of Dolsamex's right to control the
Claimant and that the Claimant has frustrated Mr. O'Neill's security rights and
Dolsamex's attempt to sell the shares in the Claimant by not providing Dolsamex with
the original instruments of transfer; (d) that the issuance of the remaining 4000 shares
in the Claimant to EMU was an attempt to dilute PHL's shareholding in the Claimant
and was not performed in accordance with Cypriot law; and (e) that to acknowledge

Mr. Vautrin's ownership of and control over the Claimant in the face of legal

77.

78.

79.

25

proceedings in Switzerland would expose Bulgaria to the risk of multiple claims by

owners claiming to act for the Claimant.

The Claimant states that the names on its share certificates are MedLink Nominees
holding 500 shares on trust for PHL, MedLink Trustees holding another 500 shares on
trust for PHL and EMU holding 4000 shares — which constitutes the entire issued share
capital of the Claimant. Under Cypriot law, all shareholders of the Claimant must be
registered in the Register of Members of the Claimant. Only a registered shareholder
can claim to be a legal and beneficial owner of Claimant's shares. No instruments of
transfer of the Claimant's shares have been remitted to Dolsamex or Mr. O'Neill,
which means they cannot be registered as the shareholders of the Claimant in Cyprus.
Absent instruments of transfer and the registration of shareholding, neither Dolsamex

nor Mr. O'Neill can lay claim to ownership of any shares of the Claimant.

If the Swiss litigation were decided in favor of Dolsamex and Mr. O'Neill, the
Claimant argues, they can only be awarded rights over the 1000 shares held by PHL,
i.e., twenty percent of the Claimant's shares, since EMU holds the other 4000 shares of
the Claimant. In addition, says the Claimant, if Dolsamex and Mr. O'Neill did or do
own or control the Claimant, the latter will still be owned or controlled by ECT
nationals and, therefore, not meet the conditions for application of Article 17(1) ECT.
Mr. O'Neill is a French national, and the other owners of Dolsamex are Bulgarian
nationals. Even if Bulgarian nationals cannot bring ECT claims directly against
Bulgaria, as the Respondent alleges, they can bring claims as ultimate owners and
controllers of a company incorporated in Cyprus as they, too, are ECT nationals and

do not meet the conditions of application of Article 17(1) ECT.

As regards the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, the Claimant contends that the scope of the MFN
clause in that treaty extends to dispute settlement and that by operation of the MFN
clause, the dispute resolution provisions of other Bulgarian BITs such as the Bulgaria-
Finland BIT of 3 October 1997, which provides for the possibility of ICSID
arbitration, are imported into the Bulgarian-Cyprus BIT. The Respondent has,
therefore, through the MFN provision, consented to submit investment disputes with
investors of Cyprus to ICSID arbitration regardless of the scope of the dispute
resolution provision in the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT; and none of the policy exceptions to

the operation of the MFN clause relied upon by the Respondent applies in this case.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

26

Slightly modifying the requests for relief by comparison with those in its Counter-
Memorial, the Claimant added a new paragraph (ii) requesting that the Arbitral

Tribunal issue a decision:

(ii) | Denying the application of Article 17(1) to the dispute on the
grounds that the conditions of application of that provision are

not satisfied.

Otherwise, the Claimant's requests for relief remain the same as in the Counter-

Memorial on Jurisdiction.

E. The Hearing on 20 and 21 September 2004

At a hearing on 20 and 21 September 2004, Mr. Jean-Christophe Vautrin was
examined and cross-examined by the parties’ counsel. There followed oral

presentation by each side of its respective case.

The Respondent's Arguments

The Respondent's arguments were presented in three parts: (1) the Dolsamex/O'Neill
litigations and their incidence on the ownership of PCL; (2) the ECT and Article 17(1);
and (3) the MFN issue. The Respondent also requested an award of costs for the

jurisdiction phase of the arbitration.

With respect to the Dolsamex/O'Neill litigations, the Respondent argued that they cast
a cloud over the ownership of PCL such that it is impossible to find with adequate
assurance that PCL is even present in this arbitration. This uncertainty makes it
impossible for the Claimant to satisfy the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention’ because it cannot be found with adequate assurance that PCL has
consented to submit the present dispute to ICSID arbitration. If this arbitration is
allowed to proceed, according the Respondent, and it is ultimately found that
Mr. Vautrin does not actually own PCL, Bulgaria stands exposed to the risk of another

claim by the true owners for the same events alleged in this arbitration.

Regarding Article 17(1) ECT, the Respondent said that this "denial of benefit

provision means that a Contracting State is not obligated to extend any treaty

85.

86.

27

protections to a national that does not have a meaningful link with the other
Contracting State. Article 17(1) gives to the Contracting State an option to provide
ECT Part III benefits or not when the circumstances described in that article exist. Its
purpose is to provide states with flexibility to determine when such a denial of benefits
is warranted. Article 17 does not require a Contracting State to give advance notice of
denial of benefits to an investor: Article 17 is itself a notice. The Claimant is wrong
when it interprets the ECT as obligating Contracting States to provide all of the
Treaty's advantages in all circumstances unless and until they decide affirmatively to
deny. A company which falls afoul of Article 17 conditions has, according to the
Respondent, no reasonable expectation that the ECT obligations are owing to it
because States are not bound to provide those advantages in that circumstance; the
investor in that situation knows from the outset that it has no ECT rights. There is,
thus, no retroactive effect as the Claimant argues. Moreover, Article 26 ECT, the
dispute resolution provision, is not binding on a State vis-a-vis an investor which falls

afoul of Article 17.

It was the Respondent's submission at the hearing that Article 17 operates to defeat
jurisdiction under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and/or Article 26 ECT. To
establish Bulgaria's consent to ICSID arbitration, there must be a dispute that concerns
an alleged breach of an ECT Part III obligation. If the Arbitral Tribunal were to decide
that the circumstances are present to satisfy an Article 17(1) denial, then the facts
alleged by the Claimant necessarily would be incapable of forming the basis of a claim
that ECT Part III has been breached. In that circumstance, Article 17(1) operates to
defeat Bulgaria's consent, which extends only to disputes involving a possible breach
of Part III and would operate to defeat jurisdiction under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. There would be no substantive obligations applicable in the relationship
between the parties which would be capable of forming the basis of a legal dispute as

required by the ICSID Convention.

Furthermore, the Respondent contended, Article 17 ECT was intended to have the
effect of denying all the benefits that flow from claims espousal as expressed in the
investment treatment portion of the ECT. A principal benefit of Part III is that ECT

Part V expressly provides a dispute resolution mechanism for breaches.

 

> See paragraph 25 supra.

87.

88.

89.

90.

28

Turning to the issue of Mr. Vautrin's ownership and control of PCL, the Respondent
argued that Mr. Vautrin's resistance to disclose fully and openly what the ownership of
PCL is raises serious doubts as to the credibility and reliability of the information he
has now given as to ownership. The Respondent pointed to inconsistencies in and
unanswered questions raised by the documents in evidence. Reference was made to
pledge agreements only recently produced by the Claimant in which the shares of
EMU were pledged by two Seychelles companies, Panorama Industrial Limited
("Panorama") and Allspice Limited ("Allspice"), stating that they were the owners of

the shares, which also casts doubt on the ultimate ownership of PCL.

Even if the Arbitral Tribunal were to find that Mr. Vautrin is the ultimate owner of
PCL, the Respondent argued, the Claimant obtained the right to acquire its investment
in Bulgaria by intentionally misleading the Bulgarian government regarding the
ownership of PCL, the investor, in order to obtain the consent of its Privatization
Agency. Bulgaria objects to jurisdiction on the ground that none of the protections of
the ECT, the Cyprus-Bulgaria BIT or the ICSID Convention can be used by a the

Claimant that obtained its in through fraudul

misrepresentations. The
consent of Bulgaria to the underlying investment, and, therefore, the Claimant's
purchase of Nova Plama shares are void as a matter of Bulgarian law. The Claimant
does not own the shares of Nova Plama, and consequently it has no investment in

Bulgaria under any of the applicable treaties.

Finally, the Respondent addressed the MEN issue, arguing that the MFN clause in the
Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT could not be used to import into that BIT from another treaty a

forum for dispute resolution different from the forum designated in that BIT.

The Claimant's Arguments

The Claimant pointed out that PCL, as a company incorporated in Cyprus, is a covered
investor under the ECT, under the definition in Article 1(7) ECT. By buying Nova
Plama, PCL made an investment in Bulgaria falling within the definition in Article
1(6) ECT. In Part III of the ECT, Bulgaria committed itself to protect covered
investments by covered investors of other contracting parties such as Cyprus. And in
Article 26 ECT, Bulgaria consented to ICSID arbitration of disputes such as those

subject of the present arbitration.

91.

92.

93.

94.

29

In reply to the Respondent's contention that Bulgaria's consent to arbitrate disputes
must concern an alleged breach of an obligation under ECT Part III and that there is no
such obligation in this case, the Claimant argued that PCL, as a covered investor with a
covered investment, enjoys Part III protections until they are validly denied. Bulgaria
only purported to deny benefits on 18 February 2003; prior thereto it had owed PCL
Part III obligations for over four years during which time it had committed the
breaches of the ECT alleged by the Claimant. By 18 February 2003, both parties had
perfected their consent to ICSID arbitration under Article 26 ECT concerning those
alleged breaches, which consent cannot be unilaterally withdrawn under the ICSID

Convention.

In any event, the Claimant argued, Article 17(1) ECT cannot apply because a third
State national does not own or control PCL. In this respect, the Claimant repeated
what it had said earlier in the arbitration, that it accepted that PCL has no substantial
business activities in Cyprus [D2.8]*. Counsel for the Claimant proceeded to describe
the facts which he said showed that Mr. Vautrin has ultimately owned and controlled

PCL at all times after the acquisition of Nova Plama.

During this presentation, the Claimant's counsel explained, as had Mr. Vautrin in his
testimony, that pledge agreements of 13 November 2002, by which Mr. Nordtomme
was depository of all of EMU shares on behalf of their owners, Panorama and
Allspice, were never consummated; and the shares were never transferred to Panorama
and Allspice. But even if they had been, these entities were beneficially owned by

Mr. Vautrin; so that would have changed nothing.

With respect to the issue of alleged misrepresentation by PCL vis-a-vis Bulgaria at the
time of its purchase of Nova Plama's shares, the Claimant did not necessarily dispute
that Bulgaria understood at the time that André and NOT were the owners of PCL.
Neither André nor NOT, and certainly not Mr. Vautrin who wanted to keep his
ownership of PCL confidential, saw any need to correct Bulgaria's understanding.
However, the Claimant pointed out that Mr. Vautrin and Mr. Nordtomme had both
testified that during the pre-closing negotiations they told Bulgarian officials that

André and NOT had withdrawn. There was no requirement that Mr. Vautrin disclose

* References to the Transcript of the Hearing on 20-21 September 2004 are to Day | or 2 followed by the page
number of the transcript of that day's hearing.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

30

that he was the owner of PCL. There is no false representation as to ownership of

PCL, the Claimants asserted, but at most an incorrect understanding by Bulgaria.

The Claimant went on to argue that Mr. Vautrin's control over PCL is demonstrated by
the fact that the directors and secretaries of PCL were all lawyers or nominee

companies who took their instructions from Mr. Vautrin or his lawyers.

Regarding the Respondent's argument that, because of the Dolsamex/O'Neill litigations
and the cloud they cast over Mr. Vautrin's ownership of PCL, PCL may not have
validly given its consent to arbitration, the Claimant replied that it is the directors of
PCL, not the shareholders, who have power to authorize the company to commence an
arbitration, which they did. The ownership of PCL is, therefore, irrelevant to the

validity of PCL's consent to arbitration.

The Claimant asserted that Dolsamex did not have a valid claim to ownership of PCL,
but that even if it were the owner it is principally held by Bulgarian nationals, and,
consequently, Article 17(1) ECT does not apply. Moreover, even if Dolsamex had a

valid claim, that claim would relate only to 20% of PCL's capital.

The Claimant explained again its interpretation of Article 17(1) ECT as reserving the
right of a Contracting State to deny ECT benefits to certain investors. Until the
Contracting State exercises that right — and Bulgaria did so only on 18 February 2003
— the protections of the ECT are owed to the investor. Since the Claimant's Request
for Arbitration was filed on 19 December 2002, Bulgaria's purported denial of benefits
took place after the Claimant's consent to arbitration was effected and can have no

effect on the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Claimant reiterated its contention that pursuant to the MFN clause of the
Bulgarian-Cyprus BIT, PCL benefits from the more favorable provisions of other
Bulgarian BITs, such as the Bulgaria—Finland BIT, permitting dispute resolution under
ICSID. The argument was that PCL is an investor under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT,
that that BIT contains an MEN provision which applies to all aspects of "treatment"
and that treatment refers not only to substantive provisions of other BITs but to
settlement of dispute provisions as well. It is more favorable treatment than the

restrictive recourse to arbitration in the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT for an investor to have,

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

31

as is provided in other Bulgarian BITs, a choice of fora for its arbitration and to have

the merits of a dispute settled by arbitration rather than only the quantum of damages.

F. Post-Hearing Submissions

The Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission

The Respondent filed a post-hearing submission on jurisdiction dated 22 October

2004.

The documents produced by the Claimant on 26 August, 6 September and 13
September 2004, says the Respondent, do not support the Claimant's claim that
Mr. Vautrin owned and controlled PCL from the outset. On the contrary, the
documents show that other entities and individuals have had ownership and control
interests in PCL, such as Panorama and Allspice, André, Forus, and Russian financiers
acting through Forus and Mr. Bonev. At best, the Claimant's evidence supporting its
claim of Mr. Vautrin's ownership and control is uncertain and conflicting. As such, it

cannot support the Tribunal's jurisdiction.

Moreover, the documents demonstrate that if the Claimant is correct that Mr. Vautrin
owns and controls the Claimant, it acquired its investment in Bulgaria through
misrepresentations to the Government of Bulgaria and is not entitled to the protections
of any of the treaties at issue in this case. The Claimant never disclosed to Bulgaria
that André and NOT did not intend to purchase the shares of Nova Plama and that

Mr. Vautrin intended instead to purchase them in his personal capacity.

The Respondent further argues that since the ownership and control of the Claimant is
subject to ongoing litigation with Dolsamex and Mr. O'Neill, it is impossible to
determine the ownership and control of the Claimant as required by Article 17(1) ECT
— or even whether the person(s) purporting to act on behalf of the Claimant in

commencing this arbitration is (are) properly authorized to do so.

Finally, the Respondent submitted the costs it has incurred in respect of its
jurisdictional objections amounting to US$ 2,679,400. It requested that it be awarded

all these costs.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

32

The Claimant's Post-Hearing Submission

The Claimant submitted its Post-Hearing Response on 19 November 2004. The
Claimant complained, in that Response, that the Respondent had ignored the Tribunal's
directions given at the September 2004 hearing by not limiting itself in its post-hearing
submission to arguments concerning the Claimant's document production prior to the
hearing. The Claimant, therefore, requested the Tribunal to disregard the Respondent's

submission other than as it relates to such documents.

The Claimant's submission argues that the documents it has produced in this
arbitration do not show that a non-ECT national owned or controlled PCL and do not
allow the Respondent to discharge its burden of proving that the factual conditions of
Article 17(1) ECT are satisfied. The documents rather confirm that it is Mr. Vautrin
who owned and controlled PCL at all relevant times. At no time did Panorama,
Allspice, André, Mr. Bonev, Ms. Guichoud, Messrs. Vassiliades and Co.,

Mr. Nordtomme or anyone else own or control PCL.

The Claimant submitted information regarding litigation in Bulgaria relevant to the

claim by Mr. O'Neill and Dolsamex of ownership of PCL shares.

As regards Bulgaria's allegations that PCL's investment in Nova Plama was obtained
through misrepresentations to the Bulgarian authorities, the Claimant argues that this
allegation was first raised as an objection to jurisdiction at the September 2004
hearing, too late, it says, for the Tribunal to consider it. In any event, the Claimant
asserts that there was no misrepresentation by the Claimant as to the ownership of
PCL, as ownership of PCL was not an issue at the time of the acquisition. Since it was

not then an issue, there was no requirement for disclosure of that ownership.

The Claimant submits a claim for costs of US$ 1,256,775.49. It argues that costs
should follow a decision by the Tribunal in PCL's favor, that the jurisdictional phase of
the arbitration could have been avoided or abbreviated with more cooperation from the
Respondent, and that PCL is impecunious as a result of Bulgaria's unlawful conduct
and, therefore, in urgent need of financial relief. It attacks the Respondent's claim for

costs as excessive.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

33

The Respondent's Post-Hearing Reply

The Respondent's Post-Hearing Reply was filed on 3 December 2004. In the Reply,
the Respondent rejects the Claimant's charge that costs claimed by it are excessive.
The Respondent had to bear high costs, it argues, because the Claimant refused to
disclose information in its possession and, thereby, needlessly aggravated the costs to

Bulgaria of having itself to find relevant information.

The Respondent characterizes the Claimant's allegations regarding recent Bulgarian

court orders relevant to the claims of Dolsamex and Mr. O'Neill as patently incorrect.

The Respondent's reply reiterates and defends its request to be awarded costs and asks
the Arbitral Tribunal to deny the Claimant's request for an award of costs in the

Claimant's favor.

Finally, the Respondent rejects the Claimant's assertions that the Respondent's Post-
Hearing Submission went beyond the scope of the Tribunal's directions.

*
* *

In a letter to the Tribunal dated 8 December 2004, the Claimant objected to the
Respondent's Post-Hearing Reply on grounds that it makes arguments entirely
unrelated to the Claimant's costs and submits new documents, contrary to the
Tribunal's directions. The Claimant requests the Tribunal to disregard all submissions
made by the Respondent in its Post-Hearing Reply except those on costs and to

disregard new documents submitted.

With regard to all the foregoing arguments, the parties cite the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, rules of international law, decisions of courts and arbitral tribunals
and learned authors to support their respective provisions. The Arbitral Tribunal will,
in the course of its examination of the parties' arguments below, discuss the law and
jurisprudence and their applicability to the facts of the present case. The Tribunal adds
that while Part V of this Decision summarizes the principal arguments of the parties,
other arguments were made and considered by the Tribunal and will be referred to

later to the extent the Tribunal considers them relevant to its decision.

116.

117.

118.

34

EXAMINATION OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

The Tribunal is required to decide the Respondent’s objection, under Rule 41 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules that the present dispute and the Claimant’s claims are not
within the competence or jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the Centre. The Claimant
contends that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is established under three instruments referred
to at the outset of this Decision: (a) the Energy Charter Treaty (the "ECT"); (b) the
Bilateral Investment Treaty between Bulgaria and Cyprus ("the BIT"); and (c) the
ICSID Convention ("the ICSID Convention"). The Claimant also contends that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction can be established under either the ECT or the BIT as
alternatives. It is therefore appropriate below for the Tribunal to consider the ECT and

the BIT separately in turn, although the ICSID Convention is relevant to both.

Applicable Law: All three instruments are treaties under international law; and their
interpretation is governed by rules of international law, expressed in Articles 31 and 32
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 quoted in paragraph 26
supra. Under Article 31(1), the general rule requires a treaty to be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their "context" and in the light of the treaty’s "object" and "purpose"; Article 31(2)
defines "context"; and the remaining provisions of Articles 31 and 32 provide further
means of interpretation as applicable. The Tribunal considers these provisions in more

detail below.

Burden of Proof: As regards the burden of proof on the Respondent’s jurisdictional
objection, the Tribunal adopts the test proffered by Judge Higgins in her separate
opinion in the Oil Platforms Case*. In addressing the question, "what is the test by
which the Court is to make its finding" in face of a preliminary objection to its
jurisdiction on grounds that a party's claims do not fall under the treaty invoked, Judge
Higgins cited the Mavrommatis Case’, in which the International Court of Justice held
that in the absence of any test set forth in the treaty or in the rules governing the Court
itself, the Court was "at liberty to adopt the principle which it considers best

calculated to ensure the administration of justice, most suited to procedure before an

5 Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), 1996, ICJ Reports 803,

at 810).

® Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, Judgement N° 2, 1924, P.C.LJ., Series A. N° 2, p. 16.

35

international tribunal and most in conformity with the fundamental principles of

international law" (para. 28 of the separate opinion). The learned Judge continued:

The only way in which, in the present case, it can be
determined whether the claims of [Claimant] are sufficiently
plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to accept pro tem the
facts as alleged by [Claimant] to be true and in that light to
interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes, that
is to say, to see if on the basis of Iran's claims of fact there

could occur a violation of one or more of them. (para. 32).
Stated in another way, the principle Judge Higgins proposed was the following:

The Court should... see if, on the facts as alleged by
Claimant], the [Respondent's] actions complained of might
violate the Treaty articles (§ 33) ... Nothing in this approach
puts at risk the obligation of the Court to keep separate the
jurisdictional and merits phases... and to protect the integrity
of the proceedings on the merits... what is for the merits,
(and which remains pristine and untouched by this approach
to the jurisdictional issue) is to determine what exactly the
facts are, whether as finally determined they do sustain a
violation of ...[the treaty] and if so, whether there is a
defence to that violation... In short it is at the merits that one

sees ‘whether there really has been a breach’. (para. 34).

119. This approach has subsequently been followed by several international arbitration
tribunals deciding jurisdictional objections by a respondent state against a claimant
investor, including Methanex v USA, SGS v Philippines and Salini v Jordan. In the
last of these cases’, the tribunal decided that it was up to the claimant to present its
own case as it saw fit; that, in doing so, the claimant must show that the alleged facts
on which it relied were capable of falling within the provisions of the treaty (paras.

131 et. seq.); and that:

7 Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Award of 15 November 2004, http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

120.

121.

36

In considering issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals do
not go into the merits of the case without sufficient prior
debate. In conformity with this jurisprudence, the Tribunal
will accordingly seek to determine whether the facts alleged
by the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of
coming within those provisions of the BIT which have been

invoked. (para. 151).

This Tribunal does not understand that Judge Higgins’ approach is in any sense
controversial, either at large or as between the parties to these proceedings.
Accordingly, the Tribunal applies this approach to the jurisdictional issues considered

below.

As regards the burden proof on other issues, relating to the merits and not to
jurisdiction, the Tribunal cannot apply the same approach; and the parties’ request that
the Tribunal should decide such issues at this early stage of these proceedings has
created certain difficulties. In particular, there was a significant difference between
the parties as to which of them bore the burden of proof on disputed facts; and there
was no agreement on the standard of proof or (as the Respondent contended but the
Claimant denied) whether and how far it was appropriate for the Tribunal to draw any
adverse inferences against the Claimant. As applicable, the Tribunal returns to these

difficulties in more detail below.

A. The Energy Charter Treaty

The Claimant here rests its case on Article 26 ECT. Part V of the ECT regulates the
settlements of disputes, with Article 26 providing for state-investor disputes and
Article 27 for state-state disputes. In relevant part taken from the ECT’s English
version, Article 26 (1), (2) and (4) provide: "Disputes between a Contracting Party
and an Investor of another Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in
the Area of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former
under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably"; and if not so amicably settled
within a period of three months, "the Investor party to the dispute may choose to
submit it for resolution" to, inter alia, international arbitration under the ICSID

Convention. Article 26 is limited to the state’s obligations under Part III ECT;

122.

123.

124.

125.

37

whereas state-state arbitration under Article 27 is not so limited. (The text of Article 26
is more fully set out in paragraph 26 of this Decision, supra). The ECT was the first
multilateral treaty to provide as a general rule the settlement of investor-state disputes
by international arbitration; and to date, it has been signed by at least 51 states and the

European Communities.

Qualifying Definitions

It is necessary first to address the definition of certain terms used in Article 26:

"Contracting Parties", "Investor", "Investment" and "alleged breach".

Contracting Parties: Bulgaria is a "Contracting Party" within the definition provided
by Article 1(2) ECT, as a state having consented to be bound by the ECT and for
which the ECT is in force, having ratified the ECT on 15 November 1996. Cyprus and
France are also Contracting Parties, having ratified the ECT on 16 January 1998 and

28 September 1999 respectively.

Investor: The Claimant is an "Investor of another Contracting Party" within the
definition provided by Article 1(7)(a)(ii) ECT, being a company organized in
accordance with the law applicable in Cyprus. With its Request for Arbitration, the
Claimant produced a certificate dated 29 March 2002 from Cyprus’ Department of
Registrar of Companies, certifying that in accordance with its records, the Claimant

was registered on 2 September 1998 and remained on its register (Exhibit C6).

Investment: There is undoubtedly a dispute between the Respondent and the Claimant,
the first relevant issue being whether the dispute relates to the Claimant’s "Investment
in the Area" of Bulgaria. As defined by Article 1(6) ECT, "‘Investment’ means every
kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an Investor"; and there
follows a broad, non-exhaustive list of different kinds of assets encompassing virtually
any right, property or interest in money or money’s worth, including "(b) ... shares,
stock or other forms of equity participation in a company ...". As defined by Article
1(10), "‘Area’ means with respect to any state that is a Contracting Party (a) the
territory under its sovereignty". The Claimant asserts that its substantial shareholding
in Nova Plama, as a company carrying on business in Bulgaria, qualifies as an

"Investment". The Claimant produced with its Request for Arbitration a temporary

126.

127.

128.

38

shareholding certificate endorsed on 18 December 1998 showing a transfer of
4,976,377 shares of Nova Plama to the Claimant (Exhibit C4) and a temporary
shareholding certificate also endorsed on 18 December 1998 showing a further transfer
of 44,862,472 of Nova Plama’s shares to the Claimant (Exhibit C5). As recorded in
Paragraph 19 of this Decision (supra), those shares represented 96.78% of Nova

Plama’s share capital.

The Respondent contended, at the September hearing, that there was no "Investment"
under Article 1(6) ECT because the Claimant had materially misrepresented or
willfully failed to disclose the Claimant’s true ownership to the Bulgarian authorities
in violation of Bulgarian law. Accordingly, Bulgaria’s Privatization Agency’s consent
to the Claimant’s purchase of Nova Plama shares was null and void under Bulgarian
law; and it followed that the Claimant had never made any valid investment. This
particular submission had not been advanced before the September Hearing. In
paragraph 80 of its Reply (p. 34), the Respondent had stated that it "*eserves the right,
should the Tribunal sustain jurisdiction on the basis that Mr. Vautrin was at all times
the sole owner of PCL, to raise an objection relating to whether Claimant’s investment
was made in accordance with law”. Subsequently, after receiving the Claimant’s
Rejoinder of 26 August 2004 and hearing Mr. Vautrin’s further testimony at the
September Hearing, Bulgaria’s Counsel stated that it was now making its objection

and "exercising that right" [D1.227-229].

As understood by the Tribunal, as a jurisdictional objection, this submission is distinct
from albeit factually similar to the broader case advanced by the Respondent on
"misrepresentation", which the Tribunal considers separately below. In any event, it
was also subject to the Claimant’s procedural complaint recorded at the September
Hearing [D2.56]. It is however appropriate to decide this particular submission here
because, in the Tribunal’s view, it necessarily fails in limine as a jurisdictional

challenge on several grounds.

First, whatever the eventual merits of the Respondent’s "misrepresentation" case
(which is denied by the Claimant), it remains the case that the Claimant was an
"Investor" under Article 1(7) ECT: it is here irrelevant who owns or controls the
Claimant at any material time. The definition of "Investment" under Article 1(6) refers

to the Investor’s investment, in other words it is again here irrelevant who owns or

129.

130.

39

controls the Claimant at any material time; and as already noted above, the definition
is broad, extending to "any right conferred by law or contract". That definition would
be satisfied by a contractual or property right even if it were defeasible. Applying
Judge Higgins’ approach to disputed facts, the Tribunal must accept, pro tem, the
investment as alleged by the Claimant; and on this ground alone, the Tribunal decides

that Bulgaria’s submission fails.

Second, it is clear that no point was taken by the Respondent on the validity of the
Privatization Agency’s consent as a jurisdictional point until the September Hearing.
In particular, as at the time of the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration of 24 December
2002 and the Respondent’s Memorial of 26 May 2004, the Claimant’s investment as an
"Investment" under Article 1(6) ECT had not been impugned by the Respondent, no
attempt having been made to avoid or to treat as null and void under Bulgarian law the
Privatization Agency’s consent. In these circumstances, the actual state of the
Privatization Agency’s consent under Bulgarian law and its effect on the Claimant’s
investment remains unclear to the Tribunal. The Tribunal here expresses no criticism
of either party’s conduct; but it decides that this submission cannot be admitted so
belatedly as a jurisdictional challenge. This decision is limited to this jurisdictional
submission; and in particular it does not extend to the merits of the Respondent’s case

on "misrepresentation".

In any event, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent's charges of misrepresentation are
not directed specifically at the parties' agreement to arbitrate found in Article 26 ECT.
The alleged misrepresentation relates to the transaction involving the sale of the shares
of Nova Plama by EEH to PCL and the approval thereof given by Bulgaria in the
Privatization Agreement and elsewhere. It is not in these documents that the
agreement to arbitrate is found. Bulgaria's agreement to arbitrate is found in the ECT,
a multilateral treaty, a completely separate document. The Respondent has not alleged
that the Claimant's purported misrepresentation nullified the ECT or its consent to
arbitrate contained in the ECT. Thus not only are the dispute settlement provisions of
the ECT, including Article 26, autonomous and separable from Part III of that Treaty
but they are independent of the entire Nova Plama transaction; so even if the parties!
agreement regarding the purchase of Nova Plama is arguably invalid because of

misrepresentation by the Claimant, the agreement to arbitrate remains effective.

131.

132.

133.

40

Accordingly, in the Tribunal’s view, the present dispute does relate to an "Investment"

by the Claimant as an "Investor" in Bulgaria’s "Area".

Alleged Breach: The next issue is whether the parties’ present dispute concerns "an
alleged breach of an obligation of [the Respondent] under Part III". Part III ECT is the
chapter entitled "Investment, Promotion and Protection", containing the ECT’s
principal substantive protections for Investors, including Promotion, Protection and
Treatment of Investments, Compensation for Losses, Key Personnel and Expropriation
under Articles 10, 12 and 13 ECT, respectively. It is self-evident from the Claimant’s
written and oral submissions to date that it is "alleging" violations by the Respondent
of several provisions in Part III of the ECT. For example, the Claimant pleads as its
"principal causes of action" Articles 10, 12 and 13 ECT in paragraphs 127 and 130-
144 of its Request for Arbitration. These are all alleged breaches of the Respondent’s
obligations under Part III of the ECT. In the Tribunal’s view, it is not necessary, at
this jurisdictional stage of the proceedings, for the Claimant to prove positively actual
violations by the Respondent: the unambiguous wording in Article 26 ECT is met by
the Claimant’s allegations of such violations. Referring again to Judge Higgins' test in
Oil Platforms, if on the facts alleged by the Claimant, the Respondent's actions might
violate the ECT, then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine exactly what the facts

are and see whether they do sustain a violation of that Treaty.

The Claimant’s "Consent"

The Claimant contends that it validly exercised its right under Article 26 ECT in
referring its disputes with the Respondent to ICSID Arbitration; and that its own
"consent in writing" expressly submitting to ICSID’s jurisdiction, as required by
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, is contained in paragraphs 109-111 of the
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, which was confirmed by the Claimant’s letter
dated 24 December 2002 to the Respondent (Exhibit C15). As recorded in the minutes
of the meeting of the Claimant’s board of directors dated 11 November 2002, the board
resolved that Mr. Nordtomme (inter alios) be entrusted to bring ICSID arbitration
proceedings against the Respondent (Exhibit C19); and a power of attorney to that end
was granted by the Claimant to Mr. Nordtomme also dated 11 November 2002. The

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration and the Claimant’s letter dated 24 December 2002

134.

135.

136.

4l

were both signed by Mr. Nordtomme as attorney for the Claimant; and by profession,

Mr. Nordtomme is a practicing attorney from Oslo, Norway.

The Respondent disputes the validity of this exercise and expression of consent in the
Claimant’s name on the ground that the persons purporting to act for the Claimant
were not entitled or authorized to do so. This submission is based on the disputed
ownership of shares in the Claimant as between Dolsamex, Mr. O’Neill and PHL.
(This is a different submission from, albeit not factually dissimilar to, the issue
addressed below relating to Article 17(1)’s first limb on the Claimant’s continuous

ownership and control.)

In the Tribunal’s view, the issue raised by the Respondent must be dismissed on two
cumulative grounds. First, the relevant exercise and consent were made by the
Claimant acting through its duly appointed corporate organs of management and duly
authorized attorney. It was not performed by the Claimant’s shareholders or persons
purporting to act as shareholders. The Claimant’s articles of association incorporate
Table A of the Companies Act of Cyprus, whereby the Claimant’s board of directors is
granted the general power to manage the Claimant, including the right to bring legal or
arbitration proceedings in the company’s name. That power is not granted to the
Claimant’s shareholders; and accordingly, any dispute over the Claimant’s share
ownership is irrelevant to the legal validity of the acts undertaken in the Claimant’s
name by its duly authorized and appointed managers and agents for the time being. It
is not suggested, nor could it be on the materials currently before the Tribunal, that the
appointment of the Claimant’s board members or the power of attorney granted to

Mr. Nordtomme were otherwise invalid.

Second, the litigation between Dolsamex, Mr. O’Neill and PHL over the Claimant’s
share ownership remains unresolved in the Swiss and Bulgarian Courts; and those
unresolved disputes, still months if not years from their final end, cannot by
themselves invalidate the otherwise valid acts of the Claimant’s managers and
attorneys. Of course, if the disputes were to be finally resolved adversely to PHL in
the future, that might then lead to a significant change in the composition of the
Claimant’s board and the continuing authority of its attorneys; but these changes
would operate only for the future; and neither, by themselves, could render invalid

retrospectively what had otherwise been done validly at the time in the Claimant's

137.

138.

139.

140.

42

name. Nor would the change of ownership or of the board of the Claimant affect any
decision rendered by this Tribunal, which will be res judicata between PCL and

Bulgaria.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that there was a valid exercise by the Claimant of its
right to refer its dispute with the Respondent to ICSID under Article 26 ECT and that
it validly made the requisite written consent under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention.

The Respondent’s "Consent"

The Claimant contends that Bulgaria's signature and accession to the ECT constitutes
the Respondent's "consent in writing" to ICSID arbitration, required by Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention. It submits that Article 26 ECT contains a standing, open
written offer of (inter alia) ICSID arbitration by Contracting States to Investors of
other Contracting States. By filing its Request for Arbitration, as already noted, the
Claimant accepted that offer; and having given its own written consent to arbitration
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is established
under the ICSID Convention and Article 26 ECT.

The Respondent counters that to establish Bulgaria's consent to ICSID arbitration,
there must be a dispute that concerns an alleged breach of an ECT Part III obligation.
The conditions of Article 17(1) ECT having been fulfilled, according to the
Respondent, there can be no claim of a breach of Part III and no consent of Bulgaria to

arbitrate any such claim.

The Tribunal accepts the Claimant's analysis of the ECT and ICSID Convention of
investor-state arbitration; but for purposes which will appear later, it wishes to
emphasize several characteristics of the parties’ arbitration agreement created by these
two instruments. First, Article 26(3)(a) ECT provides that the Contracting Parties
thereby give their "unconditional assent" to such state-investor arbitration (subject to
specific exceptions which are here immaterial); and accordingly, as a Contracting
Party, the Respondent thereby expressed unconditionally its written consent required
under the ICSID Convention. Second, Article 46 ECT provides that no reservations

may be made to the ECT; none were in fact made in regard to Article 26 by Bulgaria;

141.

142.

43

and accordingly Bulgaria’s consent was unreserved. Third, under Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention, when the parties have given their consent, no party "may withdraw
its consent unilaterally"; and accordingly the Respondent’s consent was also
irrevocable from the date of the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration. Lastly,
Article 45(1) ECT provides that each signatory agrees to apply the treaty provisionally
pending its entry into force for such signatory; and in accordance with Article 25 of the
Vienna Convention, it follows that Article 26 ECT provisionally applied from the date
of a state’s signature, unless that state declared itself exempt from provisional

application under Article 45(2)(a) ECT. (Bulgaria made no such declaration).

For all these reasons, Article 26 ECT provides to a covered investor an almost
unprecedented remedy for its claim against a host state. The ECT has been described,
together with NAFTA, as "the major multilateral treaty pioneering the extensive use of
legal methods characteristic of the fledging regulation of the global economy", of
which "perhaps the most important aspect of the ECT’s investment regime is the
provision for compulsory arbitration against governments at the option of foreign

investors ...",; and these same distinguished commentators concluded: "With a
paradigm shift away from mere protection by the home state of investors and traders
to the legal architecture of a liberal global economy, goes a coordinated use of trade

and investment law methods to achieve the same objective: a global level playing field

for activities in competitive markets’. By any standards, Article 26 is a very

important feature of the ECT which is itself a very significant treaty for investors,

marking another step in their transition from objects to subjects of international law.

The Tribunal’s Conditional Conclusion on Article 26 ECT

In conclusion, subject to the major issue raised by the Respondent on Article 17(1)
ECT (which is considered below), it follows from the decisions so far that this
Tribunal decides that it would have jurisdiction to determine on its merits the present
dispute between the Claimant and the Respondent under Article 26 ECT and the
ICSID Convention, and that both parties to the dispute have given their written consent

thereto within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

* Bamberger, Lincham and Wailde, The Energy Charter Treaty in 2000 (in Energy Law in Europe, ed
Roggenkamp; 2000), pp. 11, 31 and 32 (Legal Appendix to Reply, Exhibit 73).

143.

144.

44

Article 17 ECT

Article 17 ECT is contained in Part III of the ECT, the same part containing the ECT’s
substantive protections for Investors but a different part from Part V containing the
provisions for dispute settlement. Article 17 is entitled "Non-Application of Part III in
Certain Circumstances"; and taken from the ECT’s English version, Article 17(1)
provides: "Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this
Part [i.e., Part II] to: (1) a legal entity [Limb i] if citizens or nationals of a third state
own or control such entity and [Limb ii] if that entity has no substantial business
activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is organised; ..."._ The
Tribunal attaches significance to the word "and" linking both limbs of Article 17(1),
thereby requiring both to be satisfied. (For ease of reference below, the Tribunal has
added in the quotation above the roman numerals in square brackets to indicate these
first and second limbs). Article 17(2) ECT contains a similar provision for an
"Investment" in differently specified circumstances. (The full text of Article 17 ECT is

set out in paragraph 26 of this Decision, supra).

By letter dated 18 February 2003 to ICSID’s Acting Secretary-General, the
Respondent exercised its right under Article 17(1) ECT to deny the advantages of Part
III to the Claimant, purportedly including the right to refer its claim to arbitration
under Article 26 ECT, as follows: "The application of ECT shall be denied to the
claimant since Plama Holding Limited [sic] has not provided any evidence that the
ultimate owners of its shares are nationals or citizens of a Contracting State to ECT
and that it has any substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party
in which it is organised, namely Cyprus." (Exhibit C36). In a further letter dated 4
March 2003 to the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID, the Respondent clarified its

position: "... the clear and unambiguous wording of Article 17 of the ECT leaves no
doubt that each [Contracting Party] has reserved this right with the conclusion of the
ECT and that no prior or subsequent reservation is needed for its exercise ...
Consequently, Article 17 of the ECT confers on each [Contracting Party] a direct and
unconditional right of denial which may be exercised at any time and in any manner."

(Exhibit C37).

145.

146.

147.

45

It will be noted, as was emphasized by the Claimant in its submissions, that the
language here first used by the Respondent apparently assumed (i) the need to
"exercise" the right of denial and (ii) that its effect was prospective from the right’s
exercise ("shall be denied"), using the future tense to deny advantages to the Claimant
as if for the future only. In that event the Claimant submitted that, even if Article
17(1) applied in the present case, given that the Claimant had already submitted its
Request for Arbitration earlier on 24 December 2002, it could not deprive this
Tribunal of any jurisdiction or even operate as a defense on the merits to any claims
pleaded by the Claimant arising from still earlier events. It is necessary for the
Tribunal to consider Bulgaria’s submissions on Article 17(1) separately as regards

jurisdiction and merits.

Article 17 as a Jurisdictional Issue

The first question is whether any issue raised under Article 17(1) by Bulgaria can
deprive this Tribunal of all jurisdiction to decide the merits of the parties’ dispute. As
already described in Section III of this Decision (supra), the Claimant submits that the
Respondent’s reliance on Article 17(1) can only relate to the merits and not to
jurisdiction, whereas Bulgaria primarily contends the opposite. The Respondent
contends that there can be no dispute over its obligations under Part III of the ECT
when the Claimant has no relevant "advantages" under Part III legally capable of
giving rise to any claim pleaded under Part III. The Respondent contends that the
denial of such "advantages" are not limited to those conferred by Part III of the ECT
but include also all advantages relating to Part III, including the right to invoke
international arbitration under Article 26 of Part V of the ECT alleging any breach of
Part III. In its counsel’s words at the September Hearing: "it’s the whole thing"
[D1.160]; and as the Tribunal has already noted, unlike Article 27, Article 26 is a

remedy limited to an alleged breach of Part III.

In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent’s jurisdictional case here turns on the effect of
Articles 17(1) and 26 ECT, interpreted under Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.
The express terms of Article 17 refer to a denial of the advantages "of this Part",
thereby referring to the substantive advantages conferred upon an investor by Part III
of the ECT. The language is unambiguous; but it is confirmed by the title to Article
17: "Non-Application of Part I/I in Certain Circumstances" (emphasis supplied). All

148.

149.

46

authentic texts in the other five languages are to the same effect. From these terms,
interpreted in good faith in accordance with their ordinary contextual meaning, the
denial applies only to advantages under Part III. It would therefore require a gross
manipulation of the language to make it refer to Article 26 in Part V of the ECT.
Nonetheless, the Tribunal has considered whether any such manipulation is

permissible in the light of the ECT’s object and purpose.

Article 26 provides a procedural remedy for a covered investor’s claims; and it is not
physically or juridically part of the ECT’s substantive advantages enjoyed by that
investor under Part III. As a matter of language, it would have been simple to exclude
a class of investors completely from the scope of the ECT as a whole, as do certain
other bilateral investment treaties; but that is self-evidently not the approach taken in
the ECT. This limited exclusion from Part III for a covered investor, dependent on
certain specific criteria, requires a procedure to resolve a dispute as to whether that
exclusion applies in any particular case; and the object and purpose of the ECT, in the
Tribunal’s view, clearly requires Article 26 to be unaffected by the operation of Article
17(1). As already noted above, for a covered investor, Article 26 is a very important

feature of the ECT.

In the Tribunal’s view, the contrary approach would clearly not accord with the ECT’s
object and purpose. Unlike most modern investment treaties, Article 17(1) does not
operate as a denial of all benefits to a covered investor under the treaty but is expressly
limited to a denial of the advantages of Part III of the ECT. A Contracting State can
only deny these advantages if Article 17(1)’s specific criteria are satisfied; and it
cannot validly exercise its right of denial otherwise. A disputed question of its valid
exercise may arise, raising issues of treaty interpretation, other legal issues and issues
of fact, particularly as regards the first and second limbs of Article 17(1) ECT. It is
notorious that issues as to citizenship, nationality, ownership, control and the scope
and location of business activities can raise wide-ranging, complex and highly
controversial disputes, as in the present case. In the absence of Article 26 as a remedy
available to the covered investor (as the Respondent contends), how are such disputes
to be determined between the host state and the covered investor, given that such
determination is crucial to both? According to the Respondent, there is no remedy

available to a covered investor under the ECT at all: it has no advantages under the

150.

47

ECT at all; it has no rights under Article 26 to amicable negotiations or international
arbitration; and any attempt to initiate arbitration before ICSID will be met with a
demand by the host state that the request for arbitration should not be registered under
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention (as the Respondent contended in its letter dated
4March 2003, cited above). Towards the covered investor, under the Respondent’s
case, the Contracting State invoking the application of Article 17(1) is the judge in its
own cause. That is a license for injustice; and it treats a covered investor as if it were
not covered under the ECT at all. It is not tempered, as the Respondent’s counsel
tentatively suggested at the September hearing, by the possibility that the Contracting
State might choose, in its discretion, to extend in a friendly but wholly voluntary way
any or all of the advantages of Part III during amicable negotiations with the aggrieved

investor [D1.151 ff].

This contrary approach also cannot be reconciled with Article 27 ECT on state-state
arbitration. Under Article 27, a Contracting Party can refer to arbitration a dispute
with the host state (as another Contracting Party) any dispute concerning the
application or interpretation of the ECT, including the host state’s exercise of its right
of denial to a covered investor under Article 17(1) ECT. The Contracting Party’s right
to arbitration is unqualified by the host state’s invocation of Article 17(1); and it
follows that a Contracting Party could pursue a claim against the host state for its
improper reliance on Article 17(1) towards a covered investor. In other words, even if
(as the Respondent contends), the investor cannot invoke Article 26 at all, it would
leave intact its home state’s right, as a Contracting State, to invoke Article 27 against
the host state. It seems an unnecessarily complicated result to resolve that dispute
when, on the ordinary meaning of Article 17(1), the covered investor could invoke
Article 26 directly against the host state without the assistance of its home state. The
Tribunal notes again that for a covered investor, Article 26 is a very important feature
of the ECT; and as a remedy exercisable by an investor by itself and in its own right
against the host state, it cannot be equated with Article 27. Under the ECT, the
covered investor is more than an object of international law (see supra, paragraph

139).

151.

152.

153.

154.

48

Conclusion: For these reasons, the Tribunal decides that the Respondent’s case on
Article 17(1) cannot support a complaint to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in this case.
It would ordinarily be appropriate to stop here as regards any further consideration of
Article 17(1) ECT. However, for understandable reasons, both parties requested the
Tribunal to decide upon the application or non-application of Article 17(1) ECT even
if it did not relate to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction but related to the merits of their

dispute. Accordingly, the Tribunal now proceeds further to meet the parties’ request.

Article 17 as an Issue on the Merits

The Tribunal addresses this part of the parties’ submissions on the assumption (as
decided above) that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the Claimant’s claims
against the Respondent for one or more alleged breaches of Part III of the ECT. These

submissions raise distinct issues of legal interpretation and related factual issues.

Exercise of the Right to Deny: The Claimant contends first that where a Contracting
State wishes to deny the advantages of Part III of the ECT to a legal entity under
Article 17(1) ECT, that State must first exercise its right to deny such advantages or
take equivalent positive action that it intends to do so; and further that the denial then
operates only prospectively from the date of such exercise or other action.
Accordingly, the legal entity enjoys in full the advantages of Part III of the ECT up to
that date. In its counsel’s words at the September Hearing: " ... ‘reserves the right’,
this means the right exists, but it’s not yet exercised, the right to deny exists, but not
the denial" [D2.65]; and reference was made to Professor Walde’s expert opinion filed
by the Respondent in support of its Memorial on Jurisdiction to the effect that Article
17(1) provides an "option" for the Contracting State, thereby also suggesting the need

for that option to be exercised by the state (at paragraph 62).

The Respondent contends otherwise: first that Article 17(1) ECT requires no action by
Bulgaria; and, second, whether or not it did, the denial of benefits would operate
retrospectively. It contends that Article 17(1) is a so-called "denial of benefits"
provision found in many modern investment treaties; that the principal feature of such
treaties is the implementation, in a pragmatic way, of the home State’s right under
customary international law to provide diplomatic protection to its nationals through

the mechanism of claims espousal against the host state; and that under such law, the

49

host state is not obliged to entertain a claim presented by the home state unless there is
a genuine and continuous link between that state and its national from the date of the
alleged injury until the award settling the inter-state claim, relying on the ICJ’s

decision in the Nottebohm Case’.

155. In the Tribunal’s view, the existence of a "right" is distinct from the exercise of that
right. For example, a party may have a contractual right to refer a claim to arbitration;
but there can be no arbitration unless and until that right is exercised. In the same way,
a Contracting Party has a right under Article 17(1) ECT to deny a covered investor the
advantages under Part III; but it is not required to exercise that right; and it may never
do so. The language of Article 17(1) is unambiguous; and that meaning is consistent
with the different state practices of the ECT’s Contracting States under different
bilateral investment treaties: certain of them applying a generous approach to legal
entities incorporated in a state with no significant business presence there (such as the
Netherlands) and certain others applying a more restrictive approach (such as the
USA). The ECT is a multilateral treaty with Article 17(1) drafted in permissive terms,

not surprisingly, in order to accommodate these different state practices.

156. Moreover, if the Respondent were correct, it is surprising that Article 17(1) should be
drafted as it is: it would have been much easier to draft suitable wording to make the
Respondent’s meaning plain. For example, the ASEAN Framework Agreement on

Services of December 1995 provides in Article VI ("Denial of Benefits"):

The benefits of this Framework Agreement shall be denied to
a service supplier who is a natural person of a non-Member
State or a juridical person owned or controlled by persons of
a non-Member State constituted under the laws of a Member
State, but not engaged in substantive business operations in

the territory of Member States(s). (Exhibit C66).

That simple language requires no exercise or other action by a contracting state; and it
leaves no room for ambiguity, even though this treaty is of a different type from the
ECT. It requires little effort to imagine other similarly effective language which could

have been used for Article 17(1) ECT - but which has not there been used. In these

° Liechtenstein v Guatemala, 1955 ICJ 4.

157.

158.

159.

50

circumstances, it would clearly not be permissible for the Tribunal to re-write Article

17(1) ECT in the Respondent’s favor.

The Tribunal has also considered whether the requirement for the right’s exercise is
inconsistent with the ECT’s object and purpose. The exercise would necessarily be
associated with publicity or other notice so as to become reasonably available to
investors and their advisers. To this end, a general declaration in a Contracting State’s
official gazette could suffice; or a statutory provision in a Contracting State’s
investment or other laws; or even an exchange of letters with a particular investor or
class of investors. Given that in practice an investor must distinguish between
Contracting States with different state practices, it is not unreasonable or impractical to
interpret Article 17(1) as requiring that a Contracting State must exercise its right
before applying it to an investor and be seen to have done so. By itself, Article 17(1)
ECT is at best only half a notice; without further reasonable notice of its exercise by
the host state, its terms tell the investor little; and for all practical purposes, something
more is needed. The Tribunal was referred to Article 1113(2) NAFTA as an example
of a term providing for the denial of benefits which provides for a form of prior
notification and consultation; and whilst the wording is materially different from
Article 17(1) ECT, this term does suggest that the Tribunal’s interpretation is not

unreasonable as a practical matter.

For these reasons, in the Tribunal’s view, the interpretation of Article 17(1) ECT under
Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention requires the right of denial to be exercised by
the Contracting State. Accordingly, the Tribunal decides in the present case that the
Respondent was required to exercise its right against the Claimant; and that it did so
only on 18 February 2003, more than four years after the Claimant made its investment
in Nova Plama. The real point at issue, therefore, is whether that exercise had
retrospective effect to 1998 or only prospective effect from 2003, on the Claimant’s

"advantages" under Part III ECT.

Retrospective or Prospective Effect: The language of Article 17(1) ECT is not by itself
clear on this important point. There is some slight guidance from Article 17(1)
suggesting a prospective effect, given the use of the present tense to coincide with the
right’s exercise ("own or control" ... "has no substantial activities" ... "is organized");

and likewise, Article 17(2) ECT suggests only a prospective effect to a denial of

160.

161.

162.

51

advantages to an Investment (" ... if the denying Contracting Party establishes ..." etc).
However, the Tribunal would not wish to base its decision on such semantic

indications only.

The Tribunal returns to the object and purpose of the ECT under Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention. The parties did not here invoke under Article 31(3) and (4) any
subsequent agreement or practice between the ECT’s Contracting Parties or under
Article 32 any of the ECT’s preparatory work. Accordingly, as with many issues of
disputed interpretation turning on a relatively few words, it is a short point of almost

first impression.

The covered investor enjoys the advantages of Part III unless the host state exercises
its right under Article 17(1) ECT; and a putative covered investor has legitimate
expectations of such advantages until that right’s exercise. A putative investor
therefore requires reasonable notice before making any investment in the host state
whether or not that host state has exercised its right under Article 17(1) ECT. At that
stage, the putative investor can so plan its business affairs to come within or without
the criteria there specified, as it chooses. It can also plan not to make any investment at
all or to make it elsewhere. After an investment is made in the host state, the "hostage-
factor" is introduced; the covered investor’s choices are accordingly more limited; and
the investor is correspondingly more vulnerable to the host state’s exercise of its right
under Article 17(1) ECT. At this time, therefore, the covered investor needs at least
the same protection as it enjoyed as a putative investor able to plan its investment. The

ECT’s express "purpose" under Article 2 ECT is the establishment of "... a legal

framework in order to promote long-term co-operation in the energy field ... in

accordance with the objectives and principles of the Charter" (emphasis supplied). It
is not easy to see how any retrospective effect is consistent with this "long-term"

purpose.

In the Tribunal’s view, therefore, the object and purpose of the ECT suggest that the
right’s exercise should not have retrospective effect. A putative investor, properly
informed and advised of the potential effect of Article 17(1), could adjust its plans
accordingly prior to making its investment. If, however, the right’s exercise had
retrospective effect, the consequences for the investor would be serious. The investor

could not plan in the "long term" for such an effect (if at all); and indeed such an

163.

164.

165.

166.

52

unexercised right could lure putative investors with legitimate expectations only to
have those expectations made retrospectively false at a much later date. Moreover, in
the present case, the Respondent asserts a retrospective effect from a very late date,
even after the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration and the accrual of the Claimant’s

causes of action under Part III ECT.

The Respondent has argued that by the very existence of Article 17(1) in the ECT, the
Investor is put on notice before it makes its investment that it could be denied ECT
advantages if it falls within that Article and, therefore, if it did so fall within Article
17(1) it would have no legitimate expectations of such advantages. Such an
interpretation of the ECT would deprive the Investor of any certainty as to its rights

and the host country's obligations when it makes its investment and must be rejected.

For the Investor, the practical difference between prospective and retrospective effect
is sharp. The former accords with the good faith interpretation of the relevant wording
of Article 17(1) in the light of the ECT’s object and purpose; but the latter does not.
Moreover, if (contrary to the Tribunal’s decision), the effect could be retrospective, the
Tribunal would have to decide whether, nevertheless, in the present case it was not so
exercised, given the terms of the Respondent’s letter dated 18 February 2003. In the

circumstances, however, it is unnecessary to decide this further question.

In conclusion, the Tribunal decides that the Respondent’s exercise of its right under
Article 17(1) ECT by its letter dated 18 February 2003 only deprived the Claimant of
the advantages under Part III of the ECT prospectively from that date onwards. In the
present case, it may well be that this particular decision will render moot, or
substantially moot, any further need to consider other issues arising from the first and
second limbs of Article 17(1) ECT. Nonetheless, as requested by the parties, the

Tribunal has sought to address these issues here also.

Burden and Standard of Proof

The Claimant asserts that the Respondent bears the burden of showing that Article
17(1) applies factually to the present dispute to disqualify its claim on the merits. The
Respondent contends that, although it might have borne the burden initially in

asserting Article 17(1), the burden subsequently shifted to the Claimant to show that

167.

168.

169.

53

its ownership and control has never been held by a national of a third state, being an
approach consistent with ECT Understanding No 3 (relating to Article 1(6) defining
"Investment" where there is a "doubt" as to whether an Investor controls an
Investment, directly or indirectly). Further, Respondent contended that the burden
shifted to the Claimant when it alone could produce the relevant documentation and
testimony required to resolve disputed factual issues over its own ownership and

control.

In the Tribunal’s view, as already indicated above, the burden of proof on the merits is
significantly different from the burden applied to a jurisdictional issue. Further, the
parties were not agreed on the standard of proof, including the drawing of adverse
inferences; and the parties’ submissions may disguise a further difference between the
legal and evidential burdens of proof. Given these factors, the Tribunal has
experienced difficulties in addressing factual issues disputed between the parties,
particularly as regards Article 17(1)’s first limb. It is however convenient to begin

with its second limb where no such difficulties arise.

Article 17(1)’s Second Limb: "No Substantial Business Activities"

 

Under Article 17(1)’s second limb, the factual question is whether the Claimant "has
no substantial business activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is
organized", i.e., Cyprus. In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant asserted that it
had "substantial business activities in Nicosia" (see paragraph 85). In its Rejoinder,
the Claimant appeared to concede that it did not conduct substantial business activities
in Cyprus. In an equivocal footnote number 49 (at page 24), the Claimant there stated
that it was "prepared to accept, for present purposes, that it does not conduct
substantial business activities in Cyprus. The same is not true of PHL ...". At the
hearing on 21 September 2004, that concession was confirmed by the Claimant’s
counsel without any qualification: "We do accept that the second limb of Article 17 is
satisfied; we accept that PCL [the Claimant] has no substantial business activities in
Cyprus, the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is organised, for the purposes of
the ECT..." [D2.8].

In the Tribunal’s view, the concession was rightly, if belatedly, made by the Claimant.

It is clear to the Tribunal that the Claimant itself has never had any substantial business

170.

171.

54

activities in Cyprus; and contrary to the Claimant’s pleading, this shortfall cannot be
made good with business activities undertaken by an associated but different legal
entity, Plama Holding Limited ("PHL"), even where PHL owns or controls the
Claimant. In the Tribunal’s view, the second limb of Article 17(1) is satisfied and

applies to the present case.

Article 17(1)’s First Limb: "Own or Control"

Under Article 17(1)’s first limb, the question is whether the Claimant is a legal entity
owned or controlled "by citizens or nationals of a third state". A "third state" being a
non-Contracting State under the ECT, it would not include France (as a Contracting
State); and if a national of France "owned" and "controlled" the Claimant at all
material times, it would follow that Article 17(1)’s first limb would not be satisfied in
the present case. In the Tribunal’s view, the word "or" signifies that ownership and
control are alternatives: in other words, only one need be met for the first limb to be
satisfied, as the Claimant rightly conceded at the September Hearing [D2.37]. Also, in
the Tribunal’s view, ownership includes indirect and beneficial ownership; and control
includes control in fact, including an ability to exercise substantial influence over the
legal entity’s management, operation and the selection of members of its board of
directors or any other managing body. This interpretation appeared to be common
ground between the parties: see the Respondent’s Memorial at paragraphs 49 ff (page
17) and the Claimant’s submissions at the September Hearing [D2.38]. What was not

remotely common ground were the relevant facts.

Mr. Vautrin

The Claimant’s present case relies on Mr. Jean-Christophe Vautrin as a French
national controlling and owning the Claimant at all material times; and accordingly the
factual question under this first limb can be reformulated more simply: does the
evidence submitted support the Claimant's assertion that the Claimant’s shares were
and remain beneficially owned by PHL, incorporated in Cyprus; that PHL’s shares
were and remain beneficially owned by EMU Investments Limited (EMU),
incorporated in the British Virgin Islands; that EMU’s bearer shares were and remain
beneficially owned by Mr. Vautrin; and that consequently the Claimant was a legal

entity "owned" by Mr. Vautrin as a French national under Article 17(1) ECT and by

55

virtue of such ownership, Mr. Vautrin "controlled" the Claimant? The answer to this

question is not, however, simple from the materials currently available to the Tribunal.

172. Mr. Vautrin provided three written witness statements dated 25 March, 25 June and
26 August 2004; and he testified orally in French before the Tribunal on 20 September
2004, as recorded in English translation in the corrected transcript'®. At the outset of
his oral evidence to the Tribunal, Mr. Vautrin made the following declaration:
(translation from the French) "J solemnly declare upon my honor and conscience that I
shall speak the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth" (in accordance with
Rule 35(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules); and he also confirmed the truth of his
earlier witness statements [D1.5]. At the September Hearing, he was examined by the
Claimant and cross-examined by the Respondent and answered questions from the
Tribunal. [D1.5: examination by the Claimant; D1.39: cross-examination by the
Respondent; and D1.82: examination by the Tribunal]. Subject to Article 21(a) of the
ICSID Convention, Mr. Vautrin thereby took personal responsibility over his

testimony.

173. Mr. Vautrin testified that he was a French national and that he had never been the
national of any other country [D1.6]. He testified that he was a businessman by
profession and, a factor which may bear certain relevance in this case, not a lawyer
[D1.6 and 49]. He testified that, in the summer of 1998, he decided to participate in
his personal capacity in the purchase of Nova Plama [D1.22 and 83], that it was he
who had then given instructions to his own lawyer, Mr. Nordtomme, to incorporate the
Claimant and to act for the Claimant in the negotiations for Nova Plama’s purchase
[D1.23 and 25.]. He unequivocally testified that he was the Claimant’s ultimate owner
from 1998 onwards and that the Claimant was run according to his instructions also

from 1998 onwards [D1.38-39].

174. Mr. Vautrin testified that whilst he had never sought to mislead the Bulgarian
Government as to who owned or controlled the Claimant in the negotiations and
purchase of Nova Plama’s shares in 1998, he had also not told them that he did
[D1.59]. He explained that subsequently he did not wish to disclose publicly his true

role out of concern for his personal safety in Bulgaria; and that he only very belatedly

'© As of the date of this Decision, the parties had not yet agreed on a transcript of either the original French or
English translation of Mr. Vautrin’s testimony, a fact which does not affect this Decision.

175.

176.

177.

56

agreed to disclose that role in connection with these arbitration proceedings because "it
was explained to me that I had to do so; but I decided to do so as late in time as
possible" [D1.67]. That time was the first session of these arbitration proceedings held
in Paris on 25 March 2004, where counsel for the Claimant disclosed, in the presence
of Mr. Vautrin (and in accordance with Mr. Vautrin's first witness statement made that
same day), that Mr. Vautrin was the sole person ultimately owning and controlling the
Claimant; and further that the reference in the plural to "ultimate owners" in paragraph
84 of the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration was a mistake by the Claimant’s previous

legal representatives, which (as the record shows) included Mr. Nordtomme.

As regards the Dolsamex/O’Neill claim to ownership of PCL’s shares, Mr. Vautrin

unequivocally testified in his second witness statement: "... J confirm that neither
Mr. O'Neill nor any entity owned or represented by him possess any ownership rights
relating to PCL or any of the Plama group entities. No rights of any nature have been
recognised to these persons by courts in Switzerland or elsewhere. Neither have these
persons at any time prior to this sought to exercise any type of management control

over PCL or any of the companies in the project" (paragraph 53).

As regards the Pledge Agreement of 13 November 2002 whereby EMU shares were
apparently pledged to a lending institution as pledgee by Allspice Trading Inc and
Panorama Industrial Inc (both incorporated in the Seychelles), Mr. Vautrin
unequivocally testified that no EMU bearer shares had in fact been transferred to these
Seychelles companies for the purpose of this pledge (or at all); and in any event that he
had owned and still owned the shares in these two Seychelles companies [D1.37].
Accordingly, the Claimant submitted that this Pledge Agreement did not evidence any

break in Mr. Vautrin’s continuous ownership and control of the Claimant.

Bulgaria complains that the Claimant’s explanations of its ultimate ownership and
control by Mr. Vautrin are belated, incomplete, unreliable, incredible and even where
technically correct, less than the whole truth. The Respondent submits that the
Tribunal should reject Mr. Vautrin’s testimony and decide that the Claimant has failed
to establish that Mr. Vautrin owns and controls the Claimant within the meaning of the
first limb to Article 17(1) ECT. For reasons set out below, the Tribunal does not here
accept this submission; but it is appropriate to record that Mr. Vautrin’s evidence as to

his ultimate ownership and control of the Claimant is not only largely unsupported by

178.

179.

57

contemporary documentation but that it is materially inconsistent with parts of that
documentation and also contradicted by other statements apparently attributable to
Mr. Vautrin, particularly in the several legal proceedings by Mr. O’Neill and
Dolsamex and in the local and international press. It is also appropriate to record that
the Tribunal did not hear relevant testimony at the September Hearing from other
important witnesses from the Claimant, especially Mr. Nordtomme (although as he
was tendered by the Claimant to the Respondent as a witness available for cross-

examination).

In the Tribunal’s view, the fact remains that Mr. Vautrin testified under cross-
examination before the Tribunal at the September Hearing; his own testimony
remained unequivocal on the relevant issues; and on the existing materials, the
Tribunal would not wish to reject his evidence as false at this stage of the proceedings.
If this were a factual issue relevant only to jurisdiction, the Tribunal would therefore
be minded to accept Mr. Vautrin’s testimony at face value under Judge Higgins’
approach, notwithstanding any doubts regarding Mr. Vautrin’s continuous ownership
of the Claimant from September 1998 to the present day. As the Tribunal has already
decided, however, Article 17(1)’s first limb is not a jurisdictional issue; nor is it
necessary to decide this issue on the merits for the non-application of Article 17(1)
retrospectively from 18 February 2003. Moreover, the Tribunal is concerned that the
factual issue of the Claimant’s ownership may significantly overlap the
"misrepresentation" case advanced by the Respondent on the merits, which cannot be
decided by the Tribunal at this stage of these proceedings (as explained further below).
There is a risk of the Tribunal prejudicing one or other party’s position on these future
issues; and for the time being, therefore, the less said here the better. If it later proves
necessary for the Tribunal to decide on the merits whether Article 17(1)’s first limb
was satisfied, it can always do so. For all these reasons, the Tribunal decides that it
would be wrong here to decide whether or not Article 17(1)’s first limb was or was not
satisfied; and the Tribunal does not do so. It reserves that decision for a later stage of

the proceedings.

Summary on the Energy Charter Treaty

It is convenient to summarize the Tribunal’s several decisions on the ECT: (A) As to

the jurisdictional issues: (1) Under Article 26 ECT and the ICSID Convention, the

180.

181.

58

Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide on the merits the Claimant’s claims against the
Respondent for alleged breaches of Part III of the ECT; (2) Article 17(1) ECT has no
relevance to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to determine those claims; (3) Accordingly, the
Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the
ECT and ICSID Convention; and (B) as to the merits of the Respondent’s case under
Article 17(1) ECT; (4) Article 17(1) requires the Contracting State to exercise its right
of denial and such exercise operates with prospective effect only, as it did in this case
from the date of the Respondent’s exercise by letter of 18 February 2003; (5) the
second limb of Article 17(1) regarding "no substantial business activities" is satisfied
to the Tribunal’s satisfaction; and (6) the Tribunal declines for the time being to decide

the first limb of article 17(1) regarding the Claimant’s "ownership" and "control".

B. The Respondent's Request that the Arbitral Proceedings Be Suspended

The Respondent requests that, in the event the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction
over this dispute, which it has now done, it suspend the arbitral proceedings until the
Swiss courts finally decide in the Dolsamex litigation who the real owner of the shares
of PCL is. The Respondent argues that should the Tribunal find that it has jurisdiction
and decide this case and should Dolsamex then be found by the competent courts to be
the owner of PCL's shares, the Respondent risks a second arbitration claim against it
by the Claimant and its new owners. Should an award be issued in favor of the
Claimant, the Respondent may pay any monies awarded to an entity with no legal

entitlement to act for PCL.

The Tribunal does not believe that is a correct analysis of the situation. PCL, not the
shareholders of PCL, is the party to this arbitration. As already noted in paragraph 135
supra, PCL has shown, in the record, that its filing for arbitration was authorized by its
registered directors. It is not seriously contested that they had the authority under
Cyprus law to do so. Any decision rendered by the Tribunal will be binding upon PCL
as well as on Bulgaria and will be res judicata between the parties. If Dolsamex is
found to be the owner of the shares of PCL, it may have a claim against the company
or against Mr. Vautrin; but the Tribunal does not see how PCL, with new shareholders,
could successfully make the same claims against the Respondent as in the present

arbitration or reopen the Tribunal's decision.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

59

As a consequence of the considerations set forth in the preceding paragraph, the
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent's request that it suspend the arbitration

proceedings.

Cc. Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal under The Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT

The Claimant contends that to the extent that Bulgaria’s denial of Part III advantages
of the ECT affects this Tribunal’s jurisdiction, Bulgaria consented to ICSID arbitration
of the present dispute in the 1987 Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT through the MFN provision
contained therein. The mechanism for arriving at that conclusion is, according to the
Claimant, the following: (a) the Claimant qualifies as an investor under the Bulgaria-
Cyprus BIT; (b) the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT contains an MFN provision; (c) the MFN
provision in the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT applies to all aspects of "treatment;" and (d)
"treatment" covers settlement of disputes provisions in other BITs to which Bulgaria is
a Contracting Party. In that connection, the Claimant relies, inter alia, on the
Bulgaria-Finland BIT. The Respondent contests the Claimant’s contention on grounds

that will be considered below.

The Tribunal concludes that the MFN provision of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT cannot be
interpreted as providing consent to submit a dispute under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT to

ICSID arbitration for the reasons set forth hereafter.

The Tribunal notes at the outset that the Respondent does not seriously contest that the
Claimant qualifies as an investor under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT. As a result, the
question before the Tribunal is how the MFN provision in that BIT should be

interpreted.

The Claimant’s position appears to be prompted by the limited dispute settlement
provisions in the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT (quoted at paragraph 26 supra). Said
provisions are concerned only with disputes relating to expropriation, the legality of
which "shall be checked at the request of the concerned investor through the regular
administrative and legal procedures of the Contracting Party that had taken the
appropriate steps." (Article 4.1). A dispute "with regard to the amount of
compensation ... shall be checked either in a legal regular procedure of the

Contracting Party which has taken the measure on expropriation or by an

187.

188.

189.

190.

60

international ‘Ad Hoc’ Arbitration Court" (id.), which is detailed in Articles 4.2 — 4.5
(basically, UNCITRAL arbitration, the "Chairman of the Court of Arbitration to the
Chamber of Commerce in Stockholm" being the Appointing Authority). The Claimant

does not invoke these dispute settlement provisions in the present case.
The MEN provision set forth in Article 3 of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT reads as follows:

1. Each Contracting Party shall apply to the investments in its
territory by investors of the other Contracting Party a treatment which
is not less favourable than that accorded to investments by investors of

third states.

2. This treatment shall not be applied to the privileges which either
Contracting Party accords to investors from third countries in virtue
of their participation in economic communities and unions, a customs

union or a free trade area.

Whilst the Claimant and the Respondent agree that this provision is to be interpreted
pursuant to Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention of 1969 (see text at paragraph

26, supra), they reach opposite conclusions.

It is not clear whether the ordinary meaning of the term "treatment" in the MFN
provision of the BIT includes or excludes dispute settlement provisions contained in
other BITs to which Bulgaria is a Contracting Party. Inclusion or exclusion may or
may not satisfy the ejusdem generis principle (i.e., when a general word or phrase
follows a list of specifics, the general word or phrase will be interpreted to include
only items of the same type as those listed), but as it will be seen below, it is not

relevant to address that question.

In this connection, the difference between the terms "treatment ... accorded to
investments," as appearing in Article 3(1) of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, and
"treatment... accorded to investors," as appearing in other BITs, is to be noted. The
Tribunal does not attach a particular significance to the use of the different terms, in

particular not since Article 3(1) contains the words "investments by investors"'.

" See also, Siemens v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision of 3 August 2004, at
paragraphs 91-92, http://www.asil.org/ilib/Siemens_Argentina.pdf.

191.

192.

193.

61

The second paragraph of Article 3 of the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT contains an exception
to MEN treatment relating to economic communities and unions, a customs union or a
free trade area. This may be considered as supporting the view that all other matters,
including dispute settlement, fall under the MFN provision of the first paragraph of
Article 3 (on the basis of the principle expressio unius est exclusio alterius). However,
the fact that the second paragraph refers to "privileges" may be viewed as indicating
that MFN treatment should be understood as relating to substantive protection. Hence,
it can be argued with equal force that the second paragraph demonstrates that the first
paragraph is solely concerned with provisions relating to substantive protection to the

exclusion of the procedural provisions relating to dispute settlement.

The "context" may support the Claimant's interpretation since the MFN provision is set
forth amongst the Treaty’s provisions relating to substantive investment protection.
However, the context alone, in light of the other elements of interpretation considered
herein, does not persuade the Tribunal that the parties intended such an interpretation.
And the Tribunal has no evidence before it of the negotiating history of the BIT to

convince it otherwise.

The object and purpose of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT are: "the creation of favourable
conditions for investments by investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the
other Contracting Party." (Preamble, see also title which refers to "mutual
encouragement and protection of investments"). The Claimant places much reliance
on the foregoing and on the Report of the Executive Directors on the ICSID

Convention of 1965, according to which: "the creation of an institution designed to

facilitate the settlement of disputes between States and foreign investors can be a

major step toward promoting an atmosphere of mutual confidence and thus
stimulating a larger flow of private international capital in those countries which wish
to attract it" (Exhibit C60, at paragraph 9). The Claimant further relies on
UNCTAD’s study “Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s" which contains
language to the same effect (Exhibit C104 at p. 5). The Claimant also points to the
Maffezini decision in which it is observed: "dispute settlement arrangements are

inextricably related to the protection of foreign investors, as they are also related to

62

2
"2 Such statements are

the protection of rights of traders under treaties of commerce
as such undeniable in their generality, but they are legally insufficient to conclude that
the Contracting Parties to the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT intended to cover by the MFN
provision agreements to arbitrate in other treaties to which Bulgaria (and Cyprus for
that matter) is a Contracting Party. Here, the Tribunal is mindful of Sir Ian Sinclair’s
warning of the "risk that the placing of undue emphasis on the ‘object and purpose’ of
a treaty will encourage teleological methods of interpretation [which], in some of its

more extreme forms, will even deny the relevance of the intentions of the parties".

194. The Tribunal finds no guidance in the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 31 of
the Vienna Convention, as there are no facts or circumstances that point to their
application. The same goes for paragraph 4 of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
("A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so

intended").

195. It is true that treaties between one of the Contracting Parties and third States may be
taken into account for the purpose of clarifying the meaning of a treaty’s text at the
time it was entered into. The Claimant has provided a very clear and insightful
presentation of Bulgaria’s practice in relation to the conclusion of investment treaties
subsequent to the conclusion of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT in 1987. In the 1990s, after
Bulgaria's communist regime changed, it began concluding BITs with much more
liberal dispute resolution provisions, including resort to ICSID arbitration. However,
that practice is not particularly relevant in the present case since subsequent
negotiations between Bulgaria and Cyprus indicate that these Contracting Parties did
not intend the MFN provision to have the meaning that otherwise might be inferred
from Bulgaria’s subsequent treaty practice. Bulgaria and Cyprus negotiated a revision
of their BIT in 1998. The negotiations failed but specifically contemplated a revision
of the dispute settlement provisions (see Witness Statement by Christo P.
Tepavitcharov at paragraph 20 and Exhibit 5 thereto, containing an exchange of notes
between Bulgaria and Cyprus). It can be inferred from these negotiations that the
Contracting Parties to the BIT themselves did not consider that the MFN provision

extends to dispute settlement provisions in other BITs.

" Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction of 25
January 2000, reprinted in 16 ICSID Rev.-F.1.L.J. 212 (2001), at paragraph 54.
' The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 2nd ed. 1984, at 130.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

63

It may be mentioned here (see also Article 32 of the Vienna Convention) that the
parties to the present arbitration have not produced preparatory work of the Bulgaria-
Cyprus BIT. They did provide some indication of the circumstances surrounding its
conclusion. At that time, Bulgaria was under a communist regime that favored
bilateral investment treaties with limited protections for foreign investors and with

very limited dispute resolution provisions.

The previous two paragraphs indicate that, at the time of conclusion, Bulgaria and
Cyprus limited specific investor-state dispute settlement to the provisions set forth in
the BIT and had no intention of extending those provisions through the MFN

provision.

In the view of the Tribunal, the following consideration is equally, if not more,
important. With the advent of bilateral and multilateral investment treaties since the
1980s (today estimated to be more than 1,500), the traditional diplomatic protection
mechanism by home states for their nationals investing abroad has been largely
replaced by direct access by investors to arbitration against host states. Nowadays,
arbitration is the generally accepted avenue for resolving disputes between investors
and states. Yet, that phenomenon does not take away the basic prerequisite for
arbitration: an agreement of the parties to arbitrate. It is a well-established principle,
both in domestic and international law, that such an agreement should be clear and
unambiguous. In the framework of a BIT, the agreement to arbitrate is arrived at by
the consent to arbitration that a state gives in advance in respect of investment disputes

falling under the BIT, and the acceptance thereof by an investor if the latter so desires.

Doubts as to the parties' clear and unambiguous intention can arise if the agreement to
arbitrate is to be reached by incorporation by reference. The Claimant argues that the
MEN provision produces such effect, stating that in contractual relationships the
incorporation by reference of an arbitration agreement is commonplace. In support
thereof, the Claimant relies on Article 7(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration of 1985. The Claimant adds that in treaty
relationships the importation of the arbitration agreement through the MFN provision

operates in exactly the same way.

Article 7(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law provides:

64

The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration
clause constitutes an arbitration agreement provided that the
contract is in writing and the_reference is such as to make that
clause part of the contract. (emphasis added)

Thus, a reference may in and of itself not be sufficient; the reference is required to be
such as to make the arbitration clause part of the contract (i.e., in this case, the
Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT). This is another way of saying that the reference must be such
that the parties' intention to import the arbitration provision of the other agreement is
clear and unambiguous. A clause reading "a treatment which is not less favourable
than that accorded to investments by investors of third states" as appears in Article
3(1) of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, cannot be said to be a typical incorporation by
reference clause as appearing in ordinary contracts. It creates doubt whether the
reference to the other document (in this case the other BITs concluded by Bulgaria)
clearly and unambiguously includes a reference to the dispute settlement provisions

contained in those BITs.

201. The Claimant contends that the MEN provision in the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT is a broad
provision and is in contrast to other types of MEN provisions, such as Article 1103

NAFTA:

Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no
less favorable than it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of
any other Party or of a non-Party with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale

or other disposition of investments.

202. The same provision can be found in Free Trade of the Americas (FTAA) draft of 21
November 2003. Footnote 13 to the draft FTAA reads:

Note: One delegation proposes the following footnote to be
included in the negotiating history as a reflection of the Parties’
shared understanding of the Most-Favored-Nation Article and the
Maffezini case. This footnote would be deleted in the final text of

the Agreement:

203.

204.

The Parties note the recent decision of the arbitral tribunal in the
Maffezini (Arg.) v. Kingdom of Spain, which found an unusually
broad most favored nation clause in an Argentina-Spain agreement
to encompass international dispute resolution procedures. See
Decision on Jurisdiction §§ 38-64 (January 25, 2000), reprinted in
16 ICSID Rev.-F.I.L.J. 212 (2002). By contrast, the Most-Favored-
Nation Article of this Agreement is expressly limited in its scope to
matters "with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of

investments." The Parties share the understanding and intent that
this clause does not encompass international dispute resolution
mechanisms such as those contained in Section C.2.b (Dispute
Settlement between a Party and an Investor of Another Party) of
this Chapter, and therefore could not reasonably lead to a

conclusion similar to that of the Maffezini case.

more detail below.

which provides in its Article 3(3):

For avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided
for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of

Articles I to 11 of this Agreement.

65

This shows that in NAFTA and probably in the FTAA the incorporation by reference
of the dispute settlement provisions set forth in other BITs is explicitly excluded. Yet,
if such language is lacking in an MFN provision, one cannot reason a contrario that
the dispute resolution provisions must be deemed to be incorporated. The specific
exclusion in the draft FTAA is the result of a reaction by States to the expansive
interpretation made in the Maffezini case. That interpretation went beyond what State
Parties to BITs generally intended to achieve by an MEN provision in a bilateral or

multilateral investment treaty. The Tribunal will examine the Maffezini decision in

Rather, the intention to incorporate dispute settlement provisions must be clearly and

unambiguously expressed. This is, for example, the case with the UK Model BIT,

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

66

Articles 8 and 9 of the UK Model BIT provide for dispute settlement. The drafters of
the UK Model BIT rightly noted that there could be doubt and expressly neutralized
that doubt.

The expression "with respect to all matters" as appearing in MFN provisions in a
number of other BITs (but not the Bulgaria-~Cyprus BIT) does not alleviate the doubt

as pointed out in Siemens v. The Argentine Republic '.

Doubt may be further created by the scope of the dispute settlement provisions in the
other BITs. A number of them refer to disputes arising out of the particular BIT '°. It
appears to be difficult to interpret the MFN clause as importing into the particular BIT

such specific language from other BITs.

Conversely, dispute resolution provisions in a specific treaty have been negotiated
with a view to resolving disputes under that treaty. Contracting States cannot be
presumed to have agreed that those provisions can be enlarged by incorporating
dispute resolution provisions from other treaties negotiated in an entirely different

context.

Moreover, the doubt as to the relevance of the MFN clause in one BIT to the
incorporation of dispute resolution provisions in other agreements is compounded by
the difficulty of applying an objective test to the issue of what is more favorable. The
Claimant argues that it is obviously more favorable for the investor to have a choice
among different dispute resolution mechanisms, and to have the entire dispute resolved
by arbitration as provided in the Bulgaria-Finland BIT, than to be confined to ad hoc
arbitration limited to the quantum of compensation for expropriation. The Tribunal is
inclined to agree with the Claimant that in this particular case, a choice is better than
no choice. But what if one BIT provides for UNCITRAL arbitration and another
provides for ICSID? Which is more favorable?

It is also not evident that when parties have agreed in a particular BIT on a specific

dispute resolution mechanism, as is the case with the Bulgaria~-Cyprus BIT (ad hoc

'4 See footnote 11, supra

* See, for example Article 10(1) of the Bulgaria-Morocco BIT and Article 9(1) of the Bulgaria-Tunisia BIT,

referring to disputes relating to "failure to perform obligations under this Agreement" or obligations "arising
from this Agreement". Article 8 of the Bulgaria-Finland BIT on which Claimant relies is not entirely clear in
that respect.

210.

211.

212.

67

arbitration), their agreement to most-favored nation treatment means that they intended
that, by operation of the MFN clause, their specific agreement on such a dispute
settlement mechanism could be replaced by a totally different dispute resolution
mechanism (ICSID arbitration). It is one thing to add to the treatment provided in one
treaty more favorable treatment provided elsewhere. It is quite another thing to
replace a procedure specifically negotiated by parties with an entirely different

mechanism.

The Claimant has relied on a number of cases that it believes support its interpretation.
It is to be noted, however, that in none of these cases was it held that the dispute
settlement provisions in the basic treaty are replaced in toto by the dispute settlement
provisions contained in the other treaty through operation of the MFN provision in the
basic treaty. Indeed, the Respondent contended that no tribunal has ever done what the

Claimant is requesting this Tribunal to do in the present case.

The decision in Ceskoslovenska Obdchodni Banka, A.S. v. The Slovak Republic!® is not
relevant. The case concerned a clause in a specific contract ("Consolidation
Agreement") between the parties to those proceedings in which it was provided:
"[T]his Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the Czech Republic and the Treaty
on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments between the Czech Republic
and the Slovak Republic dated November 23, 1992." The tribunal in that case
concluded that "by referring to the BIT, the parties intended to incorporate Article 8 of
the BIT [i.e., dispute settlement provisions] by reference into the Consolidation
Agreement, in order to provide for international arbitration as their chosen dispute
settlement method" (Decision at paragraph 55). The tribunal reached that conclusion
on the basis of the negotiating history between the parties to the Consolidation
Agreement. That is a setting which is different from the incorporation of dispute

settlement provisions through an MEN provision in a BIT between two states.

In the Tribunal’s view, the lack of precedent is not surprising. When concluding a
multilateral or bilateral investment treaty with specific dispute resolution provisions,
states cannot be expected to leave those provisions to future (partial) replacement by

different dispute resolution provisions through the operation of an MFN provision,

'© ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Jurisdiction of 24 May 1999, reprinted in 14 ICSID Rev.-F.LL.J. 250

(1999).

213.

214.

215.

68

unless the States have explicitly agreed thereto (as in the case of BITs based on the UK
Model BIT). This matter can also be viewed as forming part of the nowadays
generally accepted principle of the separability (autonomy) of the arbitration clause.
Dispute resolution provisions constitute an agreement on their own, usually with

interrelated provisions.

In the Case Concerning Rights of Nationals of America in Morocco,'” the United
States claimed "privileges with regard to consular jurisdiction" as appearing in treaties
that Morocco had concluded with Spain and the United Kingdom, on the basis of the
MEN provision in the treaty of 1936 between Morocco and the United States
("whatever indulgence, in trade or otherwise, shall be granted to any of the Christian
Powers, the citizens of the United States shall be equally entitled to them"). The
International Court of Justice rejected such reliance by the United States because Spain
and the United Kingdom had terminated those provisions. The United States had
argued that such treaty provisions were intended to be "incorporated permanently by
reference". The International Court of Justice, however, examined the intent of the
Contracting Parties and the "general treaty pattern" of the other treaties concluded by
Morocco. Such a broader examination shows that, in the view of the International
Court of Justice, an MEN provision does not operate as an automatic incorporation by

reference.

In the Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. Case'*, the International Court of Justice specifically
stated: "Without considering the meaning and the scope of the most-favoured-nation
clause ..." (at para. 109). The Court concluded that the MFN provisions in the Iran-
United Kingdom treaties "had no relation whatsoever to jurisdictional matters"

between those two States.

In the Ambatielos Case’’ the International Court of Justice did not reach the issue,
although as a matter of principle it may be that the Court accepted that an MFN
provision can extend to jurisdictional matters. In the ensuing arbitration”, the parties
differed on the question whether "administration of justice" was comprised by the term

"commerce and navigation" appearing in the MFN provision in the Anglo-Greek

152 LC.J. Rep. 176, Judgment of 27 August 1952.

'8 United Kingdom v. Iran, 1952 1.C.J. 39, Judgment on preliminary objection of 22 July 1952.

' Greece v. United Kingdom, 1953 I.C.J. 10, Judgment on the Obligation to Arbitrate, 19 May 1953.
?° ambatielos Claim, Greece v. United Kingdom, XII U.N. R.LA.A. 9, Award of 6 March 1956.

216.

217.

218.

219.

69

Treaty of Commerce and Navigation of 1886. The Commission of Arbitration held
that it did. However, that ruling relates to provisions concerning substantive
protection in the sense of denial of justice in the domestic courts. It does not relate to

the import of dispute resolution provisions of another treaty into the basic treaty.

In Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain’', the question arose whether the
requirement set forth in the dispute settlement provisions in the Argentina-Spain BIT
of 1991 that "domestic courts [be given] the opportunity to deal with a dispute for a
period of eighteen months before it may be submitted to arbitration" was inapplicable
by reliance on the dispute settlement provisions in the Chile-Spain BIT (which does
not impose such condition) through operation of the MFN provision in the Argentina-

Spain BIT. The arbitral tribunal in that case answered the question in the affirmative.

In Maffezini the tribunal relied on Case Concerning Rights of Nationals of America in
Morocco, Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. Case, and Ambatielos Claim. However, the
foregoing review of those decisions shows that they do not provide a conclusive

answer to the question.

The tribunal in Maffezini also noted that in other treaties the MFN provision mentions
"all rights contained in the present Agreement" or "all matters subject to this
Agreement,” in which case, according to the tribunal, "it must be established whether
the omission [in the Argentina-Spain BIT] was intended by the parties [i.e.,
Contracting Parties] or can reasonably be inferred from the practice followed by the
parties in their treatment of foreign investors and their own investors" (Decision,
paragraph 53). The present Tribunal considers such a basis for analysis in principle to
be inappropriate for the question whether dispute resolution provisions in the basic
treaty can be replaced by dispute resolution provisions in another treaty. As explained
above, an arbitration clause must be clear and unambiguous and the reference to an

arbitration clause must be such as to make the clause part of the contract (treaty).

The tribunal in Maffezini further referred to "the fact that the application of the most

favoured nation clause to dispute settlement arrangements in the context of investment

treaties might result in the harmonization and enlargement of the scope of such

arrangements" (Decision at paragraph 62). The present Tribunal fails to see how

220.

221.

70

harmonization of dispute settlement provisions can be achieved by reliance on the
MEN provision. Rather, the "basket of treatment" and "self-adaptation of an MFN
provision" in relation to dispute settlement provisions (as alleged by the Claimant) has
as effect that an investor has the option to pick and choose provisions from the various
BITs. If that were true, a host state which has not specifically agreed thereto can be
confronted with a large number of permutations of dispute settlement provisions from
the various BITs which it has concluded. Such a chaotic situation — actually
counterproductive to harmonization — cannot be the presumed intent of Contracting

Parties.
The Maffezini tribunal was apparently aware of this risk when it added:

[T]here are some important limits that ought to be kept in mind. As
a matter of principle, the beneficiary of the clause should not be
able to override public policy considerations that the [C]ontracting
[P]arties might have envisaged as fundamental conditions for their
acceptance of the agreement in question, particularly if the
beneficiary is a private investor, as will often be the case. The
scope of the clause might thus be narrower than it appears at first

sight. (id.)

The examples given by the tribunal are: (1) exhaustion of local remedies condition;
(2) fork in the road provision; (3) "if the agreement provides for a particular
arbitration forum, such as ICSID, for example, this option cannot be changed by
invoking the clause, in order to refer the dispute to a different system of arbitration";
(4) "if the parties have agreed to a highly institutionalized system of arbitration that
incorporates precise rules of procedure" (referring as example to NAFTA). (Decision

at paragraph 63).

The present Tribunal was puzzled as to what the origin of these "public policy
considerations" is. When asked by the Tribunal at the Hearing, counsel for the
Claimant responded: "They just made it up." [D2.134]. The present Tribunal does not

wish to go that far in its appraisal of the Maffezini decision. Rather, it seems that the

 

2! See footnote 12, supra.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

71

effect of the "public policy considerations" is that they take away much of the breadth

of the preceding observations made by the tribunal in Maffezini.
In Maffezini the tribunal pointed out:

It is clear, in any event, that a distinction has to be made between
the legitimate extension of rights and benefits by means of the
operation of the clause, on the one hand, and disruptive treaty-
shopping that would play havoc with the policy objectives of

underlying specific treaty provisions, on the other hand. (Id.)

The present Tribunal agrees with that observation, albeit that the principle with
multiple exceptions as stated by the tribunal in the Maffezini case should instead be a
different principle with one, single exception: an MEN provision in a basic treaty does
not incorporate by reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth
in another treaty, unless the MFN provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the

Contracting Parties intended to incorporate them.

The decision in Maffezini is perhaps understandable. The case concerned a curious
requirement that during the first 18 months the dispute be tried in the local courts. The
present Tribunal sympathizes with a tribunal that attempts to neutralize such a
provision that is nonsensical from a practical point of view. However, such
exceptional circumstances should not be treated as a statement of general principle
guiding future tribunals in other cases where exceptional circumstances are not

present.

Whilst the Tribunal has not relied on it since the parties have not been in a position to
include it in their pleadings, the Tribunal notes that the foregoing considerations are in

line with the recent award in Salini v. Jordan”’.

In light of the foregoing review, the Tribunal need not examine the decisions in
Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed v. United Mexican States** and Siemens AG v.

The Argentine Republic’’ as both decisions are partially based on the Maffezini

> See footnote 7, supra
23 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award of 29 May 2003, reprinted in Spanish in 19 ICSID Rev.-F.L.L.J. 158

(2004).

4 See footnote 11, supra.

227.

228.

229.

230.

72

decision. Actually, the Siemens decision illustrates the danger caused by the manner in
which the Maffezini decision has approached the question: the principle is retained in
the form of a "string citation" of principle and the exceptions are relegated to a brief
examination, prone to falling soon into oblivion (Decision, at paragraphs 105, 109 and

120).

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the MFN provision of the
Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT cannot be interpreted as providing consent to submit a dispute
under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT to ICSID arbitration and that the Claimant cannot rely
on dispute settlement provisions in other BITs to which Bulgaria is a Contracting Party

in the present case.

D. Misrepresentation

The Respondent alleges that PCL misled it into believing that the Plama Consortium
consisted of Norwegian Oil Company and André & Cie, and never revealed to
Bulgaria (1) that those two companies had decided not to be investors and (2) that
Mr. Vautrin had become the owner of PCL. If it had known these facts, the
Respondent affirms that it would not have approved the purchase of Nova Plama by
PCL. Under Bulgarian law, and, in particular, Article 5(1) of the Bulgarian
Privatization Act, the obtaining of Bulgaria's consent to the investment by such
misrepresentation vitiates Bulgaria's consent so that there is no valid investment under

the ECT and consequently no ICSID jurisdiction under that treaty.

As the Arbitral Tribunal has already stated, in paragraphs 126-130 of this Decision, the
Respondent's allegation of misrepresentation by the Claimant does not deprive the
Tribunal of jurisdiction in this case. Nevertheless, these assertions by the Respondent

are serious charges which, the Tribunal will have to examine on the merits.

In its Reply, the Respondent reserved the right, should the Tribunal sustain its
jurisdiction, to raise an objection relating to whether the Claimant's investment was
made in accordance with law, given the alleged misrepresentation. The Tribunal,
consequently, joins the issue of misrepresentation to the consideration of the merits of

the case.

231.

232.

233.

234.

73

E. Registration by ICSID of the Request for Arbitration

The Respondent argues that ICSID, in registering the Claimant's Request for
Arbitration, did so only with respect to the claims based on the ECT and not those
based on the BIT. Consequently, says the Respondent, the Arbitral Tribunal has
jurisdiction only over the claims under the ECT. Given the Tribunal's decision with
respect to the BIT in section IV.C. supra, this point has become moot. Nevertheless,

the Tribunal makes the following comments.

The Respondent's argument is based on a letter from the Acting Secretary General of

ICSID dated 4 June 2003. That letter states:

.. I have carefully studied the request for arbitration and all of
the related correspondence and documents that we have
received from the Republic of Bulgaria and from Plama
Consortium Limited. I do not find with the required degree of
certainty ("beyond reasonable doubt") that the request is
unregistrable under the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty.
I must therefore register the request under those provisions. The

formal notice of registration will shortly be sent to the parties.

On 19 August 2003, the Acting Secretary General sent to the parties the Notice of
Registration, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. In that Notice of

Registration it is said:

.. I hereby notify you that I have on August 19, 2003, which is
also the date of the dispatch of this Notice, registered in the
Arbitration Register the request for arbitration of Plama
Consortium Limited of December 24, 2002, as supplemented by
its letters to the Centre of February 25, March 10, April 7, May
20, June 12 and 13, 2003.

While ICSID's letter of 4 June 2003 could be read as limited in character, the official
Notice of Registration cannot. It is plain on its face that ICSID registered the
Claimant's Request for Arbitration without any limitation at all. That Notice of

Registration is the official notice referred to in Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

74

It is then up to the Arbitral Tribunal, under Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention, to

determine its own competence.
F. Costs

Each party has requested the Arbitral Tribunal to award it costs for the jurisdictional
phase of the arbitration. Each party submitted its costs in its post-hearing memorials

and commented on the other party's cost submissions.

The Claimant says that the Respondent should bear the costs of the jurisdictional phase
because it failed to cooperate with PCL which offered and provided assistance to
satisfy the Respondent, when it first raised jurisdictional objections, that Mr. Vautrin

owned and controlled PCL.

The Respondent requests costs principally on the basis that as a result of the
complicated structure of the ownership of PCL and the Claimant's unwillingness to
respond fully to the Respondent's requests for information regarding ownership and
control of PCL, the Respondent was obliged to spend considerable time, effort and

money to obtain such information as it could on its own.

The Arbitral Tribunal is sympathetic to the Respondent's position. The Claimant had
access to and/or control over all information relating to its ownership and control. It
was obvious when PCL began this arbitration that questions would arise as to its
ownership and control in light of the provisions of Article 17(1) ECT. The evidence of
Mr. Vautrin's asserted ownership and control of PCL should have been submitted by
the Claimant as part of its case. The fact that it did not and that the structure of
ownership it described in its memorials is so obtuse has raised many questions in the
minds of the Arbitrators which remain to be explored in the second phase of this

arbitration.

This being said, for the time being, the Arbitral Tribunal has decided to defer a
decision on costs to the second phase of the case when it will be in a position to make

an overall judgment about the costs of the arbitration.

240.

75

THE DECISION

In light of the foregoing considerations, the Arbitral Tribunal makes the following

decisions:

A.

As to the jurisdictional issues with respect to the ECT:

(1) Under Article 26 ECT and the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to decide on the merits the Claimant’s claims against the

Respondent for alleged breaches of Part III of the ECT.

(2) Article 17(1) ECT has no relevance to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to
determine the Claimant's claims against the Respondent under Part III of

the ECT.

As to the merits of the Respondent’s case under Article 17(1) ECT:

(1) Article 17(1) requires the Contracting State to exercise its right of denial
and such exercise operates with prospective effect only, as it did in this case

from the Respondent’s exercise by letter of 18 February 2003.

(2) The second limb of Article 17(1) regarding "no substantial business
activities" is met to the Tribunal’s satisfaction in favor of the Respondent;

and

(3) The Tribunal declines for the time being to decide the first limb of Article

17(1) regarding the Claimant’s "ownership" and "control".

The most favored nation provision of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT, read with other
BITs to which Bulgaria is a Contracting Party (in particular the Bulgaria-
Finland BIT), cannot be interpreted as providing the Respondent's consent to
submit the dispute with the Claimant under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT to ICSID
arbitration or entitling the Claimant to rely in the present case on dispute

settlement provisions contained in these other BITs.

76

Dz. The Tribunal rejects the Respondent's application to suspend the proceedings
pending the final outcome of the litigation concerning Dolsamex and

Mr. O'Neill.

E. The arbitration will now move to the second phase, that is, an examination of

the parties' claims on the merits.

F. A decision on costs is deferred to the second phase of the arbitration on the
merits.
Place of Proceeding: Washington, D.C. Date: 8 February 2005
/signed/ /signed/ /signed/

 

Albert Jan van den Berg V.V.Veeder Carl F. Salans

