INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
PNG SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM LTD.

Claimant

and

INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. Gary Born, President of the Tribunal
The Honourable Justice Duncan Kerr, Chev LH, Arbitrator
Dr. Michael Pryles, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer
Mr. Monty Taylor (until 23 March 2015)

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Valeriya Kirsey

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 5 May 2015

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Nish Shetty

Mr. Paul Sandosham

Mr. Matthew Brown

Ms. Joan Lim

Ms. Yvette Anthony

Ms. Vinita Varghese

Clifford Chance Pte. Ltd.

12 Marina Boulevard 25" Floor Tower 3
Marina Bay Financial Centre

Singapore 018982

Dr. Sam Luttrell

Clifford Chance

Level 7, 190 St Georges Terrace
Perth 6000

Australia

Dr. Romesh Weeramantry
Clifford Chance

28" Floor, Jardine House
One Connaught Place
Hong Kong

Mr. Audley Sheppard Q.C.
Clifford Chance LLP

10 Upper Bank Street
London E14 5JJ

United Kingdom

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Alvin Yeo SC

Ms. Joy Tan

Ms. Koh Swee Yen

Ms. Wendy Lin

Ms. Monica WY Chong

Mr. Jared Chen

Mr. Yin Juon Qiang

Mr. Ahmad Firdaus bin Daud
WongPartnership LLP

12 Marina Boulevard

Marina Bay Financial Centre, Tower 3
Level 28

Singapore 018982

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION 1
A. THE PARTIES 1
1.The Claimant. 1
2.The Respondent 1

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
Il. THE PARTIES’ DISPUTE 6
Ill. KEY LEGAL PROVISIONS 10
A. ICSID CONVENTION 10
B. RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE PNG LAW 11
IV. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON JURISDICTION...
A. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION..

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

3.The MEN Objection: Section 37(1) of the IPA Is Not an MEN Clause... 26
B. THE CLAIMANT’S RESPONSE ON JURISDICTION .........:-c:scessessessessesssessesseeeeneeseesees 28
1.Consent 28
2.“Investor” and “Investment” 44
3.MEN Objection 51
C. THE RESPONDENT’S REPLY ON JURISDICTION: 53
1.The State has not consented to ICSID jurisdiction . 53
2.The Claimant is not a private foreign investor that can avail itself of ICSID arbitration. 60
3.MEN Objection 64
D. THE CLAIMANT’S REJOINDER ON JURISDICTION .........::scecceesesessesssesseseeeeseenes 64
1.Consent 65
2.“Investor” and “Investment” 68
3.MFN 70
E. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS AT THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION............0-00+5 71
1.The Respondent’s Submissions 71

2.The Claimant’s Submissions 81

iii

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Award

V. THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS 92

A.PRINCIPLES GOVERNING INTERPRETATION OF DOMESTIC
INVESTMENT LEGISLATION: 95

B. INTERPRETATION OF SECTION 39 OF THE IPA AND SECTION 2 OF THE
IDCA 103
1.Textual Interpretation 104
2.Effet Utile 112
3.Context and Purpose 117
4 Legislative History of the IPA and the IDCA..w....o cece eee neeeneneeeet te teteeeeeneees 120
5.Investment Promotion Material 131
VI. COSTS 136
A. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS ..0....scsscssesssessesessesseesessessessesesesseneesseseenese 136
1.The Respondent’s Submission On CoSts.........c:ccccceeseseeseeeeseeseseeeseesseeeseesseeseeeeeeenees 136
2.The Claimant’s Submission on Cost .........c:secsecsessessesseessesesseeseeseeseesessesssssensenseneeseese 139
3.The Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs ........c.ccsseeseeseseeseseeseseeeseeneseeteeeeeeeaees 141
4.The Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs.......c..cccscssesseeseseseeeeeeeeseeseneeeneneeeeee 143
B. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON COSTS .......csessessesssessessesseeseeseeseesessnssnsenseneenseaeeneese 145
VII. AWARD 152

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Objections to Jurisdiction

Response on Jurisdiction

Reply on Jurisdiction

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
BHP
BHPB

Dolzer Report

Griffin Report

Griffin II Report

IDCA
IPA
M&A

Mine
Ninth Supplemental
Agreement Act

OTML

PNG Companies Act
PNGSDP

Program Rules

Tenth Supplemental Act

Webb Report

Webb II Report

Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction under Rule 41(1) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, dated 15 October 2014

Claimant’s Response to State’s Objections on Jurisdiction, dated 29 October
2014

Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Response to Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1), dated 7 November 2014

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, dated 14 November 2014
BHP Minerals Holdings Pty Ltd.
BHP Billiton Ltd.

Expert Opinion of Professor Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, submitted with the
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

Expert Report of Mr. John Griffin QC, submitted with the Respondent’s
Objections to Jurisdiction

Reply Expert Report by Mr. John Griffin QC, submitted with the
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction

PNG Investment Disputes Convention Act 1978
PNG Investment Promotion Act 1992

Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Claimant, PNGSDP.

Ok Tedi Mine, open pit copper and gold mine in the Western Province of
Papua New Guinea

Mining (Ok Tedi Mine Continuation Ninth Supplemental Agreement) Act
2001

Ok Tedi Mining Limited

PNG Companies Act 1997

PNG Sustainable Development Ltd., or the Claimant

The “New Rules of PNGSDP,” Schedule to the M&A
Mining (Ok Tedi Tenth Supplemental Agreement) Act 2013

Expert Opinion of Mr. Ron Webb SC, submitted with the Claimant’s
Response on Jurisdiction

Second Expert Opinion of Mr. Ron Webb SC, submitted with the Claimant’s
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

INTRODUCTION

This Award sets out the Tribunal’s reasons and the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s

Objections to Jurisdiction under Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

A. The Parties
1. The Claimant

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd., the Claimant (also referred to as
“PNGSDP”), is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under the laws of
Singapore. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Nish Shetty, Mr. Paul
Sandosham, Ms. Joan Lim, Mr. Matthew Brown, Ms. Yvette Anthony and Ms. Vinita
Varghese of Clifford Chance Pte. Ltd., Mr. Audley Sheppard of Clifford Chance LLP, and
Dr. Romesh Weeramantry and Dr. Sam Luttrell of Clifford Chance. Professor James
Crawford AC SC and Mr. Cameron Miles also appeared on behalf of the Claimant at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction on 29-30 November 2014.

2. The Respondent
The Independent State of Papua New Guinea, the Respondent (also referred to as “PNG”),
is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Alvin Yeo SC, Ms. Joy Tan, Ms. Swee Yen Koh,
Ms. Wendy Lin, Mr. Jared Chen, Mr. Yin Juon Qiang, Ms. Monica WY Chong, and Mr.
Ahmad Firdaus bin Daud of WongPartnership LLP.

B. Procedural History

On 17 October 2013, the Claimant filed a request for arbitration dated 10 October 2013
against the Respondent (the “Request for Arbitration”) with the International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”).

On 20 December 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimant’s letters of 8 November, 22 November, and

10 December 2013, in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and so notified

Page | of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

the Parties. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Articles 37

to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

On 20 February 2014, the Claimant informed ICSID that it opted for the formula provided
by Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention for the method of constituting the arbitral

tribunal.

In the result, the Tribunal was composed of Mr. Gary Born, a national of the United States
of the America, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Dr. Michael Pryles, a
national of Australia, appointed by the Claimant; and the Honourable Justice Duncan Kerr,

Chev LH, a national of Australia, appointed by the Respondent.

On 17 June 2014, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Mr. Monty Taylor, ICSID Legal Counsel,
was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Ms. Valeriya Kirsey was designated
to serve as the Assistant to the Tribunal on 23 June 2014. On 24 March 2015, Ms.
Geraldine Fischer, ICSID Legal Counsel, replaced Mr. Monty Taylor as Secretary of the

Tribunal.

The first session of the Tribunal was held by telephone conference-call on 25 July 2014.

The Tribunal subsequently issued its Procedural Order No. 1 on 7 August 2014.

In its Procedural Order No. 1, issued after consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal
decided that the question of jurisdiction would be determined as a preliminary issue, and

the hearing on jurisdiction would take place over two days prior to 31 December 2014.!

' See Procedural Order No. 1, dated 7 August 2014, at para. 16.

Page 2 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

On 11 September 2014, after consulting with the Parties, the Tribunal established that the
hearing on jurisdiction would take place in Singapore on 29-30 November 2014, and set
out a proposed timetable for the exchange of submissions on jurisdiction, which it

subsequently confirmed.

A hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections Under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules took place at Maxwell Chambers in Singapore on 10 October 2014. (The

Tribunal’s Decision on those objections was issued to the Parties on 28 October 2014.)

On 15 October 2014, the Respondent filed its Objections to Jurisdiction under ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(1) (“Objections to Jurisdiction”) with the accompanying Expert
Opinion of Professor Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, Expert Report of Mr. John Griffin QC and

exhibits.

On 29 October 2014,” the Claimant submitted its Response to State’s Objections on
Jurisdiction (“Response on Jurisdiction”) with the accompanying Expert Report of Mr. Ron

‘Webb QC and exhibits.

On 7 November 2014, the Respondent filed its Reply to the Claimant’s Response to the
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) (“Reply on
Jurisdiction”) with the accompanying Second Witness Statement of Mr. Daniel

Rolpagarea, the Reply Expert Report of Mr. John A. Griffin QC and exhibits.

On 14 November 2014, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction with the

accompanying Second Expert Report of Mr. Ron Webb SC and exhibits.

On 26 November 2014, as agreed by the Parties, the President of the Tribunal, acting on
behalf of the Tribunal, held the pre-hearing organizational meeting with the Parties. Later
on the same day, Mr. Monty Taylor circulated a copy of the minutes of the meeting to all

participants.

2 More precisely, the Claimant filed its submission at 1:51 am Singapore time on 30 October 2014.

Page 3 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

On 27 November 2014, the Tribunal confirmed the timetable and time allocation for the

two days of the hearing on jurisdiction to be held on 29 and 30 November 2014.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the hearing on jurisdiction took place at
Maxwell Chambers in Singapore on 29-30 November 2014. In addition to all the Members
of the Tribunal, the Acting Secretary of the Tribunal (Ms. Geraldine Fischer), the Tribunal

Assistant and the court reporters, attending the hearing were:

For the Claimant:

Counsel
Professor James Crawford AC SC
Mr. Cameron Miles

Mr. Nish Shetty Clifford Chance
Mr. Paul Sandosham Clifford Chance
Dr. Romesh Weeramantry —_ Clifford Chance
Dr. Sam Luttrell Clifford Chance
Mr. Mathew Brown Clifford Chance
Ms. Yvette Anthony Clifford Chance
Ms. Vinita Varghese Clifford Chance
Parties

Mr. Andrew Lind Gadens Lawyers

For the Respondent:

Counsel

Mr. Alvin Yeo SC WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Joy Tan WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Koh Swee Yen WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Wendy Lin WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Monica WY Chong WongPartnership LLP
Mr. Jared Chen WongPartnership LLP

Page 4 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Award

A verbatim transcript of the oral hearing was prepared by Merrill Corporation.> The
transcript was issued to all participants on 29 and 30 November 2014 for Day | and Day 2

(respectively) of the hearing.

On 10 December 2014, the Respondent and the Claimant submitted their respective Lists
of References referred to at the close of the hearing on jurisdiction. The Claimant also
provided a copy of the extract from Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law

referred to at the hearing.

On 15 December 2014, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal with comments on the
Respondent’s Chronology of Amendments Made to the Claimant’s M&A distributed by the

Respondent’s counsel at the hearing on jurisdiction.

On 16 December 2014, Mr. Monty Taylor of ICSID sent the audio recording of the hearing

on jurisdiction to the Members of the Tribunal, the Tribunal Assistant and the Parties.

On 18 December 2014, Merrill Corporation circulated an errata sheet pertaining to the

transcripts of the hearing on jurisdiction.

On 21 January 2015, the Tribunal rendered its Decision on the Claimant’s Request for

Provisional Measures.

On 5 February 2015, the Tribunal invited the Parties to inform the Tribunal, by no later
than 12 February 2015, of their positions with respect to the form of the costs submissions

and their length.

On 12 February 2015, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement to exchange
submissions on costs with accompanying costs statements on 5 March 2015 (at 6:00 pm)
and reply submissions on 13 March 2015 (at 6:00 pm). The Parties confirmed that they

had agreed on a 5-page limit for each submission (excluding costs statements).

3 The references to the daily transcript (“DT”) will be in the following format: DT(Dayl).{page]-[line]. or
DT(Day2).[page]. [line].

Page 5 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

28.

29.

IL.

30.

31.

32.

Award

On 5 March 2015, the Parties filed their respective Submissions on Costs with the

accompanying Costs Statements and authorities.

On 13 March 2015, the Parties filed their Reply Costs Submissions with the accompanying

legal authorities.

THE PARTIES’ DISPUTE

This proceeding concerns the Claimant’s alleged investment in an open pit copper and gold
mine in the Star Mountains of the Western Province of PNG (the “Ok Tedi mine”). As set
out in the Request for Arbitration, PNGSDP owns a majority shareholding (i.e., 63.4146%)
in Ok Tedi Mining Ltd. (“OTML”), a PNG-incorporated company.* OTML’s rights to the
Ok Tedi mine are set out in Special Mining Lease No. | (the “Special Mining Lease”). The
Special Mining Lease is the primary asset of OTML.°

The Request for Arbitration provides details on the history of the Ok Tedi mine and on
how the Claimant was incorporated and came to own its shares in OTML.° These facts are

summarised below.

In 2001, BHP Minerals Holdings Pty Ltd. (“BHP,” a subsidiary of BHP Billiton Ltd.
(“BHP Billiton”) (the former shareholder and operator of OTML)) transferred all of its
ordinary shares in OTML to the Claimant.’ This transfer was intended to entrust an
independent, foreign-registered company with the management of the development of the
Ok Tedi mine (through OTML) and the use of its earnings from the mine to promote
sustainable development within PNG and to advance the general welfare of the people of
PNG, particularly those of the Western Province where the Ok Tedi mine is located.® In

connection with the transfer, a charge was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML

+ Request for Arbitration, at para. 16.

> Request for Arbitration,
© Request for Arbitration,
7 Request for Arbitration,

 

8 Request for Arbitration, at para. 13.

Page 6 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

33.

34.

35.

36.

Award

(the “Charge”), by way of a Security Deed dated 7 February 2002 (the “Security Deed”)
and a Security Trust Deed dated 7 February 2002 (the “Security Trust Deed”), and a
mortgage was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML (the “Mortgage”), by way of
an Equitable Mortgage of Shares dated 7 February 2002 (the “Equitable Mortgage of
Shares”).?

Following a selective share buyback in January 2011, the Claimant and the Respondent

have respectively held 63.4146% and 36.5853% of issued ordinary shares in OTML.!?

The Claimant was incorporated in Singapore on 20 October 2001.!! It is a company limited
by guarantee (as distinguished from share capital) and governed by its Memorandum and
Articles of Association (the “Memorandum and Articles of Association” or “M&A”).!”
The M&A annex a set of Program Rules (the “Program Rules”) which deal principally with
how earnings are to be applied for the purposes of fund management, transparency and

accountability. !

Since its establishment in 2001, the Claimant has financed and overseen several
development and environmental projects. It has financed these projects, and carried out
the functions for which it was established, by taking its annual dividends from OTML and
(in accordance with the Program Rules) putting them into low-risk investments in
international markets to establish two funds: a short-term fund (the “Development Fund”)

and a Long Term Fund (the “LTF”).!*

On 13 September 2013, the Respondent adopted the Mining (Ok Tedi Tenth Supplemental
Agreement) Act 2013 (the “Tenth Supplemental Act”), along with the Mining (Ok Tedi

Mine Continuation) (Ninth Supplemental Agreement) (Amendment) Act 2013.'5

° Request for Arbitration, at para. 14.
10 Request for Arbitration, at para. 15.
'! Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.
!? Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.
'3 Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.
'4 Request for Arbitration, at para. 20.
'S Request for Arbitration, at para. 35.

Page 7 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

According to the Claimant, among other things, the Tenth Supplemental Act purports to
cancel the shares held by the Claimant in OTML.'° Section 4 provides, in the relevant part,

as follows:

4. Shareholders of OTML
(1) On the coming into operation of this Act —

(a) all ordinary shares held by PNGSDP in the share capital of
OTML shall be cancelled and cease to exist; and

(b) 122,200,000 new, fully paid ordinary shares in the share
capital of OTML free of any encumbrance, charge or equitable
interest shall be issued to the State.!

37. Sections 4(5) and 4(6) of the Tenth Supplemental Act provide:

(5) All references to PNGSDP in the constitution of OTML and in
the Fifth Restated Shareholders Agreement shall, on and from the
coming into operation of this Act, be read and construed as a
reference to the State.

(6) On and from the coming into operation of this Act, the Charge
is void and of no legal effect and shall not create any interest of any
nature whatsoever in any share of OTML.!*

38. Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental Act provides:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Act, the State has
all necessary powers to restructure PNGSDP and its operations to
ensure that PNGSDP applies its funds for the exclusive benefit of
the people of the Western Province.'?

'6 Request for Arbitration, at para. 36.
"7 Request for Arbitration, at para. 36.
'8 Request for Arbitration, at para. 39.
'° Request for Arbitration, at para. 40.

Page 8 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

39.

40.

Al.

Award

According to the Claimant, the Respondent, “through its instrumentalities and entities for
which it is responsible, has mounted a concerted campaign against the Claimant and its

investments, culminating in the cancellation of the Claimant’s shares in OTML.”?°

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant claims that the enactment of the Tenth
Supplemental Act amounts to a breach of the prohibition against unlawful expropriation,”!
and the Respondent has not yet made “any proposal to compensate the Claimant adequately

"22 The Claimant further claims

in respect of the effects of the Tenth Supplemental Act.’
that the conduct of the Respondent has amounted to violations of other guarantees and
standards of treatment that must be accorded by the Respondent to foreign investors,
including: (i) the fair and equitable treatment standard; (ii) guarantee of free repatriation of
returns on investments; (iii) specific undertakings given to the Claimant (i.e., the umbrella
clause); (iv) the full protection and security standard; (v) the rule against arbitrary,
discriminatory or unreasonable measures; (vi) national treatment guarantee; and (vii) the

rule of free entry and sojourn of personnel.”

The Claimant argues that each of the jurisdictional requirements set forth in Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention is satisfied in this case.”* In particular, the Claimant argues that the

“consent in writing” requirement of Article 25 “was satisfied”?> because:

a. “[e]ither on its own, or when read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA, Section
39 of the IPA constitutes a standing offer by the Respondent to arbitrate investment

disputes at ICSID;”?6 and

2° Request for Arbitration, at para. 24.
2! Request for Arbitration, at para. 54.
2 Request for Arbitration, at para. 38.
3 Request for Arbitration, at para. 55.
>4 Request for Arbitration, at paras. 61, ef seq.
°5 Request for Arbitration, at para. 69.
?6 Request for Arbitration, at para. 67.

Page 9 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

b. the Claimant “has already accepted the standing offer made by the Respondent in
Section 39 of the IPA (and Section 2 of the IDCA) to refer the dispute that has arisen

out of the Claimant’s investments to the jurisdiction of ICSID.”?”

Ill. KEY LEGAL PROVISIONS

A. ICSID Convention

42. The relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention that are at issue at this stage of the present

case are set forth below.
43. Article 41 of the Convention reads:

qd) The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is
not within the jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons
is not within the competence of the Tribunal, shall be
considered by the Tribunal which shall determine whether to
deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits
of the dispute.

44. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides in relevant parts:

qd) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a
Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency
of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State)
and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties
to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party may
withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

27 Request for Arbitration, at para. 68. See also Letter to the Prime Minister of PNG from the Chairman of the Claimant
(26 September 2013), Exhibit CE-15.

Page 10 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration as
well as on the date on which the request was
registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or
paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any
person who on either date also had the nationality of
the Contracting State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and
any juridical person which had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and
which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention.

(3)...

(4) Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification,
acceptance or approval of this Convention or at any time
thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes
which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary-General shall
forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting States.
Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by
paragraph (1).

B. Relevant Provisions of the PNG Law
The relevant provisions of the PNG law that are at issue at the present stage of this case are
summarized below.

Article 39 of the IPA reads:

39. INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES.

The Investment Disputes Convention Act 1978, implementing the
International Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

Page 11 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

47.

48.

IV.

49.

Award

between States and Nationals of Other States, applies, according to
its terms, to disputes arising out of foreign investment.

Article 2 of the IDCA reads:

2. CLASSES OF DISPUTES WHICH MAY BE REFERRED TO
THE JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE.

A dispute shall not be referred to the Centre unless the dispute is
fundamental to the investment itself.

Article 37(1) of the IPA reads:

37. INVESTMENT GUARANTEES.

(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to a foreign investor
except where treatment more favourable to the foreign investor is
accorded under any bilateral or multilateral agreement to which the
State is a party.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON JURISDICTION

A. The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

In its Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent advances a number of arguments as to
why this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to decide the Parties’ dispute. These
objections have three principal themes: (a) the Respondent has not given its consent in
writing to refer the dispute to ICSID; (b) the Claimant does not satisfy the requirements of
a “foreign investor” and a “foreign investment” within the meaning of the IPA and the
ICSID Convention (the objections under (a) and (b) together “Article 25(1)
Objections”)”*; and (c) Article 37 of the IPA is not an MEN clause, and therefore the

Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in respect of the claims and reliefs as set out in

°8 See, e.g., Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 2-3.

Page 12 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

50.

51.

2° See, e.g., Objectio
*° Objections to Juris

Award

paragraphs 73(ii) to 73(x) of the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration (the “MFN
Objection”).”

With regard to the Article 25(1) Objections, the Respondent states that “[a]s each of these
gateway elements in Article 25(1) must exist to trigger ICSID’s jurisdiction, the
establishment of any of those grounds would per se be sufficient to bring these proceedings

to an end.”*

1. The State Has Not Consented to Submit to ICSID Jurisdiction

The Respondent disagrees with the Claimant’s case on consent as set out in paragraphs 67-

68 of the Request for Arbitration.*! The Respondent argues that:

a. “whether under PNG or international law (both of which are relevant, given the
‘hybrid’ nature of the provisions, which are rooted in the national legal order, but have
effects extending out on to the international plane), it is clear that neither Section 39
nor Section 2 provides the ‘consent in writing’ necessary for ICSID’s jurisdiction over

the matter;”?? and

 
 

s to Jurisdiction, at para. 5.
jiction, at para. 4.

 

+! In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant states that:

Either on its own, or when read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA.
Section 39 of the IPA constitutes a standing offer by the [State] to arbitrate
investment disputes at ICSID. There is nothing in either provision to posit (or
even suggest) any condition to the [State’s] consent to ICSID arbitration, and
certainly not any requirement that a separate ad hoc agreement to arbitrate be
entered into with the investor. Notably, neither [provision] contains any
equivalent of the words ‘if it so provides’ that caused the ICSID tribunals in
Conoco Phillips v Venezuela and Cemex v Venezuela to find that Article 22 of the
Venezuelan Investment Law did not constitute a standing offer to arbitrate. The
Claimant’s case is more akin to that which led the ICSID tribunal in SPP v Egypt
to make a positive finding on jurisdiction. Indeed, from a mere comparison in the
IPA and the IDCA, it is plain that the Claimants case on jurisdiction is markedly
stronger than that which was successfully made by the claimant in SPP. The
Claimant has already accepted the standing offer made by the [State] in Section
39 of the IPA (and Section 2 of the IDCA) to refer the dispute that has arisen out
of the Claimant’s investments to the jurisdiction of ICSID.

Request for Arbitration, at paras. 67-68 (emphasis added).

* Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 23.

Page 13 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

b. “regardless of whether a literal, contextual or purposive interpretation is taken of
Section 39 and Section 2, no ‘consent in writing’ necessary for ICSID’s jurisdiction

over the matter may be construed from either Section 39 or Section 2.”

a) Textual (or literal) interpretation of Section 39 and Section 2

52. First, the Respondent contends that the text of Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the
IDCA “leave no doubt that the State has not consented to ICSID arbitration.”*+ According
to the Respondent, a literal interpretation of the IPA and IDCA is warranted under both
PNG law and international law, and requires the Tribunal “to look at the grammatical and
ordinary meaning of the words,” unless that analysis leads to “absurdity, or any repugnance

or inconsistency” (PNG law), or where the text is not clear (international law).*°

53. Turning to the text of Section 39 of the IPA, the Respondent argues that the provision
simply refers to the IDCA and “confirms that the IDCA continues to apply as it stood,

‘according to its terms’.”*© According to the Respondent:

From the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words used in
Section 39, it seeks to confirm the State’s intention to abide by the
IDCA which applies ‘according to its terms’, hence clarifying that
the IDCA extends to ‘disputes arising out of foreign investment’.
The wording of Section 39 is clear, and it does not create any new
obligations for the State. This reading does not give rise to any
absurdity, repugnance or inconsistency, and should therefore be
strictly adhered to.*”

54. The Respondent then draws a parallel with Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment law

and observes that at least 6 awards rendered by ICSID tribunals (the “Venezuela Cases”?*)

 

8 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 24.

* Objections to Jurisdiction, at Heading (i) on p. 9.

+5 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 28.

%© Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 29. (citing Dolzer Report at paras. 61-63).

57 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 29.

38 Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.ARB/08/3, Award, 2
August 2011 (“Brandes v. Venezuela”), Exhibit RL-47, CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II
Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30
December 2010 (“CEMEX v. Venezuela”), Exhibit CA-2; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca
B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/30,

Page 14 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

have “unanimously found” that this provision of assertedly similar national investment
legislation contained no consent in writing.*? According to the Respondent, Section 39

“presents an even less compelling case of ‘consent in writing’” than the Venezuelan
Investment law provision, because “it does not directly refer to the ICSID Convention (it
refers only to the IDCA) and contains no mandatory language (c.f. ‘shall be submitted to

international arbitration’ in Art 22 Venezuelan Law).

55. Further, the Respondent rejects the Claimant’s assertion that its case on consent based on
Section 39 “is akin to (or, in fact, ‘stronger’ than) that in SPP v Egypt case,”*! for the

following reasons:

a. the “mandatory and hierarchic sequence of dispute settlement procedures’ in Art 8

Egypt Law is absent in Section 39;

b. unlike the Egyptian investment law provision, the IDCA does not refer to the ICSID

Convention;*?

c. the “key plank of the reasoning in SPP v Egypt was based upon the application of the

effet utile principle,”** which “is now no longer taken into account in interpreting a

Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits, 3 September 2013, (“ConocoPhillips v. Venezuela”), Exhibit CA-1; Mobil
Corporation, Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos
Holdings, Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., and Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No ARB/07/27, Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010 (“Mobil v. Venezuela”), Exhibit
RL-4; OPIC Karimun Corporation v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14, Award, 28
May 2013,Exhibit RL-50; Tidewater Inc., Tidewater Investment SRL, Tidewater Caribe, C.A., Twenty Grand
Offshore,L.L.C., Point Marine, L.L.C., Twenty Grand Marine Service, L.L.C., Jackson Marine, L.L.C. and Zapata
Gulf Marine Operators, L.L.C. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.ARB/10/5, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 8 February 2013 (“Tidewater v. Venezuela”), Exhibit RL-52.

» See Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 30-31.

 

jiction, at para. 33.

* Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 34.

43 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 34. The Respondent cites to the Inceysa v. El Salvador award as authority
for the proposition that national investment legislation does not constitute consent in writing where it does not
“mention expressly the jurisdiction of ICSID....” Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 35 (citing Inceysa Vallisoletana,
S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, Exhibit RL-48).

+4 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 36.

Page 15 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

state’s unilateral declarations, including its domestic legislation,” as opposed to

treaties;*>

d. in any event, such legislative provisions as Section 39 “could serve useful purposes,
e.g., to recall and confirm the state’s commitments under ICSID or to ‘clear the way
for the State to conclude specific types of dispute resolution agreement, without internal
issues such as ultra vires arising, and as such ... [provide] a degree of certainty for

investors’.”*°

56. The Respondent submits that the Tribunal’s finding of consent must be guided by the

principles that a State’s consent in writing must be “‘clear and unambiguous’ in order to
confer jurisdiction on an international tribunal” and “a state’s unilateral assumption of
obligations is ‘not lightly to be presumed’, especially considering that a sovereign state by
consenting to arbitration under ICSID is submitting itself to an external adjudicative
body.”47 The Respondent concludes that there is no consent to arbitrate on a literal

interpretation of the text of Section 39.**

57. Turning to the text of Section 2 of the IDCA, the Respondent submits that “[nJothing in
the text of Section 2 compels the State to submit investment disputes (which the investors
wish to so refer) to ICSID arbitration;” to the contrary, Section 2 is assertedly phrased in
“purely negative terms” and “contains the opposite of an offer to arbitrate,” because “it
precludes the option of arbitration for disputes which are not ‘fundamental to the

investment’.

45 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 37. On this point, the Respondent cites to Mobil v. Venezuela and CEMEX v.
Venezuela. See Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 37-38 (citing Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 118-119, Exhibit RL-
4; and CEMEX v. Venezuela, at paras. 110-112, Exhibit CA-2).

sdiction, at para. 39.

 

 

iction, at para. 42.
* Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 43. The Respondent adds that “[a]s far as disputes fundamental to the investment
are concerned, Section 2 is silent, and neither grants nor denies the option to arbitrate under ICSID.” Objections to
Jurisdiction, at para. 43.

Page 16 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

58.

59.

60.

Award

Quoting from the transcript of the 10 October 2014 hearing on the Respondent’s Rule 41(5)
Application, the Respondent notes that the Claimant “itself ‘readily acknowledges’ that
‘neither the IDCA generally nor Section 2 specifically, constitutes consent of the [State]
per se’,” and that the Claimant acknowledged that it did not suggest that “the IDCA
somehow represents the consent that is necessary ....*° According to the Respondent, it
follows from those statements that “the Claimant is left to argue that Section 39 on its
own represented the necessary ‘consent’ to ICSID arbitration.”*!

The Respondent argues that reading the PNG’s consent into Section 39 “would lead to
absurd results,” including: (i) the Respondent being held to have effectively “extend[ed]
an offer to arbitrate under ICSID, even to investors who are ineligible under the ICSID

Convention,” which the Respondent “could not ... have intended;”**

(ii) inconsistency with
the limitations on ICSID jurisdiction set forth in the Japan-PNG BIT;* and (iii) “[i]nsofar
as the Claimant has had to rely on ‘according to its terms’ in Section 39 to circumscribe
the availability of arbitration under the ICSID Convention to Contracting States to the
ICSID Convention (to seek to ‘cure’ the absurdity that would otherwise result from its
construction of Section 39), such resort only served to illustrate the limiting effect of those
words, which must similarly apply to the requirement of consent under Article 25(1)

(which is absent in Section 39).”*4

b) Contextual interpretation of Section 39 and Section 2

Second, the Respondent argues that the context of Section 39 and Section 2 confirm that

the Respondent has not consented to ICSID arbitration.*>

5° Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 44.

5! Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 44.

*2 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 45(a).

53 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 45(b).

54 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 45(c).

55 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at Heading (ii) on p. 17, paras. 47, ef seq.

Page 17 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

61.

62.

°© Objections to Ju

Award

For Section 39 of the IPA, the Respondent contends that “the scheme of the IPA and

location of Section 39 within it” show that there is no consent to ICSID arbitration by the

Respondent.*® The contextual elements relied upon by the Respondent include:

a. The IPA’s purposes listed in Section 1, Part 1 of the IPA — which do not include creation

of new jurisdictional rights for foreign investors.

b. Unlike Sections 37 and 38 of the IPA, which use the word “shall” to indicate “the

creation of new rights for foreign investors,”*” “[s]uch wording is noticeably absent in

Section 39;” rather, the wording of Section 39 indicates that “no additional right, e.g.,

consent to arbitration, was conferred by way of Section 39.58

c. The provisions of the Respondent’s BITs concluded prior to and around the time the

IPA was enacted* contain language that stands “in stark contrast with the wording of

Section 39” and “clearly and unequivocally contain[] ‘consent in writing’ to ICSID

arbitration;”*! these provisions show that the Respondent “clearly knows how to

express its consent (if any) clearly and unambiguously.”®* This was not done in the

IPA — which assertedly indicates that the “consent in writing” was “deliberately not

provided.”°?

For Section 2 of the IDCA, the Respondent contends that the “scheme of the IDCA”

similarly confirms that Section 2 did not contain the Respondent’s “consent in writing.”

The Respondent relies on the following arguments:

 

jiction, at para. 47.

°7 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 48-51.

°8 Objections to Juris
°° The Respondent « cites to the UK-PNG BIT, the PNG-PRC BIT and the Japan-PNG BIT.
Jurisdiction, at par:
© Objections to Ju
6! Objections to Ju
© Objections to Juris

  

iction, at para. 52.

ction, at para. 56.

6 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 56.
See Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 57 et seq.

Page 18 of 153

64

See Objections to

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

a. The IDCA’s title indicates that the Act “was meant simply ‘to implement the [ICSID

Convention]’,” which Convention in turn requires the “consent in writing” under its

Article 25(1).®

b. The definition of the term “disputes” used in Section 2 also supposedly shows that

Section 2 “remains subject to the ‘consent in writing’ requirement in Article 25(1).”°°

c) Purposive interpretation of Section 39 and Section 2

63. Third, the Respondent argues that the purposive interpretation of Section 39 and Section 2

confirms that the Respondent has not consented to ICSID jurisdiction.”
64. For the IPA, the Respondent relies on the following arguments:

a. The purposes of the IPA set forth in the Act do not include creation of “new

jurisdictional rights for ‘foreign investors’, beyond that available under the IDCA.”°*

b. The Hansard for the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991 (the “IPA Bill
Hansard”) is “silent on any intention to accord new jurisdictional rights in respect of

ICSID arbitration to foreign investors” under the IPA.”

65. For the IDCA, the Respondent states that its purpose “is to give effect to the ICSID

70

Convention in the domestic legal order of the State,”’” and relies on:

a. the record of the Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978;7!

6 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 58.

6 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 59.

67 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 60.

8 Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 61-62.

© Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 63. See also Second Reading of the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991,
at pp. 45-46, Exhibit RE-16; Griffin Report, at para. 39.

7 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 64.

7! See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 64. The Respondent quotes the statements of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade, Mr. Ebia Olewale, from the record of the Second Reading, which, in the relevant part, read: “Papua New
Guinea requires that [ICSID] may have jurisdiction only over those disputes which are fundamental to the
investment itself. ... Jurisdiction is ceded to the centre ... provided that consent in writing has been given.”
Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 64; Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978, Exhibit RE-15.

 

 

Page 19 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

66.

Award

the Respondent’s notification filed on 14 September 1978 (the “1978 Notification”)

informing ICSID and Contracting Parties that the Respondent “wished to exclude

certain types of disputes from ICSID’s jurisdiction” and stating that PNG “will only

consider submitting those disputes to the Centre which are fundamental to the
9972:

investment itself;”’~ in this regard, the Respondent maintains that the 1978 Notification

“did not contain any consent to arbitrate any class of dispute;””? and

the function of Section 2 —i.e., to serve “as a reflection of the 1978 Notification on the
domestic plane,” which implies that Section 2 “cannot be construed as itself providing

any such consent.””4

In summary, the Respondent’s submissions to the Tribunal are summarized as follows:

a. Section 2, which is subject to Article 25(1), clearly requires a
further ‘consent in writing’, and does not constitute consent per se
— this is readily conceded by the Claimant...;

b. Section 39, which merely states that the IDCA ‘applies,
according to its terms’, refers back to the IDCA, and is therefore
also subject to the same requirement;

c. While the phrase ‘according to its terms’ is akin to ‘according to
the terms of the respective treaty or agreement, if it so provides’ in
Art 22 Venezuelan Law (which has been found not to constitute
consent), Section 39 presents an even less compelling case for
‘consent’ as Section 39 does not contain any mandatory language
and does not directly refer to the ICSID Convention (as opposed to
the IDCA);

d. Section 39 cannot be compared with Art 8 Egypt Law, which
contained mandatory and hierarchic sequence of dispute settlement
procedures and express reference to arbitration under ICSID, all of

7 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 65; Notification by Papua New Guinea Concerning Classes of Disputes
Considered Suitable or Unsuitable for Submission to ICSID (14 Sept. 1978), Exhibit RL-15.

73 Objections to Juris

 

jiction, at paras. 66-67.

7 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 68.

Page 20 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

67.

68.

Award

which are absent in Section 39 (in any event, the reasoning in SPP
v Egypt is less persuasive than the reasoning in the Venezuelan cases
interpreting Art 22 Venezuelan Law, and not consonant with current
construction of international obligations);

e. The context and purpose of Section 39 (and Section 2) support the
literal interpretation that Section 39 cannot constitute consent to
arbitrate under ICSID;

f. Section 39 (whether on its own, or when read in conjunction with
Section 2) therefore does not constitute a standing offer by the State
to arbitrate disputes before ICSID; and

g. There was therefore no ‘standing offer’ for the Claimant to
accept.”°

2. The Claimant Is Not a Private Investor That Can Avail Itself of ICSID
Jurisdiction

 

The second argument put forward by the Respondent is that, even if the Claimant
overcomes the “consent in writing” hurdle, the Claimant has failed “to show that it is a
foreign investor protected under the ICSID Convention,” and that “there is a dispute arising

out of a foreign investment both under the IPA and the ICSID Convention.””°

a) The Claimant is not a “foreign investor” and its assets are not
“foreign investment(s)” as defined in the IPA
The Respondent argues that, whether on literal or purposive interpretation of the definitions
of “foreign investor” and “foreign investment” in Section 3 of the IPA, the Claimant and
its assets “clearly fall outside” these definitions.”’ Because the Claimant has not given any
consideration’® for the shares in OTML received from BHP, the Claimant neither “‘ma/dJe

or propose[d] to make an investment” in PNG, nor ‘stimulated’ foreign investment into

75 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 70.

 

78 The Respondent relies on Mr. Griffin QC’s report to support this argument. See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para.
77; Griffin Report, at paras. 80-83.

Page 21 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

PNG, “via its receipt of the Gifted Shares (which were gifted to it to be held and used solely
for the benefit of the People [of PNG]).””

69. The Respondent adds that the issuance of certificates to the Claimant under the PNG
Companies Act and Section 25 of the IPA does not address “the issue of whether the
Claimant is a ‘foreign investor’ or has made any ‘foreign investment’ in PNG.”®°
According to Mr. Griffin QC, these certificates alone “are not conclusive evidence ... as to

the Claimant’s (or any other entity’s) status as a ‘foreign investor’ under the 1992 IPA.”*!

b) The Claimant is not a private foreign investor under the ICSID
Convention

(dd) There is no “investment” under Article 25(1)

70. First, the Respondent contends that because the transfer of the Gifted Shares to the
Claimant was made for “zero consideration,” there is no “investment” under Article 25(1)

of the ICSID Convention.**

71. Relying on the Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic test for finding an “investment” within
the meaning of Article 25(1)** and citing to Caratube v. Kazakhstan,™ the Respondent
submits that the Gifted Shares “clearly do not qualify as ‘investments ” under Article 25(1).
The Respondent points out that the Claimant’s role “was nor that of an investor making
contribution, undertaking risks and reaping profits, but as ‘a trust company’ / ‘a pure
development agency and funds manager’ of the Gifted Shares and the dividends flowing

therefrom,” and its only mission was to ensure that the latter are “spent wisely on

jiction, at para. 78 (quoting from Griffin Report, at para. 87).

isdiction, at para. 79.

83 See Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 80, 83 (citing Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, Exhibit RL-51).

4 The Respondent relies on the decision in Caratube v. Kazakhstan for the proposition that “ICSID tribunals have ...
viewed with suspicion purported ‘investments’ which involve no or nominal monetary consideration.” Objections to
Jurisdiction, at para. 84 (citing Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case
No. ARB/08/12, Award, 5 June 2012, at paras. 433-435, Exhibit RL-3).

Page 22 of 153

 

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

72.

73.

74.

75.

Award

sustainable development of PNG, in particular the Western Province, for the benefit of the

People, and without any benefit to itself / its members or any foreign persons / entities.”*°

 

Similarly, Professor Dolzer opines that the Claimant’s shareholding in OTML “does not

show the features of a typical ‘investment’;” rather, it is “a very special gift’ that the
Claimant “administers for the welfare of the people of Papua New Guinea, not for its own

benefit.”*°

According to the Respondent, because the Gifted Shares are not “investments” protected
under the IPA and the ICSID Convention, the rights and interests that stem from the Gifted
Shares and are set out in paragraph 53 of the Request for Arbitration also cannot constitute

“investments.”*”

(2) The Claimant is not “a national of another Contracting
State”
Second, the Respondent argues that the Claimant is not “a national of another Contracting

State” within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention because:

while the Claimant is, in form, a Singaporean entity by virtue of its
place of incorporation, it is in substance and reality (and in the
Claimant’s own words) a ‘Papua New Guinean institution’ set up
with the sole mission supporting sustainable development programs
for the benefit of the people of PNG (i.e., the Claimant is not
‘foreign’).®

While recognizing that Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention primarily chooses the
place of incorporation as the criterion for establishing the nationality of legal entities, the

Respondent argues that “the formal ‘place of incorporation test’ must often make way for

   
  

85 Objections to Ju
86 Objections to Ju
87 Objections to Ju

jiction, at para. 86.
jiction, at para. 87 (quoting from Dolzer Report, at paras. 140-142).
jiction, at para. 89.

88 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 90.

Page 23 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

a more pragmatic/‘substance-over-form’ approach to enable tribunals to determine the

reality of an entity’s relationship to a state.”*°

76. According to the Respondent, in this case the Tribunal should “take into account the indicia
of factors which show, without a doubt, that the Claimant, is in truth and substance, a PNG

entity.”°” Among these factors, the Respondent cites:

a. the creation of the Claimant through a PNG legislation (the Ninth Supplemental Act)
for the purpose of promoting sustainable development and advancing the welfare of the

PNG People;

b. the Claimant’s income and property that are capable of being applied “solely for the

promotion” of the Claimant’s objects set forth in the M&A;

c. the requirement that, upon winding up, the Claimant’s assets “be given or transferred

to another institution of a charitable or public character” with similar objects;

d. incorporation of the Claimant in Singapore “to obtain tax benefits;” and

e. the Claimant’s “self-identity” which is “clearly Papua New Guinean.””!

77. The Respondent concludes that finding jurisdiction in this case “would be tantamount to

allowing (what is in substance) a Papua New Guinean national to pursue international

arbitration against its own government.”*

89 Objections to Jurisdiction, at paras. 91-96. The Respondent namely criticizes the majority decision in Tokios Tokelés
. Ukraine for unduly applying the criterion of the place of incorporation. Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 97
(disc ig Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004
("Tokios"), Exhibit RL-6). See also Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 98 (citing Dolzer Report, at paras. 103-104
that explains the Tokios majority decision “has no bearing upon the present case”). The Respondent further
distinguishes this case from the Tokios decision. See Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 101.

°° Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 97.

°! Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 99.

° Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 100.

    

 
 

Page 24 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

°3 Objections to Juri:
°4 Objections to Juris

Award

(3) The Claimant discharges an essentially public function and
is not a private investor

Third, the Respondent argues that the Claimant is not “a private investor who is entitled to

have recourse under the ICSID Convention.”

The Respondent cites Professor Dolzer’s Report and maintains that the requirement of
“private” foreign investor “is alluded to in the ICSID Convention” and “stems from the
basic purpose of the investment arbitration regime.”** In particular, Professor Dolzer
opines that “an ICSID Tribunal will have to decline jurisdiction in case it finds that two

parties assimilated with a State, are before it, which seek to resolve a dispute.”°°

The Respondent then relies on the “Broches test” for the proposition that wholly or
partially state-controlled companies may participate in ICSID arbitrations, unless they are
“acting as an agent for the government or discharging an essentially governmental

function.”°°

According to the Respondent, the background to the Claimant’s incorporation, its
objectives and functions “clearly suggests that is it not ‘private’ in nature, but discharges
‘an essentially governmental function’ ”°" because it is “not motivated by profit in the
ordinary sense of a pure commercial entity would be” and it is a “trustee-style not-for-

profit company, holding the Gifted Shares on behalf of the People.”**
The Respondent further relies on Professor Dolzer’s opinion that:

Looking at all the[] features of the Claimant in conjunction, it is my
view that the predominant conceptual characteristics are those
which point in the direction of a public, and not as a private
company. The legal framework adopted by Papua New Guinea and

  

sdiction, at para. 102.
iction, at para. 103.

°5 Dolzer Report, at para. 113. See also Dolzer Report, at paras. 110-112; Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 103.

° Objections to Juris
°7 Objections to Juris

iction, at para. 104.
iction, at para. 105.

 

°8 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 105.

Page 25 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

the M&A of the Claimant place it outside of the circle of entities
covered by the ICSID Convention.”
3. The MEN Objection: Section 37(1) of the IPA Is Not an MEN Clause

83. The Respondent requests that the Tribunal “decline jurisdiction for various claims/reliefs
which are predicated on the Claimant’s unsustainable argument that Section 37(1) of the

IPA is a Most-Favoured-Nation (‘MEN’) clause.”!°°

84. The Respondent argues that, even if the Article 25(1) requirements of the ICSID
Convention were satisfied, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction “would in any event be confined to
the claims arising under the IPA ... as Section 37(1) of the IPA (“Section 37(1)”) is not an
MEN Clause that would allow the Claimant (the putative investor) to benefit from more

favourable treatment available in the Listed BITs.”!°!
85. First, the Respondent maintains that:

Section 37(1) simply states that ‘a foreign investor’ shall be entitled
to the benefits set out under Sections 37(2) and 37(5) of the IPA,
unless ‘the foreign investor’ — i.e., the same foreign investor — is
accorded more favourable treatment under any other bilateral or
multilateral agreement to which the State is a party, in which case,
the more favourable treatment will prevail over the rights under the
IPA. 102

86. The Respondent argues that Section 37(1) does not have “the typical construct of an MFN

clause,” which “‘extends the better treatment granted to a third State or its nationals’ to

103

the beneficiary state in question. The Respondent adds that the “basic premise” of an

MEN clause is that the granting State undertakes to “treat investors (within a certain sphere)

equally” and hence agrees to grant those rights or treatment to “all investors that are entitled

°° Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 106 (citing Dolzer Report, at para. 135). See also Dolzer Report, at paras. 123-
135.

100 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 5.

101 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 108.

102 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 109.

103 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 110.

Page 26 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

87.

88.

89.

Award

to such MEN treatment.”! And to create such obligations, the language of the MFN
provisions must be “clear and unequivocal as to the obligations that are to be created.”!°
The Respondent concludes that, because Section 37(1) does not even refer to any “third

state,” it is not an MEN clause.!°

Second, the Respondent relies on Commentary to Article 4 of the ILC’s Draft Articles on
Most-Favoured-Nation Clauses in support for its proposition that “MFN clauses involve
the giving of inter-State undertakings, which are typically synallagmatic.”!°’ The
Respondent notes that Section 37(1) would make “a most exceptional” MFN clause
because it is “‘a unilateral domestic legislative provision addressing (not States, but) foreign

investors,”

Third, the Respondent argues that, if Section 37(1) were to be compared with the MFN
clauses of the BITs relied upon by the Claimant in its Request for Arbitration, it would be
obvious that Section 37(1) is not an MFN. clause.'® Rather, according to the Respondent,
Section 37(1) is more akin to a “savings” clause or a “clause for the preservation of
rights.”'!° The Respondent also denies that various domestic legislative provisions cited
by the Claimant as purportedly containing MEN provisions are indeed MFN clauses; even
if they were, “it does not follow that the differently-worded Section 37(1)” is an MFN

clause.!!!

Accordingly, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal:

104 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 110.

  

risdiction, at para. 110.
risdiction, at para. 111.
risdiction, at para. 112.
iction, at para. 113.
diction, at para. 114 (quoting the language of the MEFN clauses of the UK-PNG BIT, PNG-

Germany BIT, Australia-PNG BIT and China-PNG BIT, all of which contain the words “any third State.”) See
Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 114(a)-(d). See UK-PNG BIT, at Art. 3 Exhibit CL-9; PNG-Germany BIT, at
Art.3, Exhibit CL-7; Australia-PNG BIT, Exhibit CL-8; and China-PNG BIT, Exhibit CL-10.

110 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 115.

1! Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 117.

Page 27 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

90.

91.

92.

Award

a. decline jurisdiction as the State has not consented to submit to
ICSID’s jurisdiction under Article 25(1);

b. decline jurisdiction as there is ‘no dispute arising ... out of an
investment’ under Article 25(1);

c. decline jurisdiction as the Claimant is not ‘a national of another
Contracting State’ under Article 25(1);

d. alternatively, decline jurisdiction in respect of the claims and
reliefs not arising under the IPA, by dismissing or striking out
paragraphs 73(ii) to 73(x) of the RFA and the relevant paragraphs
of the RFA that refer to such reliefs, as reflected in Annex | to the
State’s Preliminary Objections;

e. order costs in favour of the State; and

f. order such other and further relief as may be deemed just and
appropriate in the circumstances.!!”

B. The Claimant's Response on Jurisdiction

In its Response, the Claimant argues that “this case is about intent — an essential element
no matter what interpretive methodology is applied by the Tribunal,”!!? i.e., intent of the

Respondent behind its national investment legislation.

Although the Claimant has presented its arguments on jurisdiction in a different sequence
from the Respondent, the Tribunal summarizes the Claimant’s arguments in the order of

the Respondent’s objections, for clarity and ease of reading.

1. Consent

The Claimant states that this case is “now about the meaning of five words: ‘applies,

according to its terms’.”''+ The Claimant first sets out what it calls the applicable

12 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 119.
113 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 1.
'l4 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 126.

Page 28 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

“interpretive regimes,” before analyzing Section 39 in light of these principles of

interpretation.

a) Interpretive Regimes — the Options

93. The Claimant notes that the Parties are in agreement that Section 39 “is a unilateral
declaration, and that some mix of national and international law governs _ its

interpretation.”!!>

However, the Claimant criticizes the Respondent’s approach to
interpretation, stating that it is “neither correct nor appropriate as a matter of international

law.”!16

94. The Claimant instead argues that the correct approach to the interpretation of Section 39 is
that adopted in SPP v. Egypt (including the effet utile principle).''” It then goes on to state
that, even if the Tribunal does not follow SPP v. Egypt, on any view, a “quasi-Vienna”
approach is warranted for interpretation of unilateral declarations of the State (which
enables to bring in additional interpretive factors, including “good faith, the object and
purpose of the declaration, the wider circumstances in which the declaration was made,
and any subsequent conduct by the State that may indicate the meaning of the text of the

declaration’”).!'®

qd) The SPP approach
95. The Claimant discusses the SPP v. Egypt decision, and, inter alia:
a. quotes the key interpretive principle from paragraph 63 of this decision, as follows:
jurisdictional instruments are to be interpreted neither restrictively

nor expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith, and

45 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 130.

   
 

'I8 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 135-136. The Claimant notes that “by asking the Tribunal to prefer the ILC
Guiding Principles over SPP, the State does itself a net harm: while it may avoid effet utile, it places its declaration
in an interpretive matrix in which good faith and intent are of paramount importance, and subsequent practice is also
given a high value.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 137.

Page 29 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

jurisdiction will be found to exist if — but only if — the force of the
arguments militating in favour of it is preponderant.!!°

b. notes the SPP tribunal’s literal analysis of Article 8 of the Egypt Law,'° including the
mandatory character of the word “shail” in that provision and the “sequence of dispute
settlement procedures” in that provision “impl[ying] a hierarchy of schemes, such that
a procedure could only be resorted to where those methods higher in the hierarchy were
not available;”!?!

c. notes the SPP tribunal’s articulation of the effet utile principle: “a legal text should be
interpreted in such a way that a reason and meaning can be attributed to every word in

the text;”!2?

d. emphasizes the SPP tribunal’s interpretation of the words “where it [i.e., the ICSID
Convention] applies” as referring to the jurisdictional requirements of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention and its conclusion that the “consent required under Article 25 of

the Convention was generated by the wording of Article 8 itself;” the Claimant notes

that Section 39 of the IPA “works the same way;”!?

e. discusses the SPP tribunal’s analysis of legislative history of the Egyptian Investment
Law, noting that the evidence presented by Egypt in that case was, as in this case,
minimal, and that the tribunal refused to draw inferences from “what was not said” in

the legislative history;!4

119 Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, at para. 63
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988 ("SPP v. Egypt"), Exhibit CA-3. See Response on Jurisdiction, at para.

40.
120 Article 8 of the Egyptian Law No. 43 of 1974 read: “Investment Disputes in respect of the implementation of the
provisions of this Law shall be settled in a manner to be agreed upon with the investor, or within the framework of
agreements in force between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the investor’s home country, or within the framework
of the Convention for the Settlement of International Disputes between the State and nationals of other countries to
which Egypt has adhered by virtue of Law No. 90 of 1971, where such law applies.” See SPP v. Egypt, at para. 71,
Exhibit CA-3; Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 138.
'21 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 141.
122 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 94, Exhibit CA-3; Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 142.
!23 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 143.
'>4 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 144.

Page 30 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

96.

97.

125

Award

f. points out the importance that the SPP tribunal attached to the “intention of the
Egyptian government” at the time the investment law was enacted, including the
government’s policy aimed at attracting investment and the conclusion of subsequent

BITs;!7> and

g. observes that the SPP tribunal “took note of official investment promotion literature”
when interpreting the national investment legislation, and held that the State’s
pronouncements “confirm[ed] the conclusion already reached by the Tribunal ... that
Article 8 does not require a further ad hoc expression of consent to establish the

jurisdiction’ of ICSID.”!?°

2127

The Claimant states that the SPP decision was “frontier theory’ at the time it was

rendered, and that it was the first case that recognized “arbitration without privity.”!?
According to the Claimant, by asking the Tribunal to disregard SPP, the Respondent is
asking the Tribunal “to disregard a decision that not only changed the way consent is
understood in investor-State arbitration, but which laid down principles that have enabled
the development of the very treaty network on which modern international investment law

increasingly depends.”!”?

(2) The approach in the Venezuela Cases

The Claimant points out the Respondent’s reliance on the Venezuela cases (as “setting out
the appropriate interpretive methodology”) that dealt with the interpretation of Article 22
of the Venezuelan investment legislation.'*° With regard to these cases, the Claimant states

that:

a. these cases are distinguishable from the present case because (i) the legislative history

of Section 39 and the intent that it reveals is “quite different” from that of Article 22

Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 145.

26 Response on Ju . . 146 (quoting SPP v. Egypt, at para. 116, Exhibit CA-3).

 

. 149.
. 148.
. 149.

30 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 151-152.

Page 31 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

of the Venezuelan Investment Law; '*! and (ii) the text of Section 39 is “very different”

from the Venezuelan law, which includes the words “if it so provides” that are

conditional in nature and “create a condition that is incapable of being satisfied;”!**

b. in Mobil v. Venezuela and CEMEX v. Venezuela, the tribunals declared that they would

“abandon any application of domestic principles of statutory interpretation and treat

9133

Article 22 as a unilateral declaration under international law, whereas the tribunals

in Tidewater v. Venezuela and Brandes v. Venezuela departed from this approach in
that they took into account both the national legal order — in which the national

legislative act is “rooted” — and the principles of international law;!**

c. hence, it is not “generally accepted” that the ICJ jurisprudence on interpretation of
unilateral declarations under Article 36(2) of its Statute applies ipso facto to the
interpretation of legislation for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,

nor that “effet utile is inapplicable when the interpretive exercise is conducted this

way....7!9

98. The Claimant argues that the Tribunal has a choice between “a purely internationalist (ICJ)
methodology, or a hybrid methodology that takes into account the fact that [Section 39] is

rooted in the domestic legal order of the State.”'*° According to the Claimant, the latter is

'3! Article 22 of the Venezuelan Decree with Force of Law No. 356 on the Promotion and Protection of Investments
of 3 October 1999 read: “Disputes arising between an international investor whose country of origin has in effect
with Venezuela a treaty or agreement on the promotion or protection of investments, or disputes to which are
applicable the provision of the Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (OMGI-
MIGA) or the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and National of other States
(ICSID), shall be submitted to international arbitration according to the terms of the respective treaty or agreement, if
it so provides, without prejudice to the possibility of making use, when appropriate, of the dispute resolution means
provided for under the Venezuelan legislation in effect.” Mobil v. Venezuela, at para. 68, Exhibit RL-4 (emphasis
added); Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 152.

isdiction, at para. 153.

iction, at para. 154 (citing Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 79-85, Exhibit RL-4, and Cemex v.
Venezuela, at para. 79, Exhibit CA-2).

'54 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 155 (citing Tidewater v. Venezuela, at para. 86, Exhibit RL-52, and Brandes v.
Venezuela, at para. 36, Exhibit CA-40). The Claimant also cites Zhinvali v. Georgia for a similar proposition. See
Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 156 (citing Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, ICSID Case No
ARB/00/1, Award, 24 January 2003 (""Zhinvali v. Georgia"), Exhibit CA-41).

135 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 157.

136 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 158.

  

 

Page 32 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

“clearly preferable” because national legislation “ought not be considered as a purely
international gesture,” but requires “at least some consideration of domestic rules of
interpretation, provided they do not conflict with interpretive principles of international
law.”!37 The Claimant concludes that common canons of statutory construction — such as

effet utile — must therefore be taken into account.!**

(3) The public international law approach

99. The Claimant then discusses the international law principles applicable to the interpretation
of the scope of unilateral declarations and its two main sources — i.e., the ICJ jurisprudence
and the ILC Guiding Principles.'*° In particular, the Claimant notes that the “analogical
application of [Article 31 of] the Vienna Convention to unilateral declarations” has been
recognized in several decisions of the ICJ (e.g., the Fisheries Jurisdiction decision, in
which the ICJ “described a system whereby the ordinary rules of treaty interpretation apply
mutatis mutandis to unilateral declarations”'*°); despite this, the Claimant argues, the

Respondent does not address this issue.'*!

100. According to the Claimant, the differences between application of Article 31 to a treaty
provision and application of “its adapted variant to a unilateral act” stem from the focus on
the “subjective intention of the declarant as sole author, as reflected in the text of the
declaration itself.”'4* With the application of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention come
other additional factors to be taken into account in the process of interpretation, including
“interpretation in good faith, the context of the initial agreement, subsequent agreement,

subsequent practice, and other relevant rules of international law.”'*? The Claimant

 

'57 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 159.

138 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 161.

139 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 163-188.
140 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 170.

 

isdiction, at para. 173. The Claimant states that, “[w]hen the Vienna Convention is applied by
analogy to unilateral declarations, the result is a complex act of interpretation,” and quotes from the ICJ Fisheries
Jurisdiction decision: “... The intention of a ... State may be deduced not only from the text of the relevant clause, but
also from the context in which the clause is to be read, and an examination of the evidence regarding the circumstances

Page 33 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

contends in particular that subsequent practice “may readily be seen to give insight into
what a State actually intended, and what it thought the legal effect of its action was, at the

time at which the relevant declaration was made.”!“4

101. | The Claimant further argues that the restrictive presumption that governs the interpretation
of a State’s unilateral declarations under international law (including as set out in ILC
Guiding Principle 7) should not apply where the State’s “unilateral acts are formulated in
the framework and on the basis of a treaty, such as the ICSID Convention.”!4> On this
issue, the Claimant disagrees with Professor Dolzer’s “restrictive approach” requiring that

146

consent be “clear and unambiguous,”'*° and rejects ILC Guiding Principle 7 as a plausible

tule of interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA.'4”

102. The Claimant concludes that, if the Tribunal decides to treat Section 39 of the IPA and
Section 2 of the IDCA as unilateral declarations under international law, “the applicable
law is that adopted by the ICJ with respect to unilateral acts in connection with treaty

frameworks,” and the appropriate interpretive methodology is “to adapt Article 31 of the

Vienna Convention for use in the context of a single declarant.”!*

103. By way of summary, the Claimant synthesizes the two possible interpretive options
available to the Tribunal under international law,'4? contending that both approaches are

similar and that the “delta” between them is “narrow.”'*° The Claimant states that:

of its preparation and the purposes intended to be served.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 174 (quoting Fisheries
Jurisdiction Case (Spain v. Canada), at p. 454, Exhibit CA-37).

144 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 176. See also Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 177.

145 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 178-182 (quoting Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 87-90, Exhibit RL-4).

146 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 183 (discussing Dolzer Report, at paras. 25-27). The Claimant quotes from
paragraph 27 of Professor Dolzer’s Report, which reads: “[W]hile a long line of decisions has assumed that such
declarations have to be interpreted neither restrictively, nor expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith,
following a ruling in SPP v. Egypt, it will be noted that recent jurisprudence has required that consent must be clear
and unambiguous, thus effectively adopting what amounts to a restrictive approach.” Dolzer Report, at para. 27.

 

148 Response on Juri

149 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 187.

150 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 188. The Claimant notes that the common requirements under both interpretive
schemes include: “both require that first the words of the declaration be read in a natural and reasonable way; both
require that due regard be paid to the intention of the State that made the declaration; both require that the declaration

Page 34 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

104.

105.

106.

Award

[O]ption one is the ICSID-specific, neutral (neither expansive nor
restrictive) approach developed in SPP and followed in certain of
the Venezuela cases; option two is the method applied by the ICJ in
the Fisheries Jurisdiction case ..., which is ‘Vienna by analogy’ —
that is, to interpret IPA Section 39 by analogy with VCLT Article
31, tailored to reflect the fact that the State is the sole author of the
instrument in question (rather than a co-author of a treaty), without
bringing to bear any particular interpretive presumption and with a
particular focus on the intent of the State, good faith and subsequent
State practice.!>!

In sum, according to the Claimant, the choice for the Tribunal is between an ICSID-specific
method developed by SPP and succeeding authorities, on the one hand, and a method

developed by the ICJ in the State-to-State context, on the other hand.!>?

(4) The role of national law

On the issue of what role the national law should play in interpretation, the Claimant
submits that “the application of national law is subject to the ultimate control of

international law.”!°

The Claimant argues that PNG statutory interpretation principles are “essentially English”
and “the sources of the underlying law of the State include English common law as it was
immediately before the date on which PNG became independent.”!** The Claimant further
contends that PNG law bears “little” differences from the general principles of statutory
interpretation under international law,'*> and highlights the following rules of

interpretation:

a. headings can be taken into account under PNG law, as confirmed by Mr Griffin QC in

his Report;!** the Claimant notes that the heading of Section 39 reads “International

be interpreted in good faith; both require that regard be had to the context of the declaration; and both allow for the
subsequent practice of declarant State to be taken into account.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 188.
'5! Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 187.

152

See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 188.

53 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 190.

155

'54 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 192 (citing to Griffin Report, at paras. 20-21).
See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 191, 193.

156 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 193; Griffin Report, at para. 47.

Page 35 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

107.

'57 Response on Ju

Award

Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes,” and that “this is the State identifying the

body to which it is prepared to submit disputes, in a law that implements (and has

annexed to it) the Convention under which that body operates;”!°’

b. PNG law contains an equivalent of effet utile, resulting from Section 190(4) of the PNG
Constitution (which requires that “statutory provisions be given a ‘fair, large and
liberal’ construction and interpretation”!>*), supplemented by a well-established
principle of common law that “a PNG court is not at liberty to consider any word or

sentence of a statute to be superfluous or insignificant; in other words, the rule is that

every provision of a written law has useful work to do;”!?

c. when interpreting PNG statutes, a court “must also have adequate regard to the social

purpose and development goals of particular legislation;”'® and

d. when interpreting PNG law, a court “must consider which of the competing

interpretations will result in the dispensation of justice.”'©!

b) Interpreting Section 39 of the IPA

The Claimant then addresses the interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA, stating that the
“core interpretive task” for the Tribunal is “to ascertain the meaning and effect of the words
‘applies, according to its terms’ .”'®? The Claimant refers to the conclusion in Webb Report

that “when IPA Section 39 is construed in accordance with PNG rules of statutory

interpretation, it is an offer to arbitrate,”!®

“quasi-Vienna” approaches. !®*

iction, at para. 193.

. 194,

. 194. See also Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 195-196.
. 197,

. 199.

. 200.

. 202. See also Webb Report, at para. 62.

   

64 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 203 et seq.

Page 36 of 153

and turns to the analysis under the SPP and

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

108.

109.

165

Award

qd) Applying the SPP approach

Referring to the SPP principle that “jurisdictional instruments are to be interpreted neither

restrictively nor expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith,”!® the Claimant

argues that:

“[I]nterpreted objectively and in good faith, Section 39 of the IPA
is, at its most basic level, a deliberate statement by the State that
disputes arising out of foreign investment are subject to resolution
in accordance with the ICSID Convention ....”!%

First, the Claimant addresses the meaning of the words “applies, according to its terms,”

arguing that:

a.

the word “applies” in Section 39 is “used to declare the present, practical operation of
the IDCA (and the ICSID Convention) to disputes arising out of foreign investment
covered by the IPA;”!°7

the comma separating the words “applies” and “according to its terms” indicates their
two distinct functions: the word “applies” has an “independent function — it declares
the State’s consent,” whereas the words “according to its terms” are “cross-referential
and fundamentally concerned with ... ensuring that the scope of the State’s consent is
limited according to the terms of IDCA Section 2” (i.e., to disputes that are fundamental

to investment itself);!°

the word “terms” encompasses “all of the articles of the ICSID Convention,” including
Article 25’s requirement of consent in writing, which is satisfied by preceding the word

“applies;”!®

Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 203 (quoting SPP v. Egypt, at para. 63, Exhibit CA-3).

166 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 204.
'67 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 207 (citing Webb Report, at para. 53).
168 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 208.
169 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 209.

Page 37 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

d. Section 2 of the IDCA “comes into equation” through the words “according to its
terms,” and the heading of that section contains permissive language — “may be referred

to the Centre.”'

110. According to the Claimant, the effect of Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the IDCA
is that the reader understands that “provided my dispute is fundamental to my investment,

I may refer it to the Centre.”!7!

111. The Claimant criticizes the Respondent’s interpretation of Section 39 for:

a. “simply making a factual statement” and notes, quoting from Webb Report, that that
interpretation would mean that “/i]t would be a statement that a law that applies,

applies.”!””

b. doing violence to the wording of the provision itself, because “not only does it
introduce a new requirement (i.e. the need for a subsequent agreement on ICSID
arbitration), but it also changes the provision (particularly the key word ‘applies’) from
the present imperative to the future conditional (i.e. the IDCA will apply, according to

its terms, but only if the State agrees);”"!75

c. giving a “disproportionate effect” to the words “according to its terms” compared to
the word “applies,” the point of difference between the Parties being whether “the word
‘applies’ closes the loop (the State’s textual case) or whether it is an end of a line that

leads to ICSID Convention (the Claimant’s case).”!”4

112. Second, the Claimant considers Section 39 in its context and submits that:

a. Section 39 is part of the “Investment Guarantees” set out in Part V of the IPA and is

styled as “an operative guarantee of investment protection;” the “right of neutral,

170 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 210.

iction, at paras. 212-213. See also Webb Report, at para. 43.
iction, at para. 215.
174 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 216.

 

Page 38 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

international adjudication that IPA Section 39 provides is the means by which the
investor can enforce the substantive ‘investment guarantees’ given to it under Part V

of the Act;”!7>

b. the legislative history of the IPA supports the Claimant’s case on the intent behind

Section 39 of the IPA because it shows that:

i. There was an earlier 1991 version of the IPA setting out the Respondent’s
standing offer to arbitrate that the final text of the IPA (1992) sought to improve
and replace.'”° In particular, Article 39(1)(a) of the 1991 version of the IPA

contained the Respondent’s “standing offer to arbitrate (at ICSID) only disputes

that concern the ‘interpretation or application’ of the IPA (in other words, ‘no
dollars’ disputes),” and stated that “for ‘disputes arising out of the activities [of
a foreign] enterprise’, an arbitration agreement is required.”!”’ According to

the Claimant, because the purpose of the 1992 Act was to “improve” the 1991

t,!78

text,'’® the current Section 39 shows that the Respondent “made a conscious

decision to broaden the scope of IPA Section 39 and make it more attractive to
foreign investors by declaring that the IDCA (and with it the ICSID
Convention) applies to foreign investment disputes, rather than just disputes

about the ‘interpretation or application’ of the IPA.”!”?

"5 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 219.

176 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 223-224(a). The Claimant points out that the Respondent has not produced
the 1991 version of the IPA and invites the Tribunal to “draw an adverse inference” against the Respondent on the
basis of this failure to produce. Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 233. See also Response on Jurisdiction, at para.
224(a).

177 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 229 (quoting from Section 39 of the 1991 IPA Act, Exhibit CL-51).

178 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 230. See also Second Reading of the IPA Bill 1991, at p. 45 (recording the PNG
Minister for Trade and Industry’s statements that the 1992 IPA was meant “to incorporate ... improvements” to the
1991 bill and “replace and repeal the previous Act.”), Second Reading of the IPA Bill 1991, Exhibit RE-16.

17° Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 230. The Claimant also argues that “the 1991 text shows that the State was.
intending to make an offer of ICSID arbitration in the IPA — on further consideration, the Government realised the
offer it made in the 1991 form of the IPA was not good enough to give foreign investors real comfort, and so it took
steps to improve the offer in the 1992 revision of the IPA.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 231.

Page 39 of 153

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

ii. “[T]he IPA was passed with the general intention of promoting PNG as a

destination for foreign investment.”!*°

iii. “[T]he IPA was drafted with the specific intention of satisfying certain
conditions that attached to the World Bank’s ‘Structural Adjustment Loan’ to

the State.”!*!

c. The history of passing of the IPA is “fundamentally different” from that at issue in the
Venezuelan cases, because PNG has not had any record of hostility to ICSID arbitration

and therefore did not need to “affirm its commitment to ICSID” in passing the IPA.'*?

113. Third, the Claimant looks at the Respondent’s “subsequent practice” —i.e., “the investment
promotion activities that the State and its agencies have conducted since the declaration
was made” in the IPA, and in particular the official investment promotion literature!*? --
and claims that it is “damning.”!** The Claimant primarily focuses on the statements on
the Investment Promotion Authority’s website, '** before and after the filing of the Request

for Arbitration,'®° and on the PNG Embassy to the Americas website,'®” and argues that:

a. the original version of the website of the Investment Promotion Authority before the

filing of the Request for Arbitration'*® left “no doubt in the reader’s mind: if you invest

  

180 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 224(b).

181 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 224(c). See also Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 225-227.

182 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 235-239.

'83 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 241.

'84 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 258.

185 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 242-244.

186 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 244-251; Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority Website (October
2013), Exhibit CE-17 and Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority website (June 2014), Exhibit CE-18.

187 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 254-255; Screenshot of Website to PNG Embassy to the Americas (October
2014), Exhibit CE-21.

188 See Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority Website (October 2013), Exhibit CE-17 (“Investment disputes
can be settled through diplomatic channels or through the use of local remedies before having such matters adjudicated
at the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes or through another appropriate tribunal of which
Papua New Guiena [sic] is a member.”).

  

   

Page 40 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

114.

115.

116.

Award

in PNG, and a dispute arises in relation to your investment, your dispute can be

adjudicated at ICSID;”'*°

b. the modified version of that website after the filing of the Request for Arbitration!*”
and the publication of the OPIC Karimun v. Venezuela decision still does not help the
Respondent, and it should be understood as meaning that “if you invest in PNG, and a
dispute arises in relation to your investment, the IPA allows you to start ICSID

arbitration against the State.”!?!

The Claimant also mentions the Ninth Supplemental Act and states that the Respondent
could have — but has not — excluded Part V of the IPA from application to the Claimant, as

it did with Section 32 of the IPA.!°”

Finally, the Claimant turns to effet utile and explains that although “intent and good faith

193 effet utile serves to “‘exclude interpretations which would render the text

come first,
meaningless, when a meaningful interpretation is possible’.”!°* With regard to the
Venezuela decisions, the Claimant notes that, “[f]ar from expressing any principled
rejection of effet utile, these tribunals either applied the rule to confirm their textual
conclusions or considered that its application was unnecessary due to the wording of the

national law provision in question.”!°>

The Claimant submits that the result of the application of effet utile in this case is two-fold:

189 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 245.

190 See Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority Website (June 2014), Exhibit CE-18 (“International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes. Section 39 of the [IPA] seeks to encourage greater flows of international
investment by providing facilities for the conciliation and arbitration of disputes between government and foreign
investors.”). The Claimant invites the Tribunal to draw adverse inference from the “corrective action that State has

taken on these webs

 

s, that inference being that the State knew the earlier version of the Investment Promotion

Authority website was harmful to its case on consent in this arbitration.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 251.

9! Response on Juri
See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras, 259-261.

192

  

iction, at para. 252.

4 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 264 (quoting CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 14, Exhibit CA-2).

195

Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 267.

Page 41 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

a. “‘it triggers the actual application of the ICSID Convention to this dispute;” and

b. it requires the Tribunal “to dismiss the State’s argument that [Section 39] merely serves
to affirm the State’s commitment to the ICSID system,” which has already been
affirmed twice — when the Respondent ratified the ICSID Convention, and when the

Respondent passed the IDCA, “which implemented the Convention locally.”!°°

(2) Applying a quasi- Vienna approach
117. Turning to the alternative interpretive approach — i.e., interpreting the declaration in
Section 39 using Article 31 of the Vienna Convention by analogy!®” — the Claimant submits

that, under the quasi-Vienna approach:

a. the SPP analysis also applies to determining the ordinary meaning of the word
“applies?!
b. also allows the Tribunal to take into account the Respondent’s subsequent practice,

including the websites;!

c. the “emphasis is placed on the context of the declaration,” including the 1991 IPA and
the purposes of the final 1992 IPA, which context “must inform the interpretation of
the IPA Section 39;”? this means that the Tribunal “can use the stated object and
purpose of the IPA to confirm the ordinary meaning of the term ‘applies’” in Section

39, and should be guided by the context in resolving “any uncertainties that it considers

exist in [the IPA’s] wording;””"!

196 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 268.

197 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 269-272.
198 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 273.

199 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 274.

x iction, at paras. 275-276.

21 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 277-278.

  

 

  

Page 42 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

118.

119.

120.

121.

202

205

Award

d. PNG’s BITs relied upon by the Respondent are irrelevant to the extent that they are not
“of similar vintage to IPA,” and even where they are, they bear “no evidentiary value”

of the Respondent’s subjective intent.?>

The Claimant concludes that, “even on the quasi-Vienna reading that the State asks the

Tribunal to prefer, consent is established.”?"

c) Additional principles bearing on the operation of Section 39 of the
IPA
The Claimant invokes two other rules and maxims — i.e., contra venire factum proprium?*

and contra proferentem.

Considering the former, the Claimant argues that in this case the Respondent “cannot deny
that the ICSID Convention applies to this dispute, and it cannot deny that it has, through
its declaration in [Section 39 of the IPA], given (and intended to give) the consent that is
necessary for this to occur.”?"> According to the Claimant, it “relied” on Section 39 and
on being deemed a “foreign enterprise” for the purposes of the IPA in making its

investment.?°°

Considering the latter, the Claimant argues that any doubts whether Section 39 contains
the Respondent’s consent should be resolved against the State as the drafter of its
legislation?” (clarifying that this rule does not apply if the Tribunal selects the quasi-

Vienna approach”).

See Response on Jui

 

24 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras, 287-293.
Response on Juris

 

 

208 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 295.

Page 43 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

2. “Investor” and “Investment”

122. In its Response, the Claimant notes that the Respondent’s Objections “conflate two

independent criteria: jurisdiction rationae personae and jurisdiction rationae materiae.”?”

The Claimant first addresses the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae and the
Respondent’s assertions relating to the Claimant not being a “private” investor and a
“foreign” investor. The Claimant then addresses the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
materiae and the Respondent’s assertions that the Claimant has not made an “investment”

in the PNG.

a) Jurisdiction ratione personae
qd) “Private” investor

123. First, the Claimant submits that there is no “explicit jurisdictional requirement that

investors must be ‘private’, let alone any requirement as to ‘private investments” under

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention,” and there is no legal basis for implying one.?!!

124. Even if there was such a requirement, the Claimant would “clearly satisfy” it, under all

three tests — i.e., the Broches Test,”!” the Structural Test?!? and the Functional Test?!4 — or

2 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 21.

210 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 26.

211 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 28-31.

?!2 According to the Claimant, the “Broches Test” provides that “a company that combines capital from private and
government sources and state-controlled corporations may be investors in ICSID arbitrations unless it is ‘acting as an
agent for the government or discharging an essentially government function’.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para.
32(a) (citing C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at p. 161, para. 271, Exhibit
CL-32).

213 oo ase

According to the Claimant, the “Structural Test” “involves an assessment of whether the entity in question — by
reference to the laws relating to its or ion and lating its activities — is i by law as a gi

entity.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 32(b), citing Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/97/7, Award, 9 November 2000 (““Maffezini”), at paras. 47-48, Exhibit CA-17.

24 The Claimant defines the “Functional Test” “is concerned with determining ‘whether specific acts or omissions are
essentially commercial rather than governmental in nature or, conversely, whether their nature is essentially
governmental rather than commercial.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 32(c) (citing Maffezini, at para. 52, Exhibit
CA-17).

Page 44 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

125.

126.

215

Award

2216

any combination thereof.?!> The Claimant argues that the Claimant “is private”?!© under

all three tests, because:

a. the Claimant is “certainly not acting as agent for the government, nor can it be said to

be discharging an essentially governmental function;”?!”

b. structurally, the Claimant is the “opposite of a government entity” because its
constitution “shows a design that was intended to prevent government control, rather

than enable it;”?!® and

c. the Claimant cannot be considered a government entity “from a functional view,” given
that it (a) “uses the dividend stream received from the operation of the Mine for
specified purposes, for the benefit of the people of PNG and of the Western Province
in particular,” and (b) “performs activities in a commercial capacity” and the “vast
majority of the Claimant’s assets today are managed by fund managers whose

instructions are to make profits.”?!

The Claimant further contends that, even if it were a charity as the Respondent contends
(and it is not??°), it should not be denied protection under the IPA or the ICSID
Convention.”?! The Claimant also emphasizes that, whatever the lay statements made by
the Claimant’s officers, “the legal truth remains: the Claimant is a company incorporated
in Singapore.”

Finally, the Claimant notes that Professor Dolzer “cannot offer any conclusive view on

> 99223

whether the Claimant is a ‘public investor’, and cites to Professor Dolzer’s statement

 

See Response on Jui
216 Response on Jurisdi
217 Response on Ju
218 Response on Ju
21 Response on Juri

sdiction, at paras. 31-33.
iction, at para. 38.

 
 
  
 
 
 

220 See Response on Jun

22! See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 41.

222

223

Response on Juri:
Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 45.

 

Page 45 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

that “[t]rue enough, the Claimant in our case is placed into a unique legal setting which

does not fall into any traditional category of a private or public company.”?>4

(2) Foreign investor

127. Second, the Claimant submits that it is a foreign investor both within the meaning of the

ICSID Convention and PNG law.”>

128. The Claimant argues that it satisfies the requirement of a “national of another Contracting
State” under Article 25(1) because it is a Singapore national — specifically, a company
limited by guarantee incorporated in Singapore under the Singapore Companies Act.?”° In

this regard, the Claimant states that the Respondent’s position that “the people of PNG in

227

fact own the Claimant” is “untenable, factually and legally,”**’ and the Respondent

wrongly asserts that the Claimant was incorporated in Singapore for tax reasons.?7*

129. According to the Claimant, under international law, “the nationality of a corporation is

taken to be the place of incorporation unless an applicable treaty imposes another rule,”???

and piercing of the corporate veil must be “exceptional, and [is] only to be allowed in
extreme cases such as fraud and malfeasance.””*° The Claimant points out that modern
international investment law authorities “respect corporate personality and the freedom of

corporate entities to organise themselves in ways that allow them to take advantage of the

231

modern system of international investment protection, and discusses several decisions

4See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 45 (citing Dolzer Report, at para. 123)
5 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 72.

226 See Response on Ju
27 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 65.

228 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 66.

2° Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 51.

230 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 53-54. The Claimant cites to the ICJ decision in Barcelona Traction in
support of this proposition. See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 54 (citing Barcelona Traction, Light and Power
Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), Judgment, ICJ Reports 1970, Exhibit CA-18).

25! Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 58.

 

 
  

 

Page 46 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

that have refused to pierce the corporate veil and applied the criterion of the place of

incorporation.?>

130. The Claimant further argues that the Claimant also qualifies as a “foreign investor” under
PNG law,?*? because the Claimant is a “foreign enterprise” and a “foreign investor” within
the meaning of Article 3(1) of the IPA.2** The Claimant notes, inter alia, that has been
granted the certificate to carry on business in PNG as a “foreign enterprise” by the
Respondent, certified as a “foreign enterprise” by the Investment Promotion Authority, and
issued a certificate of registration by the Registrar of Companies as an “overseas company

under the PNG Companies Act 1997.”235

b) Jurisdiction ratione materiae

131. The Claimant submits that jurisdiction ratione materiae is to be determined through a two-
step approach which requires the Tribunal to consider: (a) “whether each of the
investments falls within the definition of ‘investment’ in Section 3 of the IPA;” and (b)
“whether each of the relevant instruments is an ‘investment’ within the meaning of Article

25 of the ICSID Convention.”?*°

232 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 59-62 (citing Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, Exhibit RL-6; Aguas del Tunari, S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005 (“Aguas del Tunari”), Exhibit CA-25; Hussein Nuaman
Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, CSID Case No. ARB/02/7 Award, 7 July 2004 (‘“Soufraki v. Egypt”), Exhibit CA-
26; and Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/98/2,
Award, 8 May 2008 ("Victor Pey Casado v. Chile"), Exhibit CA-27).

233 See Response on Jur

  

235 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 69, 71.

236 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 74. The Claimant relies on the annulment decision in Malaysian Historical
Salvors v. The Government of Malaysia as “leading authority on this two-step approach.” Response on Jurisdiction,
at paras. 75-76 (citing Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. The Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case
No.ARB/05/10 Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 April 2009 ("Malaysian Historical Salvors"),
Exhibit CA-8).

Page 47 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

132.

133.

Award
qd) The first step: “investment” under the IPA

The Claimant refers to the “broad”*” definition of “foreign investment” in Section 3(1) of
the IPA, and notes that it requires an “investment by a non-citizen.”*** According to the

Claimant, its “investments” falling under the definition in Section 3(1) of the IPA include:

a. its shares in OTML that the Claimant owned until the Respondent “cancelled” them in

the Tenth Supplemental Act;

b. the “claim to money and/or a claim to performance having a financial value that the

Claimant has as a result of its rights under the OTML Shareholders Agreement;”

c. the “claim to money and/or a claim to performance having a financial value that the
Claimant has as a result of its rights under the Security Deed, Security Trust Deed and

Equitable Mortgage of Shares;”

d. its “proportionate interest in the concession held by OTML to exploit the natural

resources at Ok Tedi (conferred by Special Mining Lease No. 1).”?°

The Claimant argues that the Respondent does not dispute that the IPA’s broad definition
of “investment” covers the above categories;”"° rather, the Respondent’s focus is on “the
way the Claimant became the owner of them,” and in particular the fact that the Claimant
received its shares in OTML as a “gift.”*4! According to the Claimant, the broad definition
of “investment” in Section 3 of the IPA “imposes no limitation on how the relevant asset
is to be acquired, let alone how returns from it are to be spent (the latter exposing the

99242

absurdity of the [Respondent’s] ‘charity’ objection), and “it is irrelevant how the

237 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 77.
238 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 77-78.
2° Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 79.

20 Response on Juris

 

iction, at para. 80.

*4! See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 81.

242,

Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 82.

Page 48 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

134.

135.

136.

243,

245

Award

Claimant came to own them.”?4? The Claimant concludes that it “clears ‘step one’ [of the

analysis] with multiple investments.”?4

(2) The second step: “investment” under the ICSID
Convention

With respect to the second limb of the analysis, the Claimant notes that Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention does not define or qualify the term “investment,” and that there is no
“express requirement” that an investment “have any minimum economic value, any
particular duration or origin, belong or relate to a particular class of investment activity or

that it be made through any particular investment structure or vehicle.”?4°

The Claimant argues that, by providing no definition for the term “investment” in Article
25, the Convention’s drafters intended to leave that task to the Contracting States.7#° The
Claimant reminds that the Respondent has availed itself of the Article 25(4) mechanism
under the Convention in its 1978 Notification declaring that it would only consider
submitting to ICSID disputes that are “fundamental to the investment itself,’ and the

operative part of that notification is included in Section 2 of the IDCA.7*7

According to the Claimant, it follows from the broad definition of “investment” in Section
3 of the IPA — which “controls the meaning of the term ‘investment’ in Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention” — and Section 2 of the IDCA that the “only condition relating to the
State’s offer to arbitrate is that ... the dispute must be ‘fundamental to the investment
itself .”°48 The Claimant notes that this dispute “clearly is” “fundamental to the investment

itself.”24°

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Response on Ju
24 Response on Ju
Response on Juris

iction, at para. 83.

iction, at para. 83.

iction, at para. 84. See also Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 85-86.
liction, at para. 87.

iction, at paras. 88-89.

iction, at para. 90.

% Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 90.

Page 49 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

137. The Claimant notes that this case “involves GDP-changing, long-term investments”
relating to the operation of the mine that “has historically been a critical contributor to [the

250 that is “far removed from ...

Respondent’s] Treasury and its economic development,
simple sales transactions” which would not fall within the definition of “investment” under

the ICSID Convention.?*!

138. The Claimant further states that the Phoenix Action decision cited by the Respondent is
irrelevant, and, even if it were relevant, the Claimant’s investments would “match all six
of the indicators of an ‘investment’ identified by the Phoenix Action tribunal.”*? In
particular, the Claimant argues that “the contribution in money or other assets is composed
of both BHPB’s initial contribution establishing Ok Tedi and the Claimant’s subsequent
contributions to develop the mine and contribute towards economic development in
PNG.”?°? The Claimant claims that it also satisfies the requirement that “the investment
make a contribution to the economic development of the host state” applied in some
decisions, and contends that that requirement “is not necessarily limited to measureable

monetary contributions.”?>*

(3) No “investment” because the OTML shares were gifted

139. The Claimant argues that the Respondent’s assertion that the Claimant is not entitled to
protection under the IPA or the ICSID Convention because it received the OTML shares

as a gift is “simply not true.” The Claimant submits that “significant consideration was

99256

provided by the Claimant to BHPB in exchange for the shares, including through

“broad indemnities” provided by the Claimant as “consideration” for the OTML shares,?*”

250 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 92.

2 iction, at paras. 91-92.

252 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 95-104. The Claimant identifies the following six elements of the Phoenix
Action test: “(1) a contribution in money or other assets; (2) a certain duration; (3) an element of risk; (4) an operation
made in order to develop an economic activity in the host State; (5) assets invested in accordance with the laws of the
s invested bona fide.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 97.

 

 

  

286 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 110.
257 See Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 113-115.

Page 50 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

and foregone dividends invested into the buy-back of OTML shares from Inmet Mining
Corporation (“Inmet”) in 2011.2°* The Claimant also asserts that sufficient consideration
was provided under the law of the State of Victoria (Australia) which governs the Master

Agreement.??

140. Further, the Claimant contends that the case at hand is far removed from Caratube v.
Kazakhstan where two of the key factors — i.e., “a contribution to the claimant company
and the assumption of risk” — were found to be absent,” and draws a parallel with the
Victor Pey Casado v. Chile award, in which the tribunal held that “as long as the share

transfer was valid (which it was), that was sufficient to constitute an investment.”?°!

141. Finally, the Claimant argues that, even if the transfer of OTML shares to the Claimant were
considered a “gift,” the Claimant could still bring an ICSID claim because “the rights
attaching to those shares (including rights under the ICSID Convention) at the time they

were transferred passed as a bundle to the transferee,” the Claimant.”

3. MEN Objection
142. In response to the Respondent’s MFN Objection, the Claimant submits that it is entitled to
rely on Section 37(1) of the IPA as an MFN clause and that the plain meaning of this clause
is that “the investment guarantees given by the State in the IPA apply to a foreign investor,
unless more favourable treatment is accorded under any bilateral investment treaty to

which the State is a party.””°

143. The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s reading of Section 37(1) and argues that:

 

258 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 116.
259 See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 120.
26 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 118.

 

 

262 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 121. See also Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 122-123 (citing African Holding
Company of America, Inc. and Société Africaine de Construction au Congo S.A.R.L. v. Democratic Republic of the
Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/21, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 29 July 2008 ("African Holding
Company v. Congo"), Exhibit CA-30; and El Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/03/15 Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006 ("El Paso v. Argentina"), Exhibit CA-31).

263 Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 306-307.

Page 51 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

144.

145.

146.

Award

The word ‘any’ shows that Section 37(1) cannot have been intended
to have the restricted operation the State suggests. The more natural
reading, in the Claimant’s submission, is that the class of BITs to
which Section 37(1) applies is not limited by the nationality of the
investor. Rather, Section 37(1) is intended to ensure that IPA-
covered investors enjoy the same benefits provided by any BIT the
State has signed.”

The Claimant contends that the flaw in the Respondent’s reasoning is manifest, as Section
37(1) “is not an article of a treaty between two states,” but a unilateral instrument, a
“section of national law to which there is no sovereign counter-party;” therefore, this
provision could not refer to a “third state.””°° According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s

submissions are based on treaty-focused authorities and are therefore “misconceived.”?

The Claimant also argues that MEN provisions like Section 37(1) of the IPA are “not at all

unusual” and cites the examples of Albania, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.?©”

Finally, the Claimant argues that, in its investment promotion literature, the Respondent

99268

“itself has unequivocally said that Section 37(1) is an MFN clause, and refers to

excerpts from the Investment Promotion Authority website before and after the filing of

169

the Request for Arbitration,? as well as excerpts from websites of the PNG High

Commission in Australia and the PNG Embassy to Americas.?”°

The Respondent
concludes that there is “no doubt that the State intended to extend MFN treatment to the

Claimant through IPA Section 37(1).”?7!

Accordingly, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue a decision under Rule 41(1):

264 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 310.
Response on Jurisdiction, at paras. 311-312.
266 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 313.
°67 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 315.
268 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 316.

265

 

271 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 320.

Page 52 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

147.

148.

149.

  

Award

a. dismissing the Objection in full;
b. affirming that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over this Dispute; and

c. ordering the State to pay the legal costs incurred by the Claimant in relation to the

Objection.?”

Cc. The Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction

In its Reply, the Respondent reiterates its position set out in its Objections and makes the

following additional observations.

1. The State has not consented to ICSID jurisdiction
The Respondent notes that the Claimant has “‘maintain[ed] its concession that Section 2 of
the IDCA ... is ‘not ... the offer itself,” and that the Claimant’s case on consent “must
therefore rest on Section 39 of the IPA.”?”> The Respondent submits that the Claimant has

not established that Section 39 of the IPA constitutes the State’s “consent in writing.”?”

a) Approach to interpretation

The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s two interpretive approaches articulated in its
Response on Jurisdiction do “not in fact diverge much from the approach” set forth in

Professor Dolzer’s Report,?”> Le.

a. the wording should be considered “first and foremost,” as read “in a natural and
09276

reasonable manner:

esponse on Jurisdiction, at para. 322.
eply on Jurisdiction, at para. 3.

Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 4.
275 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 8.
i

26 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 8(a). See also Dolzer Report, at paras. 42-43.

Page 53 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

b. the “intention underlying these provisions” should be considered as “may be drawn
from the text of the provisions, their context and the circumstances of their preparation

and the purposes intended to be served;”?””

c. “{aJny offer to arbitrate must be clearly and unambiguously expressed, and doubt shall

be resolved against the finding of jurisdiction.”?"*

b) The text of Section 39 and Section 2 leave no doubt that the State
has not consented to ICSID arbitration

qd) It is clear from the grammatical and ordinary meaning of
the text of Section 39 that the State has not consented to
ICSID arbitration
150. | The Respondent reiterates the arguments set forth in its Objections to Jurisdiction and notes

in addition that:

a. “the Claimant accepts that Section 39 is subject, in relation to the question of the State’s

consent, to the terms set out in Section 2 and Article 25(1);”?””

b. the Claimant does not dispute?®’ and Webb Report accepts that “Section 39 imports all
the provisions of the IDCA (including Section 2) and the ICSID Convention (including
Article 25(1)) ... and Section 2 (imported into Section 39) covers only disputes within
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and which are ‘fundamental’ in the required
sense;””*! in its Reply Report, Mr. Griffin QC adds that “the ‘whole of the provisions’
of the [ICSID Convention] must include th[e] ‘consent in writing’ requirement’ ;”?*?

c. the Claimant’s reading of the words “applies, according to its terms” is circular and

“only serves to illustrate the hopelessness of the Claimant’s attempt to overcome the

2” Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 8(b). See also Dolzer Report, at paras. 42-43.

28 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 8(c). See also Dolzer Report, at paras. 24-26; Exhibit RL-19.
2” Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 10.

280 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 12.

28! Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 12-13.

282 Griffin II Report, at para. 20. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 14.

Page 54 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

clear and unambiguous wording of Section 39” —i.e., “in relation to the question of the

State’s consent, the terms of Section 2 and Article 25(1) apply, according to their terms,

to ‘disputes arising out of foreign investment’ ;”?**

d. given that “it is clear from the grammatical and ordinary meaning” of the text in Section

39 that the Respondent “has not provided its ‘consent in writing’ ,” the Tribunal “should

99284

be slow to depart from the same; the plain and ordinary meaning of Section 39

“does not lead to any absurdity;”?8°

e. in response to the Claimant’s arguments regarding Professor Dolzer’s “restrictive

approach” requiring that “any offer to arbitrate must be clearly and unambiguously

79286

expressed, the Respondent claims that these “do not ... assist the Claimant in

establishing the neutral [i.e., SPP] approach as the ‘correct approach’ ;”?8"

f. because the text of Section 39 is “clear and unambiguous” and leaves “no doubt that
no standing offer to arbitrate” was made by the Respondent, it assertedly does not

matter in practice whether “restrictive, expansive or objective interpretation should be

adopted.”?88

(2) The headings of Section 2 and Section 39 lend no
assistance to the Claimant

151. The Respondent states that the Claimant’s reliance on the word “may” in Section 2’s
heading is “a non sequitur,” given the Claimant’s concession that Section 2 is “not... the
offer itself.”°®? In any event, the word “may” without more does not assist the Claimant,

because:

283 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 17. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 16, 18-19.

284 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 22. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 23-26.

?85 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 27.

286 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 28.

?87 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 29. In particular, the Respondent reminds that the SPP v. Egypt tribunal also made
clear that “jurisdiction will be found to exist if — but only if — the force of the arguments militating in favour of it is
preponderant.” Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 29(c) (quoting SPP v. Egypt, at para. 63, Exhibit CA-3).

°88 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 30 (citing Dolzer Report, at paras. 66-67).

°89 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 31.

 

Page 55 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

152.

153.

Award

a. Mr. Webb accepts that the word “may” in Section 2 means “the State may consent” to

ICSID arbitration, and does not say that the “option lies only with the investor;”?°°

b. in interpreting the word “may,” the Claimant fails to appreciate that the “interpretation

of any dispute resolution clause depends on the specific wording and context in

question;”””!

c. the reliance on the heading of Section 2 also “adds nothing to the analysis,” because it

“says nothing (in itself) about the conditions under which the State has agreed to ICSID

arbitration.”?°?

(3) The grammatical and ordinary meaning of Section 39 does
not offend the principle of effet utile

The Respondent states that, even if effet utile did apply (which the Respondent denies”),

Section 39 would not be “a provision without content.”?°* The Respondent reiterates that

9295

such provisions “serve meaningful purposes, as explained in Professor Dolzer’s

Report,?” including that of “promoting and facilitating foreign investment by reaffirming

the State’s commitment to the ICSID Convention.””"”

c) The context of Section 39 and Section 2 confirm that the State has

not consented to ICSID arbitration

The Respondent observes that the Claimant does not address its argument relating to the
mandatory language (“shall”) in Sections 37 and 38, as distinct from Section 39.7°* The

Respondent adds that, even if Section 39 were an “investment guarantee” as the Claimant

20 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 32.

2°! Reply on Jurisdiction, at para.

 

See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 34.

2 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 35. The Respondent argues that “any other interpretation would mean that any
signatory to the ICSID Convention (which establishes the Centre) must be taken to have agreed to ICSID arbitration,
which is of course incorrect.” Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 35.

293,

See Reply on J

‘isdiction, at para. 37.

 

2 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 38.

295

Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 38.

296 See Dolzer Report, at paras. 47-48.
2°7 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 39.
28 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 40-41.

Page 56 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

contends, its scope would be governed by Section 2 and Article 25(1) —i.e., “it guarantees
the application of the IDCA (implementing the ICSID Convention), according to its terms,

to ‘disputes arising out of foreign investment’.”?”?

d) The purpose of Section 39 and Section 2 confirm that the State has
not consented to ICSID arbitration

(1) Section 39 Draft does not assist in the interpretation of
Section 39 and if anything, supports the State’s position

154. With regard to the 1991 IPA relied upon by the Claimant, the Respondent notes that:
a. the 1991 bill was “prepared under considerable time constraints,” was affected by
“legal and technical ambiguities” and “never came into force;”>°°
b. the 1991 bill “is not a valid aid to interpreting the IPA, and little (if any) reliance should
be placed on it;”°"!
c. the 1991 draft version of Section 39 “does not (contrary to the Claimant’s contention)
constitute any standing offer to ICSID arbitration” for “no dollars” disputes,*”” because:
i. it is unclear what the term “this code” (which the Claimant replaced with the
words “the IPA”) refers to in Section 39(1)(a);°
ii. it is Section 39(2) which “provides the dispute resolution mechanism applicable
to enterprises certified under Part IV such as the Claimant,” not Section 39(1)(a)
which refers to “foreign nationals”);?*
2 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 42.
5 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 47.
5°! Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 48 (citing to Griffin II Report, at para. 36).
302 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 50.
303 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 50(a)-(b)..
34 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 50(c).

Page 57 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

iii. Mr Webb accepts that the draft Section 39(2) “is not a standing offer to

arbitrate;

d. the Hansard of the 1991 bill makes it clear that Section 39 of that bill “does not

constitute any standing offer to ICSID arbitration,” because:

i. the Hansard shows that the focus of the 1991 IPA bill was “on the establishment

of the Investment Promotion Authority;”>°° and

ii. there is no mention in the Hansard of the State “seeking to promote and
facilitate investment in PNG, by agreeing in advance to arbitrate investment

disputes generally at ICSID;”°°"

e. even if the draft Section 39(1)(a) constituted a standing offer to refer “no dollars”

disputes to ICSID arbitration, the State “chose to depart from the wording used” in the

1991 draft in the final version of Section 39;** that departure “in itself, clearly indicates

that the State did not intend, by way of Section 39, to provide any standing offer to

39309

submit investment disputes to ICSID arbitration’”’”” — rather than broaden the scope of

Section 39, as the Claimant suggests;*!”

f. the foregoing analysis is assertedly supported by the Hansard of the 1992 IPA, because,
inter alia, the Hansard makes “no mention of any alleged decision to ‘broaden the

scope of [Section 39]’, after the Government had (allegedly) realised that the Section

39 Draft ‘was not good enough to give foreign investors real comfort’ >"!

155. The Respondent concludes that the 1991 IPA was not produced because “the Section 39

Draft does not assist in the interpretation of Section 39 (if anything it assists the State) —

395 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 50(d) (citing to Webb Report, at para. 57).

i
5 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 51.
57 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 52.
5° Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 54.
5 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 54.
319 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 56-57.
311 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 58(b).

Page 58 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

the old 1991 IPA Bill was never brought into force; the wording of the Section 39 Draft is
ambiguous and does not in any event amount to any standing offer to arbitrate; moreover,

Section 39 now stands in radically different form.”?!”

(2) Legislative history and purpose also supports the State’s
position
156. The Respondent submits that, contrary to the Claimant’s assertions, giving the advance
consent to arbitrate at ICSID was not part of the World Bank structural adjustment loan
requirements; rather, the issue was the replacement of the old NIDA with the Investment
Promotion Authority.*!> The Respondent adds that, “while it is true that one of the stated
purposes of the IPA is to promote and facilitate investment (both domestic and foreign) in
PNG, and for that purpose, to establish the Investment Promotion Authority, it does not

follow therefore that Section 39 must amount to a standing offer” to arbitrate.*!4

157. Further, the Respondent states that the Claimant is wrong in asserting that PNG “did not
need to ‘affirm its commitment to ICSID’” in the IPA.*'> The Respondent argues that the
context in which the IPA was adopted indicates such need existed, namely because “the
State was not particularly welcoming of foreign investment after Independence; and the

IPA was therefore just a step towards the ‘opening up’ of its economy.”?!°

158. In response to the Claimant’s reliance on the investment promotion material, the

Respondent notes that:

a. such materials “cannot, on their own, confer ‘consent in writing’ ,” as recognized in

SPP vy, Egypt3'"

3” Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 59.

313 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 60-66.

314 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 67. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 68-69.
315 Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 70-71.

316 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 73.

317 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 79.

 

 

Page 59 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

 

 

21 Rep!

 

3 Rep!

Award

b. because Section 39 does not contain “consent in writing,” there is no consent for the

promotional material to “confirm” in this case;>!*

c. the pre-RFA statement on the Investment Promotion Authority’s website (the “2013
IPA website statement”) “cannot ... be construed as reflecting the State’s ‘consent’ to

ICSID arbitration;”*!°

d. there is “nothing sinister about the amendment to the 2013 IPA website statement,”
which was made on 18 November 2013 “as part of the launch by the Investment

Promotion Authority of its new website;”*?°

e. the new text of the statements on the IPA website “does not ... indicate any consent by

the State to ICSID arbitration;”>7!

f. the statement on the website of the PNG Embassy to the Americas “does not assist the
Claimant” but rather the Respondent because “it reflects the language in the old Section

2” requiring investors to “first exhaust diplomatic channels and local remedies.”*7?

2. The Claimant is not a private foreign investor that can avail itself of
ICSID arbitration

 

a) The Claimant is not a “foreign investor” and its assets are not
“foreign investment(s)” as defined in the IPA

159. The Respondent contends that the Claimant (including in Webb Report) has not dealt with
the argument that the Claimant is not a “foreign investor” under the IPA because “it has
not made (or proposed to make) any investment in PNG.”*?> According to the Respondent,
the Claimant has not made such an investment because:

318 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 80.

3! Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 81.

30 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 82.

ly on Jurisdiction, at para. 83.
ly on Jurisdiction, at para. 84.
ly on Jurisdiction, at para. 86.

|

ZBEPeee

Page 60 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

160.

161.

162.

163.

325

Award

While a ‘foreign investment’ may have been made in the past by
BHP, there was no further investment made by the exit of BHP
and the gifting of its shares to the Claimant, to hold and use for
the sole benefit of the People?~*

The Respondent further argues that the Claimant’s status as “foreign enterprise” does not
per se inform its status as a “foreign investor” under the IPA,**° and the Claimant’s Section
25 Certificate supports the Respondent’s position that “the Gifted Shares ... cannot be

considered to be a ‘foreign investment” by the Claimant.*”°

Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s reliance on its “development programs
/ projects” in PNG “is misconceived,” because they “do not form part of the ‘investments’

which the Claimant claims it is seeking” to protect in this arbitration.*””

b) The Claimant is not a private foreign investor under the ICSID
Convention

(dd) There is no “investment” under Article 25(1)

The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s reliance on the annulment decision in Malaysia

Historical Salvors v. Malaysia is misconceived,*** and that the Claimant does not satisfy

the “criteria” or “hallmarks” for an investment.*””

First, the Respondent states that it was BHP, rather than the Claimant, that made the

1.330

contributions cited by the Claiman According to the Respondent, the only other

consideration — i.e., the indemnities agreed to by the Claimant — has been mischaracterized

(33!

by the Claimant**! and does not constitute “consideration” for the Gifted Shares.***

4 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 88.
See Reply on Juri

‘isdiction, at paras. 89-92.

 

6 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 94.
*7 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 95.

  

7-98.
s. 99, et seq.
100.

Page 61 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

164.

165.

166.

167.

Award

Second, the Respondent asserts that the other “criteria” for an “investment” are also not

satisfied, including because:

a. the Claimant’s reliance on OTML’s mining activities is “misplaced” because the

Claimant’s approved activity in PNG “is not mining but ‘community development’ ;”?*3

b. the Claimant’s reliance on its “development programs / projects in PNG” is also
“misplaced,” because the Claimant does not seek to protect these programs or projects
in this arbitration, which the Claimant “in any event unilaterally terminated in October

2013.7354

Finally, the Respondent argues that none of the authorities relied upon by the Claimant
support its case that “it can rely on BHP’s initial contributions to say the Gifted Shares are

an ‘investment’.”37°

(2) The Claimant is not “a national of another Contracting
State”

The Respondent argues that authorities relied upon by the Claimant as part of its arguments

1336

on the place of incorporation were cited out of context’”® or from another international law

regime (e.g., the IC) Barcelona Traction decision that is specific to diplomatic

protection).**7

The Respondent further notes that:

a. using the Barcelona Traction terms, the Claimant “cannot be said to have any such
‘genuine’ / ‘close and permanent’ connection or ‘manifold’ links with Singapore — its

only connection with Singapore is the fact of its incorporation here and as a result, that

333 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 104.
34 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 104.
335 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 105. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 106-108 (discussing Victor Pey Casado

v. Chile, African Holding Company

Congo and El Paso v. Argentina).

 

36 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 110.
337 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 111-115.

Page 62 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

1 (out of 7) of its directors is a Singaporean;” rather, these connection and links are

with PNG (including the Claimant’s head office and tax obligations); ***

b. the Claimant’s attempts to distance itself from its strong links with PNG “do not... take

the Claimant’s case any further,”**? because:

i. “the Claimant’s members cannot be said to have any interest in the Claimant’s
assets; rather such assets are held by the Claimant for the sole benefit of the

People;”*“° and

ii. Professor Garnaut’s statements in the Claimant’s 2002 Annual Report that
Singapore was chosen as the place of incorporation because “this allows the
Long Term Fund to be invested on profitable investments anywhere in the

world without attracting any taxation in Singapore or anywhere else.”°4!

168. Finally, the Respondent argues that the Claimant’s reliance on Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine,
Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, Soufraki v. Egypt and Victor Pey Casado v. Chile is also

misplaced.*4

(3) The Claimant discharges an essentially public function and
is not a private investor

169. First, the Respondent reiterates that “the requirement that the claimant is a ‘private’
investor follows from the international arbitration regime being designed generally for the
protection of private investors, as opposed to states acting as investors ...” and “ought to be
uncontroversial.”343

170. Second, the Respondent argues that there are no three approaches, as stated by the

Claimant, but rather “a single set of guidelines (i.e., the ‘Broches test’),” whereas

338 Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 116-117.
+ Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 118.

9 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 119.

1 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 120.

32 See Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 122.
3 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 124.

Page 63 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

171.

172.

173.

Award

“references to ‘functional’ and ‘structural’ points of views are but approaches for the

application of the Broches test.”*4+

The Respondent then reiterates its arguments in its
Objections that the Claimant discharges “an essentially governmental function,” and in
addition relies on several public “admissions” by Sir Mekere that the Claimant “has been

‘doing the Government's job’ >

3. MEN Objection
The Respondent argues that the Claimant makes “no new points” on the Section 37(1) issue
and that Mr. Webb “completely sidesteps” the “most hotly-contested issue between the
parties” — i.e., “whether the second reference to ‘foreign investor’ in Section 37(1) has a

different meaning from the first immediately preceding it.”*4°

The Respondent further argues that the websites referred to by the Claimant in its MFN
arguments “should not be given any weight” because they “cannot transform Section 37(1)
into something it is not by overriding the plain wording of Section 37(1).”*4” Finally, the
Respondent claims that the Claimant’s references to other national legislation “are

irrelevant to showing the PNG Parliament's intentions.”**

Dz. The Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
In its Rejoinder, the Claimant contends that the Respondent “has done little to advance the
debate on jurisdiction” in its Reply and states that the Claimant “will not address all of the

points” made by the Respondent.*#?

4 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 125.

345,

Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 126.

6 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 127. The Respondent clarifies that this issue is whether “the second reference to
‘foreign investor’ mean ‘the same foreign investor’” (the Respondent’s case), or “any other foreign investor” (the
Claimant’s case). Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 127. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, at paras. 128-130.

¥7 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 131.

8 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 132.

9 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 4.

Page 64 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

174.

175.

176.

177.

Award
1. Consent

First, the Claimant addresses the issue of interpretive principles to be applied.

The Claimant notes that, in its Reply, the Respondent has “fundamentally mischaracterized
(or perhaps misunderstood)” the Claimant’s submissions with respect to “the applicable
law, for the interpretation of IPA Section 39.”7°° In further support of its case on the
importance of the SPP v. Egypt decision, the Claimant cites the recent Interocean decision

on preliminary objections,*>!

noting that the decision “is by far the most recent ‘subsequent
jurisprudential development’ in the field of consent through host State law, and it

unequivocally confirms the persuasive status of SPP.”*>

Turning to the effet utile principle, the Claimant argues that the Respondent
“misunderstands” this principle.** The Claimant contends that “effective interpretation is
not expansive interpretation;” rather, “effet utile engages so as to ensure that the provision
is capable of meaningful operation: whether that particular operation is expansive or
restrictive is another matter entirely (and not a matter controlled by effet utile).”?>+
Accordingly, the Claimant submits that Section 39 should “be permitted to operate in such

a way that it is not a mere absurdity or surplusage.”*>>

The Claimant then turns to the Respondent’s submission that, when interpreting Section

356 or the “in dubio

39, any doubts should be resolved “against the finding of jurisdiction,
mitius principle.”*°’ According to the Claimant, the Respondent applies the in dubio mitius
principle in its “substantive facet” — namely, “in cases of jurisdictional doubt, an

international tribunal should decline to hear a dispute out of deference to State sovereignty;

350 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 9.
35! See Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at paras. 14-16 (citing Interocean Oil Development Company and Interocean Oil
Exploration Company v. Federal Republic of Nigeria, ICSID Case No ARB/13/20, Decision on Preliminary
Objections, 29 October 2014 ("Interocean"), Exhibit CA-51)).

5 isdiction, at para. 17.

jiction, at para. 19.

jiction, at paras. 19-20.

jiction, at para. 21.

356 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 22.

357 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at paras. 2, 22.

 

Page 65 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

178.

179.

180.

358 Rejoinder on Juri
389 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction,

    

3 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.

3 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.

Award

in other words, there should be a presumption against jurisdiction.”*>* The Claimant argues

that this “substantive form of the principle is truly a relic of a bygone age.”*>?

The Claimant submits that, if any interpretive presumption were to be applied, “it should
be a bias or presumption that favours the purpose of the IPA, which is investment
promotion;” however, the Claimant’s preference is “for a neutral reading,” with no

particular bias or presumption.>°°

Second, the Claimant turns to the interpretation of Section 39. Responding to certain

assertions by the Respondent, the Claimant clarifies, in particular, the following points:

a. “[t]he Claimant’s position is that the ‘consent in writing’ term of the ICSID Convention
is satisfied by the word ‘applies’;”°°! the “consent in writing” requirement “is not
imported by the word ‘applies’, but is instead one of the suite of terms imported by the

words that follow it (‘according to its terms’);73°

b. the Claimant disputes paragraph 20 of the Respondent’s Reply and states that the
Claimant’s case is that, “in the form of [Section 39], the State has given separate and

subsequent consent to IDCA Section 2;”°° and

c. the Claimant disputes paragraph 32 of the Respondent’s Reply and notes that it “has
never said the investor has any option under IDCA Section 2” and has “conceded from
the outset that IDCA Section 2 is not an offer, but rather a general condition to

subsequent offers (of which IPA Section 39 is one).”*

Turning to the purpose and effect of the Respondent’s declaration in Section 39, the

Claimant notes that the Respondent “continues to argue that [Section 39] serves the purpose

  

, at para. 23.
, at para. 23. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at paras. 24-27.
, at para.
, at para.
, at para.

 

Page 66 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

181.

182.

Award

of ‘reaffirming the State’s commitment to the ICSID Convention’ and ‘clearing the way’
for it to enter into arbitration agreements.”*° The Claimant submits that “neither of these
alleged purposes is convincing — first because there was no need for the provision to do
either of these things, and secondly, because there is no evidence that either was what the

State intended.”*°°
The Claimant further discusses the 1991 IPA and argues that:

a. if the 1991 draft supported the Respondent’s case, the Respondent “would have

produced it itself” in the previous stages of this arbitration;>°”

b. “it is plainly irrelevant” that the 1991 draft “was never brought into force,” because it
is part of the legislative history that is “unquestionably admissible as evidence of the

State’s intent as a declarant” under international law;*°*

c. with the exception of the term “code,” the text of the draft Section 39 in the 1991 IPA

is not ambiguous, but rather “precise and formulaic; and

d. Section 39(1)(a) of the 1991 IPA is, “on any view, a standing offer to arbitrate — just

not a very attractive one.”?”°

The Claimant then turns to the Hansard of the 1992 IPA and rejects the Respondent’s
request that the Tribunal draw inferences from its silence on Section 39.57! The Claimant
notes that the Hansard of the 1991 IPA is also silent on Section 39, although, on the
Claimant’s case, Section 39(1)(a) of the 1991 IPA “unquestionably contained a standing
offer to arbitrate at ICSID.”*”* Citing Webb II Report, the Claimant claims that the silence

in the Hansard is “at least neutral on the question of interpretation,” or even “tends to point

365 Rejoinder on Juri

366 Rejoinder on Juri
397 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.
368 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.
36 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.
37 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para.
31! See Rejoinder on Ju

, at para. 42.
, at para, 43. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at paras. 44-52.

 

 

iction, at para. 61.

 

3 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 62.

Page 67 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

away” from the Respondent’s submissions because Section 39(1)(a) “did contain a

standing offer to arbitrate.”*7*

183. The Claimant further contends that Mr. Griffin’s conclusion in his second report — i.e., that
the amendment of Section 39 in the 1992 IPA “is a clear indication that the Respondent

had no intention, by way of Section 39, to provide any standing offer to submit any

99374 27375

investment disputes to ICSID arbitration’ is “plainly misconceive:

184. Finally, with regard to the Claimant’s reliance on the Respondent’s official investment
promotion literature, the Claimant states that it “is simply asking the Tribunal to treat the
statements of the Investment Promotion Authority and the State’s High Commissions as

evidence that confirms the State’s intention was to make an offer to arbitrate in the IPA.”

2. “Investor” and “Investment”

185. The Claimant contends that, as before, the Respondent continues to conflate jurisdiction

ratione personae and jurisdiction ratione materiae2”

a) Jurisdiction ratione personae

186. First, on the issue of “private” investor, the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s
argument that the Claimant is performing “non-profit” or “non-private” functions, and
therefore is supposedly not a “typical” foreign investor, is “unsupported by the text and
travaux of the ICSID Convention” and “is at odds with international case law.”3’> The
Claimant also argues, in particular, that evidence at Exhibits DR-16 and RE-20 relied upon
by the Respondent “is not evidence of government function, but rather proof that the

Claimant is fully independent of the State.”*””

    

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 63 (quoting from Webb II Report, at para. 32).
4 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 65 (quoting Griffin II Report, at para. 45).
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 67.

© Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 68.

377 See Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 71.

378 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 74.

319 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 75.

 

Page 68 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

187. Second, on the issue of “foreign” investor, the Claimant submits that the Respondent “still
attempts to pierce the corporate veil of the Claimant”**? for which there is “simply no legal
or factual basis” in this case.**! The Claimant argues, in particular, the Barcelona Traction

“has assumed a status independent of the diplomatic-protection context in which it was

4.7382 383

originally enunciate as evidenced by recent awards.

188. The Claimant adds that “the State consciously defined the term ‘foreign investor’ in the
IPA without any denial-of-benefits conditions or nexus qualifications” and it has “no basis”
to raise those issues now.**+ Finally, the Claimant argues that the Respondent’s denial that
the Claimant is a foreign entity, after granting the Claimant the certificates as a “foreign

enterprise,” is the Respondent “arguing contrary to its own deeds,” which international law

does not allow (allegans contraria non est audiendus).>*°

b) Jurisdiction ratione materiae

189. The Claimant continues to argue that it has made an investment in PNG, both under the

IPA and the ICSID Convention, and contends that:

a. Section 3(1) of the IPA defines the term “investment” in “what are, on any view, broad

terms;”38°

b. the Respondent seeks to “impose ex post (or, at best, imply) ... a requirement of

99387

consideration,”’*’ which is problematic because:

380 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 79.

38! Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 80.

382 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 81.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 82 (citing Tokios). See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 83 (citing ADC
Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited y. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16,
Award, 2 October 2006 (“ADC v. Hungary”), Exhibit CA-24, and Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008,
Exhibit CA-22, as authorities that have followed the majority decision in Tokios).

isdiction, at para. 84.

jiction, at para. 85.

386 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 89.

387 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 90.

  

383

 

 

Page 69 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

i. it conflates the ICSID Convention ‘investment’ indicator of ‘contribution’ with

the private (contract) law notion of ‘consideration’ ;”3**

ii. the fact that the Respondent intended to define the term “investment” in “broad
terms, without any general requirement of ‘consideration’”” is supported by
Section 3(1)’s list of qualifying assets which extends both to “private law
instruments (such as shares and contracts) and instruments and rights emanating
from public law, such as ‘business and analogous concessions conferred by
law’ ;”?*? even if the OTML shares were a “gift” — which the Claimant denies —

that would not change the analysis;>”°

iii. it is a basic property law and international investment law principle that the
effect of the transfer of BHPB’s shares in OTML to the Claimant under the
2001 Master Agreement “was that all rights attaching to those shares, including

rights under the IPA, were transferred as a bundle to the Claimant.”**!

3. MEN

190. The Claimant contends, without repeating its arguments, that it is relying on the official
investment promotion literature not to “transform Section 37(1) into something it is not,”
as the Respondent contends, but rather “to prove that the State intended IPA Section 37(1)

to confer MFN treatment.”

388 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 91.

 

391 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 94. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 95.
382 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 96.

Page 70 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award
E. The Parties’ Submissions at the Hearing on Jurisdiction
1. The Respondent’s Submissions

a) Consent

191. At the hearing, the Respondent’s counsel first addressed the rules of interpretation, before
setting out the Respondent’s position on the interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA and

Section 2 of the IDCA.

(1) Rules of interpretation

192. The Respondent reiterated its position that the rules of interpretation articulated by
Professor Dolzer should apply,**? and noted that there is not “a lot of difference” between
these rules and the two interpretive schemes articulated by the Claimant,>** save for the
principle that “doubt shall be resolved against the finding of jurisdiction.”**> According to
the Respondent, the SPP v. Egypt decision supports the Respondent’s position that consent
is “not something certainly to be lightly inferred or presumed, but ... it has to be clearly
shown, not necessarily with taking a restrictive approach.”*°° The Respondent’s counsel
added that “[t]hat’s why we say essentially both schemes or approaches require the consent

to be clearly shown.”?°7

193. The Respondent further noted that the distinction between the Parties “in terms of the
restrictive approach” is Professor Dolzer’s view, in reliance on ILC Guiding Principle 7,
that “the approach to unilateral declarations should be restrictive.”*°* The Respondent

accepted that Section 39 of the IPA was “a unilateral declaration”*””

and explained that it
was not “only meant to convey information to domestic authorities; rather, it is to those

who would read this and, hence, this would include foreign investors.”*°° The Respondent

 
 
  

ee DT(Day1).2.24-5.11.
See DT(Day1).4.02-05.
885 See DT(Day1).5.06-21.
36 DT(Day1).7.08-11. See also Respondent’s discussion of the Conoco Phillips case, at DT(Day1).7.12-8.08.
37 DT(Day1).8.09-10.
38 DT(Dayl).8.11-18.
3 DT(Day1).9.21-22.
40 DT(Day!).11.12-16.

Page 71 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

194.

195.

196.

197.

Award

referred to Professor Dolzer’s position that this declaration “is of a hybrid nature because
being a national law, but intended to operate, to an extent, on the international plane, the

approach should be a mix of both national and international law principles.”4"!

The Respondent reiterated its position that, “even on the common ground between us on

the principles of interpretation, consent is not clearly shown. It is not shown at all.“

(2) Interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 IDCA

The Respondent addressed the interpretation of the relevant provisions of PNG law “at
three levels” — the text, the context (“including the circumstances leading to the preparation

of the relevant provisions”) and the purpose.“

(a) Textual interpretation

First, turning to Section 2 of the IDCA, the Respondent stated that it is “common ground
that this [provision] does not constitute the consent in writing in itself.”#°* According to
the Respondent, Section 2 does not “create[] any additional rights or take[] away any rights
in terms of what the notification serves,” and although “[t]here was no need for section 2”
because there was the 1978 Notification, the Respondent “thought it useful to reflect it

here."

Regarding the title of Section 2 itself (“Classes of Disputes which May Be Referred to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre”), the Respondent stated that it sought “to define or narrow the
type of disputes that may be referred” to ICSID, provided that “all the requirements have
been fulfilled,” and was therefore “still subject to this consent in writing being
provided.”4° On the significance of the word “may” in Section 2’s heading, the

Respondent noted that it should be read “in contra-distinction to ‘shall’, [and] generally

401 DT(Day!).11.16-20.
402 DT(Day1).8.23-25.

403 DT(Day!).12.12-21.
404 DT(Day!).14.11-13.
405 DT(Day!).16.01-07.
406 DT(Day1).15.04-10.

Page 72 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

198.

199.

200.

201.

Award

9407

it’s not mandatory, and reiterated that it did not remove the requirement of consent in

writing but rather defined “in a negative way” what could not “go up for ICSID

arbitration.”4°8

Second, turning to Section 39 of the IPA, the Respondent argued that the words “applies,

according to its terms” meant the following:

Essentially, what it provides to disputes arising out of foreign
investment, is that the IDCA applies according to these terms. What
is sought to be applied is the Act, not the convention. The words
‘implementing the convention’ appear to be descriptive of what the
IDCA did. What section 39 does is apply the Act according to its
terms.”

The Respondent argued that, “[a]pplying that natural and ordinary meaning, according to

its terms means all its terms, not some of the terms or all but one of the terms or part of the

terms; nothing more and nothing less.”*!”

The Respondent contrasted Section 39 with the national legislation in SPP v. Egypt and the
Venezuela Cases, which legislation “referred to the convention rather than the Act itself,
or the Act implementing it,” and noted that “it might be a step or half a step closer to saying

consent could apply, if it was talking in terms of the convention applying directly.”*!!

Addressing the Claimant’s arguments on construction of “applies” and “according to its

terms” as having two distinct functions,*!”

1743

the Respondent contended that “that is an
artificial way of construing i According to the Respondent, “the claimant’s

submission does involve [the Tribunal] either construing this, not in a natural and ordinary

407 DT(Day1).16.24-25.

408 DT(Day1).17.16-18.

40° DT(Day1).20.19-21.01.

410 DT(Dayl).22.14-17. See also DT(Day2).31.15-18.

411 DT(Day1).21.23-22.05. See also DT(Day1).34.09-13 (Mr. Yeo: “... Just as I’ve said, if the reference was to the
convention rather than act, perhaps an argument, you might be getting a step closer to saying that that is the standing
offer to consent, the use of the use of more mandatory language like ‘shall’.”).

412 See DT(Day1).30.03-09.

413 DT(Day1).30.12. See also DT(Day2).31.12-14 (Mr. Yeo: “I submit to the tribunal that to read ‘applies’ and

ding to its terms’ disj is not natural or ).

Page 73 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

way, but in a very contrived and artificial way or, indeed, to rewrite it.”4!* The Respondent

stated that the Tribunal can “construe [this provision] as best it can to prevent an absurdity

or an empty form, but [the Tribunal] still can’t rewrite it.”4!>

202. According to the Respondent, the expression “applies, according to its terms” “should be
construed together ... [and] ‘according to its terms’ governs or limits the application,”

which “includes the consent in writing” and “the issue about nationals of contracting

states.4!© Overall, the meaning that the Respondent attaches to Section 39 is that:

it is reaffirming Papua New Guinea’s commitment to ICSID and
clarifying or informing foreign investors, or those who make foreign
investment, if there’s a difference, that ICSID arbitration may be
available.*!”

203. The Respondent finally noted that, “reading section 39 in conjunction with section 2 ... still
wouldn’t provide that consent.”4!® According to the Respondent, what Section 39 “simply
says is the IDCA applies according to its terms,” and “takes you back to the IDCA and if

the IDCA didn’t provide the consent, then section 39, read on its own, or with it, can’t do

more than that.*!

204. In sum, the Respondent’s case, this does not “come[] any way close to clear and

unambiguous or to the force of arguments militating in favour of jurisdiction being

preponderant....”4?°

414 DT(Day1).40.18-21.

415 DT(Day1).40.15-17.

416 DT(Day1).30.13-19.

417 DT(Day1).32.13-17.

418 DT(Day1).22.21-22.

419 DT(Day1).38.11-16. See also DT(Day1).45.22-24 (Mr. Yeo: “If the IDCA didn’t provide the consent, then merely
applying it to disputes arising out of foreign investment doesn’t achieve that effect.”); DT(Day1).45.18-47.20.

#20 DT(Day1).46.11-14.

Page 74 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

205.

206.

207.

208.

Award
(b) Context and purpose

First, the Respondent noted that Section 37 and Section 39 of the IPA refer to “foreign

421

investor” and “foreign investment,” respectively,**' which under the definitions in the IPA,

both “are not restricted to nationals of contracting state; they apply to any investment, it

9422

appears, by someone who is not a citizen. According to the Respondent, Section 37

sets out “substantive rights, and they’re given to a wider group of people, foreign investors,

and there’s no limitation that that can only be enforced through ICSID arbitration.”*”>

The Respondent submitted that there was nothing to suggest that substantive rights under
Section 37, framed in mandatory terms, ‘74 could not be enforced other than through ICSID,
by “bring[ing] an action in the courts or perhaps some other court;’”*?> further, “because
it’s available to all foreign investors, not just nationals of contracting states, certainly those
nationals who are from states who are not contracting states to the ICSID convention,

would have to find another way to enforce them.’4?°

The Respondent pointed out that “the language that is employed in section 39 is markedly

different from what appears in sections 37 and 38.427

According to the Respondent,
“{w]Jhile section 39 appears in Part V,” it does not appear “from the text or the context that
39 is necessarily linked to 37 and 38” and it is not “the means by which you enforce sections

37 and 38.7478

Second, turning to the legislative history of the IPA and the IDCA, the Respondent made

the following observations:

421 See DT(Day1).26.21-28:02.

422 DT(Day1).28:07-10.

#23 DT(Day1).31.09-13.

#4 See, e.g., DT(Day1).33.04-06 (Mr. Yeo: “Rather than futurity, I considered that ‘shall’ simply, in its mandatory

form.

, was saying, ‘We are conferring substantive rights’.”).

25 DT(Day).28.24-29.05.
26 DT(Day1).29.06-10.
27 DT(Day!).31.22-24.
28 DT(Day2).35.20-36.04.

Page 75 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

a. with regard to the Hansard of the 1991 IPA, the Respondent noted that it made clear
that the “wider context and purpose of the IPA” was “to introduce the authority, the

IPA, the authority, to replace the NIDA, which was seen as being very cumbersome;””???

b. with regard to the 1991 Act, the Respondent argued that it “affords [the Tribunal] no
guidance in terms of construing the current IPA’? and that “there are considerable
difficulties in interpreting [sections] 39(1) and 39(2)” of the 1991 IPA**! in the manner
suggested by the Claimant.**? In particular, the Respondent criticized the Claimant’s
position that the 1992 IPA’s effort “improve” the 1991 IPA (as stated in the Hansard
of the 1992 IPA) “means improve from the perspective of foreign investors, not from

the state’”4

and argued that the improvement may also be seen from the perspective of
the State.4*4 The Respondent noted that, when passing legislation, the States look to
advance their own interests;**> for example, it may be in the State’s interest to grant
consent in a bilateral treaty in exchange for “something tangible in return.”4*° The
Respondent also stated that the “reference in Hansard was to improving the legislation
or to improve the bill,” to make it clearer, rather than “to improve the offer” as the

Claimant suggested.**’

c. turning to the Hansard of the 1992 IPA, the Respondent submitted that it reflects the
improvements made compared to the 1991 version, including the simplification of the
certification procedures for foreign investors and strengthening of “investment
guarantees for foreign investors.”4** The Respondent emphasized that “there’s nothing

here about ICSID arbitration, consent to jurisdiction or advance consent;” rather, the

2° DT(Day1).56.21-24. See also DT(Day1).71.01-72.08.
480 DT(Day!).59.19-20.

48 DT(Day!).62.11-14, See also DT(Day1).62.14-64.05.
482 DT(Day1).67.13-14.

83 DT(Day1).68.1 1-14.

484 See DT(Dayl).06-19.

85 DT(Day!).14-18.

+36 DT(Day1).68.19-69.05.

87 DT(Day2).46.01-05.

488 See DT(Day1).73.19-74.22.

Page 76 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

strengthening of the “investment guarantees... so as to cover ‘all foreign investors’,”

without limitation to national of Contracting States.*°
d. with regard to the various Hansards of the IDCA, the Respondent stated that:

i. the Hansard of the 1978 IDCA indicated that, “‘at least as far as the government
was concerned, the IDCA bill, being enacted in 1978, didn’t itself constitute the

consent,” and that consent in writing was required; and

ii. the Hansard of the 1982 amendment to the IDCA similarly shows that “there
was no attempt to say [that the Respondent is] providing the consent in writing
to ICSID;” rather, the focus of the debate was to eliminate the requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies which was reflected in “the sole change made in

1982” — i.e., removal of the part of the provision “about local and diplomatic

remedies.”“!

209. Third, the Respondent referred to the examples of BITs which it had entered into as alleged
evidence of knowledge how to give its consent to arbitration. The Respondent reiterated

that these treaties show that, if the Respondent “wanted to consent to ICSID arbitration,

[it] certainly knew how to do so and had done so previously in clear, unequivocal terms.”44?

210. Fourth, the Respondent submitted that the statements on the websites — that are in many

443,

ways inaccurate**’ — should not be considered by the Tribunal in resolving the interpretive

dilemma, because the websites are not “subsequent practice falling within article 31 of the

43° DT(Day1).74.15-22 (emphasis added).

#0 DT(Day2).38.18-39.06.

441 DT(Day2).40.08-17.

#2 DT(Day1).76.03-06.

+48 See DT(Day2).12.13-14.18 (the Respondent’s counsel pointed out that the IPA website contains inaccuracies,
including an outdated reference to exhaustion of local remedies: “If the tribunal notes, it’s still talking about
diplomatic channels or local remedies before the matter can go to ICSID. ... The reference to ‘diplomatic channels’
or ‘use of local remedies’ is actually a reference back to the original IDCA before the 1982 amendment. In terms of
reflecting the position post-1982, it’s simply wrong.”).

Page 77 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

211.

212.

213.

Award

VCLT.”“* According to the Respondent, the investment promotion literature can only be
g P' P y
ods

“informative,” but cannot “change the rights of the statute.
The Respondent further contrasted the websites relied upon by the Claimant with the
circumstances in Planet Mining v. Republic of Indonesia. The Respondent noted that these
circumstances were different from the present case because they did not involve “some
general statement on a website, but a very specific document pertaining to that enterprise

which was also copied to the highest authority” of the host State.

Fifth, regarding the purpose of the IPA and Section 39, the Respondent accepted that the
purpose of the IPA “was to promote foreign investment in Papua New Guinea,”4” but
noted that “there are a number of degrees in terms of how attractive you seek to make

yourself.”*#8 According to the Respondent, the IPA was “largely about setting-up the

9449

investment promotion agency”” and “streamlining the procedures for making investments

which were previously considered to be very cumbersome under the predecessor

agency.”™4°

With regard to the purpose of Section 39 itself, the Respondent submitted that, within the

wider context of the IPA, Section 39 “does serve a purpose to tell investors that ICSID

o451 «g

arbitration may be available; ‘there is a purpose in putting everything in one statute, so

77452

that parties reading it can be made aware of i The Respondent noted that:

looked at in the wider purpose or streamlining procedures for
foreign investment, [Section 39] would have value, it would have
purpose to inform foreign investors, to reaffirm the commitment to

+4 DT(Day2).10.06-08.

+45 DT(Day2).5.15-17.

+46 DT(Day2).3.07-23.

+7 DT(Day!).36.20-23.

+48 DT(Day1).37.04-06.

#9 DT(Day1).37.04-08. See also DT(Day1).50.01-21.
450 DT(Day!).50.23-25.

451 DT(Day!).35.07-11.

482 DT(Day1).35.15-17.

Page 78 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

ICSID arbitration and to inform them that this may be available for
disputes arising out of foreign investment.*>?

214. The Respondent argued that Section 39 is “not an absurdity or an empty form,” because it
“does have a meaning and purpose.”*** In any event, “you can’t just on that purpose alone,

of promoting foreign investment, rewrite this provision or read in words that aren’t

there.”*°

215. Finally, the Respondent noted that, “if you look at the context of the IPA and the purpose

that it was trying to serve, that the meaning we have advanced fits within that context and

purpose and, to us, is congruent and consistent with the words actually used.’”4°°

216. The Respondent concluded its submissions on consent as follows:

In conclusion ... adopting what is common between the two
interpretive approaches, you start with the words. And the words
are clear and refer you back to the act and all its terms, or subject to
its terms; no more, no less.

If section 2 of the IDCA doesn’t provide the consent, section 39
doesn’t take you further. Within the wider context of the IPA and
the purpose of promoting foreign investment, we say this meaning
makes sense and has purpose and effect. Remember that effet utile,
if it applies, requires you to find that the meaning we put forward is
an absurdity and an empty form. Even then, it doesn’t say you can
rewrite the provision. It says you do your utmost to prevent this
absurdity from occurring.

453 DT(Dayl).77.02-08. See also DT(Day1).82.16-21; DT(Day2)35.05-08 (“[T]here is a real purpose served in the
international plane to reaffirm your commitment to the ICSID Convention and to clarify and inform that it may be
available.”).

454 DT(Day1).85.11-12.

455 DT(Day1).37.22-24. See also DT(Day1).85.12-86.03; DT(Day2).30.06-08 (“What you can’t do is focus on the
purpose and then try to drag up those words to fit that purpose.”); DT(Day2).37.06-10 (“[T]here is at least more than
one meaning ... that would fit within that purpose. That’s why you can’t just look at the purpose and say that from
that I divine the meaning without having a strong regard to the words.”).

456 DT(Day1).86.05-09.

Page 79 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

217.

218.

Award

This is not an absurdity or an empty form, it serves a purpose.
Maybe not the purpose the claimant wants to serve, but it serves a
purpose nonetheless. So at the end of the day, we are saying it is
clear that the consent in writing requirement isn’t fulfilled.*°”

b) “Investor” and “Investment”

The Respondent underscored the “very unique set of facts” in this case and summarized
the relevant facts, the Ninth Supplemental Act and the Claimant’s M&A*** to “help [the
Tribunal] understand the animal that is the Claimant.”*°? The Respondent argued that “this

unique set of facts takes them outside the realm of the sort of private foreign investment

that was meant to have disputes adjudicated through the ICSID arbitration.”4°

In particular,**! the Respondent:

a. accepted that the place of incorporation of the Claimant is Singapore, but argued that

“beyond that factor, ... everything else points to Papua New Guinea;

the Respondent, the Claimant is “in substance ... a PNG institution, albeit incorporated

in Singapore;4°

b. clarified that it was “not talking about nominal consideration” but rather about “zero

consideration that came out from the claimants;”4*

c. stated that the Claimant’s “purposes are all public and charitable;4®

457 DT(Day2).50.22-51.16.

458 See DT(Day1).90-107. The Respondent noted in passing, without going into the merits of the claims, that the

Respondent disputes that there had been an expropriation, See DT(Day1).102.12-13.
459 DT(Day1).99.15-16.
460 DT(Day1).107.16-20.

461 The Respondent elsewhere also stated that the purpose of the Claimant’s certification as a “foreign enterprise”
under Section 25 of the IPA “is to carry on business in the country, and that’s why I say it doesn’t correlate to
investment in the context of the ICSID convention” (DT(Day1).51.24-52.05), and that the fact that the Claimant did
not avail itself of the exemption under Section 26 of the IPA did not mean that “they are not a charitable or public-

purpose type of company.” (DT(Day!).52.06-22).

46 DT(Day!).110.10-12.

463 DT(Day1).107.07-09. See also DT(Day2).28.05-09.
464 DT(Day!1).108.03-05.

465 DT(Day!).109.11.

Page 80 of 153

according to

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

d. distinguished this case from the facts and circumstances in other investor-State cases.*°

c) MEN

219. On interpretation of Section 37(1) of the IPA, the Respondent reiterated its written

submissions and summarized its position as follows:

The reference to ‘the foreign investor’... must be the same one. ...
We say our construction is consistent and congruent with the
wording of section 37, because the reference to ‘the foreign
investor’ in the second line must mean the same one in the first line.
I accept the word ‘same’ isn’t there, but I’m saying that’s the
meaning of ‘the’. The claimant’s construction would require you to
read ‘the foreign investor’ to mean ‘any other foreign investor’
because, essentially, it’s someone other than the one in the first line,
and we say that does considerable violence to the language.*®”

220. The Respondent further contended that Section 37(1)’s “reference to ‘any treaty’ to which
the state is a party is qualified by the words in the second line of ‘the investor’. In other
words, the treaty that’s being referred to needs to be with a state of which the investor is a

national.”48

2. The Claimant’s Submissions
a) Consent

221. The Claimant’s counsel approached the interpretation of Section 39 from the perspective
of a potential foreign investor looking at the IPA.“ The Claimant pointed out the
circularity of the provisions of Section 39 and stated that “[i]t needs to be interpreted, in

particular the word ‘applies’;’”4”° “[e]lliptical provisions require interpretation; they don’t

necessarily require rewriting.”*”!

466 See DT(Day1).107-110.

467 DT(Dayl).111.06-24.

468 DT(Day2).1.14-20.

469 See DT(Dayl).118.11-119.04.
41 See DT(Day1).119.05-120.04.
4 DT(Day1).124.11-12.

Page 81 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

222. The Claimant defined the Tribunal’s task in this case as follows:

[T]he question is whether what you are asked to do, having regard
to the interpretive methods available to a Papua New Guinea court
.., falls within the interpretive mandate of the tribunal or falls
outside the interpretive mandate of the tribunal so that you have to
hold up your hands and say, ‘There’s nothing to be done. The hole
can’t be fixed’, despite the fact that there was an evident intention
to give investment guarantees, which included reference to
ICSID.*””

223. The Claimant summarized its interpretive approach as follows:

[T]he question is the application of a domestic law which relates to
an international treaty. And, therefore, the parties are agreed that
you refer both to international law and to Papua New Guinea law in
determining the questions arising.

We rely on Papua New Guinea law because of its strong emphasis
on object and purpose in relation to a phrase which is equivocal. We
rely on international law as supporting the idea of investment
arbitration on the basis of a good faith commitment by the state.47?

224. According to the Claimant, the word “applies” in the context of the IPA’s purpose is that
“it is open consent to arbitration under the convention in cases where the substantive

requirements of the convention are met.”47* The Claimant noted that interpretation of

475

Section 39 “involves very careful appreciation of the facts, and argued that “the idea

that there is in principle a view of restrictive interpretation, a document of statements or

propositions in legislation made with a view to attracting foreign investment, is frankly

passé,"47

42 DT(Day!).125.01-11.
473 DT(Day1).156.13-22.
4 DT(Day1).120.11-14.
475 DT(Day1).122.08-09
476 DT(Day1).122.12-15.

Page 82 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

225.

47 DT(Day1).144.21-23. The Claimant stated that the Respondent “has not been entirely helpful in producing the
language of the legislation” and that the Claimant had to find and produce the Hansards and the 1991 IPA itself; “to
the extent that a government seeks to rely upon the terms of its legislation in front of the tribunal, it has an obligation
to the tribunal to be candid and productive in relation to the content of that legislation, which it has not been.”

Award

First, the Claimant discussed the legislative history of the IDCA and described what the

Claimant’s counsel characterized as “the trend of the PNG legislation ... to expand access

to an arbitration, with a view to attracting investment.”47”

a. The Claimant referred to the original version of the IDCA, noting that it implemented
the ICSID Convention “in a very comprehensive way,” was “carefully drafted” and
annexed the Convention itself.478 The Claimant submitted that, throughout the

revisions to the IDCA, “there was a progression towards consent over the three pieces

of legislation.”

b. the Claimant referred to the Hansard of the IDCA Amendment Act 1982**° and noted
that the sentence stating “[t]he bill will remove from the Act a provision requiring all
domestic remedies to be exhausted before this bill can be referred to ICSID” contained
a mistake and should instead read “before a dispute under the convention can be
referred to ICSID.”**! According to the Claimant, by removing the requirement to
exhaust local remedies before bringing a dispute to ICSID, the 1982 amendment “did
take Papua New Guinea quite a long way down the line to an agreement to arbitrate”

because “it got rid of a major obstacle to foreign investment, which is the local remedies

tule ... ;482

c. the Claimant stated that:

We’re told by counsel for the respondent that all of this was simply
intended to open the door to ICSID, but the door was already wide
open insofar as they would have it open, because it was already fully
agreed by 1982 that the ICSID arbitration was the best method of

DT(Day2).57.24-58.04, 58.17-22.

478 DT(Day1).126.02-09.

419 DT(Day1).128.23-24. See also DT(Day1).128.25-130.08.

480 Hansard extracts in respect of the IDCA Amendment Act 1982, Exhibit CL-15.
481 DT(Day1).130.09-21.

482 DT(Day1).131.23-132.06.

Page 83 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

resolving investment disputes. It would be a work of supererogation
for Parliament in 1991 and 1992 to say, again, ICSID is the best
method. We say that you are entitled to take into account the
progressions in the legislations, it’s [sic] public documents which
led to the position of 1992.48

The Claimant argued that “when parliament in two tries in 1991 and 1992 enacted
legislation which is capable of a broader interpretation, having regard to the object and
purpose of that legislation, that is the right interpretation to give to it.”4*4 The Claimant
stated, however, that it did not suggest that Section 2 of the IDCA, as amended in 1982,

“constituted an open offer” to arbitrate.**>

the Claimant turned to the 1991 IPA and argued that Section 39(1) “indisputably”
contained “an offer to arbitrate a certain class of cases’”**° which “wasn’t drafted by a
neophyte.”“*” Looking at Section 39(1), the Claimant stated that the reference to the
term “code” meant “as a minimum, [that] it applies to the code of investment,
substantive investment guarantees in section 37, and quite possibly to other provisions
of the Act as well.”488 The Claimant added that “it is as clear as the night follows the
day that [section] 39(2) is subject to a subsequent agreement to arbitrate and [section
39(1)] is not.“*? The Claimant concluded on this point that “in this legislation,
unproclaimed, PNG took the next step and offered arbitration for an uncertain but real

class of cases involving investment guarantees.”4°”

in relation to the Hansard of the 1991 IPA, the Claimant argued that the creation of the

Investment Promotion Agency was not “the only piece” in this Act.*?! According to

483 DT(Day1).132.07-17. See also DT(Day1).133.05-13.

484 DT(Day1).133.09-13.

485 DT(Day1).133.20-21.

486 DT(Day1).133.12-16.

487 DT(Day1).138.06.

488 DT(Day1).138.14-17. See also DT(Day1).140.11-13 (Prof. Crawford: “what is indisputable is that section 39(1),
whatever it extends to, and however far it extends, is an offer to arbitrate.”).

489 DT(Day1).140.18-20.

490 DT(Day1).140.24-141.02.

491 DT(Day1).141.20-23.

Page 84 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

the Claimant, although it is true that governments “only legislate in their own interests,
in this case there was “a relatively weak government rich in natural resources which
desperately wanted to attract inward foreign investment.”*°? The Claimant added that,

although there is a “vacuum” in the parliamentary debate on the issue of ICSID

arbitration, it could be because this issue was “passed as a technicality.”*°

f. according to the Claimant, if the 1992 IPA were interpreted as the Respondent suggests,
it would have been “a significant step backwards from a consent to arbitrate matters
related to the interpretation or application of the Act to a refusal to arbitrate matters

relating to interpretation or application of the Act.”4°* The Claimant added that:

There was nothing that the Papua New Guinea parliament could
have done after 1982 that would have made Papua New Guinea
more available to ICSID than the expression of a consent to
arbitrate. Nothing more was required.

In the context of the notion of ... the application of a treaty provision,
in the context of an act which is intended to facilitate investment and
to encourage investment, in the context of a legal system where
purpose of interpretation is more supportive and more supported
than it is in the classic common law tradition ... [,] we say that the
right interpretation is that when it is said that the convention was to
apply, that meant that the convention was to apply as a method of
the resolution of disputes.*°>

g. looking at the Hansard of the 1992 Act, the Claimant noted that the reference to that
Act’s purpose to “improve” the previous 1991 version could mean “an improvement

from the point of view of the aims which [the Minister] articulated, which included to

42 DT(Day1).142.03-10. The Claimant subsequently noted that “in capital-importing jurisdictions with weak
domestic institutions, especially those which are highly reliant on mineral exports, investment guarantees are of
extreme importance. And in making decisions about very substantial upfront investments, or further investments,
investors look to see what guarantees are on offer. Guarantees provided by domestic courts ... are not regarded as
satisfactory or sufficient.” DT(Day2).61.22-62.05.

493 DT(Day1).143.13-15.

494 DT(Day1).145.24-146.03.

495 DT(Day1).146.12-147.03.

   

Page 85 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

promote private sector investment as well as meet conditions set under the World Bank

structural adjustment loan.’”4°°

226. Second, the Claimant addressed the interpretation of Section 39 of the 1992 IPA and:

a. stated that its position was that Section 39 “imports the amended 1978 Act, including

section 2 in its amended formulation, and that it deems that section 2 is satisfied for

disputes arising out of the investment guarantees;”°”

b. cited the Interocean v. Nigeria case, in which the tribunal found that the word “apply”

was “sufficient to constitute consent in advance,” albeit applying a different legislative

provision;**

c. contended that “[i]f the effect of applying the limitation [that a normative instrument is
subject to] is that the document fails to have any operation at all, as the reference to the

tules in Interocean would have had if it had been taken literally, then you’ve got to

modify the interpretation of the word ‘applies’ accordingly;”*?

d. argued that:

the reference to ‘in its own terms’, with commas before and after, is
simply making it clear ... that the convention is still the convention
and still is subject to limitations in the convention. We say that that
is itself subject to the qualification that the convention is made to
apply as guarantee, which without consent it would not be. So the
minimum application that the convention has to have in order not
simply to be part of PNG law but to be applicable to the dispute is
that PNG has consented to the dispute.*°°

e. taking Section 39 in its context, argued that the “investment guarantees provided for in

section 37 of the 1992 Act would be of very limited value, and, indeed, ultimately

496 DT(Day1).148.15-18.
+7 DT(Day2).67.12-16.

48 See DT(Day2).62.06-19.
49 DT(Day2).70.14-19.

50 DT(Day2).70.20-71.05.

Page 86 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

perhaps of no value at all, unless they’re underpinned by the further investment
guarantee arbitration.”°°! The Claimant added that “it’s not the case that section 39 is
an afterthought in the provision, only section 37 and 38 of which constitute investment
guarantees;” rather, it was “intended as part of a section, we say a code, dealing with
investment guarantees.”*" According to the Claimant, if Section 39 had said what the
Respondent said it means, “it wouldn’t be an investment guarantee,” but would instead

“deter investment and defeat the object and purposes of the [IPA].”°

227. The Claimant submitted that there were “five interpretive conclusions available to the

tribunal” in relation to Section 39, including:**

a. “what it does is simply to reaffirm the availability of ICSID if the parties agree” — in
which case this would be an (unnecessary) fourth reaffirmation of its commitment to
ICSID by the Respondent, following the ratification of the ICSID Convention, the 1978
IDCA and the 1982 amendment to the IDCA;>°

b. it is a “domestic confirmation of the position of ICSID within the PNG legal system,
in effect confirming the force and effect of the 1978 Act;” according to the Claimant,

in a dualist PNG legal system, the 1978 IDCA, as implementing legislation, “did

everything it needed to do to give effect to ICSID” and nothing further was required;>°°

c. Section 39 “clears the way for reference to ICSID, but there’s no evidence that there

was any legal impediment once the 1982 amendment had removed the requirement of

99507

domestic remedies;”””’ according to the Claimant, this “clear the way” interpretation is

therefore “redundant;

50! DT(Day2).63.11-18.
502 DT(Day2).63.19-24.
503 DT(Day2).64.17-25.
504 DT(Day2).83.01-02.
505 DT(Day2).83.05-23.
506 DT(Day2).84.03-07.
507 DT(Day2).84.14-17.
508 DT(Day2).85.13-14.

Page 87 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

228.

229.

Award

d. “all section 39 did was to refer back to a 1978 Act, already part of the law of Papua
New Guinea, and say that the Act applied,” and that “it was not a guarantee but the

contingent possibility of a guarantee;

according to the Claimant, this interpretation
advanced by the Respondent “is inconsistent with the object and purpose of the
legislation, ... is not required by the terms of section 39” and is “an example of

redundancy, if not absurdity;”>!°

e. Section 39 “expressed an intention to extend investment guarantees, ... because that
was what parliament intended to do as the minister said in introducing the

legislation,”>! !

and the intention “achieved, albeit elliptically,” in the 1992 IPA was “to
extend and not reduce the guarantee.”*!? This is the interpretation favoured by the

Claimant.

Third, the Claimant further argued that, when one faces an “elliptical piece of legislation,”
it is a matter of “preponderance of the arguments,” and in this case “the preponderance of
arguments favours our view of the position, rather than Papua New Guinea’s view of the
position....”°!? The Claimant also stated that, “[i]f the position is that the legislation is open
to more than one interpretation ... we say that the purpose of interpretation in the context
of the legislation ... directed at the outside and intended to have beneficial effects, that

interpretation is to be preferred.”>!

The Claimant submitted that, in this case, its interpretation of Section 39 “is more than just

a possible scenario; it is the more likely scenario,”>!5

516

or “it’s not simply a possible

interpretation; it’s the better interpretation.

509 DT(Day2).87.10-17.
510 DT(Day2).87.18-21.
5 DT(Day2).87.24-88.05.
512 DT(Day2).89.15-16.

 

T(Day1).150.20-22.

514 DT(Day2).65.24-66.06.
515 DT(Day1).151.13-14.
516 DT(Day).151.23-25. See also DT(Day1).151.15-24.

Page 88 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

230.

231.

232.

233.

Award

Finally, on the issue of websites, the Claimant noted that it did not suggest, “in the context
of the interpretation of domestic legislation, ... that the practice of administrative agencies
is determinative” because “[i]t’s a matter of law, and not a matter of what may be
misguided appreciations;” however, “[i]t’s nonetheless relevant, and similar conduct has
been treated as relevant in other cases.”°!’ According to the Claimant, “the conduct of the
competent authority under the relevant legislation in giving effect to that legislation can be

taken into account.”>!§

The Claimant stated that, bearing in mind Sections 6 and 7 of the IPA setting out the

functions of the Investment Promotion Authority:

[I]t was within the scope of the statutory mandate of the IPA to do
what it did on its website, and that in doing so, it was acting as an
organ of the state in PNG within its authority and the exercise of its
competence, and what it did was to be taken seriously.*!?

Given its authority as the “competent body in respect of investment,” “it is highly relevant
what [the Investment Promotion Authority] thought the legislation meant and what it

announced the legislation meant in its public pronouncements.”°”°

Turning to the language on the website statements (pre-RFA),°~! the Claimant reiterated
that the use of the word “can” should be understood as “‘it is accessible to the investor,”
99522

rather than “it’s open to PNG to agree subsequently to settlement of disputes ...

According to the Claimant:

517 DT(Day1).153.09-14.

518 DT(Day2).74.14-17.

519 DT(Day2).75.01-06.

520 DT(Day2).77.01-10.

2! The Claimant noted that it would “rely exclusively” on the website of the Investment Promotion Authority because
the latter “was in a special position by virtue of the legislation itself.” DT(Day2).60.04-12.

522 DT(Day1).156.07-11. See also DT(Day2).80.01-17 (“[I]f I tell you a dispute can be settled by reference to ICSID,
I don’t mean that it’s theoretically possible that it could be settled by reference to ICSID, I mean that ICSID is available
for the settlement of that dispute. ... We say it reflects an understanding by the IPA that investment disputes can be
settled by reference to the centre; not in the theoretical sense that it’s possible that PNG would subsequently agree but
in the operational sense that the investor can refer to ICSID.”).

Page 89 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

234.

235.

236.

Award

a. “the situation is that the competent authority regarded the relevant provision of its act,
the act which it administered, as having that effect, and we rely on that as confirmation

that that’s what the words mean;”>?* and

b. “[t]his was not merely promotional material, it’s not merely blurb; it’s a statement by

an official agency authorised to make it as to what the position is.”°™4

b) “Investor” and “Investment”
(1) Investor

First, the Claimant submitted that it is “untenable to argue that [the] Claimant is not a

Singaporean corporation.”*?>

The Claimant argued that Professor Dolzer “grossly exaggerates the availability of piercing

the corporate veil in the context of general and international law.”°?° According to the

99527

Claimant, “in practice, it’s extremely rare, and “the basic proposition ... is that a

company has the nationality of the state where it is incorporated,” with one exception —
i.e., “where the incorporation is being used as a vehicle for fraud or is completely
artificial.”°?8

In this case, the Claimant noted that “[t]here’s no question of any concealment ... [or] of

any surreptitious change in nationality;” rather, the Claimant “was established with the full

consent and acceptance of the Papua New Guinean government,” “as a vehicle for the

holding of these shares in the circumstances where the existence of a vehicle outside Papua

New Guinea was a key element of the overall arrangement.”>”?

523 DT(Day2).81.01-05.
524 DT(Day2).81.17-19.
525 DT(Day1).165.03-04.
526 DT(Day1).163.14-16.
527 DT(Day!).163.20.

528 DT(Day1).164.04-09.
52° DT(Day1).165.08-13.

Page 90 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

237.

238.

239.

240.

Award

Second, the Claimant contended that the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant is not a
private company but rather a “state-controlled” corporation “is based on a fundamentally
flawed factual assertion.”>*° The Claimant argued that the Broches test was not satisfied,
because the Claimant “is not owned by the state, either wholly or partially, and it’s not
controlled by the state.”**! The Claimant added that, even on the Respondent’s best case,
all that it can say is that it has “joint oversight rights with BHP over this company,” which

does not raise the “question of control in any form, even on their best case.”>*?

The Claimant noted that sustainable development was not the sole purpose of the Claimant,
as the Respondent suggests, but “one of the purposes.”>*? According to the Claimant, one
of its other purposes was “to ensure that any indemnity that needs to be satisfied for
environmental claims is, in fact, satisfied.”**4 Moreover, the Claimant noted that the
breadth of the definition of the term “investor” under the IPA suggests that “the mere fact
that a company like the claimant is engaged in sustainable development ... does not

disqualify it from being an investor for the purposes of either the IPA or the ICSID.”>*>

The Claimant added that the Respondent’s trust argument did not take it anywhere,
because, even taking the Respondent’s case at its highest, “what that means is that the
trustee has taken on this investment from BHP and is managing it; it’s not the state. The

trustee is not the state.”

(2) Investment
The Claimant reiterated its written submissions and concluded that, on its case, the
Claimant’s investment falls within the definition of the term in the IPA°*” and also satisfies

all possible criteria for definition of “investment” under the ICSID Convention — whether

530 DT(Day1).169.16-17.
5 DT(Day1).169.18-20.
58 DT(Day1).170.15-171.05.
533 DT(Day1).172.23-173.03.
54 DT(Day1).175.24-176.01.
535 DT(Day1).179.05-08.
536 DT(Day1).176.17-20.
537 See DT(Day1).188.08-18.

Page 91 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

241.

242.

243.

Award

one looks at Phoenix Action, Malaysian Salvors or Salini tests.°°8 The Claimant also
argued that there was no requirement of “consideration;” even if there were, the Claimant

has given such consideration.>*?

c) MEN

The Claimant referred to its written submissions on the issue. In addition, the Claimant
argued that the word “any” in Section 37(1) “makes the class of instruments referred to

treaties unlimited, ... unlimited by nationality.”*“°

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

According to well-established principles of international arbitration and Article 41(1) of
the ICSID Convention, this Tribunal is “the judge of its own competence.”*4! This basic
tule of competence-competence applies to all international tribunals and is confirmed by

Article 41(1). Neither Party disputes the Tribunal’s competence in this regard.

In determining its competence to decide on the present dispute, the Tribunal applies the
requirements of the ICSID Convention, including the jurisdictional requirements set out in
Article 25(1), the instrument of consent and the relevant principles of international law, as
articulated below. According to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the jurisdiction of
the Centre — and of this Tribunal — “shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a

Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another

538 DT(Day1).181.16-20. See DT(Day1).181-186 (discussion of criteria of duration, risk, contribution to the economic
development of the State, assets invested bona fide, etc.).

53° See DT(Day1).186.19-188.07.

40 DT(Dayl).189.11-16. See also DT(Day1).178.13-15 (stating that the Claimant gave consideration for the transfer
of the OMTL shares “via the indemnities.”).

41 ICSID Convention, at Article 41(1). See above at para. 43. See also Mobil v. Venezuela, at para. 74 (The tribunal
is the “judge of its own competence,” and “i]t is so whatever the basis of that competence, including a unilateral offer
made in the Host State’s legislation and subsequently accepted by the investor.”), Exhibit RL-4.

Page 92 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

244.

245.

Award

Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre.”>4?

The requirement of “consent in writing” is correctly termed the “cornerstone of the
jurisdiction of the Centre.”*4? It is well-established that this requirement is not satisfied
merely by a State’s ratification of the ICSID Convention or by a notification under Article
25(4) of the ICSID Convention that the Contracting States may choose to make.*+ In
particular, the preamble to the ICSID Convention makes clear that “no Contracting State
shall by the mere fact of its ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and
without its consent be deemed to be under any obligation to submit any particular dispute
99545

to conciliation or arbitration.

Although the ICSID Convention does not precisely define the form in which consent to the
Centre’s jurisdiction must be expressed, beyond the statement that consent must be “in
writing,” it is well-established that such consent can be given in advance of any dispute,
and that consent may be expressed in multiple forms, including through domestic
investment legislation.**° According to the Report of the Executive Directors of the World

Bank:

Consent of the parties must exist when the Centre is seized ... but
the Convention does not otherwise specify the time at which consent
should be given. Consent may be given, for example, in a clause
included in an investment agreement, providing for the submission
to the Centre of future disputes arising out of that agreement, or in a
compromis regarding a dispute which has already arisen. Nor does
the Convention require that the consent of both parties be expressed
in a single instrument. Thus, a host State might in its investment
promotion legislation offer to submit disputes arising out of
certain classes of investments to the jurisdiction of the Centre, and

542 ICSID Convention, at Article 25(1).

543

The Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States

and Nationals of Other States, at para. 23, Exhibit RL-18.

544 See ICSID Convention, Preamble, at para. 7; C. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed.,
CUP (2009), at para. 374 (“The fact that the host State and the investor’s State of nationality have ratified the
Convention will not suffice.”), Exhibit RL-11; SPP v. Egypt, at para. 62, Exhibit CA-3.

545 ICSID Convention, Preamble, at para. 7.

46 See, e.g., Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 64, 86, Exhibit RL-4.

Page 93 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

the investor might give his consent by accepting the offer in
writing.**7

246. It is thus well-established that a State can make a standing offer to arbitrate in its domestic
investment legislation, which an investor can accept by bringing the dispute to ICSID.*4*
Although agreements to arbitrate in investment contracts, or offers to arbitrate in bilateral
(and multilateral) investment treaties may be more frequently encountered, there is no

question but that a binding agreement to arbitrate may be derived from national legislation.

247. The Parties largely agree on the foregoing principles. However, the Parties disagree as to
whether the relevant PNG investment legislation, at issue in this case, does in fact contain

a standing offer to arbitrate by the Respondent, sufficient to give rise here to a binding

agreement to arbitrate.>*?

248. In its Request for Arbitration, and as detailed above, the Claimant argues that “[e]ither on
its own, or when read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA, Section 39 of the IPA
constitutes a standing offer by the Respondent to arbitrate investment disputes at
ICSID.”>*° In contrast, in its Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent contends that
Section 39 of the IPA, on its own or read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA, does
not constitute a standing offer to arbitrate by the Respondent necessary to establish the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this case.>>!

47 The Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States
and Nationals of Other States, at para. 24, Exhibit RL-18 (emphasis added). See also SPP v. Egypt award, at paras.
70, 101 (“The Convention does not prescribe any particular form for the consent, nor does it require that consent be
given on a case-by-case basis.”), Exhibit CA-3; CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 58, Exhibit CA-2.

8 See, e.g., C. Schreuer ef al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at para. 378 (“Consent
may also result from a unilateral offer by the host State, expressed in its legislation or in a treaty, which is subsequently
accepted by the investor.”), Exhibit RL-11. The Claimant purports to have expressed its consent to submit the dispute
to ICSID arbitration in a letter from Sir Mekere Morauta to the Prime Minister of PNG dated 26 September 2013. See
Request for Arbitration, at para. 69; Letter to the Prime Minister of PNG from the Chairman of the Claimant (26
September 2013), Exhibit CE-15.

+49 See above at paras. 41, 51-66, 92-121, 148-158, 174-184, 191-216, 221-233.

550 Request for Arbitration, at para. 67; see above at para. 41.

551 See above at paras. 51-66.

     

 

Page 94 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

Award

The Parties made thorough submissions both on the principles of construction to be applied
to Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the IDCA, and on the proper interpretation of
these statutory provisions. The Tribunal first addresses the principles that apply to the
construction of the relevant PNG investment legislation provisions, before turning to the

interpretation of those provisions.

A. Principles Governing Interpretation of Domestic Investment Legislation

The Parties are in (apparent) disagreement on the basic approach to construction of PNG

investment legislation that is alleged to contain the Respondent’s standing offer to arbitrate.

The Respondent argues for a restrictive approach and submits that a State’s consent in

writing must be “‘clear and unambiguous’ in order to confer jurisdiction on an international
tribunal,” and that “a state’s unilateral assumption of obligations is ‘not lightly to be
presumed’, especially considering that a sovereign state by consenting to arbitration under

ICSID is submitting itself to an external adjudicative body.”>*?

The Claimant, in turn, submits that the correct approach to interpretation of Section 39 is
that adopted in SPP v. Egypt (including the effet utile principle), which essentially requires
that jurisdictional instruments be interpreted “neither restrictively nor expansively, but

rather objectively and in good faith ....”°°

Alternatively, the Claimant submits that the
Tribunal should apply what it terms a “quasi- Vienna” approach to the interpretation of the
Respondent’s unilateral declaration made in its domestic investment legislation at issue in

this case.>54

In the Tribunal’s view, it is well-settled, for good reason, that there is no presumption
against the finding of jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention, and no heightened
requirement of proof of an agreement to arbitrate. Jurisdictional instruments, whether

investment contracts, treaties or legislation, must be interpreted objectively and neutrally,

92 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 41. See above at para. 56.
553 See above at paras. 95-96.
554 See above at paras. 99-104, 117-118.

Page 95 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

and not either expansively or restrictively. The Tribunal adopts the principle set out in the

SPP decision on jurisdiction that:

[JJurisdictional instruments are to be interpreted neither restrictively
nor expansively, but rather objectively and in good faith, and
jurisdiction will be found to exist if — but only if — the force of the
arguments militating in favor of it is preponderant.>>

The Tribunal also agrees with the Amco Asia v. Indonesia tribunal’s statement that “a
convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly

or liberally.*°

254. The Tribunal disagrees with the view of the Respondent’s legal expert that “[a]ny offer to
arbitrate must be clearly and unambiguously expressed, and doubt shall be resolved against
the finding of jurisdiction.”**" It is the Claimant’s burden to prove that the Respondent has
given its consent within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, but there is
no requirement that the offer to arbitrate be “clearly and unambiguously” expressed, or that

doubts must be “resolved against the finding of jurisdiction.”

255. There is no reason, or justification, to adopt presumptions against (or in favor of) a State’s
submission to ICSID jurisdiction: the issue is rather to be approached objectively and
neutrally, aiming to ascertain the true intentions of the relevant party (or parties) in a
particular instrument. Where relevant, the standard of proof is generally held to be a

preponderance of the evidence or a balance of probabilities.

555 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 63, Exhibit CA-3.

556 Amco Asia Corp. and others v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25
September 1983, reprinted in 23 ILM 351 (1984), at p. 359, Annex 14 to Dolzer Report (also quoted in, e.g., Carolyn
B. Lamm, Jurisdic of the Centre for of h Disputes, 6(2) ICSID Review 462
(1991), at p. 465, Exhibit RL-10). The Amco tribunal also noted that “any convention, including conventions to
arbitrate, should be construed in good faith, that it to say by taking into account the consequences of their commitments
the parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged.” Amco Asia Corp. and others v.
Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September 1983, reprinted in 23 ILM
351 (1984), at p. 359, Annex 14 to Dolzer Report.

°57 Dolzer Report, at para. 49.

 

Page 96 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

256. The Tribunal agrees with the ConocoPhillips tribunal that “[t]he necessary consent is not
to be presumed.”°>* Conversely, however, the lack of consent is also not to be presumed.
The finding of consent is a matter of interpretation of the relevant provision, objectively

and in good faith, applying all relevant principles of interpretation.

257. It is sometimes suggested that States should be presumed not to have compromised their

59

sovereignty by submitting to the Centre’s jurisdiction.’ It is at least equally true,

however, that States should be presumed to desire the effective and just resolution of
international investment disputes, in a manner that enhances the prospects for foreign
investment and confidence in the rule of law. In the Tribunal’s view, these various
considerations are best reflected in a neutral, objective approach towards jurisdictional
objections, without preconceived preferences in one direction or the other, consistent with

the substantial weight of authority on the issue.* As the Claimant noted in its Rejoinder

558 ConocoPhillips v. Venezuela, at para. 254, Exhibit CA-1. The same tribunal said that, with respect to
jurisdiction, its “approach should be cautious.” ConocoPhillips v. Venezuela, at para. 254, Exhibit CA-1. The
Tribunal does not accept this. The proper approach is neither aggressive nor cautious, but objective and neutral.

55 See, e.g., Carolyn B. Lamm, Jurisdiction of the ional Centre for Settl. of h Disputes, 6(2)
ICSID Review 462 (1991), at p. 465, Exhibit RL-10 (the author summarizes Indonesia’s arguments in Amco Asia v.
Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, p. 358, as follows: “The Government further suggested that consent to ICSID
arbitration by a State should be construed restrictively since it constituted a limitation of the State’s sovereignty.”);
Dugan et al., Investor-State Arbitration, Oxford (2008), at p. 219 (“The requirement of consent to arbitral jurisdiction
in the context of investor-state arbitration is also a corollary of the principle that ‘there is no power superior to the
states which can force a judge upon them’. There is nothing to preclude states from voluntarily submitting a dispute
to a court or tribunal, however, and nothing can prevent them from making that submission irrevocable. A
fundamental element of state sovereignty is the state’s ability voluntarily to limit its own sovereignty.”), Exhibit RL-
69.

In this arbitration, the Respondent argues that consent is “‘not lightly to be presumed,’ especially considering that a
sovereign state by consenting to arbitration under ICSID is submitting itself to an external adjudicative body...”
Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 41 (emphasis added). Similarly, Professor Dolzer states that “applying ILC
Principle 7 in the present context is also consistent with the view that when states make statements by which their
freedom of action is to be limited, a restris ion is called for, especially where the is
expressed erga omnes.” Dolzer Report, at para. 26 (emphasis added).

500 See, e.g., Mondev Int'l Ltd v. United States of America, 1CSID Case No ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11 October 2002,
at para. 43 (“In the Tribunal’s view, there is no principle either of extensive or restrictive interpretation of
jurisdictional provisions in treaties. In the end the question is what the relevant provisions mean, interpreted in
accordance with the applicable rules of interpretation of treaties. These are set out in Articles 31-33 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, which for this purpose can be taken to reflect the position under customary
international law.”), Exhibit CA-58 (emphasis added); Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, CSID Case No
ARB/02/03, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005, at para. 91 (“[T]he Vienna Convention represents a move
away from the canons of interpretation previously common in treaty interpretation and which erroneously persist in
various international decisions today. For example, the Vienna Convention does not mention the canon that treaties
are to be construed narrowly, a canon that presumes States can not have intended to restrict their range of action.”),

Page 97 of 153

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

on Jurisdiction, “[i]n investment arbitration, both the interpretive and substantive facets of
in dubio mitius have been consistently rejected in favour of a neutral (neither restrictive

nor expansive) approach.”*°! The Tribunal agrees with this statement.

Exhibit CA-25; Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August
2006, at paras. 176 (“To avoid engaging in a partial or subjective analysis, it has been established that any analysis of
jurisdiction must be made with meticulous care, without starting from presumptions in favor or against the jurisdiction
of the Centre. Any presumption would corrupt the analysis and would unduly limit or expand the original consent
given by the parties.”) and 191 (“[W]hen analyzing the scope of consent, for this purpose it is necessary to apply the
principles of good faith, identification of the will of the parties and absence of a presumption in favor or against
consent.”), Exhibit RL-48 and Annex 22 to Dolzer Report; Ethyl Corporation v. Canada, Decision on Jurisdiction,
24 June 1998, (1998) 38 ILM 708, at para. 55 (“The Tribunal considers it appropriate first to dispense with any notion
that Section B of Chapter 11 [of NAFTA] is to be construed ‘strictly’. The erstwhile notion that ‘in case of doubt a
limitation of sovereignty must be construed restrictively’ has long since been displaced by Articles 31 and 32 of the
Vienna Convention.”), Exhibit CA-55; Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Dei
Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, at para. 81 (“The Tribunal considers that the Treaty has to be interpreted neither liberally
nor restrictively, as neither of these adverbs is part of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.”), Exhibit CA-57;
Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Decision
on Hearing of Respondent’s Objection to Competence and Jurisdiction, 5 January 2001, at para. 51 (“[W]e do not
accept the Respondent’s submission that NAFTA is to be understood in accordance with the principle that treaties are
to be interpreted in deference to the sovereignty of states. ... NAFTA is to be interpreted in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms in their context and in the light of its object and purpose....”),
Exhibit CA-56; CSOB v. Slovak Republic, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999 (“CSOB v. Slovak
Republic”), at para. 34 (“In determining how to interpret agreements to arbitrate under the ICSID Convention, the
Tribunal is guided by an ICSID decision which held that ‘a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively,
nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be construed in a way which leads to find out and to respect the
common will of the parties .... Moreover, ... any convention, including conventions to arbitrate, should be construed
in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the consequences of the commitments the parties may be considered
as having reasonably and legitimately envisaged.” (citing Amco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25
September 1983, 23 LL.M. 359 (1984)), Annex 20 to Dolzer Report; Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine
Republic, Award, 22 August 2012, at para. 172 (“In interpreting dispute resolution provisions in BITs ist as with
any other treaty provision — the ultimate goal is to determine what the contracting parties actually consented to. Thus,
the fact that dispute resolution clauses should be construed neither liberally nor restrictively does not authorize
international tribunals to interpret such clauses in a manner which exceeds the consent of the contracting parties as
expressed in the text. To go beyond those bounds would be an act ultra vires.”), Annex 7 to the Claimant’s Submission
on Costs, 5 March 2015. The Tribunal has found no authority in related fields to cause it to doubt the conclusions in
these decisions. See, e.g., Dispute Regarding Navigational and Related Rights (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua), 2009 1CJ
Rep. 213, at para. 48 (“[T]he Court is not convinced by Nicaragua’s argument that Costa Rica’s right of free navigation
should be interpreted narrowly because it represents a limitation of the sovereignty over the river conferred by the
Treaty on Nicaragua ... While it is certainly true that limitations of the sovereignty of a State over its territory are not
to be presumed, this does not mean that treaty provisions establishing such limitations, such as those that are in issue
in the present case, should for this reason be interpreted a priori in a restrictive way. A treaty provision which has the
purpose of limiting the sovereign powers of a State must be interpreted like any other provision of a treaty, i.e., in
accordance with the intentions of its authors as reflected by the text of the treaty and the other relevant factors in terms
of interpretation.”).

561 Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 27.

Page 98 of 153

 

 

 

 

 

  

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

258. Both Parties concur that Section 39 is a unilateral declaration and that both international
law and PNG law are relevant to the interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA.°? The

Claimant argues that “some mix of national and international law governs [Section 39’s]

79563

interpretation, while the Respondent accepts that this unilateral declaration “is of a

hybrid nature because being a national law, but intended to operate, to an extent, on the

international plane, the approach should be a mix of both national and international law

principles.”>°*

259. The Tribunal notes that several arbitral tribunals have previously addressed, with varying
results, the issue of what set of interpretive rules applies to the construction of domestic
investment legislation that is said to contain a standing offer to arbitrate to foreign
investors. The approach taken by those tribunals has ranged from the application of
“general principles of statutory interpretation,” taking into account both “relevant rules of
treaty interpretation and principles of international law applicable to unilateral

declarations,” to the application of international law without any reservation, to the

application of domestic law “subject to ultimate governance by international law.”>©

260. In SPP v. Egypt, the ICSID tribunal formulated the issue, and its preferred approach, as

follows:

[T]he jurisdictional issue in this case involves more than
interpretation of municipal legislation. The issue is whether certain
unilaterally enacted legislation has created an_ international
obligation under a multilateral treaty. Resolution of this issue
involves both statutory interpretation and treaty interpretation.
Also, to the extent that Article 8 is alleged to be a unilateral

5 See above, e.g., at paras. 52, 93-94, 105-106.

Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 130. See above at para. 93.

54 DT(Dayl).11.16-20. See above at para. 193.

585 See CEMEX v. Venezuela, at paras. 72-79, Exhibit CA-2 (citing, in particular, SPP v. Egypt, CSOB v. Slovak
Republic, Zhinvali v. Georgia); Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 77-85 (“Legislation and more generally unilateral acts
by which a State consents to ICSID jurisdiction must be considered as standing offers to foreign investors under the
ICSID Convention. Those unilateral acts must accordingly be interpreted according to the ICSID Convention itself
and to the rules of international law governing unilateral declarations of States.”), Exhibit RL-4.

566 See Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 82, 85 (regarding SPP v. Egypt, CSOB v. Slovak Republic and Zhinvali v. Georgia,
respectively), Exhibit RL-4.

 

563

     

Page 99 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

declaration of acceptance of the Centre’s jurisdiction, subject to
reciprocal acceptance by a national of another Contracting State, the
Tribunal must also consider certain aspects of international law
governing unilateral juridical acts.*”

261. Accordingly, the SPP tribunal applied the following principle of interpretation:

[I]n deciding whether in the circumstances of the present case Law
No. 43 constitutes consent to the Centre’s jurisdiction, the Tribunal
will apply general principles of statutory interpretation taking into
consideration, where appropriate, relevant rules of treaty
interpretation and principles of international law applicable to
unilateral declarations.*°*

262. Another example is the arbitral tribunal’s decision in CEMEX v. Venezuela, holding that:

Unilateral acts by which a State consents to ICSID jurisdiction are
standing offers made by a sovereign State to foreign investors under
the ICSID Convention. Such offers could be incorporated into
domestic legislation or not. But, whatever may be their form, they
must be interpreted according to the ICSID Convention and to the
principles of international law governing unilateral declarations of
States.°°

263. Similarly, in Mobil v. Venezuela, the tribunal decided that:

It is on the basis of th[e] rules of international law governing the
interpretation of unilateral acts formulated within the framework
and on the basis of a treaty that this Tribunal will now proceed to
the interpretation of Article 22 of the [Venezuelan] Investment Law.

The Tribunal must add that the fact that domestic law and the
international law of treaties are not controlling or dispositive does
not mean that they should be completely ignored:

(i)... when tribunals interpret unilateral acts, they must have due
regard to the intention of the State having formulated such acts. In
this respect domestic law may play a useful role.

(ii) Although the law of the treaties as codified in the Vienna
Convention is not relevant in the interpretation of unilateral acts, the

567 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 61, Exhibit CA-3.
568 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 61, Exhibit CA-3.
56° CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 79, Exhibit CA-2.

Page 100 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

264.

265.

266.

Award

provisions of that Convention may ‘apply analogously to the extent
compatible with the sui generis character’ of unilateral acts.*”

The Tribunal is of the view that, where national investment legislation is claimed to contain
a standing offer to arbitrate under an international instrument, such as the ICSID
Convention, that provision constitutes a unilateral declaration made by a State that is rooted
in the national legal order of that State, but that also (assertedly) produces effects under
international law. To use the words of the SPP tribunal, unlike a treaty, Section 39 of the
IPA “is not the result of negotiations between two or more States, but rather the result of a

unilateral act by a single State.”*”!

In this regard, the Tribunal concludes that such legislative provisions are of a “hybrid”
nature. As a consequence, interpretation of those provisions must also be approached from
a hybrid perspective, taking into account both that State’s domestic law on statutory
construction and international law. Where the principles of interpretation under the State’s
domestic law conflict with international law principles, international law principles will
ordinarily prevail, although this is an issue that must be resolved on a case-by-case basis,
in light of the nature of the conflict. In general, the relevant rules of international law
would be sui generis, reflecting the character of unilateral acts, but the Vienna

Convention’s provisions will often be applicable by analogy.

Beyond the general agreement that both international and PNG law are relevant to a certain
extent, one of the specific areas of disagreement that emerges from the Parties’ submissions
is whether the effet utile principle should apply to the interpretation of Section 39 of the
IPA. The Claimant argues that effet utile should apply as one of the common canons of
statutory construction; it was applied in the ICSID arbitration context in SPP v. Egypt”
and otherwise exists in an equivalent form under Section 190(4) of the PNG

Constitution.*”? The Respondent argues that effet utile should not apply because it “is now

5% Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 95-96, Exhibit RL-4.
51 SPP y. Egypt, at para. 59, Exhibit CA-3.

 

See above at paras. 55(c), 94-95. See also above at paras. 98, 115-116, 152, 176, 216.

57 See above at para. 106.

Page 101 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

no longer taken into account in interpreting state’s unilateral declarations, including its

domestic legislation,” as distinguished from treaties.*”*

267. Effet utile has been recognized as one of the principles of treaty interpretation under

5

international law.°’> However, whether this principle applies to the interpretation of

unilateral declarations of the States has been less fully considered, particularly in the
context of investment arbitration. In SPP, the arbitral tribunal referred to effet utile as a

principle of statutory interpretation, noting that:

“Under general principles of statutory interpretation, a legal text should be interpreted in
such a way that a reason and a meaning can be attributed to every word in the text.”°”°

By contrast, in CEMEX v. Venezuela, the tribunal refused to apply the principle of effet
utile to unilateral declarations, relying on ICJ judgments in Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. and

Fisheries Jurisdiction5”

268. In the Tribunal’s view, as explained above, provisions of domestic investment legislation
that assertedly contain the State’s standing offer to arbitrate must be interpreted taking into
account both international law and the law of that State. Regardless of whether it applies

to “pure” unilateral declarations made by States under international law, the Tribunal is of

974 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 37. See above at para. 55(c).

515 See, e.g., Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada), ICJ Reports 1998, p. 455, at para. 52 (The principle of
effectiveness “[cJertainly... has an important role in the law of treaties and in the jurisprudence of this Court.”),
Exhibit CA-37, RL-54 and Annex 33 to Dolzer Report; Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), ICJ
Reports 1952, p. 105 (The Court recognized that the principle of effet utile “should in general be applied when
interpreting the text of a treaty.”), Exhibit CA-35 (cited in CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 110, Exhibit CA-2);.El
Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006, at para. 110 (referring to “the rule ut magis valeat quam pereat (‘effet utile’)”), Exhibit
CA-31; CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 107, Exhibit CA-2. The Tribunal has found no authority to cause it to doubt
the conclusions in these decisions. See, e.g., Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co. v.
Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/13, and BP America Production Co. and Others v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8, Decision on Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, at para. 132 (“Given [the parties’
silence], the provision must be considered to carry some legal meaning on account of the rule ut magis valeat quam
pereat (‘effet utile’).”); Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004, at para. 95 (“Such an interpretation [of a Treaty
provision] runs counter to the general principle of effectiveness (‘effet utile’) and for that reason also ought to be set
aside.”).

516 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 94, Exhibit CA-3.

5” See CEMEX y. Venezuela, at paras. 110-112, Exhibit CA-2. See also Mobil v. Venezuela, at para. 118, Exhibit
RL-4.

 

Page 102 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

269.

270.

271.

272.

Award

the view that effet utile is one of the common principles of statutory construction that

generally apply to the interpretation of such “hybrid” provisions.

In the Tribunal’s view, the same considerations that warrant application of effet utile to
treaties apply fully to “hybrid” instruments like Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the
IDCA: States ordinarily intend their legislative acts, particularly in the context of
investment legislation, to have meaning and to produce consequences, rather than to be

empty or meaningless. Effet utile gives effect to that common sense proposition.

B. Interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the IDCA

As noted above, the Parties disagree as to the meaning of Section 39 of the IPA and Section

2 of the IDCA. The Claimant maintains that:

[I]nterpreted objectively and in good faith, Section 39 of the IPA is,
at its most basic level, a deliberate statement by the State that
disputes arising out of foreign investment are subject to resolution
in accordance with the ICSID Convention ....5

According to the Claimant, the context and purpose of the PNG legislation, as well as

subsequent practice of the Respondent, confirm this interpretation.>”

By contrast, the Respondent argues that, “regardless of whether a literal, contextual or
purposive interpretation is taken of Section 39 and Section 2, no ‘consent in writing’
necessary for ICSID’s jurisdiction over the matter may be construed from either Section

39 or Section 2.”58°

The Tribunal’s mandate therefore requires it to interpret Section 39 of the IPA and Section
2 of the IDCA, in light of the Parties’ submissions, to determine their meaning and legal

significance. These provisions of PNG law have not been previously interpreted or applied

578 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 204. See above at paras. 108-111.
519 See above at paras. 112-114.
98° Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 24.

Page 103 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

273.

274.

275.

276.

Award

by any international arbitral tribunal, and the Tribunal’s task is therefore one of first

impression.

Preliminarily, like other investment tribunals faced with an analogous interpretive task, the
Tribunal considers that, although the Respondent’s interpretation of its own legislation “is
unquestionably entitled to considerable weight, it cannot control the Tribunal’s decision as

to its own competence.”**!

It is for the Tribunal itself, applying the principles of
construction set out above, independently to construe the relevant provisions of PNG law.
The Respondent’s interpretation is of relevance, but no more so than that of other parties;
the decisive issue is how the text of the legislative provision, in all the circumstances,

would be understood by those to whom it is addressed.

In fulfilling its interpretive mandate, the Tribunal analyzes the relevant statutory provisions
in light of the ordinary meaning of their language, objectively construed, as well as their
purpose and relevant context. The Tribunal also considers the legislative history of these
provisions and the investment promotion materials as part of the relevant context in which

the legislation was adopted and understood.

1. Textual Interpretation
The starting point of interpretation of PNG investment legislation is the ordinary or
grammatical meaning of the words used in the relevant statutory provisions, objectively

construed, as they would be understood by a reasonable investor or other addressee.***

The critical provisions on which the Tribunals’ decision turns are Section 39 of the IPA
and Section 2 of the IDCA. Article 2 of the IDCA provides that “[a] dispute shall not be

referred to the Centre unless the dispute is fundamental to the investment itself.”>*? In turn,

581 SPP y. Egypt, at para. 60, Exhibit CA-3. See also CEMEX y. Venezuela, at para. 70 (“[A] sovereign State’s
interpretation of its own unilateral consent to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal is not binding on the tribunal

or determinative of jurisdictional is:

 

. Thus the interpretation given to Article 22 by Venezuelan authorities or by

Venezuelan courts cannot control the Tribunal’s decision on its competence.”), Exhibit CA-2; Mobil v. Venezuela, at

para.

75, Exhibit RL-4.

5% See, .g., SPP v. Egypt, at para. 74, Exhibit CA-3; CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 90, Exhibit CA-2.
583 IDCA (as amended in 1982), at Section 2, p. 2, Exhibit CL-2.

Page 104 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

277.

278.

279.

Award

according to Section 39 of the IPA, “[t]he Investment Disputes Convention Act 1978,
implementing the International Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, applies, according to its terms, to disputes

arising out of foreign investment.”>**

The instrument upon which the Claimant principally relies in arguing that the Respondent
has made a standing offer to arbitrate disputes at ICSID is the IPA, and specifically its
Section 39. The Claimant’s submissions on this issue have evolved through this arbitral
proceeding, from the initial position articulated in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration
—“[e]ither on its own, or when read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA, Section 39
of the IPA constitutes a standing offer by the Respondent to arbitrate investment disputes
at ICSID”>*> — to the position that Section 39 of the IPA constitutes “consent in writing,”
which requirement “is satisfied by the word ‘applies’.”°*°

In reply, and as detailed above, the Respondent submits that literal interpretations of the
IPA and the IDCA “leave no doubt that the State has not consented to ICSID arbitration,”>®”
because Section 39 of the IPA merely provides that the IDCA “applies, according to its
terms,” and thus refers back to the IDCA, and is therefore subject to the requirement of a
separate “consent in writing,”>**

39.

not independently provided by either Section 2 or Section

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ arguments and submissions, which have
been both thorough and of great assistance. The Tribunal records with particular

appreciation the value of the oral and written submissions of both Parties’ counsel.

58 IPA, at Section 39, Exhibit CL-1.

585

Request for Arbitration, at para. 67. See above at para. 41.

586 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at para. 34. See above at para. 179.
587 See above at paras. 52-59.
588 See above at paras. 52-59, 66.

Page 105 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

280.

281.

282.

283.

Award

In the Tribunal’s view, the meaning of Section 39 of the IPA turns on the interpretation of
the statement that the IDCA “applies, according to its terms.” It is this text, and ultimately

only this text, that provides, or fails to provide, the State’s standing offer to arbitrate.

The Parties agree that, grammatically, Section 39’s reference to “its terms” means the terms
of the IDCA, rather than those of the ICSID Convention.” The IDCA attaches the ICSID
Convention, as an annex, and implements the Convention, but IPA Section 39’s reference
is, as the Parties agree, to the IDCA, not the Convention. The Parties are in disagreement,
however, concerning the meaning of, and relationship between, the words “applies” and

“according to its terms,” as used in Section 39.

The Claimant argues that the words “applies” and “according to its terms” play two distinct
functions: the word “applies” has an “independent function — it declares the State’s
consent,” whereas the words “according to its terms” are “cross-referential and
fundamentally concerned with ... ensuring that the scope of the State’s consent is limited
according to the terms of IDCA Section 2” (i.e., to disputes that are fundamental to
investment itself).”°°° According to the Claimant, the word “terms” encompasses “all of
the articles of the ICSID Convention,” including Article 25’s requirement of consent in

591

writing, which is then satisfied by the preceding word “applies. Put simply, the

Claimant argues that, by declaring all of the ICSID Convention applicable to investment
disputes, Section 39 of the IPA provides the written consent required by Article 25 of the

Convention.

The Respondent submits that this is an “artificial way of construing” Section 39’s decisive

phrase; rather, the expression “applies, according to its terms” “should be construed

together ... [and] ‘according to its terms’ governs or limits the application,” which “includes

99592

the consent in writing” and “the issue about nationals of contracting states. In other

589 See above at paras. 53, 66, 109, 111(b), 150(c), 153, 198-200.

5° Response on Ju
51 Response on Juris

 
  

iction, at para. 208, See above at para. 109.
iction, at para. 209. See above at para. 109.

52 DT(Day!).30.12-19. See above at paras. 201-202.

Page 106 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

284.

285.

286.

287.

Award

words, the Respondent argues that the word “terms” encompasses all the requirements of
the ICSID Convention, including Article 25’s “consent in writing” requirement, and that

this requirement is not satisfied by Section 39 itself.>°?

These arguments are finely balanced and the proper interpretation of Section 39 is by no
means free from doubt. Nonetheless, reading the words of the legislation literally, the
Tribunal concludes that Section 39 of the IPA simply refers the reader to the IDCA, which
“applies, according to its terms.” The terms of Section 39, read literally, do nothing more

than declare that the IDCA applies, without adding to the content of the IDCA.

As both Parties appear to acknowledge, Section 39 refers to all of the terms of the IDCA.
There is no exception in Section 39’s text for any of the “terms” of the IDCA that are made

applicable through the operation of Section 39.

The Tribunal is unable to discern, in this general reference to the IDCA, anything that
would qualify as an independent consent to ICSID jurisdiction by the State. In the
Tribunal’s view, Section 39’s natural and ordinary meaning is a declaration that the terms
—all the terms — of the IDCA apply to foreign investments. Nothing in Section 39’s text

does more than that.

There is nothing in Section 39’s general reference to the IDCA that can fairly be read to
satisfy the specific requirement for written consent to ICSID jurisdiction under Article 25
of the Convention. There is no specific reference to consent or ICSID jurisdiction in
Section 39, or in the IDCA, apart from Section 2 of the IDCA (which, as discussed below,
contains no such consent). In particular, there is nothing in Section 39 that indicates that
Article 25’s requirement for consent is satisfied, or waived, in future cases. If anything,
the general reference of Section 39 reaffirms the continued application of the requirement

for consent, “according to its terms,” rather than fulfills or waives it.

583 See above at para. 203.

Page 107 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

288. The Tribunal has no doubt that Section 2 of the IDCA does not provide consent to ICSID
jurisdiction. That is the Respondent’s position,>** and the Claimant accepts this as well°*>

(although its initial position was arguably to the contrary™”®).

289. In the Tribunal’s view, the Parties’ positons regarding Section 2 are correct: the provision
does not grant consent, but instead limits the cases in which future consent may be given.
The function, and the only function, of Section 2 of the IDCA is to narrow the category of
disputes that may be referred to ICSID to disputes that are “fundamental to the investment

itself.”

290. Section 2 does not eliminate, and does not affirmatively satisfy, the requirement of
“consent in writing” under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Instead, this language
simply mirrors the Respondent’s 1978 Notification, in which it informed ICSID of its
“wish[] to exclude certain types of disputes from ICSID’s jurisdiction ... [and] will only
consider submitting those disputes to the Centre which are fundamental to the investment
itself.”°°’ Indeed, Section 2 very clearly contemplates that future consent is required for
submission to ICSID jurisdiction. Section 2 not only does not provide consent; it makes

clear that future consent is required.

291. Likewise, there is nothing else in the IDCA, beyond Section 2, that would constitute
consent to ICSID jurisdiction. The Claimant does not point to any other provisions of the
IDCA that would have this effect or purpose. In any event, that is the clear import of the
IDCA’s text: it is Section 2 of the IDCA that is the only part of the statute that is addressed
to the issue of ICSID jurisdiction. As already discussed, nothing in that provision provides
consent to ICSID jurisdiction; on the contrary, the provision clearly contemplates a

requirement that consent be provided in a future investment dispute.

594 See above at paras. 57-58, 62, 66, 148, 196-197, 216.

595 See above at paras. 179, 225(c).

5% As explained above, the Claimant’s original position on consent was that “{e]ither on its own, or when read in
conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA, Section 39 of the IPA constitutes a standing offer by the Respondent to
arbitrate investment disputes at ICSID.” Request for Arbitration, at para. 57.

5°7 See above at para. 65.

Page 108 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

292.

293.

294.

295.

Award

Thus, Section 39’s reference to the IDCA, including Section 2 of the IDCA, does not
incorporate any consent to ICSID jurisdiction from the IDCA. That is because, as the text
of Section 2 makes clear, and as the Parties agree, the IDCA does not contain any such
consent. Thus, by making the IDCA applicable to investment disputes, Section 39 does
not incorporate anything that can be regarded as consent to ICSID jurisdiction. And the
act of “apply[ing]” the IDCA to investment disputes does not, if the IDCA contains no
consent to ICSID jurisdiction, itself constitute consent to jurisdiction. Put simply, neither
Section 2 standing alone, nor Section 39’s incorporation of Section 2, provides consent to

ICSID jurisdiction.

The Tribunal is unable to conclude that Section 39’s statement that the IDCA “applies”
separately constitutes consent to ICSID jurisdiction. The statutory declaration that the
IDCA applies, read literally, is only a confirmation that the IDCA is in force and applicable
to investment disputes. That declaration adds nothing by way of consent that the IDCA
does not already provide (and, as noted above, the IDCA concededly does not provide the
requisite consent to the ICSID jurisdiction, and, on the contrary envisages that consent

must be given with respect to future disputes).

In the Tribunal’s view, this interpretation is confirmed by Section 39’s reference to
“according to its terms” (i.e., “according to [the IDCA’s] terms”). That language makes
even more clear that Section 39 does not add anything to what was contained in the IDCA,

but merely declares the IDCA’s applicability — whatever the IDCA’s terms may be.

In this regard, ICSID decisions cited by the Parties do not provide any reason to arrive at a
different interpretation of Section 2 or Section 39. As summarized above, the Parties relied

on several ICSID awards which interpreted and applied provisions of Egyptian**® and

°°8 Article 8 of the Egyptian Investment Law: “Investment Disputes in respect of the implementation of the provisions
of this Law shall be settled in a manner to be agreed upon with the investor, or within the framework of agreements
in force between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the investor’s home country, or within the framework of the
Convention for the Settlement of International Disputes between the State and nationals of other countries to which
Egypt has adhered by virtue of Law No. 90 of 1971, where such law applies.” SPP v. Egypt, at para. 71, Exhibit CA-
3; Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 138.

Page 109 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

Venezuelan>”

investment law. None of those cases materially alters the Tribunal’s
interpretive task in this arbitration because they dealt with very different wording in

different legislative provisions.

296. Because of the difference in the wording used in the Egypt Investment Law and the
Venezuelan Investment Law, on the one hand, and Section 39 of the IPA, on the other
hand, the Tribunal considers that extending the solutions reached in SPP or any of the

Venezuela Cases to the present case would be inappropriate.

297. In particular, unlike Article 8 of the Egypt Investment Law, and as the Respondent pointed
out,° Section 39 of the IPA:

a. does not contain mandatory language “shall be settled;”©!

b. does not set forth a “mandatory and hierarchic sequence of dispute settlement
procedures” for resolution of the parties’ dispute, including the right to dispute
settlement conferred under a bilateral investment treaty, and culminating with the

ICSID Convention;>"

c. does not contain the language “within the framework of the Convention for Settlement

of Investment Disputes between the State and the nationals of other countries to which

°° Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment Law: “Disputes arising between an international investor whose country
of origin has in effect with Venezuela a treaty or agreement on the promotion or protection of investments, or disputes
to which are applicable the provision of the Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(OMGI-MIGA) or the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States (ICSID), shall be submitted to international arbitration according to the terms of the respective treaty or
agreement, if it so provides, without prejudice to the possibility of making use, when appropriate, of the dispute
resolution means provided for under the Venezuelan legislation in effect.” Mobil v. Venezuela, at para. 68, Exhibit
RL-4 (emphasis added); Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 152. See also CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 64, Exhibit
CA-2.

600 See above at paras. 54-55, 66(c).

1 See SPP v. Egypt, at para. 74, Exhibit CA-3. See above at paras. 55, 66(c).

2 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 116, Exhibit CA-3.

3 See SPP y. Egypt, at paras. 83-88, Exhibit CA-3. See above at paras. 55-56.

Page 110 of 153

    

  

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

298.

299.

300.

301.

Award

Egypt has adhered by virtue of Law No. 90 of 1971, where it (i.e., the Convention)

applies.”°*

With regard to the last of the foregoing points, the Respondent noted at the hearing on
jurisdiction that such a reference to the ICSID Convention that applies would take the

605

provision one step further towards the finding of consent. It is common ground,

however, that no such language is contained in Section 39 of the IPA.

As noted above, Section 39 instead refers to back to the IDCA — i.e., the Act, and not the
ICSID Convention. It is therefore the IDCA, and not the ICSID Convention itself, which
“applies, according to its terms.” As already noted above, however, it is the Tribunal’s
view (accepted by the Parties), that nothing in the IDCA provides consent to ICSID

jurisdiction.©°

The Tribunal therefore need not, and does not, decide whether a different result would be
obtained if Section 39 had provided that the ICSID Convention itself, rather than the IDCA,
“applies, according to its terms.” In that case, not presented here, the Tribunal would need
to decide whether the legislation’s application of the ICSID Convention directly to foreign
investments would constitute consent in writing to ICSID jurisdiction. That is not,

however, the present case.

Section 39 refers to, and recognizes the application of the IDCA, but does not do the same
with respect to the ICSID Convention itself. The IDCA implements the ICSID Convention
in PNG, including by annexing the Convention, but the IDCA is not the same as the ICSID
Convention, as the Claimant acknowledges.” On the contrary, as already discussed,
Section 2 of the IDCA fairly clearly provides that future consent — and only future consent
in some categories — is necessary. Whatever the effect of direct and specific application of

the ICSID Convention itself might be, the Tribunal is satisfied that application of the

604 SPP y, Egypt, at para. 71, Exhibit CA-3. See above at paras. 55, 95(d).

 

s. 198-200.
288-292.

7 See above at para. 225.

Page 111 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

302.

303.

304.

Award

IDCA, including particularly Section 2 of the IDCA, does not constitute advance consent

to ICSID jurisdiction.

Moreover, as the Claimant pointed out,’ unlike Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment

Law, Section 39 of the IPA:

a. does not refer to an obligation relating to the settlement of disputes (“shall be submitted

to international arbitration”);°”

b. does not contain “certain conditions” to which the obligation to submit disputes to

arbitration is subject, including the conditional language “if it so provides;”°!°

c. does not contain language that renders two interpretations “grammatically possible” —
one referring to international arbitration, and the other referring to the obligation to

submit disputes to arbitration;°!!
d. does not make any reference to the ICSID Convention but only refers to the IDCA.

Again, the Tribunal agrees that the different text of the Venezuelan Investment Law makes
awards interpreting it of limited relevance here. Suffice it to say, however, that none of
the awards provides any reason for the Tribunal to adopt a different reading of Section 39

from that set forth above.

2. Effet Utile

2

As noted above,°!? in the Tribunal’s view, the principle of effet utile applies to the

interpretation of Section 39 of the IPA in this case.

08 See above at para. 97.
09 See, €.g., Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 101-111, Exhibit RL-4.

810 See, e.g., Mobi

 

y. Venezuela, at paras. 98 (“The Parties agree that [Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment Law]

 

creates an obligation to go to arbitration subject to certain conditions and in particular subject to the last condition thus
incorporated in Article 22. But they disagree on the interpretation to be given to that condition.”), 101-111, Exhibit
RL-4.

61 See, e.g., Mobil v. Venezuela, at paras. 109-110, Exhibit RL-4.

612 See above at para. 266-269.

Page 112 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

305.

306.

307.

613

Award

The Respondent denies that Section 39 of the IPA would be “a provision without content”
if the Tribunal were to adopt the Respondent’s textual interpretation.°'? According to the
Respondent, Section 39 — like other analogous investment legislation provisions — “could
serve useful purposes, e.g., to recall and confirm the state’s commitments under ICSID or
to ‘clear the way for the State to conclude specific types of dispute resolution agreement,
without internal issues such as ultra vires arising, and as such ... [provide] a degree of
certainty for investors’.”°'+ The Respondent also argues that, within the wider context of
the IPA, Section 39 “does serve a purpose to tell investors that ICSID arbitration may be
available;”°!> “there is a purpose in putting everything in one statute, so that parties reading

it can be made aware of it.”°!

The Claimant submits that “neither of these alleged purposes is convincing — first because
there was no need for the provision to do either of these things, and secondly, because there
is no evidence that either was what the State intended.”°!’ The Claimant argues that the
result of the application of effet utile in this case is two-fold: (i) “it triggers the actual
application of the ICSID Convention to this dispute;” and (ii) it requires the Tribunal “to
dismiss the State’s argument that [Section 39] merely serves to affirm the State’s
commitment to the ICSID system,” which has already been affirmed twice — when the
Respondent ratified the ICSID Convention, and when the Respondent passed the IDCA,
“which implemented the Convention locally.”°!® In other words, if Section 39 of the IPA

does not provide the Respondent’s consent to arbitrate, it serves no meaningful purpose.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that effet utile does not authorize the Tribunal to

re-write the legislative provisions.°? As acknowledged by the Claimant, “intent and good

77620

faith come firs whereas effet utile plays a subsidiary role in determining intent. As

Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 38. See above at para. 152.

614 Objections to Jurisdiction, at para. 39. See above at paras. 55, 152, 157, 202, 213.
615 DT(Day1).35.07-11.
616 DT(Day1).35.15-17.

17 Rejoinder on Juri
618 Response on Juris

 
  

iction, at para. 43. See also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, at paras. 44-52.
iction, at para. 268.

619 See DT(Day1).37.22-24. See above at para. 216.
0 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 263.

Page 113 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

the CEMEX v. Venezuela tribunal explained, effet utile “does not require that a maximum

effect be given to a text;” rather, “[i]t only excludes interpretations which would render the

text meaningless, when a meaningful interpretation is possible.”°”!

308. That said, the principle of effet utile is an important interpretive tool. As noted above, it
rests on the natural proposition that meaning should be given to the words of States, rather
than the opposite. As other ICSID tribunals pointed out, this principle requires rejecting

or disfavoring interpretations of treaties and similar instruments that would render

particular provisions or language either meaningless or redundant.©?

309. Nonetheless, there are serious reasons for applying this principle — disfavoring ex

abundanti cautela interpretations — with circumspection in the context of unilateral

623

declarations. The rationale of this position applies, in part, to national investment

legislation which, as discussed above, has a hybrid character.°* In particular, unlike cases
involving negotiated, bilateral treaties, a State’s legislation may in some circumstances be
merely confirmatory. Critically, however, this remains a question of interpretation, in
particular cases, of specific language. The presumption against ex abundanti cautela,
whatever its precise terms, is merely an aid to what remains the objective construction of

specific words in a particular context.

©21 CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 114, Exhibit CA-2. See Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 264. See above at paras.
115, 269.

62 See, e.g, CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 114, Exhibit CA-2; ConocoPhillips v. Venezuela, at para. 261, Exhibit
CA-1. See also Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/13, and BP America Production Co. and Others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8,
Decision on Preliminary Objections dated 27 July 2006, at para. 132 (“Given [the parties’ silence], the provision must
be considered to carry some legal meaning on account of the rule ut magis valeat quam pereat (‘effet utile’).”); Salini
Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 9 November 2004, at para. 95 (“Such an interpretation [of a Treaty provision] runs counter to the
general principle of effectiveness (‘effet utile’) and for that reason also ought to be set aside.”); Helnan International
Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, 17 October 2006, at
para. 52 (“[W]Jhenever possible, terms must be interpreted literally and given practical effect, which excludes
redundancy.”)

3 See, Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), ICJ Reports 1952, at p. 105, Exhibit CA-35; ILC Guiding
Principles applicable to Unilateral Declarations of States Capable of Creating Legal Obligations (2006), Article 7,
Commentary (3), Exhibit RL-19.

4 See above at para. 265.

Page 114 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

310.

311.

312.

313.

Award

In the Tribunal’s view, application of effet utile does not provide a basis for finding consent
to ICSID jurisdiction in Section 39. As explained above, the language of Section 39 of the
IPA — even when read in conjunction with Section 2 of the IDCA — is insufficient to
establish the Respondent’s “consent in writing” to ICSID jurisdiction. It is therefore not
simply a matter of selecting between two plausible interpretations that follow from the
grammatical meaning of the provisions. Finding consent in Section 39 requires going

beyond, and to some extent against, the words of this provision.

The Tribunal sees no basis for doing so. Section 39 of the IPA serves a useful purpose,
particularly in the context of a comprehensive national investment statute, even if it does
not provide the Respondent’s standing offer to arbitrate at ICSID. As the Respondent
pointed out, even on its interpretation, Section 39 serves constructive purposes, including
declaring the continued applicability of the IDCA, notwithstanding the later enactment of
the IPA; providing all material information regarding investors’ potential rights in one

625

comprehensive statute; and clearing “the way for the State to conclude specific types of

dispute resolution agreements.”°°

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Claimant’s argument that the Respondent did not
need to reaffirm its commitment to the ICSID Convention in Section 39 because it “has
already been affirmed twice.”®’ The Tribunal considers that the IPA sought to set forth a
relatively detailed and comprehensive legislative regime addressing foreign investments.
In that context, recording the continued force and effect of a prior legislative enactment,
for the benefit of readers (including investors and courts), serves a useful purpose. The
fact that the statute might, perhaps, have been interpreted to reach the same result, even

absent Section 39, does not render the provision useless.

Section 39’s purpose is to provide a limited form of investment guarantee — i.e., access to

ICSID arbitration — which will be available, but only if the requirements of Article 25 of

©5 See above at paras. 55, 152, 157, 202, 213.

66 Objections to Juri

 

iction, at para. 39.

 

©7 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 268. See above at para. 116.

Page 115 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

314.

315.

316.

317.

Award

the ICSID Convention are satisfied (i.e., that there is a an investor from another ICSID
Contracting State, an investment, a legal dispute, and consent in writing being provided by
the parties). Section 39 provides this limited protection, without also providing a further

offer to arbitrate then and there.

This result is not unusual. It is not uncommon for national legislation (and investment
treaties) to set out provisions that are conditional upon completion of certain
conditions. This is what Section 39 does: it refers to the conditions in Article 25 of the

ICSID Convention, as implemented by the IDCA, and does not do more or less.

The Claimant agrees that all of the Article 25 requirements must be satisfied, but contends
that the word “applies” “declares the State’s consent.”©* As explained above, the Tribunal
sees no reason to differentiate between Article 25’s consent requirement, on the one hand,
and the other Article 25 requirements, on the other hand. It is therefore unable to conclude
that Section 39’s statement that the IDCA “applies” separately constitutes consent to ICSID

arbitration.

PNG law principles reinforce the Tribunal’s conclusion. As pointed out by the Claimant,
PNG law contains a principle analogous to effet utile. As a general matter, as set out in
Part 2, Schedule 2.2 of the PNG Constitution, PNG law applies the rules and principles of
English common law in force as at immediately before PNG’s independence.°* It is a
well-established common law principle of statutory interpretation that a court should strive

to give effect to every element of a statutory enactment.*!

For the reasons set out above, Section 39 is not meaningless or useless if it is not interpreted

as constituting a standing offer to arbitrate; rather, it serves several possible purposes or

©8 See above at para. 109.
9 See above at para. 106(b).
60 See First Griffin QC Report, at paras. 16-23; Schedule 2.2 of the Constitution of Papua New Guinea, Annex A3 to

First

Griffin QC Report; Wahgi Savings & Loan Society Ltd. v. Bank of South Pacific Ltd. [1980] PGSC 4 (per Kapi

J), at pp. 15-16, Annex B1 to First Griffin QC Report.

1 See, e.g., Hill v. William Hill (Park Lane) Ltd. [1949] AC 530, at pp. 546-547 (“The rule that a meaning should, if
possible, be given to every word in the statute implies that, unless there is good reason to the contrary, the words add
something which would not be there if the words were left out.”), Exhibit CA-47.

Page 116 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

Award

functions. Nothing has been advanced by the Parties regarding PNG law that would

conflict with the Tribunal’s conclusion above, resulting from the application of effet utile.

3. Context and Purpose
The Tribunal has also carefully considered the Parties’ submissions on the context and

purpose of Section 39 of the IPA.

The Claimant relies on the purpose and context of the IPA, including the place of Section
39 in the chapter entitled “Investment Guarantees,” and Sections 37 and 38 of the IPA, as
confirming its case on consent.®? The Respondent submits that neither the purpose of the
IPA nor Sections 37 and 38 of the IPA indicate that “consent in writing” was provided in
Section 39.3 The Parties also discuss the Respondent’s BITs concluded prior to and
around the time the IPA was enacted; the Respondent argues that these BITs contain clear
language of express consent and show that the Respondent knows how to phrase its

“consent in writing” when one is provided.**

The Tribunal examines the main elements of the Parties’ context and purpose analysis in

turn below.

First, Section 39’s location in Part V of the IPA entitled “Investment Guarantees” does not
in and of itself indicate that Section 39 sets forth an automatic right to neutral, international
adjudication. The suggestion that inclusion of Section 39 in a Part of the legislation titled
“Investment Guarantees” connotes an intention to confer an immediate right to

international adjudication has a measure of credibility.

On more careful consideration, however, the title of Part V is of minimal assistance. If one

assumes that Section 39 contains “guarantees,” by virtue of its inclusion in Part V (labelled

© See above at paras. 112, 226(e).
©3 See above at paras. 60-66, 205-215.
© See above at paras. 61(c), 84, 88, 95(f), 117(d), 209.

Page 117 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

323.

324.

325.

Award

“Investment Guarantees”), it remains necessary to ascertain the content of those

“investment guarantees.”

As explained above,®?5

the wording of Section 39 itself does not allow the Tribunal to
conclude that the provision sets forth a right to arbitrate, absent a further “consent in
writing” by the Respondent. What Section 39 identifies as “guarantees,” therefore, are the
provisions of the IDCA and, as incorporated and implemented by the IDCA, the ICSID
Convention. Both the statute and the Convention provide significant legal protections
(“guarantees”), which is sufficient to explain the inclusion of Section 39 in a Part titled
“Investment Guarantees.” The fact that Section 39 would provide greater legal protection
for investors, if interpreted as the Claimant urges, does not alter this conclusion: Part V
refers only to “Guarantees,” not the most favorable or protective guarantees that could be

afforded.

The Tribunal considers that the natural interpretation of Section 39 is that it refers back to
the investment protections provided by the IDCA. The inclusion of Section 39 in a Part of
the IPA entitled “Investment Guarantees” does not, in the Tribunal’s view, alter the

substantive content of Section 39’s terms.

More broadly, the Tribunal is doubtful that Part V’s title can provide any substantial
assistance in interpreting Section 39. It is noteworthy that Section 37 (like Part V) is
entitled “Investment Guarantees,” while Section 38 is entitled “The Convention
Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.” An entirely plausible
explanation for the title to Part V (“Investment Guarantees”) is that it refers to the fact that
two of the three provisions in Part V are concerned with guarantees. There is no necessary
reason that Section 39 itself must be regarded as concerning guarantees, merely by virtue

of its placement in Part Vv. But, even assuming it does, then, as discussed above, that

5 See above at paras. 279-303.

66 Further, neither the Parties nor the Tribunal have any doubt that Sections 37 and 38 of the IPA extend “investment
guarantees” to investors. As the Respondent pointed out, those provisions are phrased in mandatory terms (“shall”)
and set out specific rights. In contrast, Section 39 contains no such mandatory language, suggesting that it was not in
fact intended to give investors the automatic right to international adjudication.

Page 118 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

326.

327.

328.

329.

330.

Award

title provides no real guidance in determining what the content of Section 39’s guarantees

are.

Similarly, Section 39 is entitled “International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes.” Section 39 is not titled “Enforcement of Investment Guarantees,” nor
“Guarantee of ICSID Arbitration.” The most that can be drawn from the titles to Part V
and Section 39 is that the provision contains guarantees of some sort, and that the content

of these is set out in the terms of that provision, implementing the ICSID Convention.

Second, the general purpose of the IPA also does not provide any basis for reaching a
different conclusion. It is not disputed that one of the purposes of the IPA was to promote
foreign investment; however, as the Respondent pointed out, there were other purposes, on
which the parliamentary debate was focused, including the creation of the Investment
Promotion Authority. More fundamentally, there are a variety of balances that could be
struck in promoting foreign investment, and that general objective does not compel one

interpretation or another of Section 39.

Third, as explained in Section V.B.4 below, the legislative history of the relevant PNG

legislation does not assist the Tribunal in reaching a definitive conclusion either.°*”

Finally, the reference to the BITs entered into by the Respondent also does not advance
the analysis. On this point, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that BITs relied upon by
the Respondent are irrelevant, to the extent that they are not contemporaneous to the IPA;
even where they are contemporaneous, they bear “no evidentiary value”®*® of the

Respondent’s intent behind a separate, unrelated provision of domestic investment law.

The Tribunal agrees with the arbitral tribunal’s analysis in CEMEX v. Venezuela in
addressing similar arguments. The CEMEX tribunal noted that acceptance of arbitration

clauses in BITs by Venezuela “does not imply that Venezuela was ready to accept such an

©7 See below at Section V.B.4.
©8 See above at para. 117(d).

Page 119 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

331.

332.

333.

334.

Award

obligation vis-a-vis States with which it had no BIT. One cannot draw from Article | [i.e.,
investment promotion purposes of the Venezuelan Investment Law] and from the Law as
a whole the conclusion that Article 22 must be interpreted as establishing consent by
Venezuela to submit to arbitration all potential disputes falling within the ambit of the

ICSID Convention.”°”
The CEMEX tribunal concluded that:

[T]he Tribunal cannot draw from this general evolution the
conclusion that Venezuela, when adopting Article 22, intended to
give in advance a general consent to ICSID arbitration in the absence
of any Treaty. For a State to commit itself through treaties
creating reciprocal obligations is one thing; to commit itself
unilaterally without counterpart is another.

In this case, the reference to the various BITs does not advance the discussion on whether
Section 39 of the IPA constitutes the Respondent’s “consent in writing,” other than to
illustrate the examples of possible language in which the Respondent’s consent may be
expressed.“! The language of the various BITs is irrelevant either for establishing the

Respondent’s consent, or, conversely, for disproving its existence in Section 39 of the IPA.

4. Legislative History of the IPA and the IDCA
The Parties exchanged detailed submissions on the legislative history of the IPA and the
IDCA, including the 1991 text of the IPA (the “1991 Bill”); Hansards of the 1991 Bill and
the 1992 IPA; Hansards of the 1978 IDCA and its 1982 amendment.*”

The Claimant has attached substantial significance to the legislative history of the IPA and
the IDCA. According to the Claimant, the evolution that the relevant legislative provisions
of PNG law underwent support its case on consent, because this evolution shows that “there

was a progression towards consent over the three pieces of legislation.”**? The Claimant

©9 CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 120, Exhibit CA-2.

© CEMEX v. Venezuela, at para. 126, Exhibit CA-2 (emphasis added).
© See SPP v. Egypt, at para. 111, Exhibit CA-3.

© See above at paras. 64(b), 154-158, 181-182, 208, 225.

© See above at para. 225.

Page 120 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

335.

336.

337.

Award

further argues that legislative history evidences the Respondent’s intention and desire to

improve the investment protection climate in PNG and attract foreign investment.*

The Respondent, in turn, argues that the legislative history supports its position because,
inter alia, it shows that the Respondent removed from the 1992 IPA the standing offer to
arbitrate “non-dollar” disputes that was set out in the 1991 Bill, and that the purpose of
enacting the IPA was primarily to create the Investment Promotion Authority.“ The
Respondent argues that the 1991 Bill is irrelevant because it never entered into force, and
was superseded by the 1992 IPA;*° the 1991 Bill was imperfect because it was adopted
hastily, and was therefore substituted by the 1992 final version currently in force, in an

effort to “improve” the previous version.”
a) Legislative History of Section 39 of the IPA

As explained below, the Tribunal is of the view that, contrary to the Claimant’s
suggestions, the evolution of the legislation — and in particular the change of language
between the 1991 Bill and the 1992 IPA — suggests that the Respondent did not intend to
extend a standing offer to arbitration under the ICSID Convention in that legislation.
Rather, it would appear that the Respondent intended to withdraw what would have become
the imperfect offer to arbitrate “non-dollar” disputes had the 1991 Bill been enacted, and
instead adopted a general statement currently in Section 39 of the IPA that refers back to

the IDCA that “applies, according to its terms.”

These inferences are, however, necessarily of uncertain and subsidiary weight. In the
Tribunal’s view, the fundamental point is that there is nothing in the legislative history that
justifies not giving effect to the plain, ordinary reading of Section 39 of the IPA (and
Section 2 of the IDCA).

#4 See above at para. 225(e).

645

See above at paras. 154, 156.

46 See above at para. 154.
© See above at para. 154.

Page 121 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

338.

339.

Award

The legislative history sheds some light on the Respondent’s decision-making process in

adopting the IPA. As explained below, the language of Section 39 of the IPA significantly
changed between the 1991 Bill and the 1992 IPA.

The text of the two versions of Section 39 of the IPA is provided below:

1991 Bill, Section 39%

1) A dispute resulting from interpretation or
application of this Act shall be settled by the
competent Papua New Guinea jurisdiction in
accordance with the laws and regulations of
the country.

a.

however, unless otherwise agreed by
the parties concerned, disputes
between Papua New Guinea State
and foreign nationals relating to the
application or interpretation of this
code shall be settled definitively in
arbitration conducted —

i.

in accordance with the
provisions of the convention
of March 18 1965, on the
“Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States’
adopted under the aegis of
the International Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development, and ratified by
the State; and

. if the person or business

concerned does not meet the
nationality requirements
stipulated in Article 25 of

8 Sections 37 and 39 of the 1991 IPA Act, Exhibit CL-51.
© Investment Promotion Act 1992, Exhibit CL-1.

Page 122 of 153

1992 IPA, Section 39 (current

version)™?

The Investment Disputes
Convention Act 1978,
implementing the International
Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other
States, applies, according to its
terms, to disputes arising out of
foreign investment.”

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

340.

341.

Award

this convention, in
accordance with the
provisions of the additional
mechanism approved on
September 27 1978, by the
Administrative Council of
the International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID).

2) By agreement between the Government and
investors in an enterprise certified under
Part IV, any disputes arising out of the
activities of that enterprise may be referred
to international arbitration under the
convention of the International Center for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) or to any other international
arbitration body to which the State is a
beneficiary.”

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that Section 39(1)(a) of the 1991 Bill contained
language that, had the 1991 Bill been enacted, would have constituted the Respondent’s
standing offer to arbitrate “non-dollar” disputes in ICSID arbitration (and arguably “dollar”
disputes as well). In the Tribunal’s view, however, the version of Section 39 in the 1991
Bill does not materially assist with construction of Section 39 of the 1992 Act. The two
provisions differ so significantly that it is impossible to draw any guidance from the 1991
Bill as to the meaning of the wording in the current text of Section 39. In this regard, the
Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the 1991 Bill “affords [the Tribunal] no guidance

in terms of construing the current IPA.”®!

The Hansards of the 1991 Bill and the 1992 IPA also do not provide any guidance for
establishing the legislators’ intention on the issue of consent. The Hansard of the 1991 Bill

indicates that the purposes of that Act included, inter alia, “[t]o promote and facilitate

650 See above at paras. 112(b), 182, 225(d).
65! DT(Day!).59.19-20.

Page 123 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

investment in Papua New Guinea for domestic and foreign investors;” and “[t]o establish
an Investment Promotion Authority.”°? It also indicates that the legislator intended to
“encourage both domestic and foreign investors particularly through assistance in setting
up joint ventures, to bring together the expertise of both parties.”°* The Hansard of the
1991 Bill does not make any mention of ICSID, let alone any consent granted by the

Respondent to arbitrate disputes with foreign investors at ICSID.%*

342. The Hansard of the 1992 IPA®> also does not shed light on the intention behind the text of
Section 39 of the IPA. The Claimant maintains that the Hansard of the 1992 Act aimed to
“improve” the 1991 Bill, which could mean “an improvement from the point of view of
the aims which [the Minister] articulated, which included to promote private sector
investment as well as meet conditions set under the World Bank structural adjustment
loan.”°°* According to the Claimant, because the purpose of the 1992 Act was to “improve”
the 1991 text,°*’ the current Section 39 shows that the Respondent “made a conscious
decision to broaden the scope of IPA Section 39 and make it more attractive to foreign
investors by declaring that the IDCA (and with it the ICSID Convention) applies to foreign
investment disputes, rather than just disputes about the ‘interpretation or application’ of the

IPA,7658

343. In contrast, according to the Respondent, this Hansard only indicates that the purpose of
the IPA was to streamline procedures through the establishment of the Investment
Promotion Authority, and it makes no mention of ICSID or of giving advance consent to

ICSID arbitration or of broadening the scope of such consent compared to the previous

652 Exhibit RE-18, at p. 48.

653 Exhibit RE-18, at p. 49.

654 See above at paras. 64(b), 154(d).

655 Second Reading of the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991, Exhibit RE-16.

656 DT(Day1).148.15-18.

657 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 230. See also Second Reading of the IPA Bill 1991, at p. 45 (recording the PNG
Minister for Trade and Industry’s statements that the 1992 IPA was meant “to incorporate ... improvements” to the
1991 bill and “replace and repeal the previous Act.”), Exhibit RE-16.

68 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 230. The Claimant also argues that “the 1991 text shows that the State was
intending to make an offer of ICSID arbitration in the IPA — on further consideration, the Government realised the
offer it made in the 1991 form of the IPA was not good enough to give foreign investors real comfort, and so it took
steps to improve the offer in the 1992 revision of the IPA.” Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 231.

Page 124 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

344.

345.

346.

659

Award

version of the Act.® The Respondent argues that the intention of the legislature to make
“improvements” to the previous version of the Act could be understood from the point of

view of the State, rather than from the point of view of foreign investors.°°

The Tribunal disagrees with the Claimant’s interpretation of the significance of the removal
of the 1991 Bill’s language (which, as noted above, could have constituted the
Respondent’s limited standing offer to arbitrate, had the 1991 Bill been enacted) from
Section 39 in the 1992 IPA. The Tribunal is not convinced by the Claimant’s inference,
which is merely based on the intention of PNG legislator to “improve” the 1991 text in the

1992 IPA.
The relevant passage of the 1992 Hansard reads:

[The 1991 Bill] was prepared under considerable time constraints in
the light of this Government’s ambition to promote private sector
investment as well as ambitions to meet conditions set under the
World Bank structural adjustment loan. This circumstance resulted
in an Act which as it turned out later on could be substantially
improved. 1 therefore decided not to bring the Act into force.
Instead I decided to incorporate these improvements in this
improved Bill which will replace and repeal the previous Act.

Among the improvements made in the 1992 IPA, the Hansard cites, in particular: (i) the
simplification of the certification procedures for foreign investors; (ii) the fact that
“investment guarantees for foreign investors have been strengthened so as to cover all
foreign investors, legally operating in the country;” and (iii) “several improvements ...
made in order to strengthen the promotional functions of the Investment Promotion
Authority.”° However, there is no mention of “consent in writing” to ICSID arbitration

or any broadening of the standing offer to arbitrate. As noted by the Claimant, the silence

ee above at paras. 154, 156, 212-213.

660 See above at para. 208(b).
econd Reading of the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991, Exhibit RE-16, at p. 45 (emphasis added).

econd Reading of the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991, Exhibit RE-16, at p. 46.

Page 125 of 153

661 §
662 §

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

347.

348.

349.

Award

may well have meant that the Parliament thought that dispute resolution provisions were

just a technicality, and therefore did not address the issue.°™

In any event, the Tribunal does not draw any conclusions, one way or the other, from the
silence in the Hansard on the consent to arbitration at ICSID, and agrees with Mr. Webb’s
suggestion that the Hansard should be “neutral on the question of interpretation.” Thus,
the 1992 Hansard does not assist with the Tribunal’s interpretive task. The general
reference to the 1992 IPA’s purpose of “promotion of domestic and foreign investment” in

4954

the Hansar does not, in itself, alter the Tribunal’s analysis.

In the Tribunal’s view, absent any clear indication to the contrary in the legislative history,
deletion of the standing offer to arbitrate “non-dollar” disputes is not indicative of an
intention to extend that offer to all categories of disputes. Likewise, the reference to a
desire to “improve” the 1991 Bill in the 1992 IPA does not materially advance the analysis.
As the Respondent pointed out, “improvement” is a multi-faceted concept, which could be
taken from the perspective of the State or from that of an investor. It is also a general

reference that did not necessarily extend to provisions regarding ICSID jurisdiction.

If anything, the legislative history arguably supports the Respondent more than the
Claimant. Although Section 39(1)(a) in the 1991 Bill could have constituted a standing
offer to refer “no dollars” disputes to ICSID arbitration (had the 1991 Bill been enacted),
the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the deletion of this language in the 1992 IPA
can be understood to suggest that the State “chose to depart from the wording used” in the
1991 Bill in the final version of Section 39 in the 1992 IPA;°° that departure would weigh
towards the conclusion that the Respondent did not intend to make a standing offer to

arbitrate. At a minimum, the replacement of the 1991 language with the current wording

663 See above at para. 225(e).

664 Second Reading of the Investment Promotion Authority Bill 1991, Exhibit RE-16, at pp. 45-46.
665 See above at para. 208(b).

6 Reply on Jurisdiction, at para. 54.

Page 126 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

350.

351.

352.

Award

of Section 39 cannot be interpreted as broadening the scope of the consent to arbitrate set

forth in Section 39(1)(a).°”

On balance, the legislative history of the IPA appears to show a regression — rather than a
progression — in the scope of jurisdictional rights that the Respondent granted to foreign
investors. While the 1991 Bill undoubtedly could have contained a standing offer to
arbitrate “non-dollar” disputes — albeit of limited use — had the 1991 Bill been enacted, the

1992 IPA does not contain that language at all.

b) Legislative History of Section 2 of the IDCA

According to the Claimant, the original 1978 IDCA was an act that implemented the ICSID
Convention in a comprehensive way, and which also annexed the Convention itself.
Moreover, the Claimant argues that the 1982 amendment to the IDCA, which removed the
requirement to exhaust local remedies,®” took the Respondent quite a long way down the
line to an agreement to arbitrate,” because “it got rid of a major obstacle to foreign
investment, which is the local remedies rule ....”67” The Claimant maintains that “[tJhere
was nothing that the Papua New Guinea parliament could have done after 1982 that would
have made Papua New Guinea more available to ICSID than the expression of a consent

to arbitrate. Nothing more was required.”°”!

The Respondent submits that the Hansard of the 1978 IDCA indicated that consent was not
provided in the IDCA itself but rather was required to be provided.°” The Respondent
further argues that the Hansard of the 1982 amendment to the IDCA similarly shows that
“there was no attempt to say [that the Respondent is] providing the consent in writing to

ICSID;” rather, the focus of the debate was to eliminate the requirement of exhaustion of

7 See above at para. 154.

68 See above at para. 225.

9 See above at para. 225(b).

6 DT(Day1).131.23-132.06. See above at para. 225(b).
©" DT(Day!).146.12-147.03. See above at para. 225(f).
© See DT(Day2).38.18-39.06. See above at para. 208(d).

Page 127 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

353.

354.

355.

Award

local remedies which was reflected in “the sole change made in 1982” — i.e., removal of

the part of the provision “about local and diplomatic remedies.”°”?

The Tribunal considers it useful to provide the text of the original version of Section 2 in

the 1978 IDCA and the text of Section 2 resulting from its 1982 amendment:

Original 1978 version of the IDCA, Section 2 of the IDCA in the
Section 2° Amendment Act (1982)°7°

CLASSES OF DISPUTES WHICH MAY REPEAL AND REPLACEMENT OF
BE REFERRED TO THE SECTION 2
JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE
Section 2 of the Principal Act is
“A dispute shall not be referred to the Centre _ repealed and replaced by the
unless — following:

(a) all administrative and judicial “2. CLASS OF DISPUTES WHICH
remedies in Papua New Guinea that MAY BE REFERRED TO THE
are appropriate to the dispute have JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE
been exhausted; and

No dispute shall be referred to the
(b) the dispute is fundamental to the —_ Centre unless the dispute is

investment itself.” fundamental to the investment itself.”

In the Tribunal’s view, the original text of Section 2 and its amended version do not
evidence the Respondent’s intention to make a standing offer to arbitrate. There is no
dispute between the Parties that the 1978 Section 2 of the IDCA did not constitute consent
or that the current version of Section 2 does not constitute consent in itself.°"° Likewise,

the legislative history of the IDCA does not assist the Claimant’s case either.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the Hansards of the 1978 IDCA and the 1982
Amendment Act indicate that consent in writing was still required in order to permit access

to ICSID jurisdiction. This is particularly clear from the Hansard of the original IDCA.

© DT(Day2).40.08-17. See above at para. 208(d).

4 Original 1978 Version of the IDCA, Section 2, Exhibit CL-53.

5 Act No. 14 of 1982 — Section 2 of the IDCA Amendment Act (1982), Exhibit CL-3.

6 See above at paras. 289-290. See also above at paras. 57-58, 62, 66, 148, 179, 196-197, 208(d), 216, 225(b)-(c).

Page 128 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

356.

357.

358.

Award

That Hansard states that the purpose of that bill “is to provide for the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes — ICSID — to have internal effect in Papua New

Guinea.”°”” It further states that:

The centre may only be used for dispute settlement after all Papua
New Guinea administrative and judicial remedies have been
exhausted, provided that consent in writing has been given to
permit the matter to be brought to the centre.°”*

Jurisdiction is ceded to the centre only after all Papua New Guinea
administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted, provided
that consent in writing has been given.°”

It is clear from the above excerpts that in 1978 there were two pre-conditions for bringing
a dispute to ICSID arbitration under the IDCA — (i) exhaustion of local remedies; and (ii)

consent in writing. This is also confirmed by the following passage from the Hansard:

By giving effect to the terms of the Convention, the flow of private
international investment into Papua New Guinea should be
stimulated. The limitations which should ensure that Papua New
Guinea will not be disadvantaged in entering any agreement in
which ICSID clauses are included.°*

If the 1978 IDCA provided the Respondent’s consent in writing within the meaning of
Article 25 of the Convention, there would have been no need for “any agreement in which

ICSID clauses are included” to be entered into.

The Tribunal also agrees with the Respondent that the Hansard of the 1982 Amendment

Act®*! shows that the revisions made to Section 2 were aimed at streamlining the dispute

77 Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978, at p. 15/6/2, Exhibit RE-15.

H
©8 Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978, at p. 15/6/1, Exhibit RE-15 (emphasis added).
© Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978, at p. 15/6/2, Exhibit RE-15 (emphas

 

added).

680 Second Reading of the IDCA Bill 1978, at p. 15/6/2-3, Exhibit RE-15 (emphasis added).
68! Hansard extracts in respect of the IDCA Amendment Act 1982, Exhibit CL-15.

Page 129 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

359.

360.

Award

resolution process by removing the first, but only the first, of the above two requirements

(i.e., the requirement to exhaust local remedies).°** The Hansard states that:

The Bill will remove from the Act a provision requiring that all
domestic remedies be exhausted before this Bill can be referred to
ICSID. We have found that the requirement to exhaust all domestic
remedies, that is the attempt to settle disputes through all the courts
and tribunals in Papua New Guinea has caused difficulty in
negotiating contracts for the development of this country. Foreign
investers [sic] prefer to be able to apply straight to ICSID if there is
a dispute. Their argument is that the process of going to all the
courts and tribunals of Papua New Guinea is costly and time
consuming. Also the most satisfactory way of settling these disputes
is through arbitration not through the judicial process.

Mr. Speaker, the Government believes that this agreement will be
an incentive to foreign investers [sic] and will enable agreement
with those investers [sic] to be concluded more speedily.°**

As the Respondent pointed out, this Hansard demonstrates that the purpose of the 1982
amendment was to remove the requirement for local remedies to be exhausted; nothing was
said about removing the second requirement of “consent in writing.” There is nothing
in the Hansard that would indicate the removal of the “consent” requirement. The phrase
“prefer to be able to apply straight to ICSID” does not remove that requirement; rather,
when read in the context of the paragraph in which it is contained, it clearly refers to the
removal of the requirement to exhaust local remedies as a pre-condition for referral of any

dispute to ICSID.

In its expert opinion submitted at the registration stage, Professor Crawford opined that
“IDCA s 2 was inserted in 1982 in substitution for an earlier provision requiring exhaustion

of local remedies. Again the amendment might be argued to have had some operative

682 See above at paras. 208(d), 352.
683 Hansard extracts in respect of the IDCA Amendment Act 1982, Exhibit CL-15, at p. 1.
684 See above at para. 208(d).

Page 130 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

361.

362.

363.

685

Award

effect.’”°*> In the Tribunal’s view, that amendment indeed had an operative effect — namely,
that of removing the requirement to exhaust local remedies as the last additional obstacle
to ICSID jurisdiction. Once that obstacle had been removed, investors could submit
disputes to ICSID arbitration, provided that there was a “consent in writing” from the

Respondent.

In light of the foregoing analysis and reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the legislative
history of the PNG’s investment protection legislation does not change the conclusion that
Section 39 of the IPA and Section 2 of the IDCA contain no standing offer to arbitrate

under the ICSID Convention.°*°

5. Investment Promotion Materials

Finally, the Tribunal turns to the excerpts from the investment promotion materials relied
upon by the Claimant. The Claimant argues that, as part of the Respondent’s “subsequent

practice,” the Tribunal should take into account the statements on the Investment

Promotion Authority’s website, before and after the filing of the Request for Arbitration,

and on the PNG Embassy to the Americas website.°*”

According to the Claimant, those statements are “relevant” because they are statements “by
an official agency authorised to make [them],” acting within the scope of its statutory
mandate of the “competent body in respect of investment.”°** The Claimant submits that
these statements are “damning” for the Respondent because they leave “no doubt in the
reader’s mind: if you invest in PNG, and a dispute arises in relation to your investment,

your dispute can be adjudicated at ICSID.”°*°

Prof. James Crawford AC SC, Expert Opinion on the Screening Power of the ICSID Secretary-General under

Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention in Relation to Papua New Guinea Sustainable Development Program Lid. v.
Papua New Guinea, 21 November 2013, at para. 15, Exhibit RE-2.
66 See above at paras. 275-303.

87 See above at para

113, 117, 230-233.

 

&8 See above at para. 233(b).
9 Response on Jurisdiction, at para. 245. See above at para. 113.

Page 131 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

364.

365.

366.

Award

The Respondent argues that these investment promotion materials are not “subsequent
practice falling within article 31 of the VCLT;” instead, they are purely “informative”
and “cannot, on their own, confer ‘consent in writing’.”©?! The Respondent submits that,
in any event, the excerpts from websites — both old and new — do not assist the Claimant
because their language “cannot ... be construed as reflecting the State’s ‘consent’ to ICSID

arbitration.”

The Tribunal understands that the text of the website of the Investment Promotion
Authority was modified as of 18 November 2013, as submitted by the Respondent.® The

website of the PNG Embassy to the Americas has remained unchanged.°*

Turning to the text of the websites, the Tribunal considers it useful to reproduce the

wording used on those websites in the below table.

Original Version of the
Website of the Investment
Promotion Authority (before
18 November 2013)°>

“Investment disputes can be
settled through diplomatic
channels or through the use of
local remedies before having
such matters adjudicated at the
International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment
Disputes or through another
appropriate tribunal of which
Papua New Guiena [sic] is a
member.”

Current Version of the
Website of the Investment
Promotion Authority

(since 18 November 2013)”°

“International Centre for
Settlement of Investment
Disputes.

Section 39 of the [IPA] seeks to
encourage greater flows of
international investment by
providing facilities for the
conciliation and arbitration of
disputes between government
and foreign investors.”

0 DT(Day2).5.15-17. See above at para. 210.
10.

1 See above at para. 2
02

 

 

Reply on Juri
3 See above at para. 158(d).
4 See above at paras. 113, 158(f).

 

iction, at paras. 81, 83-84.

Website of the PNG Embassy
to the Americas

“The issue of repudiating or
cancelling contracts must be
settled through diplomatic
channels or through the use of
other local remedies, before
having such matters adjudicated
at the International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment
Disputes or through another
appropriate tribunal of which
Papua New Guinea is a
member.”

5 Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority Website (October 2013), Exhibit CE-17.
66 Screenshot of Investment Promotion Authority Website (June 2014), Exhibit CE-18.

Page 132 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

367.

368.

369.

370.

Award

The Tribunal agrees with the SPP tribunal that the investment promotion materials are, by
their nature, usually informative and are not usually intended to have independent legal or

normative significance. In this regard, the Tribunal agrees with the SPP tribunal that:

In determining the effect to be accorded [to] ... statements made in
promotion investment literature the Tribunal must take account
of the fact that such statements by their nature are intended to be
informative rather than normative. Investment promotion literature
does not create rights; it informs potential investors of the rights they
will enjoy by virtue of existing law if an investment is made.°”

 

Applying the above principle, the SPP tribunal looked at the investment promotion
literature — not to alter the terms of the statute — but to “confirm the conclusion already
reached by the Tribunal on the basis of the text of Law No. 43 and the legislative intent
thereof to the effect that Article 8 does not require a further ad hoc expression of consent

to establish the jurisdiction of the Centre.”°*

However, as noted above, the ICSID Convention does not set forth any limitations as to
the form in which a State’s consent to arbitrate may be expressed.®” The Tribunal therefore
sees no reason why, as a matter of principle, a State’s consent to arbitrate cannot be given
in a statement on a website, or in another form of investment promotion literature.
Notwithstanding, for the reasons detailed below, however, the Tribunal concludes that the
pre-November 2013 version of the IPA website could not reasonably have been understood

by an investor to have been of that nature.

Unlike in the SPP case, the statements on websites relied upon by the Claimant in this case
make no reference to a “right to arbitration.”” In the Tribunal’s view, these statements
do not eliminate the requirement of “consent,” and do not themselves evidence or

“confirm” such consent by the Respondent in either the IPA or the IDCA.

7 SPP y. Egypt, at para. 112, Exhibit CA-3.

8 SPP v. Egypt, at para. 115, Exhibit CA-3.

9 See above at paras. 244-245,

100 See SPP v. Egypt, at para. 114, Exhibit CA-3.

Page 133 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

371.

372.

373.

374.

Award

The language of the statements cited by the Claimant is broad and of a general nature; they
are also rife with inaccuracies.’°! For example, the pre-November 2013 IPA website refers
to the requirement to exhaust local remedies “before” bringing a dispute to ICSID
arbitration. The website was apparently based on the 1978 IDCA, and not the 1982 version
(now in force): the requirement to exhaust local remedies was removed in the subsequent

version of Section 2 of the IDCA.7

In the Tribunal’s view, the statements on the pre-November 2013 IPA website are not only
outdated and inaccurate, but they are also equivocal and do not provide unambiguous
interpretations of Section 39 or Section 2. The excerpt from the website reads as follows:
“[iJnvestment disputes can be settled through diplomatic channels or through the use of
local remedies before having such matters adjudicated at the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes or through another appropriate tribunal of which Papua

New Guiena [sic] is a member.”

Even if the website text is understood as a statement that investment disputes “can be
settled ... at [ICSID],”’° that statement does not clearly indicate that the Respondent’s
consent has already been provided to ICSID arbitration. A variety of other interpretations
of this statement are possible, including that the requirements of the ICSID Convention,
including those set forth in Article 25 of the Convention, remain to be satisfied. If the
website intended to express a right, different language would have been used — e.g.,
“investment disputes shall be brought” to ICSID arbitration or “shall be settled through
ICSID arbitration.”

Moreover, the website refers to ICSID “or ... another appropriate tribunal of which Papua
New Guinea is a member.” Thus, the website indicates that PNG is “ta member” of ICSID

— or more accurately, a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention — and that other fora

70! See above at para. 210.

12 See above at paras. 358-359.

73 The text is in fact more equivocal. It states that “investment disputes can be settled” through diplomatic channels
or local remedies, and then only implies that such disputes thereafter also “can be settled” through ICSID or other
means. The text is ambiguous as to the status of ICSID or other international adjudication.

Page 134 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

375.

376.

377.

Award

may be available to investors (“another appropriate tribunal of which Papua New Guinea
is amember”). The Claimant does not contend — nor could it — that this sentence means

that PNG has extended its consent to arbitrate in other fora.

Thus, the website excerpt does nothing more than: (a) (mistakenly) say that local remedies
must precede bringing the dispute to ICSID; (b) indicate that PNG is a member of ICSID;
and (c) suggest (at best) that the dispute “can” be brought to ICSID. It does not say that
investors have unconditional access to ICSID, or even that they can directly bring the
dispute to ICSID. It does not say, as the Claimant argues, that “if you invest in PNG, and
a dispute arises in relation to your investment, your dispute can be adjudicated at

ICSID.”™4

The Claimant also has not alleged, and there appears to be no evidence, that it relied upon
the statements on these websites in making its investment in PNG. Absent evidence of
such reliance, the Tribunal concludes that the language on the websites do not provide
consent in circumstances where no such consent has been found in the relevant legislative

provisions of the PNG investment law.

The Tribunal does not draw any adverse inference from the modification of the text of the
website of the Investment Promotion Authority in this case, because there is no evidence
of any bad faith or other inappropriate behavior on the Respondent’s part, beyond a mere
circumstantial temporal proximity between the changes made to the Investment Promotion
Authority’s website and the filing of the Request for Arbitration. As the original version
of the IPA website shows, the relevant web-page contained a number of inaccuracies and
required an update (for example, it still referred to the requirement to exhaust local

remedies before bringing the dispute to ICSID, which, as explained below, was removed

24 See above at para. 113.

Page 135 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

by the 1982 Amendment Act to the IDCA7>). The Tribunal considers that the

Respondent’s explanation for the amendment of the website is a plausible one.

378. In any event, what is relevant in this regard is what the IPA and the IDCA provide. The
Tribunal has already indicated its views on these matters. The character of the
Respondent’s after-the-fact changes to the Investment Promotion Authority’s website is

therefore of very limited relevance.

379. For the foregoing reasons, the Claimant’s claims fail for lack of “consent in writing” by
the Respondent to the jurisdiction of the Centre and thus of this Tribunal. Because the
Tribunal has arrived at this conclusion on the basis of the Respondent’s first objection, the
Tribunal considers that it is not necessary to decide on other objections raised by the
Respondent, including that the Claimant does not qualify as an investor that has made the
requisite investment in the PNG. Similarly, the Tribunal considers that it is not necessary

to rule on the issue of whether Section 37(1) of the IPA constitutes an MEN clause.

VI. COSTS

A. The Parties’ Submissions on Costs

1. The Respondent’s Submission on Costs
380. In its Submission on Costs, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal has “full discretion
under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention to make costs orders as it deems
appropriate.””° According to the Respondent, “there is no universal ‘starting point’ /

presumptive standard for the allocation of costs ... for ICSID proceedings.”””” The

5 See above at paras. 358-359; DT(Day2).12.13-14.18 (Mr. Yeo: “If the tribunal notes, it’s still talking about
diplomatic channels or local remedies before the matter can go to ICSID. ... The reference to ‘diplomatic channels’
or ‘use of local remedies’ is actually a reference back to the original IDCA before the 1982 amendment. In terms of
reflecting the position post-1982, it’s simply wrong.”).

796 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 4.

797 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 5. According to the Respondent, ICSID tribunals
“commonly require parties to bear their own expenses and share arbitration costs equally in circumstances that either
(a) do not justify a departure from the American rule, where that is used as a starting point; or (b) justify an equitable

Page 136 of 153

 

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

381.

allocation of co:
Submission on Co:

 

710 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para.
7!! Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para.
7!2 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para.

Award

Respondent submits that “regardless of the ‘starting point’ for the analysis, the appropriate

end point would be for parties to bear their own expenses and share the arbitration costs

equally, and there are no countervailing factors (e.g., procedural misconduct) warranting a

different approach.

9708

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal should decide that the costs “lie where they

fall”? and make no order as to costs in this arbitration, for the following reasons.

a. Costs associated with the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction: the Respondent

states that:

iii.

it “is prepared not to ask that the Claimant bears the costs of the Rule 41(1)
Application, it being undisputed that the Claimant’s assets are assets held solely

for the benefit of the people of Papua New Guinea;”7!°

“costs shifting would not be a meaningful exercise where the assets of both the
Claimant and the State are to be used solely for the benefit of the People;””"!

and

there are “unusual” facts and “novel issues of law” in this case that “also favour
the making of no costs order,” and this would be consistent with the approach
of other ICSID tribunals in cases “where the matter concerns novel and complex

questions in relation to which jurisprudence remains undeveloped.”7!”

b. Costs associated with the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures and the

Respondent’s 41(5) Application: the Respondent submits that:

 

 

where the American rule is not used / not expressly used as a starting point.” Respondent’s
s, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 5.

ion on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para.
ion on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para.

2AINHD
em Es

Page 137 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

i. “there should be no order as to costs (i.e., each party should bear its own
expenses (‘party expenses’) and half of the costs payable under Articles 59 and
60 of the ICSID Convention (‘arbitration costs’)), given inter alia the relative
newness of the Rule 41(5) procedure, the expediting effect the Rule 41(5)
Application had on the Rule 41(1) proceedings, and the mixed result of the

Claimant’s [Request for Provisional Measures];”7!?

ii. the Tribunal should not order costs against the Respondent in connection with
Rule 41(5) Application because of “the relative newness of the Rule 41(5)
procedure;”’!* because the Tribunal has not found the Respondent’s Rule 41(5)
Application “to be an abuse of the Rule 41(5) procedure” as the Claimant
argued;’'> and because costs and expenses “had not ... been wasted” given that
the Rule 41(5) Application “resulted in less time being required for briefing and

hearing” the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction under Rule 41(1);7!°

iii. the Tribunal should not order costs in connection with the Claimant’s Request
for Provisional Measures, because “no clearly prevailing party emerged” in
respect of that application;’!” rather, the Tribunal “allowed only certain of the

Claimant’s provisional measures requests and rejected the others.”7!®

382. Accordingly, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal declare that:

a. “each party shall bear its own expenses incurred in respect of the Rule 39, 41(1) and
41(5) Applications and in preparing its Submissions on Costs and Costs Statement;”7!

and

 

7!3 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 3.

74 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 9.

7!5 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 10.
716 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 11.
717 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 12.
7!8 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 13.
79 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 14.

Page 138 of 153

 
 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

b. “each party shall bear half of the arbitration costs in respect of the Rule 39, 41(1) and
41(5) Applications.”””°

383. The Respondent’s costs statement is for the total amount of: (a) USD 350,000.00 (for the
advance payments on account of the arbitration costs); and (b) SGD 837,626.25 + EUR
28,000.00 + AUS 36,000.00 (for the Respondent’s legal costs and expenses).’*!

2. The Claimant’s Submission on Costs

384. In its Submission on Costs, the Claimant maintains that the Tribunal “has the authority and
discretion to make awards of costs pursuant to Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.”””?

While the Claimant notes that Article 61(2) “gives the Tribunal broad discretion to award

9723

costs as it sees fit, the Claimant invites the Tribunal to apply the costs follow the event

724

principle,’~* rather than the costs lie where they fall approach, which, according to the

Claimant, “is becoming more of an exception rather than a rule.””?>

385. In connection with each of the three applications considered by the Tribunal in this

arbitration, the Claimant makes the following submissions.

a. Costs associated with the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures: the
Claimant argues that it “should be awarded the costs incurred in the provisional
measures phase (even if the State’s objection to jurisdiction pursuant to Rule 41(1)

succeeds),””*° because the Respondent “intentionally and unapologetically took steps

which posed a direct threat to the integrity of the arbitral proceedings;”””’ according to

720 Respondent’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 14.

71 See Respondent’s Costs Statement, dated 5 March 2015, at Sections 1-6.

72 Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 3.

™3 Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 3.

74 The Claimant argues that, in applying this principle, ICSID tribunals “have taken into account, inter alia, ... (a) the
reasonableness with which the parties pursued their claims and defences; and (b) the record as it reflects the parties’
general cooperativeness in achieving cost-effective results.” Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015,
at para. 5.

75 Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 4.

6 Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 10. See also Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated
5 March 2015, at para. 7.

™7 Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 10.

 

 

Page 139 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

the Claimant, “this conduct is independent of the wider result in the arbitration and is

sufficient to warrant a costs order against the State.”7°8

b. Costs iated with the Respondent’s 41(5) Application: the Claimant submits that,

79 the Claimant

because the Tribunal “dismissed the State’s 41(5) application in toto,
is “entitled to an order that the State pay the costs that the Claimant reasonably incurred
in the Rule 41(5) phase.””° The Claimant argues that the Respondent’s conduct
“amplif[ied] its costs exposure,””*! including due to: (i) the fact that the Rule 41(5)
Application “was dismissed comprehensively;””*? and (ii) the Respondent
“unnecessarily declined to accept the Claimant’s proposal that the Rule 41(5) objection
be dealt with on the papers,” and the Respondent’s conduct in this regard was

“unhelpful and unnecessarily escalated costs.”7**

c. Costs associated with the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction: the Claimant
argues that, if it prevails on jurisdiction, the Respondent “should be ordered to pay its
reasonable costs incurred in this phase of the arbitration,” including the costs of
engaging Professor James Crawford as external counsel.”* In the Claimant’s
submission, the Tribunal “should adjust any cost order to reflect the fact that the State

was not entirely helpful in producing the language of the relevant legislation.””*>

386. The Claimant’s costs statement is for the total amount of: (a) USD 350,000.00 (for the
advance payments on account of the arbitration costs); and (b) USD 1,611,645.98 (for the

Claimant’s legal costs and expenses).’*°

8 Claimant’s Submi:
”% Claimant’s Submi
30 Claimant’s Submi
1 Claimant’s Submi
72 Claimant’s Submi

ion on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 10.

o dated 5 March 2015, at para. 14.

dated 5 March 2015, at para. 15.

dated 5 March 2015, at para. 16.

dated 5 March 2015, at para. 16(a).

733 Claimant’s Submi dated 5 March 2015, at para. 16(b).

™4 Claimant’s Submi n on Costs, dated 5 March 2015, at para. 20.

5 Claimant’s Submission on C dated 5 March 2015, at para. 21.

736 See Claimant’s Schedule of Costs, dated 5 March 2015 (Annex A to the Claimant’s Submission on Costs).

   

 

Page 140 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

387.

388.

389.

757 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para.
738 Respondent’s Reply Submission on C
739 Respondent’s Reply Subm
740 Respondent’s Reply Subm
741 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para.

Award

3. The Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs
In its Reply Submission on Costs, the Respondent reiterates that “regardless of whether
the Tribunal chooses to adopt the American rule or the principle that costs shall follow the
event as the ‘starting point’ for its costs analysis, the appropriate end point in view of the
circumstances of this case would be for parties to bear their own expenses and share the
arbitration costs ..., notwithstanding that the State would have been wrongfully forced to
go through these proceedings ..., if the arbitration is eventually terminated for want of
jurisdiction under Rule 41(1).””” The Respondent argues that the Claimant has not

established “any ground justifying a deviation from the above approach.””°*

Should the Tribunal choose to apply a costs-shifting approach, however, the Respondent
submits that “the costs presented by the Claimant ... — which were in excess of USD 1.6
million (i.e., almost 2.5 times of the State’s total expenses) and which far exceeded the
State’s corresponding expenses at every phase of the proceedings ... have not been shown
to be reasonable, and should in any case be scaled down accordingly.””*? According to the
Respondent, the Claimant has not challenged the factors that the Respondent cited in
support of its position that “costs of the Applications should lie where they fall, viz. the
relative newness of the Rule 41(5) procedure, the expediting effect the Rule 41(5)
Application had on the Rule 41(1) proceedings, the mixed result of the Claimant’s Rule 39
Application, and more importantly, the fact that the assets of both the Claimant and the

State are held for the benefit of the People.””*°

The Respondent objects to certain allegations made in the Claimant’s Submission on Costs,

which the Respondent considers as being “untrue and unwarranted,””*! as follows.

a. In response to the Claimant’s allegation that the Respondent “deliberately chose not to

disclose” the 1991 IPA, the Respondent notes that, as explained in its submissions, it

 

    

n on Cos
non C

 

, dated 13 March 2015, at para.

yPedbr

Page 141 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

did not produce the 1991 Bill because it “never came into force and was irrelevant to

the interpretation of section 39” of the IPA.”

b. Inresponse to the Claimant’s assertion that the Respondent unnecessarily amplified the
costs of Rule 41(5) phase by refusing that this application be dealt with on the papers,
the Respondent notes that this assertion is “surprising” given that the parties “were at
the outset agreed that the Rule 41(5) Application should in principle be disposed of

after an oral hearing.””4>

In any event, although Rule 41(5) Application did not
succeed, the Tribunal “did not find that the State had acted unreasonably or had misused

the Rule 41(5) procedure.””4

c. In response to the Claimant’s assertion that its provisional measures application
“should be deemed an ‘independent costs event’ as the State had purportedly infringed
its ‘self-standing’ right to the status quo,” the Respondent argues that this argument is
“a non-starter” because the Claimant “cannot rely on a non-existent ‘righ?’ to justify
costs-shifting in disregard of the mixed outcome of Rule 39 Application.””° Rather,
according to the Respondent, the Claimant “had itself escalated costs of the Rule 39
Application by engaging in lengthy post-briefing correspondence in which it constantly

shifted the basis for its provisional measures requests,” which is “a further reason

against shifting costs of the Rule 39 Application in favour of the Claimant.””*°

390. Moreover, the Respondent argues that the Claimant's costs are in any case unreasonable, ’*”

because: (a) the Claimant’s costs “far exceeded the State’s corresponding expenses at

every phase of the proceedings;””** and (b) the Claimant “has provided no detail (beyond

742 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 6.

ion on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 7.

74 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 8.

745 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 9. The Respondent submits that: (a)
“there is no ‘self-standing right’ to protection of status quo in general as rights to be preserved by provisional measures
are circumscribed by the requesting party’s claims for reliefs;” and (b) the Tribunal “did not grant the Claimant’s
request for a general order for the preservation of the status quo and had also noted that such a request would
‘ordinarily fail’.”. Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 9.

746 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 10.

747 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at paras. 11-13.

748 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 11.

Page 142 of 153

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

the total costs incurred for each Application) on how its substantial costs came to be
incurred,” making it “impossible to meaningfully assess the reasonableness of the

Claimant’s costs.””"?

391. The Respondent reiterates its requests for relief relating to costs, set out in paragraph 14 of

its Submission on Costs.”

4. The Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs
392. In its Reply Submission on Costs, the Claimant argues that the Tribunal “retains the
discretion to make orders as to costs at any stage of the arbitration that it deems
appropriate,” including to decide now on the costs relating to the various phases of

proceedings to date.”>!

393. The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s “submission on the state of the law is both
inaccurate and internally inconsistent,” in particular because the Respondent concedes that
“there is no universal ‘starting point’ with respect to the allocation of costs” but contradicts
itself “by suggesting that there somehow needs to be a justification to depart from the
principle that each party bears its own costs.””°? According to the Claimant, “[t]his is not
the law;” rather, “the ‘starting point’ is that costs follow the event and there is widespread
support amongst international investment tribunals for the idea that the costs award should
reflect success.””? The Claimant argues that “the burden lies with the State to justify a

departure from the principle that costs shall follow the event.””*4

 

  
 
 
 

749 Respondent’s Reply Subm
750 Respondent’s Reply Subm
751 Claimant’s Reply Submi

on on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 12.

on on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 14.

ion on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at paras. 3-5.

752 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 6.

Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 7.

754 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para, 8. The Claimant argues that, in its
submissions in this arbitration, the Respondent “advocated the same approach that the Claimant asks the Tribunal to
the Respondent “had previously championed the ‘costs follow the event’ approach,” and the Claimant
“invites the Tribunal to draw its own inferences from this radical shift in the State’s position.” Claimant’s Reply
Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at paras. 9-10.

Page 143 of 153

753

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

394.

395.

755 Claimant’s Reply Submi

Award

According to the Claimant, “conduct is an important factor that tribunals have regard to in

determining a just and equitable cost order;” the factors that were considered by tribunals

as tipping the scales in favour of adopting the costs follow the event approach included,

e.g., “misconduct, fraudulent activity or abuse of process by the losing party,” and

“circumstances where parties have been uncooperative or engaged in behaviour that

resulted in wastage of resources, time and costs.

755

In connection with each of the three applications considered by the Tribunal in this

arbitration, the Claimant argues that:

a.

Costs associated with the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures: the
Claimant submits that it “is entitled to the costs necessitated and/or occasioned by [the
provisional measures] application.””°° The Claimant argues that the relevant factors to
be taken into account include (a) “the Claimant’s critical success in restraining the State
from disturbing the status quo, insofar as it relates to transferring (or issuing) OTML
shares to third parties;” and (b) “the State’s manifest lack of respect for the integrity of
these proceedings, which necessitated the [provisional measures] application in the first
place.””>7 On the latter point, the Claimant asserts that the Respondent displayed its
lack of respect for the integrity of these proceedings by: (i) “declaring its intent to
transfer OTML shares ... to third parties pending the determination of this dispute;” (ii)
“acting in a manner that had a serious, adverse impact on the profitability of OTML;”

and (iii) “undermining the quality of OTML’s management.””**

Costs associated with the Respondent’s 41(5) Application: the Claimant disagrees
with the Respondent’s arguments on the “relative newness of the Rule 41(5)

9759

procedure, and states that “it should have been obvious to the State that the

procedure was wholly unsuited for cases involving ‘difficult questions of fact and law”

 

ion on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 11.

756 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 15.
757 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 12.
758 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 13.
759 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 16.

Page 144 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

396.

397.

Award

at issue in this case.’

procedure cannot be used by the State to mask the fact that its reliance on the Rule

41(5) mechanism was entirely misconceived.””°!

c. Costs associated with the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction: the Claimant
argues that the Respondent “has consistently taken the approach that costs should

follow the event” in is applications in this arbitration, and “[i]t is only now that the

State sought to manufacture various bases to depart from its original position.

According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s arguments on costs “are mere
afterthoughts.”” The Claimant submits that, “[i]f the Tribunal accepts that the

favoured approach is that costs should follow the event, this approach should be

consistently applied for all phases of the arbitration to date.””*

USD 1,655,972.54 (for the Claimant’s legal costs and expenses, including those associated

with the submissions and reply submissions on costs).

B. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

decision on the allocation of costs of this arbitration proceeding below. The Tribunal’s
decision is the result of the careful consideration of the Parties’ Submissions on Costs and

authorities relied upon by the Parties, and takes into account the Parties’ conduct during

this arbitration.

76 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 18.
761 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 20.
7 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 23.
783 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 23.
74 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 23.
765 Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015, at para. 24.

166 See Claimant’s Schedule of Costs, dated 13 March 2015 (Annex A to the Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs).

Page 145 of 153

According to the Claimant, “the relative novelty of the

Accordingly, the Claimant seeks an order that it be awarded its costs in the arbitration,”

in the total amount of: (a) USD 350,000.00 (for the ICSID and Tribunal fees); and (b)

As required by Rule 47(1)(j) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal sets out its

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

398. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal considers it useful to define the categories of costs

allocated in this award. The Tribunal’s award deals with two categories of costs:

a. The “Costs of the Arbitration” shall include the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and the

ICSID administrative charges and fees.

b. The “Legal Costs” shall include the legal fees and expenses, and any other party costs,
incurred by either Party in the course of and in connection with this arbitration

proceeding.
399. According to Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and
by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of
the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre
shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.”°”

400. As one leading commentator noted, this provision indicates that, if there is no agreement

between the parties on the allocation of costs, “the tribunal is given discretion to make a

decision on the issue.””°*

767 ICSID Convention, at Article 61(2). Similarly, Rule 28 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules gives discretion to the
Tribunal in allocating costs:
(1) Without prejudice to the final decision on the payment of the cost of the proceeding,
the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, decide:
(a) at any stage of the proceeding, the portion which each party shall pay, pursuant
to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14, of the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre;
(b) with respect to any part of the proceeding, that the related costs (as determined
by the Secretary-General) shall be borne entirely or in a particular share by one of
the parties.
(2) Promptly after the closure of the proceeding, each party shall submit to the Tribunal a
statement of costs reasonably incurred or borne by it in the proceeding and the Secretary-
General shall submit to the Tribunal an account of all amounts paid by each party to the
Centre and of all costs incurred by the Centre for the proceeding. The Tribunal may, before
the award has been rendered, request the parties and the Secretary-General to provide
additional information concerning the cost of the proceeding.

78 C, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at p. 1224, para. 3, Exhibit RL-87.

Page 146 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Award

 

401. Inthe Tribunal’s view, Article 61(2) of the Convention leaves the door open to the Tribunal

to exercise its discretion,’ in light of all the circumstances of each case,’”° to allocate

costs among the parties in the manner that it considers fair and appropriate.’”!

402. Article 61(2) does not set forth any presumption concerning allocation of costs among the
parties. The practice of ICSID tribunals on apportioning costs is “neither clear nor

uniform.”””? As the LG&E v. Argentina tribunal noted, “there is no uniform practice in

treaty arbitration with regard to this matter.”””*

403. Different ICSID tribunals followed the “costs lie where they fall” principle,’ or “the costs

775

follow the event” (or “loser pays”) principle,’” or the principle that costs should be

allocated “as a sanction against what they saw as dilatory or otherwise improper conduct
in the proceedings.”””° For example, one ICSID tribunal stated that “the recent practice of
other arbitral tribunals in investment treaty arbitrations (including ICSID) [was] to take as

their starting-point the general principle that the successful party should have its reasonable

769 See, e.g., Burimi SRL & Eagle Games SH.A v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Award, 29 May
2013, at para. 162 (referring to the tribunal’s “broad powers to rule on the costs incurred by the Parties and ICSID in
connection with this proceeding”), Annex 17 to the Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, 13 March 2015.

7 See, e.g, Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/I1, Award, 12 October 2005, at para. 235,
Exhibit RL-82.

7! Certain tribunals have used the terms “fair and reasonable.” See, e.g, Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/11, Award, 12 October 2005, at para. 236, Exhibit RL-82. Others stated that Article 61(2) allows an
ICSID tribunal to allocate costs “as it deems appropriate.” Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, at para. 150, Annex 1 to the Claimant’s Submission on Costs, 5 March 2015; Plama
Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008, at para. 316, Annex
5 to the Claimant’s Submission on Costs dated 5 March 2015.

72 ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at p. 1229, para. 19, Exhibit RL-87.
73 LG&E Energy Corp. et al. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Award, 25 July 2007, at para. 112,
Exhibit RL-80. See also, e.g., Marion Unglaube and Reinhard Unglaube v. Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case
Nos. ARB/08/1 and ARB/09/20, Award, 16 May 2012, at para. 328, Exhibit RL-85. For an award applying the “costs
lie where they fall” as a matter of principle or “normal practice” in ICSID arbitrations, see, e.g., Bayview Irrigation
District et al. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1, Award, 19 June 2007, at para. 125, Exhibit
RL-79.

74 ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at pp. 1232-1235, paras. 33-40, Exhibit
RL-87.

75 ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at pp. 1229-1230, paras. 19-21, Exhibit
RL-87.

76 ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., CUP (2009), at pp. 1230-1231, para. 22, Exhibit
RL-87.

 

 

Page 147 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

costs paid by the unsuccessful party, in accordance with the general position in other forms

of transnational commercial arbitration.””””

404. Another ICSID tribunal decided that “the traditional position in investment arbitration, in
contrast to commercial arbitration, has been to follow the public international rule which
does not apply the principle that the loser pays the costs of the arbitration and the costs of
the prevailing party. Rather, the practice has been to split the costs evenly, whether the
claimant or the respondent prevails.”””* That tribunal added that its “preferred approach to
costs is that of international commercial arbitration and its growing application to
investment arbitration” — i.e., “there should be an allocation of costs that reflects in some
measure the principle that the losing party pays, but not necessarily all of the costs of the

arbitration or of the prevailing party.””””

405. In many cases, ICSID tribunals’ decisions on costs allocation were guided, inter alia, by
the parties’ procedural conduct and specific circumstances of each case. For example, in
Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic, the tribunal applied the “costs follow the event”
principle because the Claimant’s claims failed for lack of jurisdiction, but more importantly
because the tribunal held that “the initiation and pursuit of this arbitration is an abuse of
the international investment protection regime under the BIT and, consequently, of the

ICSID Convention.”7°°

406. The Tribunal considers that its decision on costs allocation should generally be guided by:

™ Gemplus S.A., SLP S.A. and Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/04/3 & ARB(AF)/04/4, Award, 16 June 2010, Part XVII, at para. 17-22, Annex 11 to the Claimant’s Reply
Submission on Costs dated 13 March 2015. See also, e.g., Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003, at para. 24.1 (referring to “the general rule that an unsuccessful litigant in
international arbitration should bear the reasonable costs of its opponent”), Annex 15 to the Claimant’s Reply
Submission on Costs, dated 13 March 2015.

78 EDF (Services) Ltd. v. Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, at para. 322, Exhibit RL-
90.

7° EDF (Services) Ltd. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, at para. 327, Exhibit RL-
90.

780 Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, at para. 151, Annex |
to the Claimant’s Submission on Costs, 5 March 2015.

 

Page 148 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Award

a. the parties’ respective requests for relief concerning the allocation of costs;

b. the outcome of the parties’ respective claims and defenses and applications (i.e., their

relative — partial or complete — success or failure);7*!
c. the complexity or novelty of issues raised in the arbitration proceeding; 7°?

d. the existence of special reasons or circumstances, such as, for example, “procedural
misconduct, the existence of a frivolous claim, or an abuse of the [investment

arbitration] process or of the international investment protection regime;””*? and

e. the reasonableness of the parties’ legal costs, including any material disproportion that

may exist between the parties’ respective costs.’**

407. First, in this case, the Respondent has not requested that the Tribunal allocate costs in its
favor. Rather, the Respondent asked that the Tribunal apply the “costs lie where they fall”
principle by ordering that each Party bear its own Legal Costs and half of the Costs of the

Arbitration. In the circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it would generally be

%81 See, ¢.g., LG&E Energy Corp. et al. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Award, 25 July 2007, at

para. 112, Exhibit RL-80; Gemplus S.A., SLP S.A and Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States,
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/3 & ARB(AF)/04/4, Award, 16 June 2010, Part XVII, at para. 17-20, Annex 11 to the
Claimant’s Reply Submission on Costs, 13 March 2015.

782 See, e.g., Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen y. United States of America, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/98/3, Award, 26 June 2003, at para. 240 and Orders (“[T]he Tribunal is of the view that the dispute raised
difficult and novel questions of far-reaching importance for each party, and the Tribunal therefore makes no award of
costs ... [E]ach party shall bear its own costs, and shall bear equally the expenses of the Tribunal and the Secretariat.”),
Exhibit RL-81; KT Asia Investment Group BV v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17
October 2001, at para. 228 (“[T]he Tribunal finds it appropriate that each Party bear one half of the ICSID costs and
bear its own legal and other costs. Such approach seems fair and reasonable considering [inter alia] that while the
Respondent prevailed on jurisdiction, the issues involved were complex and the Claimant’s case was certainly not
brought lightly.”), Exhibit CA-19; Robert Azinian et al. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, at para. 126, Exhibit RL-84.

783 Alasdair Ross Anderson et al. v. Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3, Award, 19 May 2010,
at para. 63, Exhibit RL-78. See also Robert Azinian et al. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2,
Award, | November 1999, at para. 126, Exhibit RL-84.

74 See, e.g., EDF (Services) Ltd. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, at para. 321
(stating that “the material disproportion between Claimant’s and Respondent’s arbitration costs” is “a circumstance
that shall be duly considered when deciding the allocation of such costs”), Exhibit RL-90.

Page 149 of 153

 

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

408.

409.

410.

411.

Award

inappropriate to go beyond the relief requested by the prevailing Party — the Respondent —

and order costs in a different manner.

Second, the Tribunal has not found any evidence of “special circumstances” or procedural
misbehavior by either Party that would influence the Tribunal’s decision on the allocation
of costs. Neither Party has behaved in a procedurally improper manner in this proceeding.
On the contrary, from the moment of the constitution of the Tribunal, both Parties
contributed to the efficiency of this proceeding. Both Parties’ behaviour was exemplary in
complying with the deadlines set by the Tribunal (with minor exceptions) and with the
Tribunal’s directions in this proceeding. And, as noted above, both Parties’ counsel have

been of particular assistance to the Tribunal.

Third, both Parties have submitted reasonable applications and carefully articulated the
grounds for those applications. Neither Party’s claims, arguments nor applications were

manifestly unfounded, frivolous or otherwise improper.

The fact that the Tribunal rejected Rule 41(5) Application should not be misinterpreted as
recognition by the Tribunal of impropriety of the Respondent’s application. Rather, as
explained in the Tribunal’s Decision on the Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Application, the
Tribunal dismissed that application because there were complex issues of fact and law to
be addressed, and the Rule 41(5) process would not have allowed appropriately to address
these complex and novel issues. This decision is not to be understood as criticizing the
Respondent’s submission as improper in any way. The Tribunal also agrees with the
Respondent that its Rule 41(5) Application has significantly expedited and focused the

discussion on the issues of jurisdiction.

Similarly, the Tribunal granted the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures in part
where the Claimant had established sufficient urgency and serious harm that would result
for the Claimant if those provisional measures were not granted. In contrast, the Tribunal
rejected those limbs of the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures that were overly

broad and/or not supported by a sufficient showing of urgency and/or serious harm to the

Page 150 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

412.

413.

414.

785

Award

Claimant. Thus, the Tribunal’s decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measures, too, should not be interpreted as criticizing the Claimant or the Respondent in
any way. The Tribunal considers that it would be inappropriate, therefore, to allocate the
costs associated with the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures in favor of the

Claimant, as the Claimant requests.’*°

Fourth, the Claimant’s claims — including its arguments on jurisdiction — were not
frivolous or manifestly unfounded. As explained above, interpretation of Section 39 of the
IPA and Section 2 of the IDCA was a complex undertaking, and the Claimant advanced
serious and reasonable arguments in support of jurisdiction in this case. As noted above,
these provisions have not been interpreted by any arbitral tribunal, and the task of the
Tribunal — and the Parties — in this case was that of first impression. It was a difficult task
due to the peculiar language of the relevant provisions and the novelty of the interpretive

challenges that these provisions created for the Tribunal and the Parties.

This case is therefore far from the Saba Fakes v. Turkey scenario, where the tribunal found
that “[a] party pursuing a claim which is clearly outside the scope of the Centre’s
jurisdiction should not be encouraged, and should bear the risk of paying the full costs of
such frivolous proceedings.”’*° The Claimant’s position in this arbitration was far from
frivolous or speculative: the Claimant brought its claims in good faith and advanced an

attractive, serious case on jurisdiction.

Absent special circumstances or procedural impropriety, and taking into account the
Parties’ respective submissions and requests for costs orders (in particular, the Respondent
request that the Tribunal order no costs), the Tribunal decides to apply the “costs lie where

they fall” principle in allocating costs.

See above at para. 385(a).

286 Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award, 14 July 2010, at para. 154, Annex 2 to the
Claimant’s Submission on Costs, dated 5 March 2015.

Page 151 of 153

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Als.

416.

Award
For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal orders that the Costs of the Arbitration and the
Parties’ Legal Costs in this proceeding shall be allocated as follows:
a. each Party shall bear its own Legal Costs incurred in this arbitration; and

b. each Party shall bear 50% of the Costs of the Arbitration.

Because the Tribunal decided to apply the “costs lie where they fall” principle in this case,
there is no need to assess the reasonableness of, or otherwise “scale[] back,” the Claimant’s

Legal Costs, as the Respondent requests.’°”

VII. AWARD

417.

418.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal hereby unanimously decides that:

a. The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the claims brought by the Claimant in this

arbitration.

b. All provisional measures ordered by the Tribunal will cease to have effect as of the

Award’s date of dispatch.
c. Each Party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses.
d. Each Party shall bear 50% of the Costs of the Arbitration.

e. All other requests for relief are dismissed.

This Award concludes this arbitration proceeding.

87 See above at para. 388.

Page 152 of 153

Signed
Gary Born
President

Date: April 28, 2015

Signed [Signed]
Michael Pryles Duncan Kerr
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: April 24, 2015 Date: April 17, 2015

Page 153 of 153

