INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd.
v.
Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Gary Born, President of the Tribunal
Duncan Kerr, Arbitrator
Michael Pryles, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Monty Taylor

Assistant to the Tribunal
Valeriya Kirsey

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 21 January 2015

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. 2
Il. THE PARTIES 2
A. — The Claimant 2
B. The Respondent 2
Ill. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 5
V. PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ul
A. The Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures ll
B. The Respondent’s Observations on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measure: 16
C. — The Claimant’s Reply on Provisional Measures ...
D. Parties’ Correspondence Relating to Provisional Measures Post-Dating the
Claimant’s Reply 30
VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS 39
A. — The Tribunal’s Power to Grant Provisional Measures and Applicable Standard...... 39
1. Tribunal’s Power to Recommend Provisional Measures ..........:0::ssssseseseeseseeeeeees 40
2. Standard for Granting Provisional Measures ...........cscccseeseseeseseeeeseeteseeeseeseseeeseeeees 42
B. — The Claimant’s Requested Provisional Measures ...........sscssscesseseseeesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 48
1. Claimant’s Request No. 1 48
2. Claimant’s Request No. 2 52
3. Claimant’s Request No. 3 56
C. Relevance of the Singapore Court Proceedings .
VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION 62

 

Page | of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Ill.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

INTRODUCTION

This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s reasons and the Tribunal’s decision on the
Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures dated 14 July 2014 (“Claimant’s Request

for Provisional Measures”).
THE PARTIES
A The Claimant

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd., the Claimant (also referred to as
“PNGSDP”), is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under the laws of
Singapore. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Mr Nish Shetty, Mr Paul
Sandosham, Ms Joan Lim, Mr Matthew Brown and Ms Yvette Anthony of Clifford
Chance Pte. Ltd., Mr Audley Sheppard of Clifford Chance LLP, and Dr Romesh
Weeramantry and Dr Sam Luttrell of Clifford Chance.!

B. The Respondent

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea, the Respondent (also referred to as
“PNG”), is represented in this arbitration by Mr Alvin Yeo SC, Ms Joy Tan, Ms Swee
Yen Koh, Ms Wendy Lin, Mr Jared Chen, Mr Yin Juon Qiang, Ms Monica WY Chong,
and Mr Ahmad Firdaus bin Daud of WongPartnership LLP.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 17 October 2013, the Claimant filed a request for arbitration dated 10 October 2013
against the Respondent (the “Request for Arbitration”) with the International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”).

' Professor James Crawford also appeared as the Claimant’s counsel at the Hearing on Jurisdiction held in Singapore
on 29-30 November 2014.

Page 2 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

On 20 December 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimant’s letters of 8 November, 22 November, and
10 December 2013, in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and so
notified the Parties. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the
Parties to proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with

Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

On 20 February 2014, the Claimant informed ICSID that it opted for the formula
provided by Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention for the method of constituting the

arbitral tribunal.

In the result, the Tribunal was composed of Mr Gary Born, a national of the United States
of the America, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Dr Michael Pryles, a
national of Australia, appointed by the Claimant; and the Honourable Justice Duncan

Kerr, Chev LH, a national of Australia, appointed by the Respondent.

On 17 June 2014, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6 of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Mr Monty Taylor, ICSID Legal

Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 14 July 2014, the Claimant submitted its Request for Provisional Measures, together
with: (a) a witness statement of Sir Mekere Morauta dated 14 July 2014; and (b)
accompanying factual and legal exhibits. By letter dated 16 July 2014, the Respondent
provided some comments on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures. The

Claimant replied by letter dated 18 July 2014.

The first session of the Tribunal was held by telephone conference-call on 25 July 2014.

The Tribunal subsequently issued its Procedural Order No. 1 on 7 August 2014.

Page 3 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

In accordance with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, on 1 August 2014 the
Respondent filed its Observations on Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures
(“Respondent’s Observations”) together with a witness statement of Mr Daniel

Rolpagarea dated 1 August 2014 and accompanying factual exhibits and legal materials.

On 12 August 2014, the Claimant requested a one-day extension to file its Reply
Observations on Provisional Measures (“Claimant’s Reply”), which were due to be filed
that day under the terms of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1. This request was

granted by the Tribunal on 12 August 2014.

In accordance with the revised procedural timetable, the Claimant’s Reply was filed on
13 August 2014, together with an unsigned witness statement of Sir Mekere Morauta and
accompanying factual and legal exhibits. The Claimant subsequently filed a signed

version of Sir Mekere Morauta’s witness statement on 14 August 2014.

By emails dated 28 August and 1 September 2014, the Claimant and the Respondent
respectively confirmed their agreement to have the Claimant’s Request for Provisional

Measures determined on the papers without oral argument.

A hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules dated 16 July 2014 took place at Maxwell Chambers in Singapore on
10 October 2014. The Tribunal’s Decision on those objections was issued to the Parties

on 28 October 2014.

On 14 October 2014, the Claimant sent a letter to the Tribunal providing additional
information (and accompanying documentation) in support of the Request for Provisional

Measures. The Respondent responded to the Claimant’s letter on 24 October 2014.

The Claimant sent a further letter in support of the Request for Provisional Measures on 6
November 2014, together with accompanying documentation. The Respondent replied to

this letter on 27 November 2014.

Page 4 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

The hearing on jurisdiction was held in Singapore on 29-30 November 2014.

On 23 December 2014, the Claimant sent an additional letter to the Tribunal concerning

the Request for Provisional Measures.

On the same day, the Tribunal directed the Respondent to comment on the Claimant’s

letter by no later than 30 December 2014.

On 29 December 2014, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal to request an extension for

filing its response to the Claimant’s 23 December letter in the week of 5 January 2015.
On the same day, the Tribunal granted the Respondent’s extension request.

On 9 January 2015, the Respondent sent its response to the Claimant’s 23 December

letter.

On 14 January 2015, the Claimant sent an unsolicited letter in response to the
Respondent’s 9 January letter. On 20 January 2015, the Respondent sent an unsolicited

response to the Claimant’s 14 January letter.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

For the purposes of this Decision on Provisional Measures, and for that limited purpose
only, the Tribunal briefly summarises the facts as alleged in the Claimant’s Request for
Arbitration and Request for Provisional Measures. The following summary of alleged
facts does not constitute a finding by the Tribunal (either provisional or final) on any

facts disputed by the Parties, and does not pre-judge any issues in dispute in this case.

This proceeding concerns the Claimant’s alleged investment in an open pit copper and
gold mine in the Star Mountains of the Western Province of PNG (the “Ok Tedi mine”).
As set out in the Request for Arbitration, PNGSDP owns a majority shareholding (i.e.,
63.4146%) in Ok Tedi Mining Ltd (‘OTML”), a PNG-incorporated company.?, OTML’s

? Request for Arbitration, at para. 16.

Page 5 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

27.

28.

29.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

rights to mine Ok Tedi are set out in Special Mining Lease No. 1.? The Special Mining
Lease No. | is the primary asset of OTML.*

The Request for Arbitration provides details on the history of the Ok Tedi mine and on
how the Claimant was incorporated and came to own its shares in OTML.° These facts

are summarised below, to the extent relevant for this Decision on Provisional Measures.

The Claimant was incorporated in Singapore on 20 October 2001.° It is a company
limited by guarantee (as distinguished from share capital) and governed by its
Memorandum and Articles of Association (the “Memorandum and Articles of
Association” or “M&A”).’ The M&A annex a set of Program Rules (the “Program
Rules”) which primarily deal with how earnings are to be applied for the purposes of

fund management, transparency and accountability.®

In 2001, BHP Minerals Holdings Pty Ltd (“BHP,” a subsidiary of BHP Billiton Ltd), the
former shareholder and operator of OTML, transferred all of its ordinary shares in OTML
to the Claimant.’ This transfer was intended to entrust an independent, foreign-registered
company with the management of the development of the Ok Tedi mine (through
OTML), and for that company to use the mine’s earnings to promote sustainable
development within PNG and advance the general welfare of the people of PNG,
particularly those of the Western Province where the Ok Tedi mine is located.'? In
connection with the transfer, a charge was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML,

by way of a Security Deed dated 7 February 2002 and a Security Trust Deed dated 7

> Request for Arbitration, at para. 25.

4 Request for Arbitration, at para. 25.

5 Request for Arbitration, at paras. 9-15.
Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.

7 Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.

8 Request for Arbitration, at para. 18.

° Request for Arbitration, at para. 14.

‘© Request for Arbitration, at paras. 13-14.

Page 6 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

30.

31.

32.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

February 2002, and a mortgage was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML, by way
of an Equitable Mortgage of Shares dated 7 February 2002.!!

Following a selective share buyback conducted in January 2011, the Claimant and the
Respondent have respectively held 63.4146% and 36.5853% of issued ordinary shares in
OTML."? According to the Claimant, the Claimant carries significant risk as a
shareholder in OTML due to, inter alia, its undertaking to take over BHP’s liabilities in
respect of the mining activities (and its broader obligations as a shareholder), and
indemnities that the Claimant granted in respect of environmental claims and claims

arising out of BHP’s stewardship of OTML.!?

The Claimant also asserts that, since its incorporation in 2001, it has financed and
overseen at least USD 500 million dollars worth of development and environmental
projects.'* It has financed these projects, and carried out the functions for which it was
established, by taking its annual dividends from OTML and (in accordance with the
Program Rules) putting them into low-risk investments in international markets to

establish two funds: a short-term fund and a long-term fund.!>

In these proceedings, the Claimant asserts that the Respondent, through its
instrumentalities and entities for which it is responsible, has mounted a concerted
campaign against the Claimant and its investments, culminating in the cancellation of the
Claimant’s shares in OTML.'® In particular, on 19 September 2013, the Respondent
enacted the Mining (Ok Tedi Tenth Supplemental Agreement) Act 2013 (the “Tenth
Supplemental Act”), along with the Mining (Ok Tedi Mine Continuation) (Ninth

Supplemental Agreement) (Amendment) Act 2013.!’ According to the Claimant, among

'! Request for Arbitration, at para. 14.
'? Request for Arbitration, at para. 15.
'3 Request for Arbitration, at para. 19.
'4 Request for Arbitration, at para. 20.
'S Request for Arbitration, at para. 20.
'6 Request for Arbitration, at para. 24.
"7 Request for Arbitration, at para. 35.

Page 7 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

other things, the Tenth Supplemental Act “purported to ‘cancel’ [the Claimant’s] shares

in OTML and reissue them to the State.”!*
33. Section 4 of the Tenth Supplemental Act provides, in relevant part, as follows:
4. Shareholders of OTML
() On the coming into operation of this Act —

(a) all ordinary shares held by PNGSDP in the share capital of OTML
shall be cancelled and cease to exist; and

(b) 122,200,000 new, fully paid ordinary shares in the share capital of
OTML free of any encumbrance, charge or equitable interest shall
be issued to the State."

34. Sections 4(5) and 4(6) of the Tenth Supplemental Act also provide:

(5) All references to PNGSDP in the constitution of OTML and in the Fifth
Restated Shareholders Agreement shall, on and from the coming into
operation of this Act, be read and construed as a reference to the State.

(6) On and from the coming into operation of this Act, the Charge is void and
of no legal effect and shall not create any interest of any nature
whatsoever in any share of OTML.”°

35. Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental Act provides:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Act, the State has all necessary
powers to restructure PNGSDP and its operations to ensure that PNGSDP
applies its funds for the exclusive benefit of the people of the Western Province.!

'8 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 4. See also Request for Arbitration, at para. 36.

'° Request for Arbitration, at para. 36.

?° Request for Arbitration, at para. 39. “Charge” is defined in the Tenth Supplemental Act to mean “the Equitable
Mortgage of Shares agreement between PNGSDP and Insinger Trust (Singapore) Limited dated 7 February 2002 as
amended from time to time” (Request for Arbitration, at para. 39 fn. 31).

2! Request for Arbitration, at para. 40.

Page 8 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

36.

37.

38.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant claims that the enactment of the Tenth
Supplemental Act amounts to a breach of applicable prohibitions against unlawful
expropriation of the Claimant’s property.?? The Claimant further claims that the conduct
of the Respondent has amounted to violations of other guarantees and standards of
treatment that must be accorded by the Respondent to foreign investors, including (i) the
fair and equitable treatment standard; (ii) guarantee of free repatriation of returns on
investments; (iii) specific undertakings given to the Claimant (i.e., the umbrella clause);
(iv) the full protection and security standard; (v) the rule against arbitrary, discriminatory
or unreasonable measures; (vi) national treatment guarantee; and (vii) the rule of free

entry and sojourn of personnel.”

According to the Claimant, the primary relief that it seeks in this arbitration is “the
reinstatement of its shares in OTML, so that it can continue to use its earnings from the
Mine to perform the sustainable development and general welfare functions for which it
was established.”?+ However, because “there exists overwhelming evidence that the State
is determined to destroy (or at least paralyse) PNGSDP and prevent it pursuing this
claim,” provisional measures “are necessary to prevent the State from achieving these

objectives.”?5

In its Request for Provisional Measures, the Claimant lists a series of actions purportedly
taken by the Respondent against the Claimant or its property since the Request for

Arbitration was filed. According to the Claimant, the Respondent has:

a. “purported to exercise long-arm powers to terminate all members of the
Claimant’s Board of Directors (and appoint a ‘Transitional Management Team’ of

its own choosing);”?°

» Request for Arbitration, at para. 54.
3 Request for Arbitration, at para. 55.
4 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 6.

?5 Claimant’s Request for Pro

 

nal Measures, at para. 6.

26 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 7(a), 9.

Page 9 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

db. “taken steps to seize certain of the Claimant’s assets in Western Province and,
through the direct actions of its Prime Minister, freeze the Claimant’s bank

accounts in PNG;”?”

c. “used its influence to deprive the Claimant of access to its accounts offshore;”?*
d. “threatened the Claimant’s officers and employees with arrest and criminal
prosecution;””? and
e. “deported the Claimant’s Communications and Media Manager, Mr Mark
Davis.”3°
39. The Claimant also alleges that there are local court proceedings pending in Singapore that

were commenced at the time the constitution of the Tribunal was pending, and that relate

1

to matters of Singapore company law.*! The developments before the Singapore courts

are discussed below, to the extent relevant to this Decision.

40. The above facts are discussed in more detail in the Witness Statements of Sir Mekere

Morauta*? and Mr Daniel Rolpagarea.** The Tribunal does not detail these facts here, but

27 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 7(b), 8.

?8 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 7(c), 8. In particular, the Claimant asserts that the
Respondent “instructed the [PNG Internal Revenue Commission] to deny the Claimant tax clearance,” without
which “the Claimant will not be able to remit monies from its local account (which receives returns on its
investments, such as repayments on loans) to its operations account in Hong Kong (which the State has tried
unsuccessfully to freeze).” Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 8.

?° Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 7(d), 10. In this regard, the Claimant adds that “on or
around 12 May 2014, the State also announced its intention to set up a ‘Commission of Inquiry’ to investigate
PNGSDP’s asset sales, its company structure and the management of its finances.” Claimant’s Request for
Provisional Measures, at para. 10.

*° Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 7(e).

+! Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 9.

*2 See Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at pp. 33-52. In its Request for Provisional Measures, the Claimant states that
“Sir Mekere’s Witness Statement provides further background to this dispute, a detailed account of the State’s
attacks on PNGSDP and an explanation of what is likely to happen if the provisional measures the Claimant seeks
are not granted by the Tribunal”; and “details of the relevant facts and measures of the Respondent are set out in Sir
Mekere’s Witness Statement.” Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 2, 26. See also 2nd Sir
Mekere Morauta WS, at pp. 9-18.

33 See Ist Daniel Rolpagarea WS, at pp. 25-59.

 

Page 10 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Al.

42.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

discusses certain facts described in these Witness Statements where relevant in its

Decision below.
PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS
A, The Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures

In its Request for Provisional Measures, the Claimant states that it “urgently requires
provisional measures to: (a) prevent the continuation of oppressive and unlawful conduct
by [the Respondent]; (b) maintain the status quo; and (c) avoid further aggravation of this

dispute pending its final determination by the Tribunal.”*+

The Claimant argues that “there exists overwhelming evidence that the State is
determined to destroy (or at least paralyse) [the Claimant] and prevent it pursuing this
claim,” and “[p]rovisional measures are necessary to prevent the State from achieving
those objectives.”*> According to the Claimant, the Respondent has recently committed

“act[s] of aggravation,” including:

a. the Respondent’s “attempts to freeze the Claimant’s accounts;”*°

db. the Respondent “is escalating its attempts to starve the Claimant of the capital it
needs to continue operating” and has recently given instruction to the PNG

Internal Revenue Commission to deny the Claimant tax clearance;*”

c. “the Respondent’s long-arm attempts to replace the management of PNGSDP are
clearly acts of aggravation as they are exacerbating this dispute and making the
just resolution of it significantly more difficult” and they also “pose a direct threat
to the Claimant’s ability to continue operating and to pursue its claims.”** The

Claimant contends that it brought the proceedings in the High Court of Singapore

* Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 1.
+5 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 6.
> Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 8.

57 Claimant’s Request for Prov

 

nal Measures, at para. 8 (emphasis in original).

38 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 9.

Page 11 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

43.

44.

45.

*° Claimant’s Request for Provi
4° Claimant’s Request for Provi

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

“to try to preserve its ability to manage itself in Singaproe in accordance with its
Memorandum and Articles of Association, free from long-arm interference by the

State;”?? and

d. “there is strong reason to believe that the State directed persons for whom it is
responsible to make threats of physical harm to officers, employees and agents of
[the Claimant], or at the very least failed to prevent these persons from making

such threats,” which amount to “acts of aggravation of the most serious kind.”4”

The Claimant alleges that it has asked the Respondent “to maintain the status quo and not
aggravate this dispute pending its resolution in accordance with the ICSID Convention;”
however, the Respondent has instead “accelerated its campaign against [the Claimant]

and its investments, taking an array of actions that can only be described as predatory.”4!

The Claimant asserts that the Tribunal’s “power to order provisional measures derives
from Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,”
and that “[iJt is generally accepted that these provisions grant wide discretion to the
Tribunal.”*? The Claimant states that, in order to prevail on an application for provisional
measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, “the requesting party bears the
burden of establishing that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction ... , that there is a
prima facie basis to its claim ... , and that the requested measures are necessary,” and that

party “must specify the ‘rights to be preserved’.” #7

Regarding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Claimant states that “when a request for
provisional measures is made before jurisdiction is finally determined,” the party

requesting provisional measures “does not need to establish jurisdiction in any definitive

ional Measures, at para. 9.
ional Measures, at para. 10.

  

“| Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 26 (emphasis in original).
*. Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 12.
*8 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 13.

Page 12 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

46.

47.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

sense” but must demonstrate that there is “the prima facie existence of jurisdiction, or, to

couch this in negative terms, the absence of a clear lack of jurisdiction.”+

Regarding the standard of harm that is applicable in this context, the Claimant notes that
“ICSID tribunals tend to require a showing of harm that is either ‘substantial’ or
‘irreparable’.”*> The Claimant suggests that the harm would be “irreparable” where “‘if it
was allowed to materialise, [it would] be incapable of being cured through an award of
money damages.”*° According to the Claimant, irreparable harm would result where the
actions in question, “if not restrained by provisional measures, [would] effectively bring
an end to the investor’s business,” even if “the loss could (at least in theory) be measured

in money.”4”

Applying the above test to this case, the Claimant argues that:

a. the Claimant’s rights which “fall for final adjudication in the merits of this case”**

and which need to be preserved include:

i. “its right to operate its investments and deal with its assets (including its
bank accounts wherever located) in accordance with the Program

Rules;”*?

ii. “its right to be treated and dealt with by PNG in accordance with the
standards of treatment prescribed by the [PNG Investment Promotion Act

1992 (“IPA”)] and the BITs to which the Respondent is a party;”°°

“4 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 16 (citing Victor Pey Casado and President Allende
Foundation v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 25
September 2001, 6 /CSID Reports (2004), pp. 373-397, at p. 379, Exhibit CA-5).

Claimant’s Request for Provi
47 Claimant’s Request for Provi

visional Measures, at para. 25.
ional Measures, at para. 25(a).
ional Measures, at para. 25(b).

   

48 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 15.
49 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 14(a).
50 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 14(b).

Page 13 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

iii. “the right of its officers, employees, servants and agents to enter and
remain in the State for the purposes of engaging in activities connected
with the Claimant’s investments, and to be free from arbitrary or unlawful

arrest, prosecution and harassment by the State and its agents;”*! and

iv. “the Claimant’s procedural rights, including its rights to the preservation
of the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute (which are
recognised as ‘self-standing rights’) and the preservation of the

effectiveness of a future award.”°?
b. the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction, because:

i. the fact of registration of the Request for Arbitration by ICSID can be
taken “as evidence that jurisdiction is not manifestly lacking in this

case:”3

according to the Claimant, the standard that it must satisfy for its
Request for Provisional Measures “is only fractionally (if at all) higher
than the ‘not manifestly lacking’ standard applicable at the registration

stage.”5+

ii. as set out in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration,*> the Claimant’s
position is that each of the jurisdictional requirements set forth in Article
25 of the ICSID Convention is satisfied in this case, including the
requirements of “Contracting State .. and a National of another

Contracting State,” “investment,” “legal dispute” and consent in writing.*°

With regard to the latter, the Claimant states that “through its national law,

 

5! Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 14(c).

52 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 14(d) (citing Burlington Resources Inc. and others v.
Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5),
Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures, dated 29 June 2009, at para. 60,
Exhibit CA-4).
53 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 17.

54 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 17.

55 The Claimant cites to paragraphs 60 to 69 of its Request for Arbitration. See Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measures, at para. 18.

56 See Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at paras. 18-22.

 

Page 14 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

the Respondent has made a standing offer to arbitrate at ICSID (an offer
which was made in the form of an ‘Investment Guarantee’),” and the

Claimant accepted this offer by letter dated 26 September 2013.*7

c. there is a prima facie basis to the Claimant’s claims, as set out in the Request for

Arbitration;** according to the Claimant, “there is at the very least a good

arguable case” for each claim;>?

d. the provisional measures sought by the Claimant are “necessary” because the
actions of the Respondent since the dispute was submitted to arbitration “leave no
doubt that it intends to do as much harm as possible” to the Claimant, “or even
destroy the company, while it still can,” and the Respondent’s recent conduct
“shows that it is escalating its campaign against the Claimant and its officers.”

According to the Claimant, “[tJhere is therefore a serious danger in waiting until

the final award to give the Claimant relief?”*! and

e. as to the standard of harm, “either measure [i.e., that the harm is ‘substantial’ or
‘irreparable’ is satisfied” in this case.°* According to the Claimant, if the

Tribunal were to prefer the “irreparable harm” test, it would be satisfied because:

i. the State’s conduct, as described in Sir Mekere Morauta’s witness
statement, “is such that the physical safety and liberty of the Claimant’s

staff is at risk. Such harm would, if it was allowed to materialise, be

incapable of being cured through an award of money damages;”®

57 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 22.

58 The Claimant cites to paragraphs 54-55 of its Request for Arbitration. See Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measures, at para. 23.
*? Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 23.

6 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 24.

6! Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 24.

© Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 25.

© Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 25(a) (citing Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at pp. 40-42).

  

Page 15 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

48.

49.

 Claimant’s Request for Provi

ii.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

the State’s conduct “threatens the very existence of the Claimant and the
purposes for which it was established;” “where the actions in question
would, if not restrained by provisional measures, effectively bring an end
to the investor’s business, then the harm feared may well be ‘irreparable’
notwithstanding the fact that the loss could (at least in theory) be measured

in money.”°*

Accordingly, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal:

urgently recommend to the Respondent that, pending final determination of the
dispute, the Respondent refrain from:

(a)

(b)

(

taking (or threatening to take) any further steps under Section 6 of the
Tenth Supplemental Act, or otherwise interfering with or impeding the
Claimant's lawful operation in PNG in accordance with the Program
Rules;

harassing, arresting, or commencing any criminal prosecution against any
officer, employee, servant or agent of the Claimant in connection with the
performance of their responsibilities or functions as officers, employees,
servants or agents of the Claimant (or making any further threats to do
so); and

taking any further steps that may aggravate the dispute, disturb the status
quo as at the date of this Request, or otherwise impede the orderly
resolution of the dispute in accordance with the ICSID Convention.

B. The Respondent’s Observations on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional
Measures

In the Respondent’s Observations, the Respondent seeks a dismissal of the Claimant’s

Request for Provisional Measures on the basis that it, “apart from falling short of the

threshold requirements,

‘prays for intrusive interim measures that are unsupported by

 

ional Measures, at para. 25(b).

 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 27.

Page 16 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

50.

Sl.

52.

66,

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

any showing of urgency, are entirely unncessary and unrelated to the reliefs sought in the

arbitration.”°°

The Respondent observes that the Claimant’s Provisional Measure 1 “is sought in
essentially the same terms as the final relief sought” in paragraph 73(ii) of the Request

for Arbitration,”

and that such request “offends the principle that an arbitral tribunal
cannot grant a decision on the merits under the guise of interim relief ... , and is alone
grounds for the Tribunal to deny” this request.** The Respondent adds that the
declaration sought in paragraph 73(ii) of the Request for Arbitration “is also one which

the Tribunal does not even have jurisdiction to grant on a final basis ... much less on an

 

interim bas

  

”’ because, among other things, the jurisdictional requirements set out in

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention are absent.”

According to the Respondent, the burden is on the Claimant to establish why the Tribunal
should “take the extraordinary step of granting” provisional measures, by “showing: (a)
prima facie jurisdiction, (b) a prima facie basis to the reliefs sought in the arbitration, (c)
urgency, and (d) necessity in order to avoid irreparable harm.””° The Respondent argues
that the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures is “wholly without merit and must
be denied,””! because the Request and Sir Mekere Morauta’s witness statement filed in
support thereof “are thin on evidence, contradicted by recent events, and tellingly, do not

(presumably because they cannot) address the question of ‘urgency’ at all.”7”

The Respondent discusses the Singapore Court proceedings at some length,’* and argues

that, “given the Claimant’s failure (on non-jurisdictional grounds) to obtain the self-same

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 1.

7 In paragraph 73(ii) of the Request for Arbitration, the Claimant sought “a declaration that Section 6 of the Tenth
Supplemental Act is void and of no legal effect on the Claimant, and an order permanently restraining the
Respondent from taking any steps to ‘restructure’ the Claimant or influence its operations in any way other than in
accordance with the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the Program Rules.”

8 Respondent’s Observations, para. 1(a) at fn. 1 (emphasis omitted).

 Respondent’s Observations, para. I(a) at fn. 1 (emphasis omitted).

™ Respondent’s Observations, at para. 2 (emphasis and footnotes omitted).

7! Respondent’s Observations, at para. 3.

” Respondent’s Observations, at para. 2.

73 See Respondent’s Observations, at paras. 14-25.

Page 17 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

53.

54.

55.

56.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

provisional measures in the Singapore Courts, the Singapore Court’s finding that those
measures are not urgent/necessary ... ought, in the absence of any changed circumstances
(and there is none, as the Claimant itself recognises), to preclude the Claimant from
seeking a further bite of the ‘provisional apple’.””*

The Respondent further argues that the Tribunal should dismiss the Request for
Provisional Measures because: (1) “the threshold requirements of prima facie jurisdiction
and prima facie right to the reliefs sought are manifestly absent;””> and (2) “the
prevailing circumstances and preponderance of evidence show that the measures sought

in the [Request for Provisional Measures] are neither urgent nor necessary.””°

On point (1), the Respondent argues that none of the threshold requirements has been

established in this case.””

First, there is “a manifest lack of jurisdiction, given the non-existence of a ‘private

foreign investment” and “the absence of the State’s consent to ICSID arbitration.””* The
Respondent observes that the Claimant’s reference to the fact of registration as “evidence
that jurisdiction is not manifestly lacking” is “misguided, as registration under Article
36(3) simply reflects the ICSID Secretariat’s view that the dispute is not manifestly
outside ICSID’s jurisdiction, and cannot supplant the Tribunal’s own view of its

jurisdiction over the matter.”””

Second, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant failed to establish a prima facie basis to

its claims in the Request for Arbitration.*° The Respondent notes, in particular, that the

7 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 25 (citing Born, /nternational Commercial Arbitration, Kluwer (2nd ed.,
2014), at pp. 3787-3790, Exhibit RL-36).
75 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 4.

16

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 5.

77 See Respondent’s Observations, at para. 27.

78 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 28 (emphasis omitted).

” Respondent’s Observations, at para. 28 (emphasis and footnote omitted).
8° Respondent’s Observations, at para. 29.

Page 18 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Claimant is wrong that Section 37(1) of the IPA is a most-favoured nation (or MFN)

clause.*!

The Respondent argues that the Request for Provisional Measures “must be dismissed

outright” for the above reasons.*”

On point (2), the Respondent states that “[e]ven assuming that the threshold requirements
are cleared, the same outcome would be reached as the substantive criterion [sic] of

‘urgency’ and ‘necessity’ have not been shown to exist.”*?

In relation to urgency, the Respondent argues that “[t]he timing of the filing of the
[Request for Provisional Measures], its content (or lack of) and the prevailing
circumstances suggest that there is simply no urgency for the Provisional Measures

sought.”*+

First, the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures “‘is in fact silent on the question of

‘urgency’,” which by definition means that this key requirement “remains unsatisfied.”*°

Second, the Claimant is unable to explain the 9-month delay between its Request for
Arbitration, in which the Claimant stated that it would “shortly” be filing a request for
interim relief, and its Request for Provisional Measures; the Respondent submits that this

delay calls for an explanation, as “the bulk of the alleged ‘predatory ... acts and measures

 

of [the State]’ which purportedly triggered the [Request for Provisional Measures] took
place in or around end-2013 (i.e., those grounds had existed by the time the [Request for

Arbitration] was registered in December 2013).”*° The Respondent points out that the

8! See Respondent’s Observations, at para. 29.

®2 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 30.

83 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 31.

84 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 32.

85 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 33 (emphasis and footnote omitted).

86

Respondent's Observations, at para. 34 (citing Ist Daniel Rolpagarea WS, at para. 70) (emphasis in original). The

Respondent points out that: (a) the appointment of the Transitional Management Team by the Respondent, removal
of the Claimant’s directors, and termination of Mr David Sode’s appointment as the Claimant’s Managing Director
took place on 24 October 2013; (b) the Respondent’s instructions “to freeze the Claimant’s bank accounts were
given in October to November 2013;” and (c) the “alleged harassment and intimidation of Mr Lawrence Stephens

Page 19 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Claimant’s assertion that it “‘was unable to put forward its request for Provisional
Measures until the Tribunal was fully constituted on 17 June 2014’ ... was clearly an
afterthought,” because the Claimant was well aware of the procedure under ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39(5) allowing a party to submit a request for interim relief prior to the
constitution of the Tribunal, as is apparent from the Claimant’s statements in its Request

for Arbitration.’

62. Third, “far from discharging the ‘basic evidentiary requirement’ that ‘the complained-of
act is actually in the works and likely to take place during the course of the
arbitration’,”** the Claimant relies on (a) past events, which “obviously would not suffice
for purposes of establishing ‘urgency’ at present;”*? (b) bare allegations unsubstantiated
by evidence;” and (c) “its own speculative fear that hostile actions may be taken against
it” wheareas interim measures “are reserved for ‘situations of real (and not imagined)
harm’ and are not meant to protect against ‘potential or hypothetical harm susceptible to

result from uncertain actions’.”?!

63. Finally, with respect to the Claimant’s requested Provisional Measure 1, the Respondent
notes that it was not mentioned among the intended provisional measures listed in the
Claimant’s 25 June 2014 letter to the Tribunal, and the “conclusion that flows from this is
that [the request for Provisional Measure 1] must have arisen from (any alleged) changed

circumstances in the days between the Claimant’s 25 June 2014 letter and the date of the

 

and Mr Mark Davis similarly took place in October to November 2013.” Respondent’s Observations, at para.
35(a)-(c) (emphasis and footnotes omitted).

87 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 36 (citing the Claimant’s 18 July 2014 letter and the Claimant’s Request for
Arbitration, at para. 75).

88 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 37 (citing Mouawad & Silbert, “A Guide to Interim Measures in Investor-
State Arbitration” (2013) 29(3) Arbitration International 381 at p. 388, Exhibit RL-37) (emphasis omitted).

8° Respondent’s Observations, at para. 37 (footnote omitted).

° Respondent’s Observations, at para. 37 (citing the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, paras. 7-11)
(emphasis omitted).

°! Respondent’s Observations, at para. 37 (citing, respectively, Mouawad & Silbert, “A Guide to Interim Measures
in Investor-State Arbitration” (2013) 29(3) Arbitratic ional 381, at p. 388, Exhibit RL-37, and Occidental
Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador (1CSID
Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, at para. 89, Exhibit RL-29)
(emphasis omitted).

 

 

Page 20 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

64.

65.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

filing of the Application (14 July 2014).”*. Yet, the only post-25 June 2014 event relied
upon by the Claimant — i.e., the “purported denial of tax clearance for the Claimant on the

State’s instruction in July 2014” is irrelevant” because this allegation is
unsubstantiated, and even if it were true, clearance would have been denied because the
Claimant “has failed to comply with the relevant tax laws (or there are grounds to suspect
993

so). For the Respondent, if such a measure had ben taken in response to the

Claimant’s non-compliance with the taxation regime, “that would have had nothing to do

with the present dispute.”**

In relation to necessity, the Respondent argues that the criterion of “necessity” is also
“absent, given that the Claimant cannot even establish the substratum of facts/events
which the [Claimant’s requested] Provisional Measures are meant to address.”° The

Respondent takes each requested provisional measure in turn.

First, with respect to Provisional Measure 1, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant
“has not explained (much less proven) ... how the State has been ‘interfering with or

impeding’ the Claimant’s operations in PNG.”°° The Respondent states that:

a. the Claimant’s “operations and assets are (and remain) controlled by Sir Mekere
and his allies (to the complete exclusion of the State, including the Transitional

Management Team);”°”

db. the Claimant “has little or no presence in PNG” as a result of its decision to cease

its development programs/projects and shift its operations to Australia;°* and

® Respondent’s Observations, at para. 38.

°3 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 38.

°4 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 38.

°5 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 39.

°6 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 40.

°7 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 41 (emphasis omitted). According to the Respondent, this enabled Sir
Mekere and his allies to (a) unilaterally and wrongfully amend the Claimant’s M&A and wrongfully pass resolutions
“so as to dilute/exclude the State’s oversight of the Claimant’s operations and assets;” (b) cease/terminate the
development projects/programs which the Claimant had undertaken in PNG; and (c) “dissipate its assets in breach of
... the Program Rules.” Respondent’s Observations, at para. 41.

Page 21 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

c. “{g]iven that the Claimant’s Board and its officers remain in complete control of
the Claimant and its assets, the State is simply not in a position to affect the
operations of the Claimant, whether in PNG or any other country.”°? The
Respondent expands on the facts which it says show that “the State has no means
to influence/hinder the Claimant’s operations (or seize its assets)” at paragraph 44

of its Observations. '°°

66. Second, with respect to Provisional Measure 2, the Respondent states that the Claimant’s
assertions that the Respondent “had sought to threaten, intimidate and harass the

Claimant’s officers are similarly unsubstantiated and untrue.”!°!

The Respondent argues
that, even as at end-March 2014, the Claimant was unable to particularise the alleged
incidents of harassment (including the alleged “harassment” of Mr Mark Davis and Mr
Lawrence Stephens) despite the alleged incidents purportedly occurring in 2013.'° In
any event, for the Respondent, the alleged harassment of these two individuals is “more
illusory than real.”!°? According to the Respondent, “the deportation of Mr Davis arose
from Mr Davis’ breach of visa conditions,” and no action was taken by the UK
authorities regarding the alleged threat to Mr Stephens.'** The Respondent argues that it,
as a sovereign, has a “right and obligation to enforce its criminal laws within its own
territory, and unless a ‘strong linkage’ can be shown (and there is none here) between the

criminal proceedings and the investment dispute before the ICSID tribunal, which

 

°8 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 42.

°° Respondent’s Observations, at para. 43.

100 See Respondent’s Observations, at para. 44 (emphasis omitted). Among the relevant alleged facts, the
Respondent notes the following: (a) the Claimant’s use of its assets to finance the litigation in Singapore court; (b)
the Transitional Management Team “never took its position, and it is Sir Mekere (and his allies) who remain in
complete control of the Claimant;” and (c) the State has not succeeded in freezing the Claimant’s assets in Bank
South Pacific.

101 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 45.

10 See Respondent’s Observations, at para. 46.

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 47.

104 Respondent’s Observartions, at para. 47 (citing Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 143, Exhibit SMM-42, and
Ist Daniel Rolpagarea WS, at paras. 74(a), (c)).

103

Page 22 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

67.

68.

105
106

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

threatens to undermine the integrity of the arbitral process, the State’s domestic criminal

proceedings is a domain upon which the Tribunal should not infringe.”!°>

Third, in respect of Provisional Measure 3, the Respondent argues that this requested
measure which relates to “a ‘self-standing right’ to the preservation of the status quo
ignores the weight of authority confirming that the rights to be preserved by provisional
measures are circumscribed by the requesting party’s claims for reliefs, i.e., there is no

106

‘self-standing right’ to the protection of the status quo in general. The Respondent

points out that, in any event, the Respondent itself also applied to the Singapore Courts

for orders preserving the status quo,'”

and was successful in obtaining interim relief
from the Singapore Courts “enjoining the Claimant from affecting the status quo and
aggravating the dispute.”!°* According to the Respondent, the Claimant should not be
allowed to avail itself of Provisional Measure 3 under the principle that a tribunal “will
not issue an injunction where it is found that the petitioner does not have clean hands.”!”
The Respondent adds that it “simply does not have the ability to disturb the status quo of

the matter,” and therefore there is no need for Provisional Measure 3.!!°

The Respondent concludes that the Claimant’s complaints appear rooted in a distrust of

the current PNG Government, or a political disagrement between Sir Mekere and the

current administration.!!!

According to the Respondent, “[a]rbitral tribunals have long
been wary of the possible misuse of provisional measures for extraneous/tactical
purposes and have thus insisted on a strict compliance with the requisite threshold and

substantive requirements,” and this case should not be an exception.!!*

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 48 (footnotes omitted).
Respondent’s Observations, at para. 50 (emphasis and footnotes omitted).

107 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 52. See also Respondent’s Observations, at paras. 14-25.

108 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 51.

10° Respondent’s Observations, at para. 51 (citing Yesilirmak, Provisional Measures in International Commercial
Arbitration, Kluwer (2005), at para. [5-42], Exhibit RL-34).

110 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 52.

'l See Respondent’s Observations, at para. 53.

112

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 54 (footnote omitted).

Page 23 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

69.

70.

71.

13

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Accordingly, the Respondent requests that the Claimant’s Request for Provisional

Measures be dismissed in its entirety, with costs.!!°

C. The Claimant's Reply on Provisional Measures

In its Reply, the Claimant argues that the question for the Tribunal is “whether there is
evidence that during this timeframe [i.e., the duration of the arbitration] there exist
circumstances which present a serious danger to the Claimant or the integrity of the
proceedings;” if there is evidence of such danger (and the Claimant says that “there
certainly is”), then “provisional measures are necessary and may be granted provided that
the Claimant’s case — both on jurisdiction and the merits — is not destined to fail (and, in

the Claimant’s submission, it certainly is not).”!'*

The Claimant argues that the Respondent has admitted (or at least has not denied) most of
the material facts that underpin the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures,

including that the Respondent:
a. expropriated the Claimant’s shares;!!>

b. imposed a travel ban on the Claimant’s then Chairman, Professor Garnaut, and

refused to grant Mine Life Extension to OTML;!!®

c. unilaterally took a range of “hostile and aggravating actions against the Claimant”
since taking the Claimant’s shares in OTML,'!” including: (i) “attempting to

seize control of the Claimant’s assets and operations;”''* (ii) “writing to the

 

Claimant’s banks to block the access to its funds;”!'® (iii) “purporting to replace

its board of directors with a ‘Transitional Management Team’ of its own

Respondent’s Observations, at para. 55.

14 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 4 (emphasis omitted).

1s
116

Claimant’s Reply, at para. 6.
Claimant’s Reply, at para. 7.

'!7 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8.
18 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(a).
119 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(b) (citing Ist Daniel Rolpagarea WS, at para. 96).

Page 24 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

72.

73.

74.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

choosing;”!?° (iv) “freezing certain of the Claimant’s assets in PNG;”!! (v)
“threatening, intimidating and harassing the Claimant’s officers and staff;”!?? and
(vi) “announcing its intention to establish a ‘Commission of Inquiry’ to

investigate the supposedly ‘criminal’ conduct of the Claimant’s officers.”!?

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s argument that “while [the Respondent] has
done these things, it did so too long ago for its actions to be relied upon as a basis for
provisional measures” cannot be right.'** According to the Claimant, “there is a real
danger that, pending the completion of this arbitration, the Claimant will suffer further
attacks by the Respondent and the dispute will be aggravated, if the provisional measures

are not granted.”!?5

The Claimant responds to the Respondent’s arguments on three points: (1) necessity of
provisional measures requested by the Claimant;!° (2) the Singapore Court
proceedings; '?” and (3) the threshold requirements of prima facie jurisdiction and prima

facie right to the reliefs sought in the arbitration. !7°
First, with regard to the issue of necessity, the Claimant argues:

a. in response to the Respondent’s argument that “the provisional measures are not
urgent ... as the Claimant waited nine months” after filing the Request for
Arbitration to submit its Request for Provisional Measures,'”? the Claimant notes

that it filed its Request for Provisional Measures “promptly after the Tribunal was

constituted (the process of which was delayed by the State’s own actions)” and

120 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(c) (citing Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at paras. 127-129).
21 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(d).

122
123

Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(e) (citing Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at paras. 141-148).
Claimant’s Reply, at para. 8(f).

'>4 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 9.

125
126

Claimant’s Reply, at para. 10.
See Claimant's Reply, at paras. 11-24.

27 See Claimant’s Reply, at paras. 25-31.
228 See Claimant’s Reply, at paras. 32-37.
!2° Claimant’s Reply, at para. 11.

Page 25 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

that “the focus is on what the State has done (and, based on that conduct, what the

State is likely to do).”!°°

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention says nothing about urgency, which was not
included in the text when the Convention was drafted, and the Tribunal is not
bound by the decisions of other ICSID tribunals which “have found that a
requirement of ‘urgency’ is implied in the text of Article 47 of the ICSID

29131

Convention; rather, the Tribunal “may ... give natural priority to the

requirement that the drafters did include: the requirement that the measures must

be necessary;”!*?

even if the Respondent is right that there is an implied requirement of “urgency”
in Article 47, the proper temporal question is “can the applicant wait until a final
award is rendered to receive the relief it seeks now?” (and not how much time has

passed before the Request for Provisional Measures).'*?

According to the
Claimant, the answer to its articulated question is “no” in view of the “undisputed
facts” including events shortly preceding the filing of its Request for Provisional

Measures; !*+

in response to the Respondent’s assertions that the Singapore Court “(allegedly)
found that there was no urgency in the Claimant’s application for an interlocutory
injunction in that forum,” and the scholarly opinion of the President of this
Tribunal that “a national court’s finding on urgency should be followed by an
arbitral tribunal absent ‘changed circumstances’,”'** the Claimant notes that the

circumstances have recently changed (for the worse) since the Singapore court’s

'30 Claimant's Reply, at para. 12 (emphasis omitted).

'3! Claimant’s Reply, at para. 13.

132

Claimant’s Reply, at para. 13 (emphasis omitted).

'33 Claimant’s Reply, at paras. 14, 15 (emphasis and footnote omitted).
34 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 15 (citing 2nd Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 17(b)).

135

Claimant’s Reply, at para. 16 (citing Born, /nternational Commercial Arbitration, Kluwer (2nd ed., 2014), at p.

3787, Exhibit RL-36).

Page 26 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

decision rejecting the Claimant’s ex parte application for injunctive relief in

October 2013;!°°

e. in response to the Respondent’s assertions that it is “unable to intefere with the
Claimant’s operations in PNG,” the Claimant contends that this suggestion is
“absurd,” inter alia, because the Tenth Supplemental Act “gives the State the
(purportedly long-arm) power to ‘restructure [the Claimant] and its operations’,
and the State has — at least within its own borders — already used that power to
great effect,” and has taken other measures that “are doing real harm” to the

Claimant;!*”

f. in response to the Respondent’s argument that “it has a sovereign right to enforce
its own laws,” the Claimant submits that this assertion “misses the point,” because
the focus of the Claimant’s application is on the Respondent’s “compliance with

"138 the Claimant’s officers need to “enter and

its international legal obligations;
exit PNG to prepare for this arbitration and manage the Claimant’s investments
and operations,” and through the most-favoured nation provision of the IPA, they
“have a right to do so freely.”!*? The Claimant adds that there are “at least 6 staff
members of the Claimant [who] are still in PNG,” including its CEO, Mr David

Sode, who need protection;!4°

g. in response to the Respondent’s argument that the Commission of Inquiry has not
yet been constituted and there is “no reason for the Claimant to be concerned,” the
Claimant argues that ICSID tribunals have “shown themselves willing to take
steps necessary to protect the investor (and the arbitration process) from this kind
of ‘home town justice’.”'#! In this respect, the Claimant notes that the tribunal in

City Oriente Ltd. v. Ecuador held that threats by a host State to commence

'36 Claimant’s Reply, at paras. 16, 17.

'37 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 19.
138 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 21 (emphasis in original).
13° Claimant’s Reply, at para.
140 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 22 (citing Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, at para. 48(viii).
141 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 23.

S

N

Page 27 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

criminal proceedings against the claimant’s officials jusitified the

recommendation of provisional measures;'*? and

h. the Respondent’s argument that the “preservation of the status quo and non-
aggravation of the dispute is not a ‘free-standing’ right which is worthy of
protection via provisional measures” “flies in the face of international law and

ICSID practice;”'*? they must be ensured for the effectiveness of this arbitration

process.!“4
75. Second, with regard to the Singapore court proceedings, the Claimant contends that:
a. The Singapore court proceedings “relate to wholly different matters and are not

duplicative;”'#5 those proceedings concern “domestic Singapore law matters
relating to the corporate governance of the Claimant” which this Tribunal could
not decide upon, even if it were requested to do so.'4° Under Singapore law, the
Court “has no jurisdiction to impose an injunction on another sovereign state,”
which is why the Claimant seeks this relief before this Tribunal.'*” In any event,
the Claimant “is not seeking any injunctive relief against the State” in the

Singapore proceedings. '**

'® Claimant’s Reply, at para. 23 (citing City Oriente Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal

Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 19
November 2007, at para. 69, Exhibit CA-13).

'43 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 24 (emphasis and footnotes omitted).

144 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 24.

'45 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 26. The Claimant elaborates on this point, stating that the relief it seeks before the
Singapore Court includes: (a) “declarations that the State’s purported removal of the Claimant’s board of directors
through legislation enacted in PNG has no effect under Singapore law, and that the duly-appointed members of the
Claimant’s board of directors continue to have full authority to manage the business of the Claimant in accordance
with its M&A;” and (b) “injunctions restraining the individuals (but not the State) who were purportedly appointed
by the State as members of a ‘Transitional Management Team’ from attempting to interfere with the Claimant’s
operations.” Claimant’s Reply, at para. 27 (emphasis in original). See also Claimant’s Reply, at para. 30
(elaborating upon why the Claimant maintains that the relief it sought in the Singapore Court is not duplicative of its
requested provisional measures in this proceeding).

146 Claimant's Reply, at para. 28 (emphasis omitted).

'47 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 29 (citing section 15(2) of the Singapore State Immunity Act (Cap. 313), Exhibit CL-
21).

148 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 30(c).

Page 28 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

db. The Singapore Court’s orders were “simply holding orders, pending the
conclusion of the hearing of the injunction application.”!*
76. Third, with respect to the threshold requirements of prima facie jurisdiction and prima

facie case on the merits, the Claimant states that:

a. applying the ICSID Tribunal’s standard articulated in Pey Casado v. Chile,'*°
what must be demonstrated is “the prima facie existence of jurisdiction, or, to
couch this in negative terms, the absence of a clear lack of jurisdiction;” this
threshold “‘is only fractionally (if at all) higher than the standard in the context of
the Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objection” and the Claimant’s jurisdictional
arguments in its Reply Observations on the Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objections
(filed on 8 August 2014 in this proceeding) are “sufficient for both Rule 41(5) and

provisional measures (‘prima facie’) purposes;”!*!

db. the Claimant repeats its Reply Observations on the Respondent’s Rule 41(5)
objections on the issue of the Claimant’s prima facie right to the relief it seeks in
this arbitration, and notes that: (i) the State does not dispute the Claimant’s prima
facie right to the reliefs it seeks with respect to expropriation; and (ii) the
Claimant’s position is that Section 37(1) of the IPA is an MFN clause, and even if

it is wrong on the MFN clause, “it is still entitled to the reliefs it seeks under

152

either PNG law or international law (or both). The Claimant concludes that,

“even if the State is right that the Claimant is not entitled to MFN treatment, the

Claimant still has a prima facie case for the relief it seeks from the Tribunal.”!>?

149 Claimant's Reply, at para. 31 (emphasis omitted).

180 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation y. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2),
Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 25 September 2001, 6 JCSID Reports (2004), pp. 373-397, at p. 379,
Exhibit CA-5.

151 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 34.

'S2 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 36.

'53 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 37.

Page 29 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

77.

78.

79.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

The Claimant reiterates its request that the Tribunal grant its Request for Provisional

Measures because it “needs and deserves protection.”!**

D. Parties’ Correspondence Relating to Provisional Measures Post-Dating the
Claimant's Reply

On 14 October 2014, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal to provide an update on recent
developments that it believed relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of the Claimant’s
Request for Provisional Measures.'** In its letter, the Claimant expressed concerns about
“the serious adverse impact” of the Respondent’s actions on the management and
performance of OTML!*® since the Respondent “(unlawfully) increased its direct
ownership in OTML to 87.8%.”!°7 According to the Claimant, recent developments
“point to a significant diminution in value of the Ok Tedi Mine and also to a worrying
move away from global standards of transparency and accountability.”!** Among these
developments, the Claimant noted: (a) the diminution in the net profits generated by
OTML in 2013 (US$17 million compared to $472 million in 2012); (b) the fact that
OTML paid no dividends in 2013; (c) the increase in remuneration of OTML’s Managing
Director and CEO, Nigel Parker; (d) “operating costs (in PNG Kina) were over budget by
16%, and US$80m (unbudgeted) was spent on ‘redundancy payout’ expenses in
December 2013;” (e) the OTML Board of Directors “decided not to renew OTML’s
membership of Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative;” and (f) in addition to the
four current directors of OTML, “there are to be three so-called ‘independent’ directors,

as part of a restructuring sanctioned by the Respondent’s National Executive Council.”!°°

The Claimant raised its concern that “if it is restored in its position as majority

shareholder of OTML, serious (if not irreparable) harm may have already been done to

'S4 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 38.

155 See Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014.

'56 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 6.

'57 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 5.

'58 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 6.

'S? Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 5. The Claimant relies on the 2013 OTML Annual
Review as evidence of these developments.

Page 30 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

80.

81.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

the company, both in economic terms and in terms of its reputation as a miner.”!°° The
Claimant argued that the “status quo of OTML’s management and economic
performance must be preserved if the future order of restitution is to be effective.”'®! The
Claimant reiterated its Request for Provisional Measures, “including an order for

res 99162
maintaining the status quo.”"°

On 24 October 2014, the Respondent replied to the Claimant’s 14 October letter, denying
all allegations made in the Claimant’s letter and stating that the Claimant “is now seeking
to introduce, by way of correspondence, a new basis for its Request” for Provisional
Measures, after the briefing phase on provisional measures has closed.' The
Respondent argued that the “developments” raised in the Claimant’s letter are not new, as
they pre-date the passing of the Tenth Supplemental Act and have been brought to the

164

attention of the Claimant’s representative on the OTML Board of Directors;"*" these

developments have “nothing to do with the Tenth Supplemental Act” or other actions by
the Respondent;!® and the Claimant has not explained how certain of these developments
can be said to have “serious[ly]” and “adverse[ly]” impacted OTML’s management and

performance.!%

The Respondent noted that the representative director in OTML would have received
weekly Managing Director reports and monthly Operational Reports and would have
been updated on these matters; it is therefore surprising for the Claimant to suggest that
these matters “have only just come to its attention.”'°’ According to the Respondent, the

Claimant’s purported concern about these stated developments is “an afterthought, which

160 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 7.

'6! Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 7.

'© Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 October 2014, at para. 8.

'6 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at paras. 2, 4.
‘64 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at paras. 4, 5.
'65 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para. 5.

'66 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para. 5.

‘67 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para. 6.

Page 31 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

82.

83.

'68 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para.
‘© Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para.
‘7 Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

deserves little (if any) weight in the Tribunal’s deliberation on the Request [for

Provisional Measures].”!°*

Furthermore, the Respondent argued that these purported developments provide no
support for the Request for Provisional Measures, because “OTML’s operations have
always been carried out independently of the Claimant (who previously only
nominated/appointed 1 out of the 4 directors on OTML’s Board), and the Claimant is, in
any event, no longer involved in OTML.”!® The Respondent contends that the Claimant
“is seeking a general order ‘for maintaining the status quo’ to curtail the OTML Board’s
ability to make operational decisions in the ordinary course of business ... and bring
OTML operations to a standstill.”!”° The Respondent contends that there is no basis for
such a “drastic order, bearing in mind that OTML is not even a party to these
proceedings, and that the ‘extraordinary’ step of imposing provisional measures is not,

even in the ordinary case, one to be lightly taken.”!7!

The Respondent reiterated its
request that the Tribunal dismiss the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, with

costs.”

On 6 November 2014, the Claimant replied to the Respondent’s letter of 24 October,
stating that the letter “has only increased the Claimant’s fear that irreparable harm is
being done to OTML” and that OTML “is being run into the ground.”!”> The Claimant
challenged the Respondent’s explanations for the various developments raised in the
Claimant’s 14 October letter!” (explanations which, according to the Claimant, “pose[]
more questions than answers”!’>), and pointed out that, contrary to the Respondent’s

assertions, most of the developments in question, “all of which show a rapid diminution

pp

'! Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para. 8 (emphasis in original).

'? Letter from the Respondent, dated 24 October 2014, at para.

©

"3 Letter from the Claimant, dated 6 November 2014, at paras. 2, 4.
'4 Letter from the Claimant, dated 6 November 2014, at para. 18.

175

Letter from the Claimant, dated 6 November 2014, at paras. 6-18.

Page 32 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

84.

85.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

in the profitability of OTML and the quality of its management,” have “occurred since

September 2013.”!7

On 27 November 2014, the Respondent replied to the Claimant’s letter of 6 November,
inviting the Tribunal to dismiss the Request for Provisional Measures (with costs). The
Respondent contended, in particular, that the evidence presented by the Claimant with its
recent correspondence “cannot provide a basis for the Request [for Provisional
Measures];”!”’ this evidence in any event supports the Respondent’s assertions in its 24

October letter;!7*

and the Claimant remains unable to explain how some of the
developments that it invokes (in particular, the appointment of independent directors to
the OTML Board) have caused OTML to be “run into the ground.”!”? The Respondent
argued that “unsubstantiated speculations cannot justify the imposition of interim
measures, which are reserved for situations of real, and not imagined, harm ... , let alone
measures which will substantially affect OTML’s operations/business, bearing in mind

that OTML is not a party to these proceedings.”!*°

On 23 December 2014, the Claimant sent a letter to the Tribunal providing information
regarding two recent developments “which are of great concern to the Claimant.”'*! The
Claimant reported, in particular, recent actions by the Respondent which relate to the
transfer of OTML shares to third parties, and which may therefore alter the existing
status quo. According to the Claimant, PNG Prime Minister O’Neill announced on 14
December 2014 that “a 33% stake in OTML has been given to the people of Western
Province, after the State’s National Executive Council ‘approved the free transfer of

equity in OTML following consultation with landowners and provincial government’.”!*?

"6 Letter from the Claimant, dated 6 November 2014, at paras. 3, 18.

'”” Letter from the Respondent, dated 27 November 2014, at para.
"8 Letter from the Respondent, dated 27 November 2014, at para.

Rw

"7 Letter from the Respondent, dated 27 November 2014, at para. 4(e).
180 Letter from the Respondent, dated 27 November 2014, at para. 5.
'8! Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 2.

'8 Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 4.

Page 33 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

86.

87.

88.

89.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

In its letter, the Claimant argued that if “the share tranfer (or issue) is allowed to be
completed, the status quo — both generally and as it relates to the ownership and
management of OTML -— will be profoundly disturbed,”'** and “if the State is allowed to
transfer (or issue) OTML shares to third parties, the effectiveness of any future order of
restitution will be seriously undermined. Thus, the State’s actions directly threaten the

integrity of this arbitration.”!**

In addition, the Claimant alleged that there are indications that “there has been a
‘contribution’ of PGK190 million (approximately USD74 million) from OTML to the
State,”!®> and that the Claimant is “entitled to question the basis for such ‘contribution’,
which exacerbates the Claimant’s fear that irreparable harm is being done to the company

pending the resolution of this dispute.”!*°

In light of these developments, the Claimant requested that, “as a measure under
paragraph 27(c) of the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures,” the Tribunal
“move as soon as possible to order the State to refrain from transferring or issuing (or
completing the transfer or issue of) any OTML shares to any third party, or taking any
steps that otherwise change the ownership of OTML, pending determination of this

dispute in accordance with the ICSID Convention.”!*”

On 9 January 2015, the Respondent replied to the Claimant’s 23 December 2014 letter,
arguing that “the Claimant’s purported reliance on these ‘recent developments’ do [sic]
not, in any way, warrant any Provisional Measures being granted,” and that the
Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures “should be dismissed with costs.”!** In its
letter, the Respondent states that the Claimant’s position “has dramatically evolved with

time” since its Request for Provisional Measures,'*? and that the Claimant “dramatically

'83 Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 10.
'84 Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 11.

185

Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 15.

'86 Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 17.
'87 Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 20.
'88 Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at paras. 18-19.
'8° Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at paras. 2-4.

Page 34 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

90.

1° Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.
'°! Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.
Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.
Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.

192
193

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

changed the premise of its [Request for Provisional Measures] from one of protecting the
‘very existence of the Claimant and the purposes for which it was established’ to that of
purportedly protecting ‘the ownership and management of OTML’.”'®° The Respondent
maintains that “there remains no basis for the Claimant’s [Request for Provisional
Measures],” and notes that “it has never been the Claimant’s position that it would not be
adequately compensated by damages but only by an order of specific performance;”!*!
rather, in this arbitration, the Claimant seeks “the cancellation of the issuance of the
OTML shares to State or alternatively, damages for the OTML shares.”'*? According to
the Respondent, “it is hardly consistent for the Claimant to now claim that it would suffer
‘irreparable harm’ which cannot be remedied by damages, such that provisional measures

are necessitated.”!°3

With regard to the intended transfer of OTML shares to the people of the Western
Province, the Respondent confirms that “the State’s National Executive Council had
approved the free transfer of 33 percent ownership in OTML to the people of Western
Province, following consultation with the stakeholders, including the landowners, with
the remaining 67 percent of OTML owned by the people of PNG through the State.”!**
The Respondent maintains that the Claimant’s concerns with this transfer “are entirely
unfounded”!*> because the intended share transfer “is to the people of Westen

2196

Province and “ensures that the OTML shares are applied solely for the benefit of

those people, and is entirely in line with the Claimant’s objects (i.e., to use its assets for

the sole benefit of the people) and the Claimant’s proclaimed motivations.”!*”

Wa

'°4 Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 4 (emphasis omitted).

195
196

Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.
Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 8 (emphasis omitted).

~s

'"7 Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 10. The Respondent notes that “it is ironic that the
Claimant sees the Intended Share Transfer as an act of aggravation, while the Claimant’s purported gifting of a
number of its assets to the communities and government of Western Province is not an act of aggravation, but an act
to mitigate the impact of the ongoing dispute between the State and the Claimant on the people of PNG.” Letter

Page 35 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

91.

92.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

The Respondent further states that the Claimant “has altered the basis on which its relief

is sought,”!°8

and “‘it is the State that is in actual fact seeking to ensure that the status quo
remains the same by allowing the people of the Western Province to continue to benefit
from the OTML shares, which programs the Claimant has discontinued.”!? The
Respondent argues that “there is ... no necessity for any Provisional Measure to prevent
‘irreparable [or substantial] harm’ from being caused to the Claimant” because “the
Claimant has not claimed that it would not be properly compensated by ... an award of
damages” for the OTML shares. Moreover, the Respondent argues that “any fears
which the Claimant alleges to have regarding the Intended Share Transfer are premature
and speculative, to say the least” because the State’s National Executive Council “has
simply announced that it has approved of the proposed transfer of the shares” but “[n]o
transfer has taken place,” and “the intended manner by which the transfer is to be
implemented (not to mention the actual transfer) of the OTML shares has not yet been
decided, and would be discussed with various stakeholders, including the people of the

Western Province.”?°!

The Respondent “confirms that the shareholding of OTML remains unchanged and will
not be altered until: (a) such further discussions are carried out, (b) a further decision is
made by the State as to how best to implement the Intended Share Transfer having regard
to such discussions, and (c) a transfer is then made pursuant to this further decision.”?°?
According to the Respondent, “[t]hat being the case, it is entirely speculative for the
Claimant to assert that the Intended Share Transfer may result in economic and

reputational harm to OTML ... ” and the Claimant’s assertions that “there will be serious,

 

from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 9 (referring to paras. 184 and 197 of Ist Sir Mekere Morauta

WS).

'°8 Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 11.
'% Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para.11 (emphasis omitted).
2 Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 11.

?°! Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 11 (emph:
Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 12 (emphasis in original).

202

is omitted).

 

Page 36 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

93.

94.

95.

203,

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

irreparable harm caused to OTML if the provisional measures are not granted” are

without merit.

With regard to the second issue raised by the Claimant in its 23 December 2014 letter, the
Respondent notes that: (1) OTML’s financial position has improved in 2014 as
compared to 2013;2™ and (2) the contribution made by OTML to the State is in line with
the contributions made to the State in previous years and therefore “[t]here is ... nothing
questionable about the OTML Contribution, in spite of the Claimant’s attempt to cast

suspicion on what is otherwise an entirely uncontroversial matter.”?°>

On 14 January 2015, the Claimant sent an unsolicited letter responding to the
Respondent’s 9 January letter, stating that the latter “only serves to highlight the urgent

need for provisional measures in this case.”°

In its letter, the Claimant argues that
“[t]his arbitration is now ata critical juncture” and the Tribunal “should order provisional
measures — if not to protect the Claimant, then to protect the process of this

arbitration.”27

The Claimant argues that: (1) the Respondent “has unequivocally confirmed its intention
to transfer the OTML shares ... , offering only the cynical retort that the Claimant should
be happy the [Respondent] will do so because the transfer will benefit the people of the
Western Province,” and therefore, “[o]n any view, with the intent to transfer confirmed,
the [Respondent]’s description of the Claimant’s fears as ‘premature and speculative’ ...

is hard to credit;”2°*

and (2) instead of saying that “prior to the Tribunal’s final award, it
will refrain from taking any further steps to transfer the OTML shares, or deal in any

other property that is the subject of this dispute,” the Respondent is “bold in its disregard

Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 12.

204 See Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 14.

205

Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at paras. 15-16.

2° Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 2.
?°7 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 9.
?°8 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 3(a).

Page 37 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

for the Tribunal and the arbitration process, purporting to act as the owner of the OTML

shares,” which “alone is sufficient to justify provisional measures.”?°°

96. The Claimant further notes that its request for provisional measures “has had to evolve to
address the changing state of affairs” in this case, because “the threat the Claimant faces,

and the threat that is now unquestionably posed to the arbitral process, has increased

210

dramatically. The Claimant adds that, in any event, “nothing in the ICSID

Convention prevents a party from modifying or expanding its request for provisional

measures (indeed, such a rule would defeat the very purpose of provisional measures).”?!!

97. Moreover, the Claimant contends that the “[hJarm of the scale threatened by the
[Respondent] qualifies as irreparable on any sensible measure, and it is trite that threats to
the integrity of an ICSID arbitration are, by their very nature, irreparable.”?!? In addition,
according to the Claimant, “just because the Claimant makes an alternative claim for
monetary compensation does not give the [Respondent] a free hand to do whatever it

likes with the property in dispute;” the Respondent “cannot be allowed to ... take steps to

place this property beyond the reach of the Tribunal.”?!>

98. Finally, with respect to the OTML Contribution, the Claimant states that the
Respondent’s 9 January letter “does nothing to allay the concerns of the Claimant,” and

therefore “the Claimant can only restate its belief that serious irregularities have occurred

at the company since the expropriation was carried out.”?!+

2° Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 3(b).
2! Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para.
?!! Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 5.
?!2 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 6.
Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para.
214 Letter from the Claimant, dated 14 January 2015, at para. 8. In its (unsolicited) response to the Claimant’s 14
January 2015 letter, the Respondent reiterates its request that the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures “be
dismissed with costs” and states that the Claimant “has not raised any new submission, and simply seeks to
regurgitate its earlier submissions” which the Respondent “has already responded to ... in its earlier correspondence
and submissions ....” Letter from the Respondent, dated 20 January 2015, at paras. 2,7. The Respondent also notes
that: (1) any alarm raised by the Claimant with respect to the change of ownership of OTML shares is “misplaced”
given that “it remains undisputed that the OTML shares are to be held for the benefit of the people of PNG,
particularly those of the Western Province;” (2) “[w]here the Claimant itself accepts that monetary compensation

*

213,

>

  

Page 38 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

VI.

99.

100.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

A, The Tribunal’s Power to Grant Provisional Measures and Applicable Standard

The Tribunal’s authority to grant provisional measures in this ICSID proceeding is

governed by Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. Article 47 of the Convention provides:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be
taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

In turn, ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 provides that:

@)

2)

3)

4

(5)

At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by
the Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the
measures the recommendation of which is requested, and the
circumstances that require such measures.

The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made
pursuant to paragraph (1).

The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own
initiative or recommend measures other than those specified in a request.
It may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify or
revoke its recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of
presenting its observations.

If a party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1) before the
constitution of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall, on the
application of either party, fix time limits for the parties to present
observations on the request, so that the request and observations may be
considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.

 

would be an adequate remedy by claiming for monetary compensation as its final relief, the Claimant cannot
possibly assert that the integrity of an ICSID arbitration would be threatened if its Request [for Provisional
Measures] were not granted;” (3) “the constant changing of the basis of the [Claimant's] Request [for Provisional
Measures] every time the Claimant’s assertions are demonstrated to be false / misleading / selective itself suggests
that the Request is unmeritorious;” and (4) the Claimant’s change of focus from OTML’s 2014 financial position to
that in 2013 “is yet another illustration of the selective approach the Claimant is taking in its Request [for
Provisional Measures], and demonstrates the hopelessness of the Request.” Letter from the Respondent, dated 20
January 2015, at paras. 2-6 (emphasis omitted).

Page 39 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

101.

102.

103.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided that they have so
stipulated in the agreement recording their consent, from requesting any
judicial or other authority to order provisional measures, prior to or after
the institution of the proceeding, for the preservation of their respective
rights and interests.

These provisions of the Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules are the basis for the
Tribunal’s authority to order provisional measures, and define the circumstances in which

such authority should be exercised.
1. Tribunal’s Power to Recommend Provisional Measures

Despite the use of the term “recommend” in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, this
provision of the Convention has properly been understood as allowing the Tribunal to
order provisional measures.*'> The phrase “recommend,” in the context of the
Convention, means “order” or “direct.” An arbitral tribunal constituted under the ICSID
Convention has the power not merely to propose or urge provisional measures, but also to

issue orders mandating that such measures be taken.

The Tribunal has broad authority to order particular provisional measures under Article
47 of the ICSID Convention. However, this power must be exercised in a manner
consistent with the general purposes and character of the provisional measures. Those
purposes and character include, in particular, the exceptional nature of relief granted
before the parties have had the opportunity fully to present their respective cases. In the
words of the ICSID tribunal in Maffezini v. Spain, provisional relief is “an extraordinary

measure which should not be granted lightly by the Arbitral Tribunal.”?!°

215 See, e.g., Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The
Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, at

para.

. 58, Exhibit RL-29.

216 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision on Provisional
Measures (Procedural Order No. 2), dated 28 October 1999, at para. 10 (cited in Schreuer et al, The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 776, para. 64, Exhibit CL-19).

Page 40 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

104. It is nevertheless uncontested that the Tribunal may decide on provisional measures
before having decided on the jurisdictional objections raised in this proceeding.” A
decision on a request for provisional measures naturally does not impede the tribunal’s
determination of, or otherwise pre-judge, the issues of jurisdiction pending before a
tribunal. As noted below, a tribunal’s finding that it has prima facie jurisdiction for the
purposes of a decision on provisional measures is without prejudice to the final

determination on the issue of jurisdiction.

105. The types of provisional measures that may be granted by an ICSID tribunal include a
wide range of measures, which depend on the particular circumstances of the case and the
rights that are sought to be protected.?'* Measures that are commonly sought include
orders for the preservation of the status quo, orders directing performance of a contract or
other legal obligations, orders for the preservation of evidence, enforcement of

confidentiality obligations, and orders for security for costs.?!°

106. In this case, the Claimant seeks three categories of measures directed at the Respondent —
i.e., that the Tribunal order the Respondent to refrain from, pending final determination

of the dispute:

a. “taking (or threatening to take) any further steps under Section 6 of the Tenth
Supplemental Act, or otherwise interfering with or impeding the Claimant’s
lawful operation in PNG in accordance with the Program Rules” (“Claimant’s

Request No. 1’);

db. “harassing, arresting, or commencing any criminal prosecution against any
officer, employee, servant or agent of the Claimant in connection with the

performance of their responsibilities or functions as officers, employees, servants

217 See, e.g., Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 771, para. 46,
Exhibit CL-19.

218 Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 779, para. 76.

219 See, e.g., Born, International Commercial Arbitration, Kluwer (2nd ed., 2014), at pp. 2511-2540. See also
Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 776, para. 76, Exhibit CL-19.

Page 41 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

or agents of the Claimant (or making any further threats to do so)” (“Claimant’s

Request No. 2”); and

c. “taking any further steps that may aggravate the dispute, disturb the status quo as
at the date of this Request, or otherwise impede the orderly resolution of the
dispute in accordance with the ICSID Convention.”””° (“Claimant’s Request No.

3”).
2. Standard for Granting Provisional Measures

107. The requirements that must be satisfied for an order of provisional measures under
Article 47 are well-settled, and are not materially in dispute between the Parties in this

case (save for the requirement of urgency).”?!

108. According to one leading authority on the ICSID Convention, “it is clear that provisional

measures will only be appropriate where a question cannot await the outcome of the

9222

award on the merits. As the same commentator summarized, ICSID tribunals

typically “will only grant provisional measures if they are found to be necessary, urgent
and are required in order to avoid irreparable harm.”?”* It is well-established?™* that the

requesting party has the burden of showing why the requested provisional measures are

1,225

necessary and should be ordered by the Tribunal In addition, tribunals commonly

hold that a decision on provisional measures cannot pre-judge the merits of the case.

109. In particular, the party requesting provisional measures must demonstrate that, if the

requested measures are not granted, there is a material risk of serious or irreparable

220 Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 27.

221 See above at paras. 44-46, 50-51, 58-67, 70-77.

22 Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 775, para. 63 (footnote
omitted), Exhibit CL-19 (quoted with approval in, e.g., Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of
Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Procedural Order No. 1, dated 31 March 2006, at para. 68, Exhibit CA-
12).

223 Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 776, para. 64, Exhibit CL-19.
224 See, e.g., Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 776, para. 64,
Exhibit CL-19.

5 See Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 13; Respondent’s Observations, at para. 2. See above
at paras. 44, 51.

 

Page 42 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

injury. There are variations in approach or the precise wording used by the ICSID
tribunals as to whether this requirement is that of “irreparable” harm, or whether a
demonstration of “serious” harm will suffice. In the Tribunal’s view, the term
“irreparable” harm is properly understood as requiring a showing of a material risk of
serious or grave damage to the requesting party, and not harm that is literally
“irreparable” in what is sometimes regarded as the narrow common law sense of the
term. The degree of “gravity” or “seriousness” of harm that is necessary for an order of
provisional relief cannot be specified with precision, and depends in part on the
circumstances of the case, the nature of the relief requested and the relative harm to be
suffered by each party; suffice it to say that substantial, serious harm, even if not
irreparable, is generally sufficient to satisfy this element of the standard for granting

provisional measures.

110. | Thus, in Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Ecuador, the tribunal stated that the ICSID Convention
“does not lay down a test of irreparable loss and the authorities do not warrant so narrow

a construction.”?2¢

That tribunal therefore reasoned that: “[i]f Perenco’s business in
Ecuador were effectively brought to an end in this way [by seizure of its assets], such
injury could not, in the Tribunal’s judgment, be adequately compensated by an award of

damages should its claim ultimately be upheld.”?27

111. The Tribunal is also of the view that the requesting party need not prove that “serious”
harm is certain to occur. Rather, it is generally sufficient to show that there is a material
risk that it will occur. The requirement of showing material risk does not, however,
imply a showing of any particular percentage of likelihood, or probability, that the risk
will materialize. The proper requirement is that the requesting party must establish the
existence of a sufficient risk or threat that grave or serious harm will occur if provisional

measures are not granted.

26 Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009, at para. 43, Exhibit CA-6.
27 Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009, at para. 46, Exhibit CA-6.

Page 43 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

112. Of course, the harm alleged by the requesting party must not be purely hypothetical or
theoretical. As the tribunal in Occidental rightly noted:

Provisional measures are not meant to protect against any potential or
hypothetical harm susceptible to result from uncertain actions. Rather, they are
meant to protect the requesting party from imminent harm.?8

113. In this regard, in deciding whether to grant provisional measures, tribunals also generally
look to the nature of the provisional measures that are requested, and the relative injury to
be suffered by each party. While some provisional measures (such as, for example,
preserving the status quo and ordering performance of a contract or other legal
obligation) typically require a strong showing of serious injury, urgency and a prima
facie case, other provisional measures (such as preservation of evidence, enforcement of

confidentiality obligations) are often unlikely to demand the same showings.

114. The requirements of necessity and urgency are also well-established. Although these
requirements are not set out in express terms in the ICSID Convention, it is well-
established that an order of provisional measures will only be granted if these measures
are necessary to preserve the requesting party’s rights, and are urgently required to avoid
serious harm. In the words of the tribunal in City Oriente v. Ecuador, provisional
measures may only be ordered “if their adoption is necessary to preserve the rights of the
parties and guarantee that the award will fulfill its purpose of providing effective judicial
protection.”?”? In this regard, the Tribunal agrees with the Burlington v. Ecuador tribunal
that the requirement of “necessity” means that the requested provisional measures “must

be required to avoid harm or prejudice being inflicted upon the applicant.”?°°

 

28 Occidental Petroleum Ci ion and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of
Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ‘ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, at para. 89,

Exhibit RL-29.

»° City Oriente Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 19 November 2007, at para. 52, Exhibit
CA-13.

230 Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Oriente’s Request for
Provisional Measures, dated 29 June 2009, at para. 75, Exhibit CA-15.

Page 44 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

115. Moreover, as the Respondent rightly notes,?*! there is a wealth of authority concluding
that an implicit requirement of urgency must be read into Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention. Indeed, the very concept of interim or provisional relief necessarily requires
a showing of some measure of urgency; absent urgency, there is no justification for a
tribunal issuing mandatory orders before having heard the parties’ full submissions and

evidence.

116. In the Tribunal’s view, a request for provisional measures will satisfy the requirement of

urgency where it entails “a question [that] cannot await the outcome of the award on the

99232

merits. As noted above, the precise degree of urgency required in each case will

again depend on the provisional measures sought, and on the balance of harms that would
result if the risk of harm were to materialize. In the words of the tribunal in Biwater

Gauff v. Tanzania:

the degree of ‘urgency’ which is required depends on the circumstances,
including the requested provisional measures, and may be satisfied where a party
can prove that there is a need to obtain the requested measure at a certain point
in the procedure before the issuance of an award. In most situations, this will
equate to ‘urgency’ in the traditional sense (i.e. a need for a measure in a short
space of time). In some cases, however, the only time constraint is that the
measure be granted before an award — even if the grant is to be some time hence.
The Arbitral Tribunal also considers that the level of urgency required depends
on the type of measure which is requested.”

117. Thus, contrary to the Respondent’s assertions,”**

the mere passage of time between the
Request for Arbitration and the Request for Provisional Measures will not per se be
conclusory that there is no urgency. The Tribunal will assess urgency taking into account
the entirety of the circumstances of the case, and will take into account both the
seriousness of the harm and the balance of injuries that would be suffered by both parties

if provisional measures are (or are not) ordered.

231 See above at paras. 51, 58-62.

232 Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 775, para. 63, Exhibit CL-19.
23 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Procedural Order
No. I, dated 31 March 2006, at para. 76, Exhibit CA-12.

2M See above at para. 61.

Page 45 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

118. The Parties agree,?*>

and the Tribunal concurs, that in order to succeed in obtaining
provisional measures, the requesting party must show that the Tribunal has prima facie
jurisdiction. The tribunal in Occidental explained this clearly, holding that “[w]hilst the
Tribunal need not definitely satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction in respect of the merits of
the case at issue for purposes of ruling upon the requested provisional measures, it will
not order such measures unless there is, prima facie, a basis upon which the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction might be established.”?*°

119. The fact of registation of the Request for Arbitration alone is not sufficient to establish
prima facie jurisdiction for the purposes of the provisional measures application under
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal agrees with the Perenco tribunal,
which concluded that the fact of registration of the Request for Arbitration is “not enough
for the Tribunal,””*’ and the tribunal must itself be satisfied that there is a prima facie
basis for jurisdiction. As Professor Schreuer notes in his commentary on the ICSID
Convention, “[iJt is ultimately with the tribunal whether it will accept the Secretary-
General’s registration as a sufficient basis or whether it wants to form a prima facie

38

opinion on jurisdiction before recommending provisional measures.”* Deciding

otherwise would effectively mean depriving the Tribunal of the power to determine
whether it has jurisdiction, albeit on a prima facie basis for the purposes of a provisional
measures application, and limit the analysis to the high level review that the ICSID
Secretariat conducts at the registration stage. The determination of the prima facie
jurisdiction for provisional measures is a somewhat higher threshold than that to be
applied at the registration stage, although it of course also falls short of a final decision

on jurisdiction.

235

See above at paras. 44, 51.

236 Occidental Petroleum Ci ion and, Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of
Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/Q6/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, at para. 55,

Exhibit RL-29.

237 Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009, at para. 39, Exhibit CA-6.

238 Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, CUP (2nd ed., 2009), at p. 772, para. 48 (footnote
omitted), Exhibit CL-19.

 

 

Page 46 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

120. The requesting party must also show that there is a prima facie case on the merits of its
claims. Although a tribunal should engage in a consideration of the prima facie strength
of the parties’ respective claims, counter-claims and defenses, that analysis should not

pre-judge the merits of the case (as explained below’).

In practice, the requirement to
demonstrate the prima facie success on the merits will ordinarily lead to a rejection of a
request for provisional measures only in rare circumstances, where the requesting party

has failed to advance any credible basis for its claims.

121. Granting a request for provisional measures must not involve the tribunal pre-judging the
merits of the case. It is essential, in this regard, that a tribunal not pre-judge, either
consciously or unconsciously, the resolution of any aspect of the parties’ respective
claims and defenses. The Respondent also correctly refers to this rule as “the principle
that an arbitral tribunal cannot grant a decision on the merits under the guise of interim
relief.”**° This requirement means that an order recommending provisional measures

must not preclude the tribunal from ultimately deciding the issues in the arbitration in any

particular way after the parties have fully presented their cases on disputed substantive

issues (such as jurisdiction or the merits of the claims).

122. The assessment of whether the above requirements are satisfied, and in particular whether
there is a material risk of serious or irreparable harm, and whether the requested measures
are urgent and necessary to prevent that harm from occurring, must be made in light of
the circumstances of the case, and particularly the likelihood that the injury will occur
during the pendency of the arbitration. As noted above, when assessing whether the
requirements of showing serious harm, urgency and necessity are satisfied, the tribunal
should also consider the respective hardships that either party would be subjected to if the

provisional measures are granted.

123. Thus, provisional measures would ordinarily be available where the claimant, asserting a

prima facie credible claim, proves that they are necessary and urgently required to avoid

239 See below at paras. 124, 133, 163.
240 Respondent’s Observations, para. | at fn. 1 (emphasis omitted).

Page 47 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

124.

125.

126.

127.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

serious injury that is likely to result from the actions threatened by the respondent that
would alter the existing status quo. That is particularly true where the respondent would
not suffer material harm from a grant of provisional measures to the claimant under the

circumstances.

B. The Claimant’s Requested Provisional Measures

Without pre-judging any of the issues in this case that are to be finally determined at a
later stage in this proceeding, the Tribunal considers that the “threshold requirements””+!
— i.e. that there is prima facie jurisdiction and prima facie case on the merits — are
satisfied in this case. This conclusion does not pre-judge the merits of the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections or the Claimant’s claims in any way, which remain subject to the
Tribunal’s disposition on the basis of the evidence and argument submitted by the parties

in the course of the arbitration.

For the same reasons discussed in the Tribunal’s Decision on the Respondent’s
Objections under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal considers that
the Claimant has satisfactorily demonstrated a prima facie case on both jurisdiction and
the merits of its claims. There are of course serious counter-arguments — both
jurisdictional and otherwise — to the Claimant’s claims. But, for present purposes, the

Claimant has satisfied the relatively undemanding requirements of a prima facie case.

Bearing this in mind, the Tribunal discusses each of the Claimant’s Requests for

Provisional Measures below.

1. Claimant’s Request No. 1

In its Request No. 1, the Claimant seeks an order directing the Respondent to refrain from
“taking (or threatening to take) any further steps under Section 6 of the Tenth

Supplemental Act, or otherwise interfering with or impeding the Claimant’s lawful

24! Expression used by the Respondent. See above at paras. 49-58; Respondent’s Observations, at para. 4 and
Section III.

Page 48 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

128.

129.

130.

242

243

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

operation in PNG in accordance with the Program Rules.” This request is for injunctive
relief to restrain the Respondent from altering the status quo with respect to the
Claimant’s operations, in particular in respect of the Claimant’s management structure.
The Claimant argues, in particular, that this provisional relief is necessary because “the
Respondent’s long-arm attempts to replace the management of [the Claimant] are clearly
acts of aggravation as they are exacerbating this dispute and making the just resolution of
it significantly more difficult” and “[t]hey also pose a direct threat to the Claimant’s

ability to continue operating and to pursue its claims.”

As noted above, Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental Act purports to give the

Respondent the power to restructure the Claimant:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Act, the State has all necessary
powers to restructure PNGSDP and its operations to ensure that PNGSDP
applies its funds for the exclusive benefit of the people of the Western
Province.**

The Tribunal notes that, among the measures that the Respondent has sought to exercise
on the basis of Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental Act, the Respondent purported (by
letter dated 24 October 2013) to terminate all Board members of the Claimant and replace
them with a “Transitional Management Team” appointed by the Respondent.?#
Furthermore, Mr David Sode, the Claimant’s Managing Director, received a letter from
the Prime Minister of PNG, stating that his appointment was terminated.74> The Tribunal
understands, however, that the “Transitional Management Team” in fact “never took its
position, and it is Sir Mekere (and his allies) who remain in complete control of the

Claimant.”

In the Tribunal’s view, these facts demonstrate that the Respondent had already

attempted to replace the Claimant’s management. In turn, that indicates, in the Tribunal’s

Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 9; see above at para. 42(c).
Request for Arbitration, at para. 40 (emphasis added).

244 | st Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 127. See above at paras. 38(a), 71(c).

 

246

45 1st Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 128.
See above at para. 65 and fn. 100; Respondent’s Observations, at para. 44.

Page 49 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

view, that there is a real risk that the Respondent may undertake to implement or give
effect to this measure or undertake further measures with the same purpose of depriving
the current management of the control over the Claimant. The Tenth Supplemental Act
remains in full force and effect and there is no indication that the Respondent’s views
regarding the Claimant and its assets and management have altered since October 2013.
The likelihood of further actions by the Respondent, along similar lines, is in the
Tribunal’s view likely to materialize before the end of this proceeding, and therefore it is

a question that “cannot await the outcome of the award on the merits.”?47

131. The Tribunal also finds that there is a risk of grave or serious harm to the Claimant
during the pendency of the arbitration, because the evidence shows that the Respondent
will likely undertake further actions to take over control and operations of the Claimant,
including by seeking to remove and replace the Claimant’s management, as it already
purported to do by appointing the “Transitional Management Team.” Such a
restructuring of the corporate management of the Claimant would likely cause serious
damage to the Claimant, including by endangering its very existence and affecting its
ability to participate as a party in this arbitration. Among other things, a restructured
management could abandon (or alter) the Claimant’s position in these proceedings or the
Singapore court proceedings, or could dispose of or encumber the Claimant’s assets, or
conclude agreements with the Respondent or other parties that would be potentially

adverse to the Claimant’s interests as asserted in this arbitration.

132. Given the foregoing, the Tribunal considers that an order of provisional relief directed at
interference with or changes to the Claimant’s management is necessary in order to
prevent this harm from occuring during the pendency of these proceedings. The Tribunal
does not, at present, consider that a sufficient showing has been made with regard to
more generalized actions by the Respondent assertedly affecting the status quo. If the
Respondent were to undertake additional actions potentially causing grave harm to the

Claimant, the Claimant would be able to seek further provisional relief from the Tribunal.

247 See above at paras. 108, 116.

Page 50 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

133. There is no risk that the Tribunal’s order would pre-judge any of the issues in this case.
In this respect, the Tribunal does not see how the Claimant’s Provisional Measure 1
“offends the principle that an arbitral tribunal cannot grant a decision on the merits under
the guise of interim relief.”*** In particular, the Tribunal’s order would not in any way
pre-judge the Claimant’s claim that the Respondent has unlawfully expropriated the
Claimant’s investment in the PNG or the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections. Rather,
the Tribunal’s order will allow the Claimant to continue its operations, under its current
management, during the remainder of this proceeding, without fear of restructuring or

other interference with its pre-existing corporate and management structure.

134. The Tribunal also considers that the requested measures are “urgent” under the applicable
standard for provisional measures.”4? As indicated above, the Respondent has already
taken steps to remove and replace the Claimant’s management and there is no indication
that it will unilaterally desist from such efforts in the immediate future. In the Tribunal’s
view, there is a material likelihood of further steps by the Respondent to remove or

replace the Claimant’s management during the remainder of this arbitration.

135. In addition, the balance of harms weighs in favor of granting the measure requested by
the Claimant. If the provisional measure is not granted, there is a risk of serious harm to
the Claimant. By contrast, the harm that would be suffered by the Respondent would be
limited. In particular, there is no persuasive evidence that the harm that the Respondent
would allegedly suffer if the Claimant’s assets were dissipated by its management is
likely to occur during this proceeding. If clear and convincing evidence of such
dissipation of assets by the Claimant is discovered during the course of this proceeding,
the Respondent would be free to request provisional measures from the Tribunal directed

at the preservation of such assets.

136. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal considers it appropriate and necessary to enjoin the

Respondent from undertaking any further actions during this arbitration that would alter

248 Respondent’s Observations, para. | at fn. 1 (emphasis omitted).
49 See above at paras. 107-108, 114-117.

Page 51 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

the corporate or management structure of the Claimant. The Tribunal therefore orders

that:

the Respondent refrain from taking any further steps under Section 6 of the
Tenth Supplemental Act, or otherwise interfering with the Claimant’s
management. In particular, the Respondent should refrain from taking any
measures purporting to restructure or otherwise alter the management of the

Claimant.

137. This order shall remain in effect unless and until it is revoked by the Tribunal or until the

end of this arbitration proceeding.

2. Claimant’s Request No. 2

138. In its Request No. 2, the Claimant requests an order directing the Respondent to refrain
from “harassing, arresting, or commencing any criminal prosecution against any officer,
employee, servant or agent of the Claimant in connection with the performance of their
responsibilities or functions as officers, employees, servants or agents of the Claimant (or

making any further threats to do so).”

139. The Tribunal finds that the Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the requested
provisional measure is necessary to prevent imminent serious harm, or that the requested
measure is urgent. In particular, the Claimant has not provided evidence — beyond Sir
Mekere Morauta’s professed “belie[f]”?™° — that the State “directed persons for whom it is
responsible to make threats of physical harm to officers, employees and agents [of the
Claimant], or at the very least failed to prevent these persons from making such

threats,”?5!

140. In particular, the Claimant has not provided sufficient evidence of actual harassment of or

injury to the Claimant’s employees by the Respondent, or of physical harm to the

250 Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 142.
25! Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 142.

Page 52 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

141.

142.

143.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Claimant’s employees. Nor has the Claimant provided satisfactory evidence, either direct
or circumstantial, of threats of future harm or harassment by the Respondent, or evidence
that any such harassment was done upon the Respondent’s instructions, prompting or
encouragement.”>? As such, this requested measure is not sufficiently substantiated by

the factual evidence provided by the Claimant.

The Tribunal emphasizes, however, that provisional measures would generally be
appropriate if there were credible evidence that either party had made, directed or
encouraged threats of physical harm against employees, officers or agents of the other
party. Such actions would be a serious breach of each party’s obligation to arbitrate in

good faith and would ordinarily warrant immediate relief.

The Claimant also has not satisfactorily established that Mr Davis’ deportation was
connected with the Parties’ dispute, rather than Mr Davis’ breach of the visa conditions,
as the Respondent contends.*> The Tribunal notes the timing of Mr Davis’ deportation
and accepts that it suggests a connection with these proceedings. However, standing
alone, this indication is insufficient to warrant the substantial intrusion on the
Respondent’s governmental authority that would result from an order requiring
revocation of Mr Davis’ deportation. The Tribunal also notes that, in the event that there
are concrete circumstances indicating that the presence of Mr Davis (or others) in PNG
was necessary for purposes of preparing for these proceedings or otherwise conducting
the Claimant’s operations, provisional measures would in principle be available if such

presence were not permitted by the Respondent.

In addition, like other ICSID tribunals, the Tribunal considers that requests for
provisional measures should be denied where they are aimed at “prevent[ing] an action

which [the Claimants] are not even sure is being planned,”?** or where granting a

252 See Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 143.
253 oe above at para. 66; Ist Sir Mekere Morauta WS, at para. 144.

 

Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company y. The Republic of

Feuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, at para. 89,
Exhibit RL-29.

Page 53 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

provisional measure involves “a degree of speculation” and where there is insufficient
evidence before the tribunal that the risk would be likely to materialize.7** Here, the
establishment of a Commission of Inquiry, announced by the Respondent on or around 12
May 2014,?*° does not in itself entail that the Claimant’s officers and/or employees would
be subjected to harassment or any other inappropriate actions by the Respondent. There
is no evidence, at least at this juncture, that the Commission of Inquiry would not
perform its functions in a transparent and independent manner, unconnected to these
proceedings. The Respondent is entitled to pursue its own fact finding inquiries into the
circumstances of the Claimant’s activities in the PNG and the mere establishment of a

commission to do so cannot be regarded as improper or wrongful.

144. In addition, any alleged harassment or other harm arising from establishment of the
Commission of Inquiry would be merely hypothetical at this stage, because the

Commission of Inquiry has “not yet been constituted”?*”

and hence the harm (if any) that
could result from the activities of this Commission of Inquiry remains hypothetical and
uncertain. As explained above, purely hypothetical harm cannot provide the basis for
granting interim measures.”** There is also no evidence that would suggest that, even if
the Commission were to be established and were to take adverse actions, these actions

would materialize during the pendency of this arbitration.

145. Furthermore, the Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Caratube International Oil Co. LLP
v. Kazakhstan that the State’s investigative powers, including in criminal matters, are “a
most obvious and undisputed part of [its] sovereign right ... to implement and enforce its
national law on its territory” and “a particularly high threshold must be overcome before

an ICSID Tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding criminal

255 See, e.g., Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited v. Independent Power Tanzania Limited (ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/8), Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures, dated 20 December 1999, at paras. 13-
14, Exhibit RL-33.

256 See above at paras. 71(c), 74(g); Ist Sir Mereke Morauta WS, at para. 148.

257 1st Daniel Rolpagarea WS, at para. 76(a).

258 See above at para. 112.

Page 54 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

investigations conducted by a state.”"*? The ICSID tribunal’s decision in Lao Holdings is
to the same effect. As explained above, there is insufficient evidence here of either
actual or threatened harm, or of improper actions by the Respondent, sufficient to warrant

interference with the Respondent’s exercise of its lawful governmental functions.”°!

146. The Claimant argues that “threats by a host State to commence criminal proceedings

against the claimant’s officials justif[y] the recommendation of provisional measures,”?°

and that “[t]here is clearly a ‘strong linkage”” between the institution of the Commission
of Inquiry and the investment dispute before the Tribunal.?°? Although there appears to
be some connection with the facts that the Respondent has characterized as the
dissipation of the Claimant’s assets, which was part of the Respondent’s justification for
its recent actions vis-d-vis the Claimant, the Tribunal is unconvinced that there is a
sufficiently “strong linkage” between the institution of the Commission of Inquiry and
this proceeding. The Tribunal notes, in particular, that the second prong of the Lao
Holdings tribunal that applied the “strong linkage” test is missing in this case — i.e., that
“such a situation [i.e., concurrent pendency of criminal local proceedings and arbitration

proceedings] threatens the integrity of the arbitral process.”?°*

147. The Claimant’s Request No. 2 is therefore rejected. As indicated above, however, in the
event of substantiated threats of physical or comparable harm to a party’s employees,
officers or agents, provisional measures to prevent such harm from occurring would be

available.

25° Caratube International Oil Company LLP y. The Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12),
Decision Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures, dated 31 July 2009, at paras. 134-137,
Exhibit RL-24.

20 See Lao Holdings N.V. v. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6), Ruling on
Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order, dated 30 May 2014, at paras, 21-25, Exhibit RL-28.

261 See above at paras. 139-142.

262 Claimant’s Reply, at para. 23 (emphasis omitted).

See above at paras. 66, 74(g); Claimant’s Reply, at para. 23.

264 Lao Holdings N.V. v. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6), Ruling on
Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order, dated 30 May 2014, at para. 37, Exhibit RL-28.

263

Page 55 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

148.

149.

150.

151.

265

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures
3. Claimant’s Request No. 3

The Claimant’s Request No. 3 relates to the preservation of the status quo and the non-
aggravation of the dispute. Preliminarily, it appears from the Claimant’s submissions that
it makes one general request for the preservation of the status quo, as set out in paragraph
27(c) of the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, and also formulates (in its 23
December 2014 letter?°>) a more specific sub-request, within the broad request for the

preservation of the status quo, relating to the ownership of OTML shares.°°

The general Request No. 3 and the more specific sub-request relating to the ownership of

OTML shares are discussed in turn below.
a) Claimant’s general Request No. 3

In its Request No. 3, as articulated in paragraph 27(c) of the Request for Provisional
Measures, the Claimant seeks an order from the Tribunal enjoining the Respondent from
“taking any further steps that may aggravate the dispute, disturb the status quo as at the
date of this Request, or otherwise impede the orderly resolution of the dispute in
accordance with the ICSID Convention.” As such, the Claimant’s Request No. 3 is a
request for a general order for the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of

the dispute.

The Claimant’s Request No. 3 is rejected, because the Claimant has not shown either
urgency or the necessity for such an open-ended order. The Claimant’s request for the
preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute, without requesting
specific, clearly articulated measures, is overly broad, and, as such, will ordinarily fail to
satisfy the requirements of urgency and necessity. Here, the breadth of the Claimant’s

request precludes the Tribunal from assessing the risk of serious harm that would be

See above at paras. 85-88.

266 See Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 20 (requesting that, “as a measure under
paragraph 27(c) of the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, the Tribunal move as soon as possible to
order the State to refrain from transferring or issuing (or completing the transfer or issue of) any OTML shares to

any third party, or taking any steps that other

change the ownership of OTML, pending determination of this

 

dispute in accordance with the ICSID Convention”) (emphasis added).

Page 56 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

152.

153.

154.

155.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

likely absent such an order, or establishing whether there is necessity and urgency for

such an order in light of that risk.

In addition, the Claimant has not articulated the character of the status quo that assertedly
needs protection under this request. The broad category of measures “preserving the
status quo” would therefore be extremely difficult to implement in practice, because any
legislative measures, regulatory decisions or other actions could potentially be considered
as an alteration of the status quo in this case. That is inconsistent with the purpose of the
provisional measures or Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. Rather, requests for
provisional measures must generally be narrow and specific, so that a tribunal, and the
party defending the request for provisional measures, are able to clearly identify the

measures, and ensure compliance therewith.

As the Respondent rightly points out, provisional measures are “exceptional” measures
not to be taken lightly, particularly where they are ordered against a State. The Tribunal
agrees with the tribunal in CEMEX v. Venezuela that the “so-called principle of non-
aggravation cannot supplant the requirements of Article 47,” and that “‘non-aggravation
measures’ are ancillary measures which cannot be recommended in the absence of

measures of a purely protective or preservative kind.”?67

The Claimant’s general Request No. 3, as articulated in paragraph 27(c) of the Claimant’s

Request for Provisional Measures, must therefore be rejected.

b) Claimant’s request relating to the ownership of OTML shares as
set out in the Claimant’s 23 December 2014 letter

As noted above, in its 23 December letter, the Claimant formulated a more specific sub-
request within the general order sought in paragraph 27(c) of the Request for Provisional

Measures. In this specific sub-request, the Claimant seeks an order directing the

Respondent to “order the [Respondent] to refrain from transferring or issuing (or

267 CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolvarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15), Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, dated 3 March 2010,
at paras, 61-65, Exhibit RL-25.

Page 57 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

156.

157.

158.

159.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

completing the transfer or issue of) any OTML shares to any third party, or taking any
steps that otherwise change the ownership of OTML, pending determination of this

dispute in accordance with the ICSID Convention.”?°*

269

Unlike the Claimant’s general Request No. 3, discussed above,” this more specific

request satisfies the requirements of specificity, urgency and necessity.

First, unlike the Claimant’s general Request No. 3, this sub-request is narrow and specific
and clearly sets out the character of the status quo that the Claimant seeks to preserve

(i.e., the ownership of OTML shares).

Second, in the Tribunal’s view, the circumstances described by the Claimant and
evidence submitted by both Parties show that an urgent order is required. In particular,
information provided by the Claimant regarding the imminent disposal of 33% of shares
in OTML for the benefit of the People of the Western Province, including recent press
articles reporting that this sale is about to materialize, is sufficient evidence of imminent

harm.

In addition, the Claimant’s evidence is confirmed by the Respondent’s admissions in its 9
January 2015 letter. In its letter, the Respondent confirmed that “the State’s National
Executive Council had approved the free transfer of 33 percent ownership in OTML to
the people of Western Province, following consultation with the stakeholders, including
the landowners.”?”° The Respondent also referred to “further discussions” that will be
carried out, followed by “a further decision [to be] made by the State as to how best to
implement the Intended Share Transfer” and then the transfer itself.?”! Although the
Respondent does not specify the timeframe for these next steps, there is little doubt that

this question “cannot await the outcome of the award on the merits;” rather, it requires

268 See above at para. 88.

26 See above at paras. 150-154.

21 See above at para. 90; Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 4 (emphasis omitted).
21! See above at para. 92; Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 12 (emphasis omitted).

Page 58 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

160.

161.

162.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

urgent injunctive relief to restrain the Respondent from altering the ownership of the

OTML shares.

Third, in the Tribunal’s view, there is a material risk of serious harm to the Claimant, if
the Tribunal does not issue an order. The above facts demonstrate that the Respondent
has already expressed an intention to, and has in fact undertaken concrete actions in order
to, alter the ownership of the shares in OTML. In turn, that indicates that there is a real
risk that the Respondent: (a) will proceed to finalize the transfer of 33% of shares in
OTML to third parties in the near future, while this arbitration is still pending; and (b)
will likely undertake further actions to alter the ownership of the OTML shares, in a
manner that would significantly affect the Tribunal’s ability to render an award of

restitution, as sought by the Claimant.

The mere fact that the transfer has not yet taken place does not make the risk of harm
merely “speculative.” Rather, the Respondent itself admitted that it had started taking
steps towards the disposal of the OTML shares; therefore, contrary to the Respondent’s

272 The basic purpose of

assertions, this risk is not “premature and speculative.
provisional measures is to prevent the harm from materializing; had the transfer already
been completed, the provisional measure requested by the Claimant would be belated,

and therefore of little use.

In the Tribunal’s view, the transfer of the shares to third parties — that would potentially
qualify as bona fide third party purchasers — would significantly undermine the
opportunity for the Claimant to receive “reinstatement and return of its shares in OTML”
which is the primary relief that the Claimant seeks in this arbitration.?” In this regard,
contrary to the Respondent’s assertions, the Claimant is not required to show

4

“irreparable” harm;?”4 rather, as noted above, a showing of substantial, serious harm

would generally suffice. In the Tribunal’s view, such a showing has been made by the

2? See above at para. 91; Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 11.
233 See Letter from the Claimant, dated 23 December 2014, at para. 8; Request for Provisional Measures, at para. 6.
274 See above at para. 109; Letter from the Respondent, dated 9 January 2015, at para. 11.

Page 59 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

163.

164.

165.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Claimant, and confirmed by the Respondent’s admissions with regard to its intended
transfer of OTML shares. The Tribunal therefore considers that an order of provisional
relief is necessary to prevent this harm from occuring during the pendency of these

proceedings.

Moreover, there is no risk that the Tribunal’s order would pre-judge any of the issues in
this case. An order directing the Respondent to refrain from altering the status quo with
regard to the ownership of OTML shares would not in any way pre-judge any of the
Claimant’s claims; rather, it would allow the Tribunal to preserve its authority to decide
on the merits of the case (should it determine it has jurisdiction), including to order
restitutionary relief, if the Tribunal decides that such relief is appropriate in this

arbitration.

In addition, the balance of harms also weighs in favor of granting the Claimant’s
requested measure for the preservation of the status quo with respect to ownership of
OTML shares. The Respondent has not provided any reasons that would justify the need
to urgently dispose of OTML’s shares, nor has it explained the harm that the Respondent
would suffer if the shares are not disposed of at this time. By contrast, the harm that is
likely to result for the Claimant will be serious, and potentially irremediable. Therefore,
the need to protect the Claimant’s rights — and preserve the Tribunal’s authority to decide
on the merits of this case and grant relief that it considers appropriate — outweighs the
considerations that could warrant the disposal of shares in OTML by the Respondent

before the Tribunal’s final award in this arbitration.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal considers it appropriate and necessary to enjoin the
Respondent from undertaking any actions during this arbitration that would alter the
status quo with respect to the ownership of the shares in OTML. The Tribunal therefore

orders that:

Page 60 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

166.

167.

168.

169.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

the Respondent refrain from transferring or issuing (or completing the transfer
or issue of) any OTML shares to any third party, or taking any steps that
otherwise change the ownership of OTML.

This order shall remain in effect unless and until it is revoked by the Tribunal or until the

end of this arbitration proceeding.
Relevance of the Singapore Court Proceedings

The Parties disagree about the relevance of the Singapore court proceedings for the
Tribunal’s decision on provisional measures in this case. In particular, the Respondent
has alleged that “given the Claimant’s failure (on non-jurisdictional grounds) to obtain
the self-same provisional measures in the Singapore Courts, the Singapore Court’s
finding that those measures are not urgent/necessary ... ought, in the absence of any
changed circumstances (and there is none, as the Claimant itself recognises), to preclude

the Claimant from seeking a further bite of the ‘provisional apple’.”?”>

In this case, the Tribunal sees no scope for application of the preclusion principle referred
to by the Respondent. The relief that the Claimant sought before the Singapore court was
related to issues of the Singapore company law.” By contrast, in this arbitration, the
Claimant seeks injunctive relief against the Respondent, a sovereign State, under the
relevant principles of international law, which the Singapore Court was not requested
(and might well not have the authority) to grant.?’? Thus, there can be no preclusive
effect of the Singapore Court decision rejecting the Claimant’s requested interim relief,

because the measure requested and the basis for the requested measure was different.

In this regard, the Tribunal notes that it is not determinative that “the[] same facts were

relied upon by the Claimant in its unsuccessful attempt to obtain similar reliefs in

275 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 25 (citing Born, International Commercial Arbitration, Kluwer (2nd ed.,
2014), at pp. 3787-3790, Exhibit RL-36).

276

See Claimant’s Reply, at paras. 26 ef seq.

277 See above at para. 75(a).

Page 61 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

170.

VIL.

171.

Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

Summons 5547”’* before the Singapore Court. Rather, the character of the relief
requested and the legal standard and basis for that request must also be substantially

similar.

Conversely, the Tribunal’s analysis is not altered by the Singapore Court’s injunction that
the Claimant refrain from “effecting any further changes to its M&A and to the
composition of its Board,” which, in any event, the Tribunal understands is a temporary,

“holding order,” pending the conclusion of the hearing of the injunction application.?”
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

For the above reasons, the Tribunal hereby:

orders that, for the duration of these arbitration proceedings, the Respondent
refrain from taking any further steps under Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental
Act, or otherwise interfering with the Claimant’s management. In particular, the
Respondent should refrain from taking any measures purporting to restructure or
otherwise alter the management of the Claimant, for the reasons set out above.?*°

The remainder of the Claimant’s Request No. 1 is rejected.
rejects the Claimant’s Request No. 2, for the reasons set out above.?*!

rejects the Claimant’s general Request No. 3 as articulated in paragraph 27(c) of

the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures, for the reasons set out above.”

grants the Claimant’s sub-request set out in its 23 December 2014 letter, relating
to the preservation of the status quo with respect to the ownership of shares in

OTML, and orders that, for the duration of these arbitration proceedings, the

278 Respondent’s Observations, at para. 35(a) fn. 44 (emphasis omitted). See also Respondent’s Observations, at
para. 35(b) fn. 45.

279 See above at para. 75(b).

280 See above at paras. 127-137.

281 See above at paras. 138-147.

282

See above at paras. 150-154.

Page 62 of 63

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures

 

Respondent refrain from transferring or issuing (or completing the transfer or
issue of) any OTML shares to any third party, or taking any steps that otherwise
change the ownership of OTML.?*?

e. reserves the decision on costs associated with the Request for Provisional

Measures.

172. The above orders shall remain in effect unless and until they are revoked by the Tribunal
or until the end of this arbitration proceeding. These orders are made strictly without
prejudice to the Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the issues in dispute in this
arbitration. Nothing in this decision may be understood as pre-judging the outcome of
any of the issues in dispute in this case, including whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction

over the Claimant’s claims.

[Signed]
Gary Born, President

[Signed] [Signed]
Michael Pryles Duncan Kerr

Date: 21 January 2015

283,

See above at paras. 155-166.

Page 63 of 63

