INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd.
v.
Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS UNDER
RULE 41(5) OF THE ICSID ARBITRATION RULES

Gary Born, President of the Tribunal
Duncan Kerr, Arbitrator
Michael Pryles, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Monty Taylor

Assistant to the Tribunal
Valeriya Kirsey

 

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 28 October 2014

IL.

Il.
IV.

VI.

VII.

e

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE PARTIES
A. The Claimant
B. The Respondent
THE ARBITRAL PROCEDURE AND APPLICATION .......scssssssssssssssnessessessesseeseesncenees
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON THE APPLICATIO!
A. The Respondent’s Application
1. Jurisdiction
2. Claims based on alleged MEN clause............0.00.
B. The Claimant’s Observations on the Respondent’s Application .
1. “Private Foreign Investment? 00.0.0... ccc ees eeeeseseeeeeseeeeteeeeeeeeeneneneeeeeee
2. Consent
3. MEN clause
Cc. The Respondent’s Reply to the Claimant’s Observations ..........0.0:0ccceseeeeeeee 23
1. Consent 23
2. “Private Foreign Investment? ............c ccc eeeeseeeeeseseseeeeeeteeeteneneeeeeeeeee 25
3. MEN clause 26
THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS 26
A. Rule 41(5): Scope and Standard ..0.......cc ccc cece eeeeeeeeneeeeeseeeeeeteteseeeeeneneeeeieee 27
B. The Respondent’s Objections 28
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION 31

 

L

IL.

Il.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

INTRODUCTION

This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s reasons and the Tribunal’s decision on the
Respondent’s “Preliminary Objections Under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules”
dated 16 July 2014 (the “Application’”).

THE PARTIES

A. The Claimant

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd., the Claimant (also referred to as
“PNGSDP”), is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under the laws of
Singapore. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Nish Shetty, Mr. Paul
Sandosham, Ms. Joan Lim, and Mr. Matthew Brown of Clifford Chance Pte. Ltd., Mr.
Audley Sheppard of Clifford Chance LLP, and Mr. Romesh Weeramantry and Mr. Sam
Luttrell of Clifford Chance.

B. The Respondent

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea, the Respondent (also referred to as
“PNG”), is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Alvin Yeo SC, Ms. Joy Tan, Ms. Swee
Yen Koh, Ms. Wendy Lin, Mr. Jared Chen, Mr. Yin Juon Qiang, Ms. Monica WY
Chong, and Mr. Ahmad Firdaus bin Daud of WongPartnership LLP.

THE ARBITRAL PROCEDURE AND APPLICATION

On 17 October 2013, the Claimant filed a request for arbitration dated 10 October 2013

against the Respondent (the “Request for Arbitration”) with the International Centre for

Page 1 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”).

On 20 December 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID (“‘Secretary-General”) registered
the Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimant’s letters of 8 November, 22
November, and 10 December 2013, in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention and so notified the Parties. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-
General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible

in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

On 20 February 2014, the Claimant informed ICSID that it opted for the formula
provided by Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention for constitution of the arbitral

tribunal.

In due course, the Tribunal was composed of Mr. Gary Born, a national of the United
States of America, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Dr. Michael Pryles,
a national of Australia, appointed by the Claimant; and the Honourable Justice Duncan

Kerr, Chev LH, a national of Australia, appointed by the Respondent.

On 17 June 2014, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6 of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been
constituted on that date. Mr. Monty Taylor, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to
serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Ms. Valeriya Kirsey was designated to serve as the

Assistant to the Tribunal.

On 16 July 2014, the Respondent submitted the Application, together with accompanying

factual and legal exhibits.

The first session of the Tribunal was held by telephone conference-call on 25 July 2014.
The Tribunal subsequently issued its Procedural Order No. 1 on 7 August 2014.
Page 2 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

In accordance with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, on 8 August 2014 the
Claimant filed its “Observations on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under Rule
41(5)” (“Claimant’s Observations”), together with accompanying factual exhibits and

legal materials.

On 12 August 2014, the Claimant requested a one-day extension to file reply
observations with respect to its “Request for Provisional Measures” dated 14 July 2014,
which were due to be filed that day under the terms of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order
No. 1. This request was granted by the Tribunal on 12 August 2014, and an equivalent
one-day extension was granted to the Respondent to file its “Reply Observations on Rule

41(5) Preliminary Objections” (“Respondent’s Reply Observations”).

In accordance with the granted extension, the Respondent’s Reply Observations were

filed on 20 August 2014, together with supporting legal exhibits.

In accordance with the revised procedural timetable, hearing on the Application took
place at Maxwell Chambers in Singapore on 10 October 2014. In addition to the
Members of the Tribunal (with Dr. Pryles attending by video-conference), the Secretary
of the Tribunal, the Tribunal Assistant (attending by audio-conference) and the court

reporter, attending the hearing were:

For the Claimant:

Counsel

Mr. Nish Shetty Clifford Chance
Mr. Paul Sandosham Clifford Chance
Mr. Romesh Weeramantry — Clifford Chance
Mr. Sam Luttrell Clifford Chance
Mr. Mathew Brown Clifford Chance
Parties

Mr. Andrew Lind Gadens Lawyers

Page 3 of 31

IV.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

For the Respondent:

Counsel

Mr. Alvin Yeo SC WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Joy Tan WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Koh Swee Yen WongPartnership LLP
Ms. Wendy Lin WongPartnership LLP

Ms. Monica WY Chong ‘WongPartnership LLP

A verbatim transcript of the oral hearing was prepared by professional stenographers.
This transcript was issued on 10 October 2014.! The audio recording of the hearing was

dispatched to the Tribunal and the Parties on 14 October 2014.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

To the extent required by the Tribunal to address the Respondent’s Application, and for
that limited purpose only, the Tribunal briefly summarises the factual background to the
dispute as pleaded in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration. The below summary of the
facts does not constitute any finding by the Tribunal on any facts disputed by the Parties,

still less any final findings of fact.

This proceeding concerns the Claimant’s alleged investment in an open pit copper and
gold mine in the Star Mountains of the Western Province of PNG (the “Ok Tedi mine”).
As set out in the Request for Arbitration, PNGSDP owns a majority shareholding (i.e.,
63.4146%) in Ok Tedi Mining Ltd (“OTML”), a PNG-incorporated company.” OTML’s

rights to the Ok Tedi mine are set out in Special Mining Lease No. 1 (the “Special

' Under Paragraph 24.4 of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, the parties shall agree on any corrections to the
transcripts within 15 days of the later of the dates of the receipt of the sound recordings and the transcripts, and such

 

given the time constraints

   

suing this ruling (pending the outcome of the Application, a hearing on jurisdiction

currently due to take place at the end of November 2014), the Tribunal in this Order will refer to the transcript as
issued on 10 October 2014 (i.e., without corrections by the parties). The references to the draft transcript (“DT”)
will be in the following format: DT.[page].[line].

? Request for Arbitration, Para. 16.

Page 4 of 31

20.

> Request for Arbitr
+ Request for Arbitration, Pa
> Request for Arbitration, Pa
© Request for Arbitration, Pa
7 Request for Arbitr

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

Mining Lease”). The Special Mining Lease is the primary asset of OTML.}

The Request for Arbitration provides details on the history of the Ok Tedi mine and on
how the Claimant was incorporated and came to own its shares in OTML.'* These facts
are summarised below, to the extent relevant for the consideration of the Respondent’s

Application.

In 2001, BHP Minerals Holdings Pty Ltd (“BHP,” a subsidiary of BHP Billiton Ltd
(“BHP Billiton”) (the former shareholder and operator of OTML)) transferred all of its
ordinary shares in OTML to the Claimant.* This transfer was intended to entrust an
independent, foreign-registered company with the management of the development of the
Ok Tedi mine (through OTML) and the use of its earnings from the mine to promote
sustainable development within PNG and advance the general welfare of the people of
PNG, particularly those of the Western Province where the Ok Tedi mine is located.® In
connection with the transfer, a charge was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML
(the “Charge’’), by way of a Security Deed dated 7 February 2002 (the “Security Deed”)
and a Security Trust Deed dated 7 February 2002 (the “Security Trust Deed”), and a
mortgage was created over the Claimant’s shares in OTML (the “Mortgage’”’), by way of
an Equitable Mortgage of Shares dated 7 February 2002 (the “Equitable Mortgage of

Shares”).

Following a selective share buyback conducted in January 2011, the Claimant and the
Respondent have respectively held 63.4146% and 36.5853% of issued ordinary shares in
OTML.*

 

 

jon, Pare

 

jon, Pa

  

§ Request for Arbitration, Para

Page 5 of 31

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
The Claimant was incorporated in Singapore on 20 October 2001.2 It is a company
limited by guarantee (as distinguished from share capital) and governed by its
Memorandum and Articles of Association (the “Memorandum and Articles of
Association” or “M&A”).'° The M&A annex a set of Program Rules (the “Program
Rules”) which primarily deal with how earnings are to be applied for the purposes of

fund management, transparency and accountability."!

According to the Claimant, the Claimant carries significant risk as a shareholder in
OTML due to, inter alia, its undertaking to take over BHP’s liabilities in respect of the
mining activities (and its broader obligations as a shareholder), and indemnities that the
Claimant granted in respect of environmental claims and claims arising out of BHP’s

stewardship of OTML.”

The Claimant asserts that, since its establishment in 2001, it has financed and overseen at
least USD 500 million dollars worth of development and environmental projects. It has
financed these projects, and carried out the functions for which it was established, by
taking its annual dividends from OTML and (in accordance with the Program Rules)
putting them into low-risk investments in international markets to establish two funds: a

short-term fund (the “Development Fund”) and a Long Term Fund (the “LTF’).3

The Claimant asserts that the Respondent, through its instrumentalities and entities for
which it is responsible, has mounted a concerted campaign against the Claimant and its

investments, culminating in the cancellation of the Claimant’s shares in OTML.'*

In particular, on 13 September 2013, the Respondent adopted the Mining (Ok Tedi Tenth
Supplemental Agreement) Act 2013 (the “Tenth Supplemental Act”), along with the

° Request for Arbitration, Para. 18.
' Request for Arbitration, Para. 18.
" Request for Arbitration, Para. 18.
!? Request for Arbitration, Para. 19.
'S Request for Arbitration, Para. 20.
' Request for Arbitration, Para. 24.

Page 6 of 31

26.

27.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Mining (Ok Tedi Mine Continuation) (Ninth Supplemental Agreement) (Amendment)
Act 2013.5 According to the Claimant, among other things, the Tenth Supplemental Act
purports to cancel the shares held by the Claimant in OTML. Section 4 provides, in the

relevant part, as follows:

4. Shareholders of OTML
(1) — On the coming into operation of this Act —

(a) allordinary shares held by PNGSDP in the share capital of OTML
shall be cancelled and cease to exist; and

(b) 122,200,000 new, fully paid ordinary shares in the share capital of
OTML free of any encumbrance, charge or equitable interest shall
be issued to the State.'®

According to the Claimant, Subsection 5(1) of the Tenth Supplemental Act purports to
empower the Prime Minister of PNG, Mr. Peter O’Neill, to declare whether
compensation is payable to any person in respect of the effects of the Tenth Supplemental
Act and, if so, the amount of compensation and the terms on which it is payable.” The
Claimant further states that Section 5(4) provides that nothing in the Tenth Supplemental
Act imposes any obligation on the Respondent or any other person to pay compensation
in respect of the effects of the Tenth Supplemental Act other than pursuant to an order

under Section 5(1).'8
Sections 4(5) and 4(6) of the Tenth Supplemental Act provide:

(5) All references to PNGSDP in the constitution of OTML and in the Fifth
Restated Shareholders Agreement shall, on and from the coming into operation of
this Act, be read and construed as a reference to the State.

(6) | Onand from the coming into operation of this Act, the Charge is void and of

'S Request for Arbitration, Para. 35.

'© Request for Arbitration, Para. 36.
"” Request for Arbitration, Para. 37.
'8 Request for Arbitration, Para. 37.

Page 7 of 31

28.

29.

30.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

no legal effect and shall not create any interest of any nature whatsoever in any
share of OTML."

Section 6 of the Tenth Supplemental Act provides:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Act, the State has all necessary
powers to restructure PNGSDP and its operations to ensure that PNGSDP applies
its funds for the exclusive benefit of the people of the Western Province.”

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant claims that the enactment of the Tenth
Supplemental Act amounts to a breach of the prohibition against unlawful

expropriation. 21

The Claimant further claims that the conduct of the Respondent has
amounted to violations of other guarantees and standards of treatment that must be
accorded by the Respondent to foreign investors, including (i) the fair and equitable
treatment standard; (ii) guarantee of free repatriation of returns on investments; (iii)
specific undertakings given to the Claimant (i.e., the umbrella clause); (iv) the full
protection and security standard; (v) the rule against arbitrary, discriminatory or
unreasonable measures; (vi) national treatment guarantee; and (vii) the rule of free entry

. - 2
and sojourn of personnel.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON THE APPLICATION

A. The Respondent’s Application

The Respondent raises two objections in the Application regarding the Claimant’s
Request for Arbitration: first, that the jurisdictional requirements set out in the ICSID
Convention are not satisfied, and therefore that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the
Claimant’s claims; and second, that certain of the Claimant’s substantive claims are

manifestly without legal merit.

' Request for Arbitration, Para. 39.
?° Request for Arbitration, Para. 40.
*! Request for Arbitration, Para. 54.
Request for Arbitration, Para. 55.

Page 8 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

1. Jurisdiction

31. In referring to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent notes that the
jurisdiction of the Centre may only be invoked in relation to a “legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State ... and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the

Centre.””?

The Respondent claims that it is clear from a review of the Request for
Arbitration that the mandatory jurisdictional requirements of Article 25(1) are not
satisfied, as there is no “private foreign investment” and there is no consent to arbitration

by PNG under the ICSID Convention.4

32. Dealing first with the argument as to “private foreign investment,” the Respondent
alleges that the Claimant’s objects and the circumstances surrounding the Claimant’s
incorporation compel the conclusion that PNGSDP is not a “foreign investor” and that

: coi Coreen j 9925
there is no “private foreign investment.”

33. The Respondent notes that, in order to determine whether an alleged “investment” falls
within the auspices of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, one must look at the object
and purpose of the Convention.”° In referring to the Report of the Executive Directors on
the Convention and other legal materials for guidance on that object and purpose,” the
Respondent contends that the existence of a private foreign investment is required in
order to qualify for protection under the ICSID Convention.** The Respondent submits

that no such private foreign investment is present in this case.”

°3 Application, Par
*4 Application, Par
°5 Application, Para. 19.
26 Application, Para. 20.

27 See Application, Paras. 21-22 in this respect.
°8 Application, Paras. 21-23.

> Application, Para. 23.

     

Page 9 of 31

34.

35.

36.

37.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
Citing Clauses 5 and 12 of the M&A, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s
members” have no rights to the income and property of the Claimant, as these are to be
applied solely towards the promotion of the objects of the Claimant: namely, to promote
sustainable development within, and advance the general welfare of the people of, PNG
(and in particular the Western Province thereof)! The Respondent contends that it is
undisputed that the assets held by the Claimant, including its shares in OTML, are to be
used solely for the benefit of the people of PNG, and are not beneficially owned by the

Claimant or its members.*”

In light of the above, the Respondent claims that PNGSDP cannot be a “foreign investor”
with a “private foreign investment,” as the company exists to fulfil the sole public
purpose of promoting sustainable development and advancing the general welfare of the

PNG people.**

The Respondent also alleges that the Claimant is not a private investor with respect to the
OTML shares, as these were simply gifted to the Claimant by BHP for a specified public
purpose.** The Respondent concludes that, as a result, there has been no “private foreign

investment” to speak of, since the time BHP exited as a shareholder of OTML in 2001.*°

The Respondent submits that the present dispute is one between PNG and, in substance
and effect, its own nationals, and the ICSID Convention is not intended to apply to such
disputes.*° The Respondent concludes that any contention by the Claimant that this
dispute concerns a “private foreign investment” is manifestly without legal or factual

merit, and as a consequence, the Tribunal should decline to find jurisdiction.*”

*° The Respondent notes that the Claimant has no shareholders, but rather only members (Application, Para. 25).

 

. In this regard, the Respondent refers to the Request for Arbitration, Paras. 13 and 21-23.

** Application, Para. 28.

** Application, Pa
6 Application, Pa

 

57 Application, Para. 32.

Page 10 of 31

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

As to consent, the Respondent notes that the Claimant in this proceeding relies upon
provisions of the Respondent’s domestic legislation as constituting the requisite written
consent for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Specifically, the
Claimant contends that section 39 of PNG’s Investment Promotion Act 1992 (“IPA”),
either on its own or when read in conjunction with section 2 of PNG’s Investment
Disputes Convention Act 1978 (“IDCA”) (as amended by the Investment Disputes
Convention (Amendment) Act 1982), constitutes a standing offer by PNG to arbitrate
investment disputes at ICSID.** The Respondent submits that this reliance is flawed, and
that there is a clear failure to satisfy the Article 25(1) jurisdictional requirements in this

3
case.”

Section 39 of the IPA provides as follows:

 

[The IDCA], impl i the International Ci i on the Settl of

Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, applies, according
to its terms, to disputes arising out of foreign investment.

Section 2 of the IDCA provides as follows:

A dispute shall not be referred to [ICSID] unless the dispute is fundamental to the
investment itself.

By reference to Principle 7 of the UN International Law Commission’s 2006 Guiding
Principles applicable to Unilateral Declarations of States capable of creating Legal
Obligations (“ILC Principle 7”), the Respondent submits that consent to ICSID
arbitration in “clear and specific terms” (as required by ILC Principle 7) is conspicuously

absent in the two above-excerpted provisions.“

The Respondent refers to an alleged acknowledgement by the Claimant that neither the

*8 Request for Arbitration, Para. 67.

* Application,
*° Application,

. 58.
. 40.

 

Page 11 of 31

43.

  

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

IDCA generally, nor section 2 of the IDCA specifically, constitutes consent by PNG per

se! The Respondent argues that this asserted concession was rightly made,” and raises,

in summary, the following arguments as to why section 2 of the IDCA does not constitute

written consent for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention:

(a)

(b)

(c)

The provision is framed in the negative and only precludes the option of
arbitration for a certain class of disputes (namely, those which are not
fundamental to the investment itself). It does not otherwise deny or grant an

option to arbitrate other categories of disputes under ICsID;

Section 2 merely reflects a notification filed by PNG on 14 September 1978 under
Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention to inform ICSID and other Contracting
States that PNG wished to exclude certain types of disputes from ICSID’s
jurisdiction.“ Pursuant to Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention, any such

notification shall not constitute the consent required by Article 25(1);*° and

Because the term “disputes” in section 2 is defined in the IDCA by reference to
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention,*° section 2 is subject to (rather than
constitutes) the jurisdictional requirement of written consent set out in Article

25(1) of the ICSID Convention.”

As section 2 of the IDCA does not provide for written consent (as allegedly conceded by

the Claimant), the Respondent submits that it must follow that no consent resides in

section 39 of the IPA because that provision simply refers to the IDCA and states that the

is. 41 and 48, excerpting the Claimant's letter to the Tribunal Secretary dated 8 November 2013.
42.
43.
44.

45 Application, Para. 45.

#© Section 1(1) of the IDCA provides as follows:

 

ispute’ means any legal dispute arising directly out of an

investment as referred to in Article 25 of the [ICSID] Convention.”
47 Application, Para. 47.

Page 12 of 31

44.

4S.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

IDCA implementing the ICSID Convention “applies, according to its terms.”**

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s argument that section 39 of the IPA must function
as a standing offer to ICSID arbitration because otherwise the provision could not be
assigned any other useful purpose.” Rather, the Respondent submits that it is commonly
accepted that legislative provisions such as section 39 can serve useful purposes,
including: (i) recalling and confirming the State’s commitments under the ICSID
Convention; or (ii) to clear the way for the State to conclude specific types of dispute
resolution agreements without facing internal ultra vires issues, and thereby providing

encouragement to investors.

The Respondent argues that its interpretation of section 39 of the IPA is confirmed by
context. In particular, the Respondent refers to two bilateral investment treaties entered
into by PNG prior to and around the same time as the 1992 IPA was enacted
(respectively, the UK-PNG BIT, signed on 14 May 1981 and entered into force on 22
December 1981, and the PNG-PRC BIT, signed on 12 April 1991 and entered into force
on 12 February 1993), which contain clear and unequivocal consent to ICSID

arbitration.*!

The Respondent contends that, had the State intended to give unilateral
consent to ICSID arbitration in section 39 of the IPA, it could have easily inserted into
that Act the clear language of consent adopted in its BITs with other States.” The
Respondent posits that it is implausible that a country would consent to ICSID’s
jurisdiction through treaties in clear and precise terms but, at the same time, seek to
express consent to ICSID arbitration by way of an opaque and generalised reference in its

national legislation.

48 Application, Para. 50.

* Application, Par
*° Application, Par

  
  

Sl.
51, and the authorities cited therein.

 

*! Application, Para. 52. The Respondent also refers to a more recent example of a BIT entered into by PNG which
also provides unambiguous consent to ICSID arbitration (see Articles 16(4) and 16(5) of the Japan-PNG BIT, signed
in April 2011: Application, Para. 53).

* Application, Para. 55.

*3 Application, Para. 55.

Page 13 of 31

46.

47.

48.

49.

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
The Respondent also contends that incongruities would arise if the Claimant’s
interpretation of section 39 were preferred. The Respondent submits that, if the
Claimant’s interpretation of section 39 were accepted, then the State would effectively
have extended an offer to arbitrate under ICSID to ineligible investors under the ICSID
Convention: i.e. the definition of “foreign investment” and “foreign investor” under the
IPA is not limited to investors who are nationals of ICSID Convention Contracting

States. The Respondent submits that the State could not have intended this outcome.

The Respondent refers to the Preamble of the ICSID Convention, which provides that “no
Contracting State shall by the mere fact of its ratification, acceptance or approval of this
Convention and without its consent be deemed to be under any obligation to submit any

particular dispute to conciliation or arbitration.”*°

As described in the Report of the
Executive Directors on the Convention, consent is “the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of
the Centre,” and the Respondent concludes that there is an obvious absence of that
consent in the IPA and the IDCA.” As such, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s

claims should be dismissed in their entirety with costs.**
2. Claims based on alleged MEN clause

The Respondent also contends that the Claimant’s reliance upon the alleged “most

favoured nation” clause in section 37(1) of the IPA is manifestly without legal merit.”

Section 37(1) of the IPA provides as follows:
The provisions of this section shall apply to a foreign investor except where treatment

56.
. 56. The Respondent also notes that the five year limitation period in the Japan-PNG BIT

would make no sense if the IPA operated in the manner proposed by the Claimant, as Japanese investors could
easily circumvent that limitation period by relying upon the IPA (Application, Para. 56).

 

°8 Application, Para. 58.
*° Application, Para. 66.

Page 14 of 31

50.

51.

52.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

more favourable to the foreign investor is accorded under any bilateral or
multilateral agreement to which the State is a party.

The Respondent contends that the wording of this provision is clear: a foreign investor
will be entitled to the protections under the IPA, unless that investor is entitled to more
favourable treatment under any other bilateral or multilateral agreement to which PNG is
also party, in which case the more favourable treatment prevails over the rights under the
IPA. In this way, the provision does not function as a typical MFN clause, which
entitles a foreign investor to avail itself of more favourable treatment offered by the

Respondent to investors of other States.°!

In light of the wording of section 37(1), the Respondent submits that the Claimant cannot
rely upon the provision to import (for itself) rights which PNG has granted to investors of
other States.” Referencing ILC Principle 7, the Respondent notes that an MEN clause
has to be clear and unequivocal as to the obligations that are created; by way of example
and also by way of contrast with section 37(1), the Respondent refers to two MFN
clauses agreed by PNG in its respective treaties with Germany and Australia. The
Respondent submits that these clauses, unlike section 37(1), make clear that PNG has
promised to give investors of the beneficiary state equal treatment as that enjoyed by any

other state.

The Respondent contends that, as section 37(1) of the IPA is not an MEN clause, the
Claimant is not entitled to the various “more favourable” protections which PNG has
provided to investors of other States. Rather, if the IPA applies in this arbitration
(which the Respondent denies), the Claimant is only entitled to those protections
specifically enumerated in that statute at sections 37(2) to 37(5) thereof. As such, the

Respondent submits that any relief sought by the Claimant that is not provided for under

  

 

6s Application,

o Application,
6

 
 

Page 15 of 31

53.

54.

55.

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

sections 37(2) to 37(5) of the IPA is manifestly without legal merit and should be

dismissed or struck out.*

The Respondent requests the following relief from the Tribunal in its Application:°”

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)

B.

Dismiss all of the Claimant’s claims in the [Request for Arbitration] on the
basis that they are “manifestly without legal merit”, as the mandatory
jurisdictional requirements in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention are not
met; and/or

Dismiss or strike out paragraphs 73(ii) to 73(x) of the [Request for
Arbitration] and the relevant paragraphs of the [Request for Arbitration] that
refer to such reliefs as set out in Annex I, on the basis that these reliefs are
“manifestly without legal merit”, as section 37(1) of the [IPA] (even if
applicable, which is denied) is not a MFN Clause and the reliefs fall outside
section 37(2) to 37(5) of the [IPA];

Order costs in favour of the State; and

Order such other and further relief as may be deemed just and appropriate in
the circumstances.

The Claimant’s Observations on the Respondent’s Application

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s Application must fail for reasons of form

(lack of clarity) and substance (failure to demonstrate that any part of the Claimant’s case

is “manifestly without legal merit”).°* The Claimant contends that the Application

represents a misuse of the Rule 41(5) procedure.

In providing its summary of the relevant standard to be applied under Rule 41(5), the

Claimant notes that a successful objection under this Rule must show that the relevant

. 71.
. 72; Respondent's Reply Observations, Para. 38.

°$ Claimant's Observations, Para. 2.
© Claimant's Observations, Para. 3.

Page 16 of 31

56.

57.

58.

 

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
claim is “manifestly without legal merit,” which is a high standard.” The Claimant
submits that the phrase “legal merit” dictates that only the law (and not disputed facts)
can be considered at this early stage of the proceeding.”! Further, the Claimant notes that
the Rule requires that an objection “shall specify as precisely as possible the basis for the
objection,” and submits that objections which are expressed with insufficient precision

should fail for lack of clarity.”

The Claimant maintains that each of the jurisdictional requirements set out in Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention is satisfied in this case, and that Article 37(1) of the IPA
is an MEN clause. That said, the Claimant preliminarily notes that all it must show in
order to defeat the Application is that the Respondent is unable to establish, with relative
ease and despatch, that the Claimant’s case on jurisdiction is manifestly without legal
merit.”*

1. ‘Private Foreign Investment”

First, the Claimant observes that the Respondent’s objection on this question requires a
factual enquiry, which is outside the scope of Rule 41(5)." In any event, the Claimant

submits that the objection lacks the clarity required under Rule 41(5).”°

The Claimant submits that it is an investor under both the IPA and the ICSID
Convention: with respect to the former, it holds the necessary certification under Part IV

of the IPA, and with respect to the latter, the Claimant is a Singapore-incorporated

Observations, Para.
Observations, Para.
Observations, Para. 9.

 

7 Claimant’s Observations, Para. 13. The Claimant also notes that the Respondent’s Application only specifically
addresses one of the Claimant’s alleged investments, namely the Claimant’s shares in OTML. To the extent that the
Respondent argues that the Claimant's other alleged investments “stem from” those shares, the Claimant contends
that this would not be sufficient for the purposes of a Rule 41(5) objection with respect to those investments
(Claimant's Observations, Para. 14).
” Claimant’ s Observations, Para. 15.

Page 17 of 31

59.

60.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
company (Singapore being a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention) and is therefore
a “national of another Contracting State” for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the

Convention.”®

As to whether there is a “private foreign investment” for the purposes of the ICSID
Convention, the Claimant notes that this is a highly contested issue and should be fully
argued, rather than decided in an expedited Rule 41(5) procedure.” The Claimant
contends that the State’s argument is a factual one which should not be determined
summarily at this stage, because the Respondent’s submissions regarding the transactions
which underpin the Claimant’s alleged investments and the origin of the investment
capital (to the extent the latter is relevant, which the Claimant denies) will require
evidence and a closer analysis than the Rule 41(5) procedure can afford.”* In any event,

the Claimant maintains that its alleged investments are foreign in character.”

Beyond the alleged inappropriateness of the enquiry at this stage, the Claimant submits
that it has covered investments under the commonly used “two-step test,” namely under
both section 3 of the IPA and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.*° The Claimant
contends that the only question with respect to jurisdiction ratione materiae for the
purpose of Rule 41(5) is whether any of the relevant investments are “pure commercial

9,81

transactions’ the Claimant submits that they clearly are not, and contends that the

Respondent has not suggested otherwise.*?

 

” Claimant's Observations, Para. 22. The Claimant notes that there is no requirement under the ICSID Convention
that the investment be private.

* Claimant’s Observations, Pai

21, 22 and 24.

 

8! The Claimant in this respect relies upon Global Trading Resource Corp v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/11),
Award, 1 December 2010, which is the only instance to date where a Rule 41(5) objection based upon the meaning
of the term “investment” under the ICSID Convention has been successful. There, according to the Claimant, the
tribunal found that the short-term poultry sales contracts under consideration were “pure commercial transactions”
and, as a result, were outside the scope of the ICSID Convention (Claimant's Observations, Paras. 21 and 23).

* Claimant’ s Observations, Paras. 2] and 23.

Page 18 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

2. Consent

6l. The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s consent objection requires a factual enquiry,
which is outside the scope of Rule 41(5).8 The Claimant also contends that the
Respondent’s objection does not establish that the Claimant’s case on consent is

manifestly without legal merit.*4

62. The Claimant addresses the Respondent’s objections with respect to both the IDCA and
the IPA. As to the IDCA, the Claimant submits that section 2 of that instrument is not the
Article 25(4) notification itself, and as such some other purpose must be assigned to the

provision.

The Claimant contends that section 2 expresses a general condition or
jurisdiction/admissibility requirement applicable to subsequent agreements to arbitrate
entered into by the State, and that the permissive wording of the title of the section
(“Classes of disputes which may be referred to the jurisdiction of the Centre”) is

supportive of the Claimant’s case on consent.*®

63. Turning to the IPA, the Claimant argues that ILC Principle 7 should be approached with
caution: the ILC Principles offer guidance, rather than a prescriptive reflection of
customary international law.*” The Claimant submits that the principles are primarily
concerned with diplomatic acts performed by States (as opposed to the interpretation of

foreign investment laws), and that the Tribunal should rather take guidance from ICSID

cases.**
64. In considering ICSID cases, the Claimant contends that the tribunal’s jurisdictional
*S Claimant’ s Observations, Para. 26.

 

 

** Claimant’s Observations, Para. 27. The Claimant submits that this Tribunal, in considering whether the Rule
41(5) test is met, is not prohibited from taking into account the fact of registration of the Request for Arbitration by
the Secretary-General of ICSID. In this connection the Claimant notes that the standards are the same (“manifest”)
in both the registration and Rule 41(5) settings (Claimant’s Observations, Para. 29).

* Claimant’s Observations, Pat
* Claimant’ s Observations, Para.

*” Claimant’s Observations, Para. 31.
* Claimant's Observations, Para. 31.

    

 

 

Page 19 of 31

65.

66.

    

® (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3), Decision on Ju

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
decision in Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of
Egypt? (“SPP decision”) has not been challenged, but rather followed, by other ICSID
tribunals, and notes the tribunal’s statement in that case that “jurisdictional instruments
are to be interpreted neither restrictively nor expansively, but rather objectively and in
good faith.”°” The Claimant submits that the purpose of section 39 cannot be to recall
and confirm the State’s commitments under the ICSID Convention, as this was achieved

by the prior enactment of the IDCA.”!

To the extent that the Respondent compares the terms of section 39 with the language of
other BITs entered into by PNG, the Claimant submits that no firm interpretive
conclusion can be drawn from the dates on which PNG entered into other BITs, as some
were entered into before the IPA was enacted and others were entered into after.” In any
event, the Claimant submits that the language of section 39 is not “opaque or
generalised” in comparison with the language used by PNG in its treaties (as contended
by the Respondent): the language of section 39 is short, clear and simple, and provides
that the IDCA, implementing the ICSID Convention, applies, according to its terms, to

foreign investment disputes.”*

The Claimant also addresses the Respondent’s argument that, under the Claimant’s
interpretation of section 39, PNG would effectively have extended an offer to ICSID
arbitration even to investors who are not nationals of ICSID Contracting States. The
Claimant submits that this argument is devoid of legal merit, as section 39 provides that
the ICSID Convention “applies, according to its terms,” which includes the requirement
in Article 25(1) that the dispute must be between a Contracting State and a national of

another Contracting State."

ction, 14 April 1988.
. 63 of the SPP decision).

** Claimant's Observations, Para. 31.

Page 20 of 31

67.

68.

69.

70.

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s reliance upon the Japan-PNG BIT is also
misplaced, as an investor covered by the IPA and the Japan-PNG BIT may simply elect

ich |G + 95
which instrument to use to make a claim.”

The Claimant observes that the key interpretive task for the Tribunal is to determine the
meaning and legal effect of the phrase “applies, according to its terms” in section 39,°
On this issue, the Claimant notes that statements on the PNG Investment Promotion
Authority’s website (the agency responsible for administering the IPA and for promoting
PNG as a destination for foreign investors) are lacking in any reference to the need for a
subsequent arbitration agreement with the State.°” In reliance upon the SPP decision, the
Claimant submits that these statements can be taken into account as evidence of the

legislative intent behind the unilateral declaration in section 39.8

The Claimant also notes that all “Investment Guarantees” in Part V of the IPA (of which
section 39 is one) are extended and effective as soon as the investor receives the requisite
certificate under Part IV of the same Act.” As the Claimant has such a certificate, the
Claimant submits that it is entitled to all the benefits and protections it entails, including
recourse to ICSID arbitration, without any further formalities.'° Further, to the extent
that the IPA is ambiguous (which the Claimant denies), the Claimant observes that it
should be construed in a manner that aids rather than impedes its effective operation as a

declaration of consent to ICSID arbitration.'"!

Finally, the Claimant posits that the principle of effet utile can be applied in this case and,

‘a. 37. The Claimant also submits that, as the State drafted the provision in question,

doubts over its meaning should be resolved contra proferentem against the State and in favour of the Claimant
(Claimant's Observations, Para. 39).

Page 21 of 31

71.

72.

 

 

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

in reliance upon this principle (and ICSID authority'””), submits that the purpose of the

IPA (inter alia, to “promote and facilitate investment in [PNG] by citizens and foreign
investors”) should be applied in favour of the protection of covered investments where

there is uncertainty in the IPA’s interpretation.'°°

3. MEN clause

The Claimant observes that the Respondent had to effectively re-write section 37(1) of
the IPA in order to make its objection with respect to that provision.'™ According to the
Claimant, the Respondent’s argument replaces the term “the foreign investor” in section
37(1) with the term “that foreign investor.”!°> The Claimant submits that this distorts the
language of the Act, as “the foreign investor” in the context of section 37(1) refers to the
foreign investor (as a class) under a more favourable treaty instrument, rather than the
foreign investor under the IPA.'®° In this sense, the Claimant contends that the provision
provides that the investment guarantees given by the Respondent in the IPA apply to a
foreign investor (here, PNGSDP) unless standards of treatment more favourable to the

foreign investor are available under any BIT to which the Respondent is a party.'°”

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue a decision under Rule 41(5):

(a) dismissing the Application in full; and

(b) ordering the Respondent to pay the legal costs incurred by the Claimant in

relation to the Application.'*

© Namely, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6),
Dec!

ion on Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004 (“SGS v. Philippines”), Para. 116.

    
      
 

'°3 Claimant's Observations, Para. 38.
. Para. 42.
s, Para. 45.
s, Para. 46.
'°7 Claimant's Observations, Para. 48.

'°8 Claimant's Observations, Para. 49.

Page 22 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

(on The Respondent’s Reply to the Claimant’s Observations

73. In reply, the Respondent claims that the Claimant, in its written submission, offers no
credible answers to the Respondent’s various Rule 41(5) objections.'” The Respondent
suggests that the Claimant’s Observations both mischaracterise matters and strain legal

principles.’ 10

74. The Respondent contests the Claimant’s submission that the State’s Rule 41(5) objections

require a factual enquiry.!!!

The Respondent notes that there are no factual disputes for
the purposes of the present application, as the only facts it relies upon are undisputed

facts contained in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration.!?

1. Consent

75. The Respondent’s argument with respect to written consent can be summarised briefly: as
the Claimant has allegedly conceded that no consent resides in section 2 of the IDCA,
and as section 39 of the IPA simply refers back to the IDCA, it follows that section 39 of
the IPA does not constitute “consent in writing” for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the

ICSID Convention.''?

76. The Respondent observes that the Claimant has not sought to retract its asserted

concession with respect to the IDCA (namely, that neither the IDCA generally nor

‘© Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 2.

' Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 2. With respect to legal principles, the Respondent disagrees with the
Claimant’s assertion that the legal standards are the same under both Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention relating
ation and Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. It notes that the Secretary-General’s decision to
register the Request for Arbitration under Article 36(3) does not in any way bind this Tribunal in its consideration of
the Respondent's Rule 41(5) Application (Respondent's Reply Observations, Para. 2, fn 3, and the authorities cited
therein).

'! Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 4.

"2 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Paras. 4 and 5.

Respondent’s Reply Observations, Paras. 6 and 12.

Page 23 of 31

 

   

113

77.

78.

79.

"4 Respondent's Reply Ob:

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
section 2 specifically constitutes consent of the State per se).''4 To the extent that the
Claimant has relied upon the “permissive” heading of section 2 of the IDCA, the

Respondent notes that PNG statutory interpretation law provides that section headings do
5

not form a part of the relevant statutory provision." As such, the Respondent submits
that the heading could not override the clear and express wording of the provision itself,
which precludes the option of arbitration for a class of disputes (i.e., disputes that are not
fundamental to the investment itself) and makes no pronouncement on the availability of

arbitration for other classes of disputes.''°

The Respondent expresses some confusion with respect to the Claimant’s argument
regarding the distinction between section 2 of the IDCA and the actual Article 25(4)
notification made by the State to ICSID in 1978.'” The Respondent submits that, as the
1978 notification was incapable of constituting the consent required by Article 25(1), a

fortiori a domestic statute reflecting that notification must be similarly incapable.'!*

The Respondent posits that the Claimant’s arguments are also flawed with respect to
section 39 of the IPA.'!? It distinguishes the SPP decision on the basis that the Egyptian
investment law under consideration in that case included mandatory language with
respect to the submission of disputes to ICSID (i.e. disputes “shall be settled ... within
the framework of the [ICSID Convention]”), whereas such language is absent from

section 39 of the IPA.'*°

The Respondent distinguishes the promotional material referred to in the SPP decision
from the statements on the IPA website, and notes that those statements cannot fulfil the

legal requirement of “consent in writing” under the ICSID Convention: these statements

rvations, Para. 7.

 

"5 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 10, referring to section 26(3) of the PNG Interpretation Act (Cap 2,
1975).

''6 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 10.

"7 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 11.

''8 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 11.

''° Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 13.

'20 Respondent's Reply Observations, Para. 14.

Page 24 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

cannot create rights, and cannot alter the terms of the 1PA.”?! Further, in oral submissions
at the hearing in Singapore on 10 October 2014 the Respondent contended that the SPP
decision is not reconcilable with the line of ICSID cases which have considered

Venezuela’s investment law, and as such the SPP decision is “simply wrong.”!”?

80. The Respondent submits that the principle of effet utile and the contra proferentem rule

do not apply in this case: the former does not apply to unilateral declarations made by

3

States,'* and the latter is a principle relating to the interpretation of contracts, not of

national legislation.'* The Respondent also contends that, notwithstanding the
Claimant’s argument otherwise, the generally accepted view is that the ILC Principles

(including ILC Principle 7) are applicable to domestic legislation.'”°

81. Finally, the Respondent criticises the Claimant’s interpretation of section 39 in the
context of the IPA.'° The Respondent submits that the conferment of benefits flowing
from the grant of a certificate under Part IV of the IPA cannot ipso facto give rise to the

requisite “consent in writing” where none in fact exists in section 39 of the same Act.27
2. “Private Foreign Investment”

82. The Respondent observes that, given the objects of the Claimant (namely, to promote
sustainable development within PNG and to advance the general welfare of the PNG

people) and the fact that it is obliged to use its assets solely for those objects, it is not the

'2! Respondent’s Reply Observations, Paras. 16-17. The Respondent also notes that the tribunal in the SPP decision
only relied upon promotional literature to the extent that it “merely confirm[ed]” the conclusion already reached by
the tribunal. The Respondent submits that the IPA website statements do no such ‘confirming’ in this case, as no
consent can be located in either the IDCA or the IPA (Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 19).

' DT.64-67.

"3 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 21, citing authority in support at fn 25. The Respondent contends that
the Claimant's reliance upon SGS v. Philippines in this respect is irrelevant (see Claimant's Observations, Para. 38)
because that concerned a bilateral investment treaty, not a State’s unilateral declaration (Respondent's Reply
Observations, Para. 21).

'4 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Paras. 22-24.

25 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 26.

26 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Paras. 27-28.

"27 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 28.

      

 

 

Page 25 of 31

83.

84.

VI.

85.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
archetypal “private investor” contemplated under the ICSID Convention.’ To the extent
that the Claimant alleges that there is no requirement that an investment be “private,” and
that the expression “private foreign investment” is not used in the ICSID Convention, the
Respondent notes that the Preamble to the Convention refers to “private international

. 99129
investment.

The Respondent reiterates its position that, as the Claimant was gifted the OTML shares,
there has been no “private foreign investor’ to speak of since BHP’s exit in 2001 (the
Respondent’s argument is that the Claimant has no standing under the ICSID Convention
because it has not contributed to a flow of capital into the economy of PNG).' The
Respondent also notes that none of the contracts executed in connection with the transfer

of shares from BHP to the Claimant included ICSID dispute resolution clauses.'*!

3. MEN clause

The Respondent observes that it does violence to the plain wording of section 37(1) of
the IPA to contend (as the Claimant does) that the reference to “the foreign investor” in
that provision refers to someone other than “a foreign investor” referred to in the
preceding line of the same section; in this respect, the Respondent submits that the

reference to “the foreign investor” could not refer to comparators from a third State.!*?

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

The Tribunal first addresses the scope of the provision in Rule 41(5) and the relevant

standard to be applied, before considering the Respondent’s objections.

'28 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 31.

'29 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Pars
'30 Respondent’s Reply Observations, Pars

  

33.

‘5! Respondent’s Reply Observations, Para. 36.

132

Respondent's Reply Observations, Para. 37.

Page 26 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

A. Rule 41(5): Scope and Standard

86. Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides as follows:

Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making
preliminary objections, a party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the
Tribunal, and in any event before the first session of the Tribunal, file an objection
that a claim is manifestly without legal merit. The party shall specify as precisely as
possible the basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving the parties the
opportunity to present their observations on the objection, shall, at its first session or
promptly thereafter, notify the parties of its decision on the objection. The decision of
the Tribunal shall be without prejudice to the right of a party to file an objection
pursuant to paragraph (1) or to object, in the course of the proceeding, that a claim
lacks legal merit.

87. Previous ICSID tribunals have considered Rule 41(5)’s expedited procedure and
commented upon the standard to be applied under the provision, namely, “manifestly
without legal merit.” Like the Parties in this arbitration, the Tribunal regards these
interpretations by prior ICSID tribunals as highly relevant and material to its

consideration of the Application.'*?

88. Several ICSID tribunals have found that “manifest,” as used in Rule 41(5), is equivalent
to “obvious” or “clearly revealed to the eye, mind or judgment.” Under Rule 41(5), the
respondent must establish its objection “clearly and obviously, with relative ease and
despatch.”!> The Rule is intended to capture cases which are clearly and unequivocally

136

unmeritorious, ~” and as such, the standard that a respondent must meet under Rule 41(5)

133

 
  

Both the Claimant and the Respondent have relied upon previous de
Global Petroleum Inc. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/25), The Tribunal’s Decision
on the Respondent's Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 12 May 2008, Exhibit RL-7
(“Trans-Global’); Global Trading Resource Corp. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/11), Award, 1 December
2010, Exhibit CA-7 (“Global Trading”); Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/3), Decision on the Respondent's Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, 2 February 2009, Exhibit RL-2 (“Brandes Investment”). The Tribunal refers to these decisions where
relevant below.

'4 Trans-Global, Para. 83; Global Trading, Para. 35.

'5 Trans-Global, Para. 88; Brandes Investment, Para. 63; Global Trading, Para. 35.

'8° Brandes Investment, Para. 62.

ns of ICSID tribunals, including Trans-

 

 

Page 27 of 31

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

' Trans-Global, P:
'8 Trans-Global, P:

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
is very demanding and rigorous.'*7 In the opinion of the Tribunal, a case is not clearly

and unequivocally unmeritorious if the Claimant has a tenable arguable case.

Rule 41(5) is not intended to resolve novel, difficult or disputed legal issues, but instead

only to apply undisputed or genuinely indisputable rules of law to uncontested facts.

In considering the scope of a Rule 41(5) objection (i.e., the scope of the phrase “without
legal merit’), ICSID tribunals have found that objections should be based on legal
impediments to claims, rather than factual ones.'** Given the preliminary nature of the
proceeding, a tribunal considering a Rule 41(5) application may not be in a position to

decide upon disputed facts.'?

Further, as the Respondent’s Rule 41(5) objections concern both matters of jurisdiction
and merits, the Tribunal notes that it agrees with the decisions of other tribunals to the
effect that Rule 41(5) allows for objections related both to jurisdiction and the merits of
the case.'*° Nonetheless, the very demanding standard of proof outlined above applies no

less to jurisdictional than other matters.

B. The Respondent’s Objections

Having considered the Parties’ written and oral submissions on the Application, the
Tribunal concludes that the Respondent has not satisfied the applicable standard of proof
in respect of its three objections under Rule 41(5) — i.e. that of “manifest” lack of legal
merit. As such, the Tribunal determines that the Respondent’s Application should be

dismissed.

As outlined above, the Respondent’s objections concern, inter alia, the interpretation of

 

. 88; Brandes Investment, Para. 63; Global Trading, Para. 35.
97.

139 +, ' - ,
Trans-Global, Para. 97.
“© Brandes Investment, Para. 55; Global Trading, Para. 30. This is not disputed by the Claimant in this case.

Page 28 of 31

94.

95.

8! DT.45.2

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)
both PNG’s domestic legislation and the ICSID Convention. Again as outlined above,
the Respondent’s objections also call for a factual analysis of the character of the
Claimant itself and the circumstances behind its economic activity in PNG. In the

Tribunal’s view, none of these matters is appropriate for resolution under Rule 41(5).

The Tribunal considers that the factual circumstances of this case are relatively unusual,
and that the Respondent’s objections raise novel issues of law. Consistent with this, at
the hearing conducted on 10 October 2014, the Respondent referred to the “unique”
nature of both this case and the Claimant itself.'*! In the Tribunal’s view, it would in
principle be inappropriate to consider and resolve novel issues of law in a summary
fashion, which would inevitably limit the Parties’ opportunity to be heard and the
Tribunal’s opportunity to reflect. That is particularly true where those issues are disputed

and potentially complex.

The Tribunal notes that the interpretation of the IPA and IDCA is central to the
Respondent’s objections with respect to written consent and the alleged MEN clause in
the IPA. The Tribunal considers that these interpretations cannot be satisfactorily made
in the context of a Rule 41(5) application, which necessarily involves an expedited and
summary procedure. The Tribunal notes that there are disputed questions regarding
which system (or systems) of law should apply to the interpretation of the IPA and IDCA

. « : A . = «ay 142
(in particular, international or domestic rules of interpretation),

and in addition, which
specific interpretive principles should apply (e.g., the effet utile principle and the rule of
contra proferentem). Further, the Tribunal notes that the IPA and the IDCA have not yet
been the subject of interpretation by an ICSID tribunal, and it will therefore be required
to decide issues of first impression. Doing so in a summary Rule 41(5) procedure would

be inappropriate.

 

DT.64.6-7, DT.130.5-9, and DT.135-136.

 

'® DT.52-53; DT.103-106. In the event that domestic PNG laws may apply to the interpretation of the relevant
provisions of the IPA and IDCA, the Tribunal notes that (at this stage) it would be undertaking an intepretive
process in a summary fashion without the benefit of secondary legislative materials, such as second reading
speeches or explanatory memoranda (see DT.16-17). Such materials may shed light upon the intended purpose of
the sections in issue.

Page 29 of 31

96.

97.

98.

99.

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

The Tribunal also notes that, in the context of interpreting section 39 of the IPA, the
Respondent has submitted that the SPP decision was wrongly decided.'** Insofar as the
SPP decision is relevant to the interpretive task of the Tribunal in this arbitration (and the
Tribunal has not formed any view on this point), this is an issue that must be addressed

by the Parties, and considered by the Tribunal, outside of a summary procedure.

Finally, the Respondent’s objection with respect to “private foreign investment” cannot
be satisfactorily dealt with at this stage of the proceeding. The Respondent’s objection
does not appear to be based upon an explicit jurisdictional criterion set out in either the
ICSID Convention or the relevant PNG legislation. Rather, the Respondent’s objection
appears to be based on the Respondent’s interpretation of the ICSID Convention’s
jurisdictional requirements in light of materials extraneous to the terms of Article 25(1)
(in particular, the Convention Preamble and the Report of the Executive Directors on the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States) and a distinction drawn by the Respondent between the Claimant and what
the Respondent refers to as “typical foreign investors” considered in other ICSID

Convention cases.'“*

As such, the Respondent’s objection is unsuited for a Rule 41(5) Application. It does not
involve application of undisputed or indisputable legal rules, but rather involves novel
issues of interpretation and analysis. The Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to

undertake such analysis in the context of a Rule 41(5) procedure.

In sum, the Tribunal considers that all of the arguments raised by the Respondent’s
objections involve disputed, and often complex, legal and factual issues which cannot
properly be resolved within the expedited Rule 41(5) procedure. The Respondent’s

Application must therefore be dismissed.

3 DT.64-67.
'4 Tn respect of distinguishing the Claimant from “typical foreign investors”, see DT.43-44.

Page 30 of 31

PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33)

VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

100. For the above reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:

1. The Respondent’s Application of 16 July 2014 is rejected;

2. All questions as to the costs of the Respondent’s Application are reserved;

3. The further procedure for this arbitration will be according to the Tribunal’s

Procedural Order No. | and the Tribunal’s letter of 11 September 2014.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[Signed]

Gary Born
President of the Tribunal

Date: 28 October 2014

Page 31 of 31

