 

\3-G1-0u

22:18 44d S1Z20U044 Luau

 

NAFTA UNCITRAT, INVESTOR STATE CLAIM.
POPE & TALBOT INC AND ‘THLE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
RULING BY TRIBUNAT.
ON

CL_ATMANTS MOTION FOR INTERIM MEASURES

Article 1134 of NALA does not confer jurisdiction on the ‘Tribunal to enjoin the
application of a measure, Since the relief requested js, in the View of the ‘Iribunal, to
enjoin the upplication of the measure which is the guota regime und ifs
implementution, the Tribunal takes the view that it lacks power to grant such relief

‘That view applics regardloss of the jurisdictional basis of the ‘Isibunal’s general

 

power to prant 6 measure of relicf Lt follows that the motion will be dismissed.

However the Tribunal levels compelled to state that the veriligation review and the
report Hiergon were seriously Mawed und are nota reliable busis for (urther action.
Nevertheless taore were also admiticd exvors by Pops & ‘Talbot Inc, But the Tribunal

finds these to be vin} in the coatext of Pope & ‘Talbot’s total quota and past

  
 

ection by Cani niplenienting the measure.

The Tribunal wishes if to be understood that it will be mindsil of the views just

expressed should these matiers hecome material in the future.

Ake ee

Presiding Arbitrator

~O4-00 © 22:19 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECN ___Page 05-

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER
ELEVEN OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

POPE & TALBOT, INC

Claimant/Investor
and
‘THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Respondent/Party
AWARD
by
TIIE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

 

The Honourable Lord ‘aitd (Presiding Arbitrator)
Mr Murrey J Belman (Arbitrator)
The Honourable Benjamin J Greenberg Q.C. (Arbitrator)
In relation to
PRELIMINARY MOTION BY GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
TO
DISMISS THE CLAIM BECAUSE IT FALLS OUTSIDE THE SCOPE

AND COVERAGE OF NAFTA CHAPTER ELEVEN
“MEASURES RELATING TO INVESTMENT” MOTION

j-01-00

22:20 441312200644 LORDDERVALRD

Nn

w

~>0016139443213 ECM

1. ‘The Parties
The Claimant is Pope & Talbot, Inc, 1500 S.W. First Avenue, Suite 200 Portland
Oregon, a publicly traded corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of
Delaware in the USA. It has en Investment, Pope & Talbot Ltd., 2 corporation
organised under the laws of the Province of British Columbia ~ which is a wholly
owned subsidiary of another British Columbja corporation, Pope & Talbot
International Limited, which is, in tun, a wholly owned subsidiary of the
Claimant. The Investment is a wood products company that manufactures and
sclls softwood Jumber. Jt harvests timber in the province of British Columbia and

operates three sawmills and two forestry divisions there.

The Respondent is the Government of Canada, Justice Building, 284 Wellington
Street, Ottawa.

The parties are hereafter referred to as the “Claimant,” the “Investor” or “Pope &

Talbot” end the “Respondent” or “Canada” respectively,

2. Summary Descriptio: of the Dispute and the Proceedings

This is an arbitration under Chapier 11 of NAFTA for settlement of a dispute
between Canada ss a NAFTA Party aad Pope & Talbot as an Investor of another
NAFTA Pery (together with its Investment).

Pope & Talbot claims that Cenada has breached certain of its obligations In
relation to investments set forth in NAFTA Chapter 11, Section A, and submits its

claims to arbitration under Section B.

For the purpose of the present motion only, Canada does not dispute the accuracy
of Pops & Talbot's pleadings on factual matters; consequently, the exposition of
the facts set out in this ruling are as alleged by the Claimant. Canada does contend
that as pleaded the claim falls outside the scope of Chapter 11 of NAFTA and

Page 06°

wy aww 05717

6-Di-00

22:20 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ->0016139443213 ECN

should be dismissed.

On March 19, 1996 Canada and the United States of America exchanged
diplomatic letters whereby Canada undertook to add certain softwood lumber
products to its Export Control List. On Merch 26, 1996 Canada added them to the
Export Control List and thereby required exporters of softwood lumber products
originating from the provinces of Quebec, Ontario, Alberta and British Columbla,
“the Listed Provinces,” to obtain an export permit to qualify to export such
products ta the United States. On Muy 29, 1996 they entered into a bilsteral
agreement, the Softwood Lumber Agreement ("SLA") for 3 years retroactive to
Ist April 1996, which established a limit on the free export into the United States
of softwood lumber by Canadian softwood lumber producers located in the Listed

Provinces.

To give effect to the SLA Canada created an Export Contro) Regime under which
()) Cenada required manufacturers of softwood Jumber products first
manufactured in the Listed Provinces to obtain 2 permit in order to export

those products to the United States;

(2) Canada promulgated Expor Permits Regulations (Softwood Lumber

products) providing for e permit epplication regime;

(3) Ceneda promulgated the Softwood Lumber products Export Permits Fees

 

regulatioy quiring peyment of fees for issuance of such export permits;
(4) Canada provided for @ discretionary allocation regime that authorised the
Canadian Minister of Foreign Affuirs and International Trade, “the Minister,”
2 .xemps Certain exporters from paying the full fee for export permits based
vpen annual quota levels fixed under the SLA.

01-00

22:21 441312200644 LORDDERVATRD ~>0016139443213 ECN

On 31 October 1996 the Minister issued Notice to Exporters No. 94 stating
Canada’s policy as to who would qualify for a limited exemption from, payiug
fees to obtain the export permits, Notice No. 94 stated that only certain softwood
lumber producers in the Listed Provinces would qualify for allocation of the
annual quota levels fixed under the SLA and that export permits would only be
issued et the discretion of the Minister. Other notices have since been issued
goveming how the establishment, acquisitlon, expansion, management, conduct,
operation and sale or other disposition of the business of lumber producers are

affected by Canada’s allocation of quote.

Under the Export Control Regime exporters of softwond lumber first
manufactured in the Listed Provinces are required to pay e fee called for by the
SLA in respect of lumber exported to the United States at # fixed rate per
thousend board feet. If the Minister determines e producer so qualifics under the
Canadian quota ellocation policy, it may export a limited emount to the United
States “fee free” (ic. without that fixed charge) and a lesser amount at a lower fee

base (currently one half of the standard fixed rate). Softwood lumber producers

 

located elscwhere in Canada than tie Listed Provinces do not require permits to

export lumber to the United States vor Go they have to pay export permit fees.

Pope & Talbot claims that measwes by Cenada thet have resulted in harm to the

Tavestor and its Investment in Canada Include:

(1) requiring permits for export to the United Stutes of softwood lumber products
criginating in only the Listed Provinces under the Expart Control List

(2) requiring payment of export permit fees

(3) urfairly and Inequitably allocating “fee-fn:e" and “LYB” quota amounts to the

Investment of the Investor from 1995.

uw Page 08°

-01-00

22:21 441312200644

12.

LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECN

 

Cenada argues in relation to the present motion:

(1) The facts alleged in the Statement of Claim disclose no “investment dispute”
within the meaning of NAFTA Article 1115. Accordingly, the Statement of
Claim cannot be arbitrated under the NAFTA chapter Eleven dispute
settlement mechanism established exclusively for investment disputes. We
address this contention at Section 3(A) below.

(2) The SLA and Canada’s measures to implement the SLA do not “relate” to
investors or investments. The claim advanced cannot be erbitrated under
NAFTA Chupter Eleven because it falls outside the scope and coverage of the
Chapter (NAFTA Article 1101). We address this contentlon et Section 3(B)

below,

(3) Despite the Investor’s assertion that the Claim is not about the legitimacy of
the SLA per se, the Statement of Claim challenges the SLA itself. It is nota
measure, and js thus outside the scope of Chapter Eleven (NAFTA Anticle

1101). We address this contention at Section 3(C) below,

Pursuant to Article 1128 of NAFTA, the United Mexican States, having given
notice of inteation to make u submission to the disputing parties, provided that
submission dated 2nd December 1999. Mexico concurred with the general
interpretation of NAFTA propounded by Canada. In particular it supported, with
further arguments, the distinction between measures relating to trade in goods and

services, and investment.
The disputing parties eccept that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine
whether a claim falls within NAFTA Chapter Eleven, under particular reference

to Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

For the purposes of the present Award it is not necessary to record the procedural

Page 05

O1-00

22:22 441312200644

LORDDERVAIRD ->0016139443213 ECN eee Page 10°

history of this arbitration to date save to record that the disputing parties are
agreed that this motion be disposed of without en oral hearing,

3. Discussion of Canada’s Challenges to the Tribuna)’s Ju; ct
A. Canada’s Contention That This Is Not an Investment Dispute

Canada first contends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal extends only to
“investment disputes” and that “sn investment dispute arises [only] when a
measure prohibited by * * * NAFTA Chepter Eleven * © © is primarily aimed at
investors of enother Party of at investments of investors of another Party.”

(Emphasis added.)

NAFTA Anicle 1115 pzovides:

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Partics under
Chapter Tweoty ... this Section [B of Chapter Eleven) establishes a
mechanism for the settlement of investment disputes that assures both
cqua} treatment among investors of the Parties in accordance with the
principle of international reciprocity and due process before an impartial

tribunal.

NAFTA Anicle 1139 defines “investment” to include an “enterprise,” and
“enterprise” in tum is defined by Article 201(1) to Include “any corporation.”
“Investment of an investor of a Party” is defined in Article 1139 to mean “an
investment owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of such
Party." And “investor of 2 Party” is defined in Article 1139 as meaning “a Party
* * ¥ or en enterprise of such Party that seeks to make, is making or has made an
invesument.” Applying these definitions, Pope & Talbot is an investor of a Party
end Pope & Telbot Ltd. an investment of an investor of a Party. Pope & Talbot is
rozking a claim under Section B of Chapter Eleven end is thus a disputing

01-00

22:22 444312200644

investor within the definition in Article 1139 as “an investor that makes 2 claim

under Section B.”

The contention of Canada in this regard is that the fact that Pope & Talbot is “an
investor that makes a claim under Section BY docs not make its claim an
investment dispute. NAFTA does not define “invesument dispute,’ but, es noted,
Canada contends that the term applies only to disputes about measures “primarily
aimed” at investors of another Party or investments of those investors. In support
of this definition, Canada points to the following:

() The definition of investment already cited. However, as noted, neither that

definition, nor any other In NAFTA defines “investment dispute.”

(2) The types of investment measures for which the NAFTA Parties cleimed ap
obligations that would otherwise apply. The

exemptions cited by Caneda relate to government Joans, acquisitions of

21

   

tion from Axticls

   

Canadian businesses, constraints on ownership of companies, sales of shares
in state cnterprises, limitations on share voting, acquisition of realty and the
like. Since the claim before us does not fell into any of these categories,
Canada argues that it is not covered by Chapter Eleven. However, as the
Claimant points out, Canada's references to exemptions leave out others thet
contain clements quite simller to those of the cispute before us, like waivers of
customs duties conditioned on the fulfilment of performance requirements
and limitations of the rights of forcign enterprises to secure import or export

permits,

(3) “ istingtion” NAFTA draws betw. ade i s_issues.
investment issues. NAFTA’S Pert Two, “Trede in Goods,” deals with matters
concemiing trade In goods such as market access, rules of origin and customs
procedures, Canada notes that softwood lumber is a “good” covered by Part
Two, and the dispute in the present case therefore relates to trade in a good.

LORDDERVAIRD =~ 0016139443213 ECM ue,

6-01-00 22:23 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECN

According to Canada, Article 2004 reserves dispute settlement respecting
trade in goods to the NAFTA Parties. Article 2004 provides:
Except for the matters covered in Chapter Nincteen ... and as

otherwise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement

provisions of this Chapter [i.e. Chapter 20) shall apply with respect to
the avoidance or settlement of all disputes benween the Parties
regarding the interpretation or application of this Agreement or
wherever ea Party considers that an actual or proposed measure of
another Party is or would be inconsistent with the obligations of this
Agreement or cause nullification or impairment in the sense of Annex
2004. (Emphasis added.)

Accordingly, in general all disputes between the Parties to the NAFTA

Agreement are to be deelt with under the dispute sectlement provisions of

Chapter 20. This, however, is not a dispute between Parties, so the limitations

in Antcle 2604 ase not applicable to the question before us

For their part, Pope & Talbot ergus that, since “investment dispute" is not defined
ws such, the term cannot be considered as é limitation on the Tribunal’s
assessment whether it has jurisdiction to decide a particular dispute. (They further
contend that, even if there were 2 minimal definition of the term (of the kind
found, for exemple, in the United States Model Bilateral Invesument Treaty), the
Cispuie before us would surely qualify under that definition.) There heing no
definition of an investment dispute, Pope & Telbot assert that the only
requirements for an investor to bring a claim within Chapter 1] are that it shall
have fulfilled the conditions actually set out in Chapter 11. These are set out in

Article 1116:

(J) That a Party hes breached an obligation under (a) Section A or Article 1503(2)
(State Enterprise) or (b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises)
where the monopoly bas acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s
obligations under Section A;

Page 12°

5-01-00

22:23 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECM

21.

(2) That the investor must have incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising
out of, that breach;

(3) That the investor has made the claim within three years from the date on
which the investor first acquired, or should first have acquired knowledge of
the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or
damage.

In all material respects, the seme conditions apply where the claim is made by an

investor of a Party on behalf of an enterprise of another Party.

As noted, Pope & Talbot further observe thet the list of exceptions to Chapter
Eleven taken by the Parties may yield an inference opposite to the one Canada

urges,

Sn its Reply, Cenada again refers to the wording of Article 1115. It also claims
that the Investor “states incorrectly that there is no limit on the disputes that may
be submitted to arbixration pursuant to Chapter 11." The Tribunal does not so
tead the Investor's Response. But even if, es Canada ergues in its Reply, there are
both procedural and substantive limits beyond those cited by the Investor in its

Response, none of those limits appear applicable to the present case.

Section B of Chapter Eleven is entitled Settlement of Disputes between e Pany
and an investor of another Party. As Article 1115 states, Section B establishes a
mechanism for the setlement of “investment disputes.” The only person to whom
it gives a right to make a claim is an investor of one Party contending either (i)
that it has incurred loss or damage by reason of or erising out of a breach by
another Party of an obligation under Section A of Chapter Eleven (or other
obligetions immaterial for present purposes) or (ii) that an enterprise of another
Party owned or controlled by the investor has incurred such loss or demage.

__. Page 13°

-01-00

22:24 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECM

24,

In the present case the Investor claims thet Canada is in breach of four separate
provisions of Section A of Chepter 11.

(1) Ip terms of Article 1102 — National Treatment, it claims breach of the
obligation to eccord to Investors of another Party treatment no less favourable
than it accords in like circumstances to its own investors with respect to the
establishment, acquisidon, expansion, mansgemont, conduct, operation and
sale or other disposition of investments. The like obligation erises under

1102(2) in relation to investments of investors of another Patty.

(2) In terms of Article 1105 - Minimum Stendard of Treatment, it claims breach
of the obligation to accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment in accordance with internationa! law, including fair and equitable
treatment: and full protection and security.

(3) In terms of Anicle 1106 - Performance Requirements, it claims breach of the

obligation not to impose or enforce eny of the following requirements, or

 

enforce ony commitment or undertaking, in connection with the
establishment, ecquisition, expansion, menegement, conduct or operation of

an investment of an investor of @ Party or of a non-Party in its territory:

a. lo export £ given level or percentage of goods or services;
va8

ce. to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such
investment produces or provides by relating such sales in any way

to the volume o7 value of its exports.
In additlon, under the same Article, it clalms breach of the obligatlon not to

condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage in connection with

an investment in its tertitory, of en investor of e Party or of 2 non-Party, on

10

~~. Page 14°

5-Oi-00 © 22:24 441312200644

->0016139443213 ECM

LORDDERVAIRD v2 585 1010p.

compliance with the following requirement:

d. to restrict sales of goods in its territory that such investment
ptoduces or provides by relating such sales in any way to the
yolume of its exports.

(4) In terms of Article 1110 - Expropriation and Compensation, it claims breach
of the obligation not to directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
investment of an investor of enother Party in its tertitory or take a measure
tantamount 10 nationalization or expropriation of such an investment

(“expropriation”) except:

a, for 2 public purpose

b. on a non-discriminatory basis

c in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1) and

d, on payment of compensation in accordance with pasegraphs 2

 

through 6.

snt of Claim the Investor claims that the breaches described above

 

¢ to the Investor o7 the Investment, and that in cach cese it or the Investment

 
 
   

 

stained loss or damage by reason of those breaches. For tie purposes of the
cat Motion, the Tritunel must take those assertions of fect es true. Upon that

 

it cannot be said that there is no investment dispute between the Investor and
nada. The Investor claims breaches of specifled obligations by Canada which

fol within the provisions of Section A of Chapter Eleven. In the view of the
anal, the Investor and Canada are disputing parties within the definition in
to 1139. Whether or not the clzims of the Investor will turn out to be well

founded in fact or law, at the present stage it cannot be stated the! there are not

 

   

suvestment disputes before the Tribunal.

(he Tribunal would further observe this. There is no provision to the express

Page 1o-
12/17

6-01-00

22:25 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD 7>0016139443213 ECM

27.

28.

effect that investment and trade in goods are to be treated as wholly divosced from
each other. The reference in Section A of Chapter 11 10 treatment of investments
with respect to the management conduct and operation of investments is wide
enough to relate to measures specifically directed at goods produced by a
particuler investment, The provisions for minimum standard of treatment in
Article 1105 might well relate to similar measures, And Article 1106 in relation
to performence requirements makes specific reference to limitations on dealing
with goods in certain ways. It appears to the Tribunal accordingly that the
language of Section A of. Chapter 11 does not support the narrow interpretation of

investmant dispute which Caneda and Mexico seek to advance,

B. Canada’s Contention That the Measures Challenged Do Not
Relate to Investment or Investors.

Canada submits in any event that “the SLA and Canada's administration of the
SLA are not meesures relating t9 Investors of another Pasty or to investments of
Investors of another Party.” (Emphasis in original.) Article 110} limits the
coverage of Chapter 1] to measures “relating to” such investors or investments,
and Canad (supported on this argument by Mexico) claims thet it is not enough
that a measure may “affect” an investor or investment. The measure must “relate”

to the investor of investment in a “direct and substantial” way.

Canace points out thet in several articles of NAFTA the more general term
“affect” has been used and suggests that this denotes a lesser extent of connection
than “relete.” Canada elso cites certain WTO cases that considered Article XX(g)
of ths GATT, which elso addresses “measures relating to.” In those cases, panels
have found the term “relating to” to be synonymous with “primerily aimed at.”
So while Canada accepts that the Investor’s operations are affected by the SLA
and Canada’s edministration of the SLA, this does nol transform the case into one

dealing with measures related to investment.

Page 16°

5-i-08

22:25 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~ 0016139443213. ECN

29.

30.

The Investor points out thet the position taken by Canada here is contrary to its

Statement on Implementation submitted to Parliament on the coming into force of

NAFTA, which states “Asticle 1101 states that Sectlon A covers measures by a

Party (i.e. any level of government in Canada) that offeer:

- investors of another Party (i.e. American parent company or individual
Mexican or American investor)

- investments of investors of another Party (i.c. the subsidiary company or

asset located in Canada)."

Canada in its Reply argues that its Statement on Implementation is not legally”

binding in domestic law, nor does it have legal! effect in intemational law.

The Investor also points out that the WTO cases relied on by Canada involved
derogations from the obligations of the GATT and, therefore, must be interpreted
strictly, The provisions before the Tribunal involve substantive treaty obligations

for which there is no equivalent justification for strict constniction.

In its support of Canada, Mexico observes that a measure such as allocation of
quota is on the face of it 2 measure relating to trade in goods, and in its view a
claim of this nature prime facie fells outside the scope and coverage of Chapter

Eleven.

 

 

The view of Coneda and Mexico eppears thus to be that it is possible at the outset
to categorize a measure as relating to trade in goods. If it is, then the measure
cannot be seen as relating to, i.e. as primarily eimed at, Investors or investments.
Accordingly, the investor will have no redress under Chapter Eleven of NAFTA
in such cases, and any remedy must be found in Governments applying tho

dispute resolution provisions of Chepter 20 if they wish to do so,
it appears to the Tribunal that Canada’s arguments fail in two quite different

ways:
In the first place, where a quota allocation system is involved of the type

13

Page 17+

“01-00

22:26 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECM

34

35.

36.

here under consideration, it necessarily involves thet quota be directly conferred
upon or removed from enterprises. It is not a mere linguistic truism to say that
such @ system directly applies to a particular enterprise, namely cach of the
releyant softwood lumber producers in the Listed provinces. It directly affects
thelr ability to trade in the goods they seck to produce, bin it can equally be
described as the way that the measures applied to the various enterprises affect the
total trade in the relevant products,

In the second place, the fact that a measure may primarily be concerned
with trade in goods does not necessarily mean that it does not also relate to
invesument ar investors. By way of example, an attempt by a Party to require all
producers of 2 particular good located in its territory to purchase all of a specified
necessary raw material from persons in its territory may well be said to be a
measure relating to trade in goods. Butit is clear from the terms of Article 1106
that jt is elso a measure relating to investment insofar as it might affect an

enterprise owned by an investor of a Party.

For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects Canada’s submissions that a measure can
only relate to an investment if it is primarily directed at that investment and that a
measure eimed at trade in goods ipso facto cannot be addressed as well under

Chapter 11.

c. Canada’s Contention that the SLA is Not a Measure

NAFTA Anicle 201, which contains definitions of general application, defines

“measure” es including any law, regulatian, procedure, requirement or practice.

Measure is not otherwise defined, and Article 110] provides that Chapter Eleven.

applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party exclusive of those covered

by Chapter Fourteen (Financial Services).

Censda observes that Pope & Talbot’s Statement of Claim expressly challenges
components of the SLA, end observes that the SLA is not a domestic measure

14

Page 18°

O1-00

22:26 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECM

adopted or maintained by a NAFTA Party, but rather is an intermational
agreement. To the extent that the Investor challenges the SLA os 4 measure, it is
outside the scope and coverage of NAFTA Chapter Eleven. The Investor points
out that it pleaded in its notice of arbitration that it was not challenging the SLA
in this clara. What it is expressly challenging are the measures taken by Canada
which it claims to be an unfaiy and inappropriate implementation by Canada of Its
obligations under the SLA.

The Tribunal is not concemed with the SLA dirsctly, which the Investor concedes
is not a measure and cannot be the subject of the claim in this arbitration. On the
other hand the steps taken by Cansda to implement its obligations under the SLA
are cepable of constituting measures within the meaning of Articles 201 and 1101
of NAFTA, Since the claim is restricted to e challenge of certain measures of
implementation, it does relate to measures within the meening of Chepter Eleven.

This head of challenge is eccordingly rejected.

Page 1%

1-00 © 22:27 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~20016139443213 ECM Page 20-

CONCLUSION

38. For the foregoing reasons the Tribus] rejects at this stage the motion by Cenada
to dismiss the Investor's Claim.

     

Murray J. Belman, 2 ts

Dated: Jonvary 26, 2000

1A

JSN-Z6-22@8 12:16 2225281018 38% o

a2
TOTAL P.@2

S25 4520 DEBIT EBI LORDDERVAIRD ~>0016139443213 ECH P.i?e2i gy

THE HON LORD DERVAIRD :
‘ 4 MORAY PLACH
EDINBURGH
IH3 6DS

TELEPHONE: +44 (0)131 228 1881
FACSIMILE: +44 (0)131 220 0644

 

Pope & Talbot, Inc
c/o Mr Barry Appleton
Appleton & Asociates

* 1140 Bay Sweet, Suite 300
“Yorouto, Outariv, M55 2B4
Fax: 00 1 416 986 8801

Government of Canada

wo Maitre Eric Harvey

Counsel, Trade Law Division

Department of Foreign A Mairs ami Intemational Trade
125 Sussex Drive

Ovtawe, Ontaria, KIA 0G2

Vax: 00 1 613 944 3213

2 April 2000

Dear Sirs

NAFTA UNCITRAT. Investor-State Claitn
Pope & Talbot Inc and the Guvernment of Cunada

The ‘Sribunsl yefers tu the faxss passing betwoou the parlics aud the ‘Tribunal be
relalion to the question whether Canada was or is entitled to make available to
representatives of sub-national goveraments documents ocewting in ar generated by
the present arbitration,

1. ‘Yhe parties aro subject to a Confidentiality Order, Procedural Order No. 5
whereby Protected Documents and Third Party Protected Dixaments, ara
subject {0 restriction. — .

2. Under paragraphs 9 and 10 of thet Order disclosure of those documents is
limited to particular classes of person ag sel out in each of those parugrapbs.

3. Wide ranging arguments have bean put forward by cach party, relating on the
one hand to the proper scope and meaning of the expression “Canada” id the
NAFTA Agreement and on the other to the proper scope end range of
confidentiality in relation to international commercial arbitration in general
and NAFTA arbitration in parliculer.

4. In the view of the ‘Iribunal those wide ranging arguments do not arise
immedistety. The Tribunal ix conscious thas Procedural Oyder’ on

(704-GER 83,62 2

 

DEU_LDUAIT EBI  LORDDERVAIRD =>00161394435213 ECH

 

Confidentiality No. 5 is u docoment based on materials put forward by the
pextios to this arbitration, In psrticular paragraphs 4, 5, 9 and 10 of Procedural
Order No. 5 arc in preciscly the temas which Canada proposed fhat these
peragripls should have in their faxes to the Tribunal dated 171 and (8th
November 1999. There was no diflerence between the parties es to the terms
of paragraph 9, end as to-parsgraph 10 Cansde desired, end the Tribunal
agreed, and therefore included in its direction that the prohibition on’
disclosure should not apply only to 2 representative of the ClaimanvInvestor
Present at tha hearings. In these circumstances the initial question which
ises is the exten! to which disclasure is permitied by che terms of the Order,
t tie generel law may be in rogerd to the wider mattcrs canvassed,
Cenade is a party to this erbitretion. ‘The sub-national governments of Canada
es such are nol parties to this arbitration. The only possible right thut there
might be under the present Order for represenlatives of sub-national
goveraments to have access to these documents would be if they fell within
category (2) of paragraph (9), namely officials or employees of the parties
whose involvement in the preparstion or conduct of thess procecdings is
reasonably necessary. Otherwise there could he no entitlement under any
bead, It uppears to the Tribunal selfevident that representatives of sub-
regional governments are not ofEciels ar emplovess of Canada. Accordingly
there can bs mo question under tho present Procedural Order of such pe.
heing permitted access ta Prouyvicd Dowuments. (No similar provision exista
under paregreph 10 for Third Party Protected Docurnents). .

  

  

 
 

5. in its submissions Canada refers to its Jong stinding practices fer the sharing,
of information with provinecs end tocritories, and in particular so informing
them in relation to Chapter 11 vaaterials. However the fact is that Coneda and
the Clsimunt were agreed upon and the Tribunal in due course directed in
relation to Protectad Jecunrents in paragraph 9 that such documents may be

od_only_in these procosdings ... and may be disclosed only for such
purposes, and in the case of psragraph 10 thet neither Pope & Talbot Inc-nor
the Government of Cansda may, directly or indirectly, ase Third Party
Protected Documents or informuliun recorded in or derived from tbose
Documents for_any pumose other than this arbitration. The passages
underlined indicate clearly that whatever other intormation Canada might
properly shate with provinsiel end territorial governments, it wes restricted in
the use it might make of eny information within the protected classes to the
purposes of this erbitretion. Sharing thet material with C-lyade
representatives is not for the purposes of this arbitration but as Ms. Ayotte
states et paragraph 18 of hos affidovit “essential to avoid ncw measures that
may generate fulure claims . Tf thot be the purpose for which Canada
seeks to use that protected information the Tribunal is in no doubt that it is not
open to Canada to do sy under the tams of tae Procedural Order.

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. For the loregoing reasons it is unnecessary Lor the Tribunal to consider the
wide issues raised by the parties in relation to Procedural Order No. 5. Conada
has propased and the Tribuna) bas accepted and contained in its Order
restrictions on the use which may be made and the persons to wham disclosure
aay be miede of the information produced in this arbitration, in particular,
arotet-J and third party protected information. In these circumstances it is

 
     

0%-82R 83°22 @2:45PM DFAIT EBI  LORDDERVAIRD ~>UWIOLoyasoeio Bun

P.1Sr21 ve

nol open fo Cunada to discloss such infoonation unless a vuriation order i is
made to Procedural Order No. 5,

7. In ils sutinission Canada makes an alernative case that for the proper
functioning end due observance of the NAFTA sccess to such documents
should be permitted by vasiation of Procedural Order No. 5 to that effest.. In
the view of the ‘Iribunal, Cenada makes a convincing casc that such a
vaziation is desirable in order to enable Canads to ensure compliance with the
NAFTA. Reference is made to NAFTA Article 105 and to the affidavit of Ms
Ayatte, :

& The Tribunal hes considered the amiondments proposed by Canada. fy is
sulisfied that with cerlain modifications (hose amendinzals will safeguanl ‘the
contidentislily of protected documents as well as meeting Canada's
requiremonts. Iowever one issuc arises. Under Article 10, both partics, that
is to say Pope & ‘Lalbot Inc and the Government of Canada, are subject to the -
prohibition already mentioned in that neither may “directly or indirectly use
Third Party Protected Documents or information recorded ju or derived from
these Documents for ny purpose other than this arbitration.” Toe amendment
proposed by Canada parmits disclosure to provincial and temtorial wade
Cee fo the "C-Trade commu «2, .,, 2258 to the Tribunal that if

‘ taat general prah sin pssgraph 10 is to be overcome it is necessary to
: include reference to federal reprexentatives as well in paregrapy 30.1.

  

vy, “the Tribunal also considers that it is necessary to ensure that cach person Who
may be comprised within the “C-Trade” committee provides Confidentiality
Agreements before gaining tecess to eny such Protected or Third Party
Protected Documents. Accordingly any exercise of tho Ixrwor conferred under
the proposed Article 10.1 will be subject inter alie to The provision. of
paragreph 13 of the existing Order.

10. The Tribunsl accordingly orders that Procedural Order No. S be amended in
the manuer shown in the Annex hereto.

Yours faithfully
SLE

: Lord Dorvaird

Presiding Arbitrator

Copy:

 

Murrey J Belman
Benjamin J Greenberg

 

 

04-55% CPu IPP WSPSSSPULDEBIT EB LogppeRvarRD — -20016139443213 ECH

 

. ANNEX
NAIA UNCITRAL INVESTOR -- STATE CLAIM
POPE & TALBOT INC. AND-THE GOVERNMENT O}' CANADA

AMENDMENT TO FKOCEDURAT, ORDER NO, 3
(PROCEDURAL ONL ON CONFIDENTIALITY)

The Yollowing amendments shul] be rozde.fo Procedunil Order No. 5 with immediaty
effect. :

1. Aftor Poragraph 10 there shall ba a new paragraph 10.) as follows:-

10.1 Notwithstanding peragraphs 2, 3, 4, 9 atid 10 of this Order, bul subject
always to patapraphs 11 and 13 of this Order, Cunada may disclosé to
federal, provincial and territorial] wado representatives of the “C-
‘Trade, a federil-provincialAorritorial commines which meots ‘on
matters relating t> infernetional trade poliey, any confidential,
Protected or Third -Fart; Protected Documents, including pleadings,
submissions, memorials, cvidence tendered to tho ‘Tribunal and
evidence and argumie'r heard by the ‘Tribunal at hearings. AU such
documents shall be treated as confidential and uszd solely for purposes
of “C-Trade” deliberations.
2. In pategreph 11 there shall be inserted immediately before the Jast sentence
: the following: “Canada shall have the obligation of notifying all “C-Trado”
: representatives provided with confidential Protected or Third Party Protected
Documents of the adligations under this Order.”

3. In all other respects Procedural Order No, 5S shall remain unchanged and of
Jul} force and effect,

: Ake 7
‘ Lord Dervaird
: . Presiding Arbitrator

1. Apri 2000

 

 

2-00

24:46 441312200644

1S. The Investor has drawn the allention of the Tribunal to the award on jurisdiction in
the Fray/ Case and in particular paragraphs 90 und 91 where the Tribunat there dealt with
eg similar issic, Cenada points out that ia that case the claimant provided its waiver and
conseut with the Statement of Claim rather thn with the Notice of Arbitration but did so
within the three-year limitation period. Tn the present case the Thvestor presented its
consent and weiver with the Notice of Arbitration and the Slutoment af Cluim. Thwas
Hanmac’s waiver only thal wus nol then presented.

 

 

 

16. As noved by the L/y-/ Lribunal, conscut to erbination and the initiation of arbitral
proveedinys may he taken us a constructive waiver of (he righ( to iniliafe other
proceedings. The presence of the waiver requirement in Article 1121 might, therelore, be
scou as unnecessary, at loust as it would apply to the tivestor the parly both issuing the
consont nade: Article 1121() Ka) and initiating the proceedings, Llowever, Article
1121(1)(b) is something other than g description of what otherwise would be a
constructive waiver, lor it tells us what exvelly is being waived. The Article 1121(1Xb)
wetver is not absolute: il permils the investor to seek injunctive and similar relief from
the Courts aud administrative bodios of the disputing NAMIA Party. ‘lhe availability of
this type of relief from the ‘Libuual is limited under Article 1134, and the limitations on
the Waiver appearing in Article 1121(1)(b) must therefore be in recognition of the need fo
provide investors with some recourse to judicial or administrative injunctive relic even
wWhon an arbitration is und “[bus, the javestar’s faihue to exceute an Article
J121¢1 Xb) waiver could not prejudice the disputing Party; tat feijune could only work to
the investor's disadvantage. Viewsd in this light, the ‘Lribunel believes that there would
dod reason fo muke the execution of the investor's waiver a precondition ofa

 

   
     

bene g
valid claim for arbitration

 

17. [his analysis doos not address waiver by the investment. as is also required by Article
V21(1)(b), The investment does nol issue # consent to arbitration, indeed, if has no right
fo the remedies of Chupter 11. Therelore, il mighl be argued thal the waiver requirement
plays a more important role with respoct fo an invesnuent and that that importance should
be respected by making the waiver a precondition to the validity of a claim grounded on
injury to the claimant caused by harm to its investment. ‘Lhe short auswer to sucha
conlgntion ix that the invesiment would likely be subject fo the sume constructive waiver
(hat would apply to the investor ilsell! Thal is, the consent fo and inifiation of arbitration
by an investor Would likely cause 9 court to invoke a consmictive Waiver on its owned or
contolled subsidiary, particularly where, as here, the two ar hypothetically so close that
damage to one can be quantified es injury to the other. (OF course, other owners of u
hon- wholly owned, nom waiving enterprise might seek reliz! for injuries caused to their
intervats, but, in those circumstances, the disputing NAFTA Parly would not normully be
projucdiced by the absence of a fonnal waiver becauss that portion of the investuient’s
damages subject to arbitration would, for the reasons noted, likely be subject to a
constructive waiver.) The provisions of Article 1121(1)(b) relating fo an investments
waiver thus play the same role us with respect to investors, Le., they limit what would
otherwiso be a constuctivo Waiver of all rights to recours> before other tribunals. Mor
these reayons, the ‘Tribunal is not willing to attributes such importance to the requirement

 

 

 

LORODERVAIRD —->0016139443213 ECM Pag

32-00

21:47 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD ~ 0016139443213 ECH

for an investnent’s waiver in Article 1121(1 Kb) as to make that waiver a precondition ta -
the validity of a claim.

18, Jn any erse, there is nothing in Article 112] preventing a waiver from having
wtronctive effect to validate a claim conunenced before that date. ‘Phe requirement in
Article 1121(3) that a woiver required by Article 1121 shall be included in the submi:
ofa claim to arbitration does nol necessarily entail that such ao requirement is a necess
prerequisite before a claim can competently be made. Rather if is a requirement thal
before the ‘Lribuns] satertain the claim the waiver shall have been etYected. ‘that has now
boon Gone, Canada has sustained no prejudice in this respect. No attempt was made by
Harmac to initiate any proceedings in relation lo the measure (even assuming that it
would ever heave been competent far it to do so). Tn its argument Canadu states,
“Llamiae’s right to commence prococdings against Canada ifany expired three yeary
affor Canada imposed the measure or measures described in the Statement of Claim.” In
terms of Chapter 11 of NAFTA Hunmac, heing a Canadian company, could nol at any
lime have brought proceedings e

 
  

  

inst Cunude under the arbitration provision, Tit had

 

 
  

 
 

ast Cunada, those rights would have rested upon other
nd the three yvar time lintit te which Canads refers relates only to the
im in an srbitvation by the Livestor, and not to ruy claim by ILamniac or its successar
the amalgamated Pope & Tulbot Tad. There ix thus no prejudice in this respect to
Canada.

      

    
 
 
  

19, The fo
adaguately
to Harmac,

d that the Smrtoment of Claim
re case Causda must incet with respect
Go thts we how (um

 

2U, Canada makes the point that 34 and 103 of the Statoment of Claim fail to
state Whethar the investor submits the claim on its awn behalf under NA JA Article
1216 or on behalfof Baunnue under Article 1E17, Both the Notice of Arbitration and the
Statement of Claim issued therewith on 28 March 1999 are expressly made under Article
1116. There is no substance in this pot.

 

 

21. ‘The important point made in this respect by Canada is that the pleadings ought to
deling the issues helween the parties so as fo give the opponent adequate information on
the case if musi meet, and to avoid surprise al (he hearing. Caneda wlleges that the
references to Hamuac in the Stistement of Claim are too vague. caring in mind that this
claim is onc under NAMTA Article 1216 only, it appears to the ‘Tribunal that the
pleadings ure such as to give notice that the Investor is claiming loss ar damage to ifs
investment in Harmac Ine by reason of the breaches of the several urliches of NAFTA
specified by the Tavestor, thet loss having arisen for the reusons stated in paragraph 103.
It docs not appear to the ‘Tribunal that this pleading is so cxiguously stated in the
Statement of Claim that it should be excluded upon that bas!s.

   

22. The Trihtmal uecardingly refuses Cunuda’s motion fo strike paragraphs 34 and 103 of
the Statement of Claim at this stage.

22-00 21:48 441312200644 LORDDERVAIRD 0016139443213 ECM Page 07

e8'd WLOL
c oe ne V2z@h 19CO AT 314-397-3348 FROM 2OBsO8i010 PACE 2 (PRINTED PAGE
7 t 7 sits 9 i.
say 2-24- 0 GLEIBTAK : THOMPSON COUR SL 4-997-3558.

i 27-2

23, Canada In its letter dated January 28, 2000 sought leave, in the event that the TAbunal
rejected Jis motlan, to umend its Statemcut of Defence to inulude a response. That leave
is granted, to the effect thal Cansde may make such an amendment within 14 duys of this
ceclsion being communicated to its counsel.

 

Dated; February 24, 2060

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION

UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN
POPE & TALBOT INC
and
THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
AWARD CONCERNING

THE MOTION BY GOVERNMENT OF CANADA RESPECTING THE
CLAIM BASED UPON IMPOSITION OF THE “SUPER FEE”

BY

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

The Hon Lord Dervaird
(Presiding Arbitrator)

The Hon Benjamin J Greenberg Q.C.

Mr Murray J Belman

In a motion dated July 13, 2000, the Government of Canada asked the Tribunal
to decline to address the issue raised by the Investor concerning implementation
of the so-called “super fee.” For the reasons described below, the Tribunal denies

that motion.

BACKGROUND

The background and procedural history of this arbitration are set out at length
in the Tribunal’s Interim Award dated June 26, 2000. Briefly, the matters in
dispute arise out of Canada’s implementation of the April 1996 Softwood
Lumber Agreement with the United States (the “SLA”). The arbitration
proceedings began on December 24, 1998, when the Investor served upon
Canada a notice of intent to submit a claim to arbitration under Article 1119 of
NAFTA. The Claim was submitted on March 25, 1999, and Canada submitted
its Defence on October 8, 1999. As it stands today (after amendment by the
Investor and rulings by the Tribunal), the Claim involves alleged violations of
two provisions of NAFTA, Articles 1102 (national treatment) and 1105

(minimum standards of treatment).

Effective June 1, 1998, the Government of British Columbia introduced a
reduction in stumpage fees charged to harvesters of timber from Crown lands in
that province. That measure triggered an arbitration between the United States
and Canada which, on August 26, 1999, resulted in a bilateral agreement
amending the SLA to create a “super fee” to be applied to exports to the United

States of softwood lumber first manufactured in British Columbia. For the

1

remainder of year 4 of the SLA after the registration of SOR/99-419 on October
21, 1999, the super fee on those exports was implemented by repricing
90,000,000 board feet previously assessed at the lower fee base {“LFB”} to the
higher, upper fee base ("UFB"). In addition, after the registration, the fee
applicable to UFB exports over 110,000,000 board feet (including the repriced
former LFB exports) was increased to US$146.25 per thousand board feet.

Canada also announced similar (but not identical) increases for year 5 of the

SLA!

4. The first reference to the super fee in the pleadings and briefs occurred in
paragraph 89 of the Investor’s Memorial (Initial Phase), submitted on January
28, 2000. The Investor contended that the measure discriminated between
investors and investments in British Columbia and those in other provinces,
thereby providing further evidence of Canada’s alleged breach of national
treatment obligations under Article 1102 of NAFTA. Canada’s Counter
Memorial submitted on March 29, 2000 argued that the Tribunal should not
address the super fee issue, since it was not pleaded in the Statement of Claim,
but that, in any event, the super fee was justifiable because of circumstances
prevailing in British Columbia that differed from those existing in other

provinces and, presumably, not violative of Article 1102.

‘These provisions were set out in Notice to Exporters, 120, September 3, 1999.

5. The Tribunal did not address the super fec in its Interim Award dated June 26,
2000. However, in its appendix to the Award, it requested documents and
information regarding the super fee. In seeking clarification of those requests,
Canada asserted on July 10, 2000 that the super fee issue is not properly before
the Tribunal. In its Procedural Order No. 9, the Tribunal required the parties to
submit statements of their position on that question. Canada made its
submission on July 13, 2000 aud the Investor on July 20, 2000. The Tribunal
also received statements concerning the issue by the governments of Mexico and

the United States, as well as comments thereon by Canada and the Investor.

CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES

Position ada

6. Canada argues that it would be inappropriate under NAFTA and the
UNCITRAL arbitration rules to allow an investor to enlarge and alter the scope
of its dispute without amending its original claim, particularly after a responsive
Pleading has been filed. Canada notes that the UNCITRAL mules require the
Parties to state their positions clearly in their statements of claim and defence,
and, hence, to narrow the issues to be arbitrated, it asserts that the scope of the
arbitration is limited by the facts and issues as set out in the investor's claim.
UNCITRAL Rules 18 and 19. Canada also points out that the UNCITRAL

tules permit a tribunal to disallow an amendment to a claim “having regard to

the delay in making it or prejudice to the other party or any other

circumstances.” UNCITRAL Rule 20.

Canada notes that the March, 1999 Statement of Claim was confined to
measures then in existence. Since the regulations implementing the super fee
are thus new and distinct measures from those pleaded in the Claim, they
cannot be found to be a part of that Claim. Because the super fee arises out of a
distinct set of facts from those set out in the Clair, Canada argues that its

implementation cannot properly be characterized as a “continuing breach.”

Canada also suggests that the Investor has failed to take certain procedural steps
necessary to make a claim regarding the super fee. It notes that the Investor has
1

never sought consultation on the issue as contemplated by NAFTA Article 1118
nor did it file notice of intent to arbitrate the super fee as required by Article
1119 or a waiver pursuant to Article 1 121. Canada contends that, since the
super fee did not exist when the Investor filed its Claim and the Claim has not
been amended, there is no basis for finding a constructive or retroactive waiver

concerning a measure that did not exist at the time the Investor made its

original waiver.

Canada argues that the failure of the Investor to amend its Claim (and not raise
the super fee issue until it filed its Memorial, five months after the measure in
Question occurred) prejudiced Canada by denying it an opportunity to address

the issue in its Defence.

mOG-eimeuwT bate Vie re eee

10. As aresult of these defects, Canada believes that the questions posed by the
Tribunal with regard to the super fee are “irrelevant” to issues of national
treatment and “have no anchor in an alleged breach of Article 1105.” Canada is
concerned that the Tribunal could, therefore, find in favor of the Investor on

grounds not previously disclosed to Canada.

11. Canada argues that it would be inappropriate to allow the Investor to amend its
Claim at this juncture. Canada notes that the Investor had notice of the super
fee agreement for at least a month before Canada filed its Defence, and it should
have sought to amend or supplement its Claim at that point. Canada notes that
the Investor could also have sought to amend its Claim prior to filing its
Memorial. Because the Investor did not do so, Canada argues that it was

prevented from responding adequately to the super fee issue to its prejudice.”

2 Canada also makes certain arguments concerning the possibility of consolidation under
NAFTA Article 1126. In view of the Tribunal’s ruling, these arguments are not relevant.
However, the Tribunal notes that consolidation under that NAFTA provision appears to be
directed to consolidation of cases involving different investors making similar claims, rather
than single investors making different claims:

Asticle 1126 addresses the possibility that more than one investor might submit to
arbitration claims arising out of the same event. It provides for the appointment * * °
of a special three-member tribunal to consider whether such multiple claims have
questions of law or fact in common * * *.

Statement of Administrative Action submitted by the President of the United States in
transmitting the NAFTA to the Congress, H. Doc. 103-159, Vol. 1 (1993) at 596.

13.

0! ce Investor

For its part, the Investor asserts that the super fee represents a continuing
breach of NAFTA and that an amendment to the Claim is unnecessary. It
argues that Paragraph 15 of the Claim, which described the Export Control
Regime implementing the SLA, described various aspects of that Regime in
language applicable to the super fee. The Investor contends that the super fee is
an integral part of the Regime and is "merely a repackaging” of other clements of
the Regime with specific reference to British Columbia. The Investor alleges
that the super fce is thus not a “new measure” but an adjustment to existing
measures, which has had a more damaging effect on producers in British

‘Columbia.

The Investor also argues that it would be “unfair to permit Canada to insulate
itself from effective review by this Tribunal on the simplc basis that Canada had
re-priced or re-labeled its former UFB softwood lumber export levy with an
amended regulation.” Allowing parties to act in this manner would permit them
effectively to avoid NAFTA Chapter 1] review by modifying challenged
measures during the course of arbitration. In this respect, the Investor contends
that it was impossible for it to anticipate Canada’s change of policy but that its
Claim plainly intended to cover any modifications having a bearing on the

issues it was raising.

14,

16.

17.

The Investor also points out that if the Tribunal were to refuse to consider the
super fee issue, it would be entitled to resubmit the very same claim to another
NAFTA tribunal. It states that this course would penalize the Investor and

would be wasteful of the arbitral process.

The Investor also challenges the arguments concerning procedural requirements
raised by Canada. It points out that consultations never occurred prior to the
submission of any aspect of the Claim. The Investor argues that NAFTA does
not require that the Investor issue a new notice of intent for each and every
amendment to the measures it challenges, noting that such an interpretation
would enable parties to evade NAFTA review by making frequent changes to
constituent elements of challenged regulations. In any event, the Investor

argues that the six-month “cooling off” period has long since elapsed.

The Investor also contends that its waiver previously submitted pursuant to
Article 112] covers the measures at issue in the arbitration, including

subsequent amendments; therefore, there is no need for a new waiver.

The Investor also argues that an amendment to the Claim at this juncture
would not be prejudicial to Canada. It argues that Canada has had ample
opportunity in its Counter Memorial and at the substantive hearings in
Montreal in May 2000 to address the issue before t!:e Tribunal. The Investor
also states that it has previously provided all the documents in its possession

sought by Canada in its third request for documents. Consequently, there is no

new documentary information available (in the possession of the Investor) that
Canada is not now aware of. For these reasons, the Investor argues that if an

amendment of the Claim were required, it would be appropriate for the Tribunal

to permit it.

Positions of the United States and Mexico

18.

Acting pursuant to Article } 128 of NAFTA, on July 24, 2000 the United States
submitted comments related to the super fee issue; although it expressly took no
position on how the interpretations it offered apply to the particular facts before
the Tribunal. Basically, the United States pointed out that intemational
precedent and authorities, particularly the UNCITRAL arbitration mules, are
clear that a claim properly before a NAFTA arbitral tribunal may not be
amended to include an additional or incidental claim that is outside the scope of
the NAFTA Parties’ consent to arbitration. Under NAFTA, the State Parties
consent “to the submission of a claim to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this agreement.” NAFTA Article 1122 (1). The United
States argued that that language serves to condition consent to arbitration on
the satisfaction of what it called “procedural prerequisites for submitting a claim
to arbitration,” which are “principally set forth in Section B of Chapter 11.” For
these reasons, the United States concluded that “a Chapter 11 tribunal
confronted with a new claim may not permit amendment unless that claim is

properly within the tribunal's jurisdiction in all respects.”

19.

By letter dated July 24, 2000, the Government of Mexico subscribed to the
positions taken by the United States. Mexico added that it believed that
NAFTA Asticle 1119 was intended to enable the respondent Party to take
measures in response to a claim, including consultation, remedial action, etc.
Mexico pointed out that if a new claim is asserted during the course of an
arbitral procecding, the respondent Party is denied the opportunity to take those
steps. Mexico concluded by claiming that the procedural requirements in
Articles 1116 through 1122 of NAFTA are mandatory in order for “a

subsequently established tribunal to have jurisdiction.”

Responses of Canada and the Investor

20.

21.

By letter dated July 27, 2000, Canada claimed that the submissions of the
United States and Mexico “support Canada’s argument that the ‘super fee’ is

outside the scope of this arbitration.”

On July 27, 2000, the Investor contested the suggestion that the super fee
constituted a “new claim” outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Accordingly,
it contended that the position of the United States did not apply to the facts at
issuc in this claim. The Investor also contested the suggestion that the consent
of the NAFTA Parties to arbitration pursuant to Chapter 11 goes only “to the

claim as it is expressed at the time of submission of the claim.”

DECISION

22. Analysis of the issues raised by the several submissions must begin with an
analysis of the Claim in this proceeding. If the super fee issue is comprehended
within the Claim as originally submitted, much of the argument concerning the
extent of the NAFTA Parties’ consent to arbitration falls by the wayside. Thus,
we start with the very first paragraph of the Claim submitted by the Investor on
March 25, 1999. That paragraph opens with the statement: “This is a case
about the discriminatory application of a quota scheme concerning exports from
Canada.” The paragraph goes on to describe briefly the genesis of the SLA and

the Export Control Regime and concludes with the following:

The Export Control Regime is not imposed on all exports, but only on
certain exports from certain parts of Canada. The Claim in the present
case is based on the unfair allocation of the rights to export softwood
lumber free of the export fee (or at a reduced fee rate}, in violation of
several provisions of the Investment Chapter of NAFTA. This Claim is
not about the legitimacy of the Canada-U.S. Softwood Lumber Agreement
per Se, but it is about the specific and unfair manner in which Canada

chose to implement this Agreement.

23. The Claim then proceeded to discuss at some length how the various types of

quotas were allocated during the first years of the agrecment and the effects of

24.

25.

those allocations on the Investor. Claim 146-68. That discussion analyzed

how the regime changed over the first three years of the SLA.

Based on any fair reading of the Claim, it is patent that the Investor was
challenging the implementation of the SLA as it affected its rights under
Chapter 11 of NAFTA and that, as the Regime changed from year to year, those
effects might also change. In other words, the Claim asked the Tribunal to
consider the Regime not as a static program, but as it evolved over the years.
Canada’s Counter Memorial followed the very same approach, analyzing at
some length the various changes in the program over its life. Counter
Memorial, 11 71-105. Indeed, the circumstances surrounding the
implementation of the super tee are set out in Canada’s historical account as

another development in the evolution of the prograrn in year 4 of the SLA.

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the Investor's contentions
regarding the super fee are not a “new” claim, but relate instead to a new
element that has recently been grafted onto the overall Regime. In this respect,
the super fee is akin to the various changes in allocation methodology, use of
discretionary quotas, and the like, that have marked the Regime since its
inception. The fact that the super fee arose from a request by the United States
for arbitration under the SLA is not relevant; an investor's rights under NAFTA
do not depend on the motivations behind the measures it challenges. Nor is it

relevant that the super fee arbitration resulted in an amendment to the SLA; as

with the rest of its claim, the Investor challenges the implementation of the

SLA, in this instance as it has been amended.

26. The Tribunal’s conclusion makes issues raised by the United States and Mexico
irrelevant to this case. Even if the Tribunal were to concur with the United
States that Article 1122 (1) conditions consent to arbitration on the satisfaction
of each of the procedures set out in Articles 1116-1122, the Tribunal has
concluded in its previous rulings that those requirements have been satisfied. In
any case, as rulings by this Tribunal and the Ethy] Tribunal have found, strict
adherence to the letter of those NAFTA articles is not necessarily a precondition
to arbitrability, but must be analyzed within the context of the objective of
‘NAFTA in establishing investment dispute arbitration in the first place.? That
objective, found in Article 1115, is to provide a mechanism for the settlement of
investment disputes that assures “due process” before an impartial tribunal.

3 See, e.g., this Tribunal’s ruling dated February 24, 2000 (thc Harmac Ruling) wherein
we stated:

{T]he investor's failure to execute an Article 1121(1)(b) waiver could not prejudice the
disputing Party; that failure could only work to the investor's disadvantage, Viewed in
this light, the Tribunal believes that there would be no good reason to make the
execution of the investor's waiver a precondition of a valid claim for arbitration.

The Ethy! Tribunal made a similar deterinination:

The Tribunal has little trouble deciding that Claimant’s unexpected delay in complying
with Article 1121 is not of significance for jurisdiction in this case. While Article
1121's title characterizes its requirements as “Conditions Precedent,” it does not say to
what they are precedent. Canada’s contention that they are a precondition to
jurisdiction, as opposed to a prerequisite to admissibility, is not borne out by the text of
Article 1121 * °°.

Ethyl Corp. v. Canada, Award on Jurisdiction (June 24, 1998), 28 ILM 708 at 991.

12

27.

28.

Lading that process with a long list of mandatory preconditions, applicable

without consideration of their context, would defeat that objective, particularly if

employed with draconian zeal.*

The Tribunal also notes that contrary to the suggestion made by Canada,
neither the United States nor Mexico argued that the super fee is outside the
scope of this arbitration. Indeed, the submission of the United States was at
pains to make clear that it was taking no position on how its legal argument
applied to the facts of this case. As noted above, since there is no “new claim,”

the legal arguments of the United States and Mcxico are not pertinent to the

super fee issue.

Since the Tribunal finds that the super fee is not a new claim and consequently
no amendment of the Claim is required, the contentions of Canada regarding
serious prejudice are not strictly relevant. Nonetheless, the Tribunal would
have been sympathetic to a request for an extension of time to remedy real
prejudice. However, the Tribunal notes that the issue has been on the table
since January, 2000, when the Memorial was filed, that Canada delivered a
substantial response in its own Counter Memorial, that Canada has long since
received all of the Investor’s documents relating to the issuc, and that it still has

almost two and one-half months to work on its Counter Memorial concerning

It must be remembered in considering the positions taken by the State Parties, that if

their arguments prevailed, it would still be open to the Investor to institute a new claim to be
handled by a new tribunal. It is difficult to see how the aims of Article 1115 would be
furthered by resort to this duplication of effort.

13

 

the current phase of this Arbitration, which presumably will address the Issue of
the super fee under Articles 1102 and 1105.* Under these circumstances, the

Tribunal does noe belicve that Canada has demonstrated sesicus prejudice.

Por the foreguing masons, Ure ‘ribunal rcfuyes the relief requested by Canada.

 

 

  

 

29.
The Honourable Lord Desvaird, Presiding Arbitrator
The utable Benjamin J. Greenberg, QC, Arbluator
Muttay J. Belmea, Arhil
Dated: Priyest 7 LODO
t
, Por the avoid. of daube, stand Ih 9 of Procedural Order 9 dated

 

fs
July 11, 2000, Canada will, in its Counter Memorial, be entided oi sddrces the application of
Asucle 1102 to the super foc lerespective of whether the Lavestor makes suy commence under
maragraph 7 of that Order, and the Invescur will be entided to addreas the jesuc in ins
Supplements! Memorial a6 provided in paragraph 1! of that Order.

le

