LORD DERVALRD 401312200644 26/117 'O2 10:51 NO.691 0¢/0)
Tene elas |

From: Diane Janie

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN
OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
BETWLIEN
POPE & TALBOT INC
and
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
AWARD
TN RESPECT OF costs
BY
ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

The Hon Lord Dervaird
(Presiding Arbitrator)

The Hon Benjamin J. Greenberg QC

Mr Murray J Belman

 

 

ED Pt

From: Diane Jarvie

AWARD ON COSTS

POPE & TALBOT INC vy GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

In this final phase of the arbitration both parties have made submissions in
which euch urgues that the Tribunal should exercise its disoretion by awarding
arbitration costs and costs for legal representation and assistance in its favour
against the other party. Canada submits, in the alternative, that each party
should bear its own legal costs and that the Investor should pay to Canada its
share of costs of the arbitral Tribunal.

In accordance with Article 33 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules which
apply to this arbitration the arbitral tribuna] is required to fix the costs of
arbitration, In the present case the relevant items constituting the costs include
(a) the fees of the arbitral tribunal, (b) the travel and other expenses incurred
by the arbitrators and (c) the costs of expert advice and of other assistance
required by the arbitral tribunal, At the date of this award each party has
advanced US $750,000, i.e. a total of $1,500,000. The fees of the members of
the Tribunal were fixed at the outset of the arbitration as to daily and hourly
rates, and the entire sum advanced subject to certain bank deductions but
together with interest earned thereon has been expended thereon, taking into
account the expenses incurred by each arbitrator and the costs of assistance

from Mr Michael Miller, advocate, except for the sum of US $39,571.30.

Atticle 38 also addresses other costs:~

{dy The travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses
are approved by the arbitral tribunal.

() The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successfull party
if such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to

 

 

 

LURV VERVALRD +01312200644

26/17 ‘Uz :
From: Diene Jarvie PVT “U2 10252 NY-OYI _Yrsue

the extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such
costs is reasonable.

4, Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:-

Mm Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of the arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.

(2) With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred
to in Article 38, paragraph (e) the arbitral tribunal, taking into account
the circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party
shall bear euch costs, or may apportion such costs between the parties

if it dctormines that apportionment is reasonable.

5. It is thus clear that as regards the costs of the arbitral Tribunal, il is to provide
in principle for the costs to be borne by the unsuccessful party, but that is
subject to the power of the Tribunal to apportion such costs if, taking into
account the circumstances of the case, it determines that apportionment is
reasonable.

As regards costs of legal representation and assistance of the parties, the
matter is di the discretion of the Tribunal taking into account the
circumstances of the case. In this case both parties claim legal costs in the
course of the proceedings in terms of Article 38(e). They both include in these
legal costs the travel and other expenses of witnesses and experts, which might
otherwise fall under Article 38(4)

é& The Investor claims US $3,780,088 for legal costs (after deduction of

$465,044 awarded to it by the Tribunai and since paid to it by Canada).
Canada claims costs of Can $3,953,231.22. In addition each claims its share

on irene

nanny
are hanna mene.

See INV PN TUIS 122644

— eOrit
From: Diane Janie

VE Wese Ny oy) ver ue

of the Tribunal’s fees and expenses. In the alternative, upon the basis that
each party bears its own legal costs, Canada claims the emount advanced by it
to the Tribunal.

7. It is common ground between the parties that this arbitration raised a number
of important and novel issues relating to NAFTA Chapter 11. Further, many
complex issues of fact and law were raised, and significant procedural issues
arose.

g, While the Investor was successful in that it obtained an award of damages
from the Tribunal, that success was limited to one Article only of those upon
which claims were made, and the sum awarded was less than 1% of the sum
claimed at earlier stages in the arbitration, and about 20% of the sum claimed
at the damages phase. The claims presented by the Investor under Articles
1102, 1106 and 1110 failed. On the merits, so did the claims based on Article
1105 in all respects other than in relation to the Verification Review Episode.
which occurred after the arbitration proceedings had been commenced. Upon
that basis, in summary, Canada submits that although technically the Investor
may have “won” the arbitration it was in effect unsuccessful in al] the major
issues raised and for that reason should be required to pay the legal costs
incurred by Canada.

a, It appears to the Tribunal that it is over simplistic to treat this case as one
where the Investor “won” and therefore should recover costs, or where Canada
“really won” having regard to the very limited degree of success of the
Investor and should therefore recover costs. Rather it is necessary to consider

4 variety of aspects in order to arrive at a reasonable result.

10 In the first place, many issues were raised hy each party by way of incidental
pleading. Canada sought to have the case dismissed for lack of jurisdiction on
three different bases — that the claim was not an “investment dispute”, that the
measures challenged did not “relate” to investment and that the Softwood
Lumber Agreement was not a “measure”. These all failed after consideration

a

ee terial ticle

TUS I ceuUO4e

COs I Ue Wat im
From: Dlane Jamie iu

WAOZ1 oy
vewue 22tt¥e

by the ‘Tribunal of written submissions. Similarly Canada’s attempt to have
paragraphs 34 and 103 of the Statement of Claim struck out (the “Harmac”
matter) failed, Similarly the attempt by Canada to have the “Super Fee” issue
excluded failed, It is thus clear that Canada failed on important legal aspects
of the case.

ll. ‘The matter of de ry producti quires special i Canada
made documentary requests, and to the extent that the Investor objected to
production, that objection was in large measure upheld. Similarly, the
Investor made requests for documents and some of Canada’s objections were
upheld. However, particular difficulties were created by Canada’s treatment
of the issue of confidentiality in the arbitral process on the one hand and its
reluctance to produce documents on the grounds of cabinet confidence on the
other. The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to rehearse these matters in
detail. It suffices to observe that Canada simply chose not to comply with the
directions of the Tribunal in either respect.

 

1Z, Canada has drawn attention to the fact that the Tribunal has already imposed a
sanction by way of an award of costs in favour of Canada in its decision of
September 27, 2000. As thut decision makes expressly clear, thal malter was
closed by that decision, and the legal position of the parties would not in any
way be prejudiced by that matter.

13. One other matter of concern to the Tribunal is that Canada, despite requests by

the Investor and by the Tribunal, did not produce any Travaux Preparatoires in

relation to the relevant Articles of NAFTA, in particular 1105, until virtually
the end of the arbitration, having previously asserted they did not exist

14, Of equal concern to the Tribunal is the fact that certain documents. were
withheld from the Investor and the Tribunal until the actual hearing on breach
of Article 1105, which had a direct and material impact upon the matters in

' dispute (see Award on Merits Phase II paras 177 — 179).

 

LORD DERVALRD FUND ee wane van SOC E EME ISI NY SALTS page oe

15. The Investor made an application at the end of the damages hearing to change
the place of the arbitration. It was rejected because of the very late stage at
which it was made. The issues raised were important and difficult.

16. The Investor put before the Tribunal cerlain letters passing between the parlies
with a view to arriving at a settlement. Canada objected to these having been
produced but in the event produced some further material. The Tribunal has
not found this material particularly helpful.

17. Taking an overall view of the case, the Tribunal concludes that the success of
each party was mixed. In the circumstances the Tribunal has determined that
each party should bear its own legal costs under Article 38(d) and (e).

18. As to the costs of the arbitral Tribunal under Article 38(a), (b) and (c), the
parties have each advanced US $750,000. Those sums (inclusive of interest
earned thereon) have been expended on the fees and expenses of the arbitral
Tribunal and its assistant Mr Michael Miller, to the extent of US
$1,474,359.50, But the Tribunal considers it reasonable that the Investor
should be awarded that portion of the arbitral Tribunal’s costs which refates to
the Verification Review Episode, including the hearing which took place at
Fort Lauderdale, Florida on January 6 and 7, 2000, and the consequent
damages phase. Based upon an in depth review of the fees and expenses
incurred by the Tribunal on these elements of the case, the Tribunal assesses
the costs of this portion at US $240,400. Accordingly it awards to the Investor
US $120,200 being its one half share of those costs. Interest on that sum is

assessed at 5% per annum compounded quarterly and pro rata within a quarter.
CONCLUSION

For the reasons given above, the Tribunal orders the Government of Canada to pay
the Investor US $120,200 with interest payable from and after the date hereof until

 

LORD DERVAIRD __ +01312200644 ZO/11 (Ud 1U23e NU.OYI YO/sVO

 

t
and within
sepment in iat thera of 9 por anim sompeuded HAS pro peta
a quarter.
Mentreal

DatedNovenher 20 2002

TOTAL P.G3

 

