2
4%
24%
SSS
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION 2.3%
UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE % 3
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT $3 %
all A,
OW % %
4o%
3%?
BETWEEN 3 7
oO
POPE & TALBOT INC .
and

THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

AWARD ON THE MERITS OF PHASE 2

BY

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

The Hon. Lord Dervaird
(Presiding Arbitrator)

The Hon. Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C.

Mr. Murray J. Belman

TABLE OF CO TS
INTRODUCTION

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

B. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
THE CLAIM UNDER ARTICLE 1102
A. INTRODUCTION

B. LEGAL ANALYSIS

1. The Semantics of Article 1102
a. Use of the plural form

b. “Most favourable” etc.
2. Substance of Article 1102
3: Determination of “in like. circumstances”

a. Introduction
b. The legal context of “like circumstances
c. Factual determinations

THE CLAIM UNDER ARTICLE 1105
A INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE 1105
B. APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 1105

New Entrants
Transitional Adjustments
Wholesaler Issue

BC Adjustment

Super Fee

Verification review episode
Administrative faimess

NAUP ODE

FINAL MATTERS

CONCLUSIONS

30 - 32

33 - 38
39 - 42.
43-72

73-76
77 - 82
83 - 104

105 - 118
119

120-121
122 - 123
124-125
126 - 128
129 - 155
156-181
182-185

186 - 193

194-196

INTRODUCTION
Procedural History
The Tribunal issued its Interim Award on June 26, 2000. As a result of that
Award it was necessary for the parties to proceed to a further stage wherein the
questions under consideration were a further examination of the claim under
Article 1102 in light of the additional material called for by the Tribunal in the
appendix to the Interim Award and an examination of the claim under Article
1105. This stage is generally referred to as Phase 2 of the arbitration.
A procedural issue which had been foreshadowed was the extent to which
conduct by Canada subsequent to the Investor’s Statement of Claim should be
subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Specifically, that matter arose in
connection with the Super Fee Base levy (discussed in detail elsewhere in this
Award) which arose in the latter part of 1999.
In the course of a conference call with the parties on July 6, 2000 the Tribunal
ordered that if Canada wished to have a determination of the issue whether the
Super Fee Base levy should be excluded from the scope of the present claim it
should make a written submission by July 13 and the Investor respond by July
20. The parties duly did so, and the Tribunal ruled on August 7, 2000 that the

Super Fee Base levy issue did fall within the scope of the present claim.

In the course of the document discovery process between the parties Canada
declined to produce certain documents upon the basis that these constituted
Cabinet confidences within the meaning of the Canada Evidence Act s.39.

The Tribunal upon consideraticn of the parties’ submissions on the matter held
that the Canada Evidence Act did not apply to a NAFTA Chapter 11 Tribunal
and requested Canada to provide justification for its refusal to produce the
documents in question. Canada declined to so do, and also declined to produce
or further identify those documents.' By reason of circumstances surrounding
the dispute about the non-production of the documents by Canada, the Tribunal
found the Investor liable to Cas:ada for costs related to this particular matter.
The Investor submitted a Memorial in relation to the Second Phase on
September 5, 2000, and Canada a Counter Memorial on October 10, 2000. The
Investor submitted a Supplemental Memorial on October 25, 2000 and Canada
a Supplemental Counter Memorial on November 7, 2000.

Each party filed prior to the hearing documents and authorities and lodged
affidavits of witnesses on whose evidence it sought to rely.

Mexico and the United States each exercised its right under Article 1128 to
make written submissions to the Tribunal on questions of interpretation of
NAFTA and the Investor responded thereto on November 10, 2000.

The hearing on the Phase 2 issues took place in Montreal between November 13

and November 17, 2000.

See 1 193 below.

10.

12.

13.

14.

17.

The Investor was represented by Mr. Barry Appleton and Mr. Keith Mitchell.
Canada was represented by Mr. Brian Evernden, Ms. Meg Kinnear and Professor
Don McRae.

The Investor submitted an affidavit by Howard Rosen who was cross examined
on behalf of Canada.

Canada submitted affidavits by Mr. Douglas George and Mr. Claudio Valle and
they were cross examined on behalf of the Investor. In addition, Mr. George
was recalled by the Tribunal for further questioning.

The Tribunal had indicated that it would wish to call Mr. Tom MacDonald and

a Ganada statistics witness if the Investor did not do so. In the event, the

. Tribunal questioned Mr. MacDonald but decided that it did not require to

question a statistics witness.

Representatives of Mexico and the United States attended the hearing
throughout.

The disputing parties made oral submissions at the conclusion of the hearing.
Mexico and the United States each made post-hearing submissions in relation to
Articles 1102 and 1105 on December 1, 2000. The Investor and Canada both
responded thereto on December 15, 2000.

On February 20, 2001 Canada applied to the Tribunal to release it from its
obligation of confidentiality in relation to the Article 1128 submission filed by
the United States in the case (in relation to Article 1105), in order that it might
use the same in an intervention it had been allowed to make in a statutory
review of another NAFTA award before a Court in British Columbia. The

3

18.

Investor objected to such release and on February 21, 2001 the Tribunal refused

the application.

Factual Background

On May 29, 1996 Canada and the United States signed the Softwood Lumber

Agreement (hereinafter “SLA”).

.

In terms of Article 1 the United States undertook not to take certain
specified actions under the laws of the United States with respect of imports
of softwood lumber from Canada.
In terms of Article 2.1 Canada was required to place softwood lumber on the
~~Export Control List under the Export and Import Permits Act and to require
a Federal export permit for each exportation to the United States of softwood
lumber first manufactured in the covered provinces.
By Article 2.2, Canada was bound to collect a fee on issuance of a permit for
export to the United States of softwood lumber first manufactured in the
covered provinces for quantities above the established base in a given year.
The Established Base (“EB”) was 14.7 billion board feet, and up to that level
the export was free of charge. Between 14.7 and 15.35 billion board feet
could be exported to the United States at the Lower Fee Base (“LFB”) of $50
per thousand board feet.* For exports in excess of 15.35 billion board feet,

the Upper Fee Base (“UFB”) of $100 per thousand board feet applied. Those

 

Unless otherwise indicated, all dollar amounts are in U.S. currency.

19.

20.

fees were subject to adjustment for inflation on April 1 of each year
beginning April 1997.

e By Article 2.4 Canada waz io allocate the EB and the LFB for each year prior
to its beginning among Canadian softwood lumber exporters.

e By Articles 2.5 and 2.6 Canada was obliged in effect to collect fees under the
LEB or the UFB from each exporter of softwood lumber first manufactured in
the covered provinces whose exports to the United States in that quarter
exceeded 28.75% of the exporters’ yearly allocation of the EB (the “speed
bump” provision).

«By Article 2.9 Canada was not required to collect a fee under 2.5 or 2.6 from
an exporter whose production of softwood lumber in the previous calendar
year was less than 10 million board feet.

¢ By Article 3 for each calendar quarter in which the average price in the
United States for specified lumber exceeded the trigger price as defined, a
further 92,000,000 board feet of softwood lumber first manufactured in the
covered provinces could be exported to the United States, fee free, during the
following four quarters (“trigger price bonus”).

The SLA was retroactive to April 1, 1996. Canada added Softwood Lumber

Products (where the province of first manufacture was any of the covered

provinces) to the Export Control List until March 31, 2001.

By Notice to Exporters No. 90 issued on March 25, 1996, Canada informed

exporters that, as of April 1, 1996, softwood lumber products would be placed on

21.

22.

23.

the Export Control List and as of that date, where the province of first
Manufacture was British Columbia (B.C.”), Alberta, Manitoba or Quebec, all
exports to the United States would require an export permit. As to Ontario, the
Notice stated that the application of an export permit remained under
discussion and would be decided shortly.

By Notice to Exporters No. 92 issued on June 19, 1996 Canada amended the
information in Notice to Exporters No. 90 (inter alia, by deleting Manitoba from
the list of provinces and substituting Ontario). It also requested softwood
lumber stakeholders from the covered provinces to complete a questionnaire on
production and exports of softwood lumber for the years 1994 and 1995 and the
period January 1 to March 31, 1996 and invited views from softwood lumber
stakeholders as to methods of allocation.

On June 21, 1996 Canada issued Softwood Lumber Products Export Permit Fees
Regulations, which introduced an administrative fee to be paid by an exporter
for the issuance of a permit in respect of exports of softwood lumber products in
the EB, and for export fees to be paid for permits in the LFB of $50 and in the
UEB of $100 per thousand board feet.

On the same date Canada issued Export Permit Regulations (Softwood Lumber
Products) setting out the requirements of and procedure for issuing a permit to
export softwood lumber to the United States. The Regulations limited issuance
of permits in respect of exports in the EB or the LFB to exporters that had been

assigned an export level, i.2., a share of the EB or the LFB totals.

24.

25.

26.

By Notice to Exporters No. 94 dated October 31, 1996 Canada set out the
method of allocation, and also updated the matters contained in Notices to
Exporters Nos. 90 and 92.

In terms of Article 6.2 of Notice to Exporters No. 92, until a system of
allocation was designed and implemented (for which the due date was
September 30, 1996), softwood lumber export controls were administered on a
“first-come, first-served” basis. Limits were set for each of the first two quarters
at 4,226,250,000 board feet (28.75% of the annual EB). Once that total had
been reached in each quarter, exporters faced a fee of $50 per thousand board
feet for the next 186,875,000 board feet (28.75% of the annual LFB) and $100
per thousand board feet beyond that level. This was changed to an allocation
regime under Notice to Exporters No. 94.

According to Notice to Exporters No. 94 the allocation is a national corporate —
based system, under which EB levels (attracting no fee) and LFB levels (with a
fee of $50 per thousand board feet) were allocated to primary producers and
remanufacturers, including new entrants. Exports to the United States above
the EB and LEB levels fell into the UFB and attracted a fee of $100 per thousand
board fee. The allocation was based on recent export shipments, and on special
criteria in the case of new entrants. The system was to be reviewed annually,
with adjustments to allocations then being made. Allocations were normally to
be valid for one year at a time, and unused amounts at the end of a year did not
carry forward. The policy of Canada was stated to be that the allocation system
be a flexible and responsive one. One of the four important elements of market

7

27.

responsiveness was stated to be a growth mechanism for companies whose sales

exceeded their EB level, and another an under-utilization provision allowing the

reallocation of quantities away from those unable to ship their allocated levels.

In order to allocate the EB in the first year, Canada appears to have proceeded as

follows:

¢ The 14,7 billion board feet EB referred to in the SLA was reduced by 2% i.e.
294,000,000 board feet as provision for new entrants.

e Other deductions, namely a one-time transitional adjustment of 170,000,000
board feet and a ministerial reserve of 50,000,000 board feet, were reserved
from the EB figure.

e The balance, 14,186,000,000 board feet, was allocated to companies, either
primary mills or remanufacturing facilities in the four covered provinces. As
a consequence, firms based in B.C. received 59% of the EB available, in
Alberta 7.7%, in Ontario 10.3% and in Quebec 23%. (Some remanufacturers
located outside the covered provinces that used lumber originating in a
covered province had quota assigned to them out of the quota allocated to the
covered province.)

¢ In arriving at the EB allocation, Canada applied different methods in

different provinces for the calculation of the base. In relation to B.C., the
base for remanufacturing concerns was the better of 1994 or 1995 calendar
year direct exports to the United States. For B.C. primary mills, the base was
the average of direct exports in each of 1994 and 1995, with a saving for
cases where the average showed a diminution over 1995 alone in excess of

35%, in which case the 1995 figure was used. In al] the other covered

TOTAL P.62

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

3

provinces the base was taken as the best of 1994, 1995 or a constructed
figure consisting of the last half of 1995 and two times the first quarter of
1996.
The original amount of LFB notionally available for allocation was 650,000,000
board feet. That figure was reduced by 150,000,000 board feet for new entrants
and by a further 50,000,000 board feet for a one-time transitional adjustment.
Like all primary producers and remanufacturers of softwood lumber in B.C., the
Investment completed and subiitted its initial Questionnaire responses.*
Thereafter, the Investment received its share of quota allocations based upon
those responses.
THE CLAIM UNDER ARTICLE 1102
Introduction
The Investor claims that its Investment has been denied treatment guaranteed
by NAFTA Article 1102, particularly paragraph 2 of that Article, which provides:
Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment no less favorable than it accords, in, like circumstances, to
investments of its own investors with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of investments.
There is no dispute that the implementation of the SLA does relate at least to
the “expansion, management, conduct [and] operation” of the Investment. The

contentions of the Parties concerning Article 1102(2) relate to three other

See Responses dated July 29, 1996, Joint Book of Documents submitted by the parties

for the November 2000 hearing, Tab 39. These documents are hereinafter referred to as
“Tab__”

32.

33.

issues: First, how should the terms “investments of investors” and “treatment
no less favorable” in Article 1102(2) be interpreted? Secondly, what standards
should be employed in determining whether the Investment has been denied
“treatment no less favorable” than that received by investments of Canadian
investors? Finally, in applying Article 1102(2), to which Canadian-owned
investments should the Investment be compared, i.e., which of those Canadian-
owned investments are “in like circumstances” to the Investment?
These questions require an interpretation of the language and substance of
Article 1102 and consideration of the facts of this case within that legal context.
Legal Analysis
1. The Semantics of Article 1102.

a, Use of the plural form.
What began as an apparently offhand comment during the May 2000 hearing on
the initial phase of this case developed into a significant element of Canada’s
argumentation on Article 1102(2). At the May 4, 2000 hearing, counsel for
Canada advanced the suggestion that, since Article 1102(2) uses the plural form
—“investments of investors” - NAFTA may require that more than one investor

be disadvantaged before the national treatment provisions would apply.*

Canada’s counsel stated:

Might I add one comment. On the national treatment point, it’s not “find an
investor.” The language is “investors in like circumstances.” We might ...

are

34. This use of the plural form was not directly addressed in Canada’s Phase 2
Counter Memorial, other than in an oblique reference to the requirements
Canada believed necessary to establish de facto discrimination.’ However,
Canada’s Phase 2 Supplemental Counter Memorial developed the argument,
this time adding the suggestion that it might be necessary to consider more than
one domestically owned investment in determining whether national treatment
has been accorded to the foreig:. »wned investment:

Article 1102 would have been worded differently had it intended that only
the circumstances of the disputing investment were the relevant
comparator. If the Investor were correct, Article 1102(2) would require
comparison of the treatment accorded to a disputing investment with the

.- treatment accorded to domestic investments, even to a single domestic
investment. Article 1102(2) does not provide for this nor is it reflected in
WTO or GATT jurisprudence on national treatment.

wae

Where the issue is de facio discrimination, the adjudicator must Jook at
the effect of the measure. In all such cases, discrimination has been
found only where the measure wholly or disproportionately discriminates®
against the foreign origin goods or services. No case has found
discrimination based on a lesser record of discrimination, much less
discrimination against a single entity.’

We have to find more than one, but I think it’s a ... class because it relates to
the treatment that is afforded to those investors, and that’s the important
consideration. That’s what the language says. It’s not my invention.

May 2000 Tr. Vol. VIL, pp 204:4-18.

5

See Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 1490.
s In its various submissions, Canada has used the terms “disproportionate
discrimination” against foreign investments, “disproportionate disadvantage” to foreign
investments and “disproportionate favour” to domestic investments. The Tribunal views
these terms as meaning the same and will use “disproportionate disadvantage” in this decision.
7 Phase 2 Supplemental Counter Memorial at 11 100-102. In its submission dated
December 1, 2000, Mexico subscribed to this interpretation: “It is noted that Article 1102

ll

35. During the Phase 2 hearings in November, 2000, Canada continued to stress
the use of the plural form in Article 1102(2) as a reason to deny relief to a single
investment, but acknowledged that a single investment could be considered a
“class” of one.® However, to achieve that status, the investor would have to
prove that there were no other investments in “like circumstances” that were
also owned by U.S. or Mexican investors.

36. The Tribunal rejects Canada’s argument that the plural form of the language of
Article 1102(2) places a single investment outside the Article’s coverage or
requires a claimant on behalf of that investment to demonstrate whether there
are other similarly situated foreign owned investments. The Tribunal also
rejects the contention that that plural form requires, as a matter of semantics,
comparison of the treatment provided to the foreign investor with that accorded
to more than one domestically owned investment.

37. Asa general principle of interpretation, use of the plural form does not, without

more, prevent application of statutory or treaty language to an individual case.!°

requires the Tribunal to compare the treatment of investors of another Party to the treatment
of domestic investors, not a domestic investor (in the singular).” Canada expressly agreed with
this formulation in its Response dated December 15, 2000 (at 7 10).

8 Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol XIII, at 23:9-24. However, shortly thereafter, counsel for Canada
again urged that the plural form was determinative. Id. at 26:12 - 27:24.

° Nov. 2000 Trx., Vol. XIII, at 21:8 — 27: 24. During those hearings, Canada also refined
its arguments on the need for disproportionate disadvantage as a predicate for a violation of
Article 1102(2). The Tribunal addresses those arguments below.

10

See, e.g., Sutherland, Statutory Construction, 6" Ed. 2000 at § 47.34:

12

38.

u

Laws outlawing discrimination against “women” or setting labour standards for
“children” could not reasonably be interpreted to prevent their application to a
woman or a child. NAFTA Article 1102 requires the Parties to accord national
treatment under specified circumstances, and there is no evidence of any
intention that more than one investor need be aggrieved before that requirement
comes into play. Indeed, Article 1102(4), in order to create “greater certainty,”
prohibits Parties from imposin; “on an investor” specified requirements or
requiring “an investor” to take specified actions. Finally, Article 1105 uses the
very same plural form as Article 1102(2), and Canada has never suggested that
more than one investment must be affected before the provisions of that Article
apply." In short, the text of Chapter 11 simply does not support Canada’s
interpretation.

Moreover, the contemplation of “ne drafters must have been that Chapter 11
cases would most often involve claims by individual investors that they or their
investments were being denied national treatment. In that context, the Tribunal

sees no special justification for departing from the normal and common sense

Common usage in the English language does not scrupulously observe a
difference between singular and plural word forms. This is especially true when
speaking in the abstract, as in legislation prescribing a general rule for future
application. In recognition of this, it is well established, by statute and by
judicial decision, that the legislative terms which are singular in form may apply
to multiple subjects or objects. Those that are plural in form may apply to
single subjects or objects if that is the intended or reasonably understood
meaning and effect. [Citations omitted.}

Indeed, Canada made specific reference to “investment” in the singular in its

discussion of Article 1105, thus demonstrating its awareness that the plural form may
encompass the singular. See Canada’s Response dated December 15, 2000 to Post Hearing
Submissions of Mexico and the United States at 1 4.

13

interpretation of the plural form in Article 1102(2), which would include
individual investors and investments. For these reasons, the Tribunal
determines that the language of Article 1102(2) permits individual investors and
investments to maintain claims of denial of national treatment based upon a
comparison of the treatment they receive with the treatment received by host
country investors and investments.!* This conclusion also entails rejection of
Canada’s contention that the language of Article 1102(2) requires claimants to
show whether and how many other foreign owned investments may fall within
the “like circumstances” as themselves.

“= db “Most favorable,” “no less favorable,” and “best.”

39. In another textual argument, Canada sought to draw a substantive distinction
between the rights accorded an investment under Article 1102(2) (to “no less
favorable” treatment) and those accorded under Article 1102(3) (to “no less
favorable than the most favorable” treatment).!* The former provision applies to
the national government and the latter to states and provinces,'* and Canada

suggested that NAFTA treats the two levels of government differently. Canada’s

2

As noted, this ruling on the language of Article 1102 does not address Canada’s
contention that d a of disprop ge for foreign
investors and investments.

3s

Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. II, at 35:3 - 35:14.

4 Article 1102(3) reads as follows:

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with
respect to a state or province, treatment no less favorable that the most

favorable treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by the state or province to
investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party of which it forms a part.

14

40.

4l,

1s

semantic argument is that, since Article 1102(2) does not employ the modifier
“than the most favorable,” it permits national governments to provide foreign
investments something less than the most favourable treatment. However, the
structure of Article 1102 strongly suggests that Canada’s semantic construct is
flawed.

Article 1102(3) expressly states :nat it is defining the meaning of the
requirements of Article 1102(1} and 1102(2) when those provisions are applied
to states and provinces. Therefore, to adopt Canada’s semantics would require
the Tribunal to conclude that the supposedly narrower requirements of 1102(1)
and-(2) are somehow broadened to restrain states and provinces more vigorously
than the NAFTA Parties themselves.

Canada has suggested no reaso: «vhy the NAFTA parties would have
undertaken such an approach ox any evidence of an intention to do so, and the
Tribunal can see none. Instead, the Tribunal believes that the language of
Article 1102(3) was intended simply to make clear that the obligation of a state
or province was to provide investments of foreign investors with the best
treatment it accords any investment of its country, not just the best treatment it

accords to investments of its investors.'* Since, as noted, the treatment of states

Article Il (7) of the U.S. Model Bilateral Investment Treaty contains language

suggesting that the obligations of a state (or province) under its national treatment
requirements are less broad than under NAFTA, ie., limited to the treatment it accords to
companies of other states:

The treatment accorded by the United States of America to investments and
associated activities under the provisions of this Article shall in any State,
Territory or possession of the United States of America be the treatment

15

42.

43.

16

and provinces in Article 1102(3) is expressly an elucidation of the requirement
placed on the NAFTA Parties by Articles 1102(1) and (2), that interpretation
lends support to the conclusion that, like states and provinces, national
governments cannot comply with NAFTA by according foreign investments less
than the most favorable treatment they accord their own investments.!*

In summary, the Tribunal is wnable to accept that these different wordings
carry any substantive difference in the conduct owed investors and investments
under Article 1102. Accordingly, the Tribunal interprets the treatment required
by Articles 1102(1) and 1102(2), on the one hand, and 1102(3) on the other, to
beidentical, save for the limitations to states and provinces. The Tribunal also
interprets both standards to mean the right to treatment equivalent to the “best”
treatment accorded to domestic investors or investments in like circumstances.
The Tribunal thus concludes that “no less favorable” means equivalent to, not
better or worse than, the best treatment accorded to the comparator.

2. The substance of Article 1102

The parties agree that Article 1102 can apply to measures that do not facially
discriminate against the investors or investments of other NAFTA parties, and
that the implementation of the SLA would be such a measure, since it in no way

singles out foreign owned lumber producers for special treatment. Canada

accorded therein to companies legally constituted under the laws and
regulations of other States, Territories or possessions of the United States of
America.

Canada also contended that the language used in Article 1102 is not equivalent to

“best” treatment. Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. III at 78:1 - 82:13.

16

argues that, in such de facto cases, a violation of national treatment obligations
can be found only if the measure in question disproportionately disadvantages
the foreign owned investments or investors.!”

44. Canada asserts that, to apply the disproportionate disadvantage test in this case,
the Tribunal must determine whether there are any Canadian owned
investments!® that are accorde:; the same treatment as the Investor. Then, the
size of that group of Canadian investments must be compared to the size of the
group of Canadian investments receiving more favorable treatment than the
Investment. Unless the disadvantaged Canadian group (receiving the same

* treatment as the Investor) is smaller’® than the advantaged group, no

discrimination cognizable under Article 1102 would exist.”

v Canada does accept that the disproportionate disadvantage test is not applicable to

cases of de jure discrimination. See, e.g., Nov. 2000 Tr. Vol. Ill at 67:18 - 68:15.
1B In this discussion, it is assumed, solely for clarity of analysis, that the Canadian owned
investments and the Investor's Investment are in “like circumstances.”

» How much smaller is unknown (Canada has offered no guidance on this point), but the
difference would have to be enough to justify a conclusion that the size of the advantaged
Canadian owned group is “disproportionate” to the disadvantaged Canadian (and foreign)
group.
2 Canada advocated a stricter test at one point: “[T]he Investor must establish that
‘virtually all’ *** or ‘most’ of the investments in the covered provinces (particularly British
Columbia), who receive the less favourable treatment, are of U.S. origin and that ‘virtually all’
or ‘most’ of the investments in the non-covered provinces, who receive the more favourable
treatment, are of domestic origin.” Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 1490. This position was
modified at the hearing to the formulation in the text. See Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. II at 54:12 -
59:12.

45.

46.

47.

23

Canada acknowledges that the disproportionate disadvantage test does not
appear in the text of NAFTA, it finds these requirements in GATT and WTO
precedents.’ The Tribunal addresses those precedents below.

a. European Communities - Regime for the Importation, Sale and
Distribution of Bananas.”

The “Bananas” dispute involve-| an elaborate program governing the
importation of bananas into the European Union.” That program treated
various sources of imports differently:
e Traditional African, Caribbean and Pacific suppliers parties to the
Lome Convention (ACP) were provided a fixed level of duty-free
imports.
e A fixed level of imports dutied at 75 ECU per tonne was allocated (i)
49.4% to parties to the Framework Agreement on Bananas (BFA), (ii) a
fixed tonnage level te ACP countries for their non-traditional supply

to EC countries, and (iii) the remainder to other banana exporters.

e Imports in excess of those amounts were subject to a high duty (in
1995, 722 ECU per tonne for ACP countries, 822 ECU for others).

e Bananas from EC territories could be sold without restriction.
To implement these measures, the EC established licensing procedures and
tules categorizing the “operators” that distributed bananas:

e Category A - Those who had, during a previous three-year period,
marketed third country and non-traditional ACP bananas.

See Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. II at 45:22-25.
WT/DS27/R/USA22, May 1997.

The WTO panel referred to the European Union as the “EC,” and the Tribunal will

follow that nomenclature.

48.

49.

¢ Category B - Those who had, during a previous three-year period,
marketed EC and traditional ACP bananas.

© Category C - New entrants who begin marketing third country and
non-traditional ACP bananas.

In practice, some operators could meet the requirements for both A and B
categories and could thus quali: as botk
The EC regulations earmarked for Category A operators 65% of the licenses for
the reduced duty imports of third-country and non-traditional ACP bananas.
Category B operators were reserved 30% of those licenses, and Category C, 3.5%.
The panel first found that reserving 30% of the third-country and non-
traditional ACP licenses for Category B operators encouraged operators to
increase purchases of EC and trsditional ACP bananas. The provision thus
violated Article I1I:4 of the GATT, which requires members to accord products
of other member countries treatment “no less favourable” than that accorded to
their own like products with respect to laws, regulations and requirements
affecting their internal sale, etc. In reaching this conclusion, the panel
performed no analysis whether imported products were subjected to
disproportionate disadvantage. Indeed, it rejected the EC’s argument that third-
country and non-traditional ACP bananas received a benefit from other
provisions of the regime, refusing to consider whether the relative effects of the
various operator regulations might benefit imported products:

The Panel was of the view that, regardless of the trade effects, the

apportioning of 66.5 per cent of the tariff quota to operators who had
marketed third-country or non-traditional ACP bananas could not offset

19

or legally justify the inconsistencies of the licensing system with Articles
Tl:4 and I:1.*

50. The finding by the Bananas panel that GATT Article III:4 was breached made it
unnecessary for the panel to consider whether the operator rules also violated
the WTO Trade Related Investment Measures (TRIMs) Agreement:

[T]he TRIMs Agreement essentially interprets and clarifies the provisions
of [GATT] Article II (and also Article XI) where trade-related investment
measures are concerned. Thus the TRIMs Agreement does not add to or
subtract from those GATT obligations, although it clarifies that Article
11:4 may cover investment related matters.”
This language suggests that the Bananas panel would have applied its analysis of
GATT Article III:4 to an investment issue under the TRIMs Agreement, and
would have refused to consider whether the treatment of foreign products (and,
therefore, under TRIMs, of foreign investors as well) was or was not
disproportionately unfavourable.

51. The Bananas panel also considered whether the EC regime violated the WTO
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). Canada principally relies on
that discussion in urging the Tribunal to adopt the disproportionate

disadvantage standard.

 

cad WT/DS27/R/USA22 at { 7.179, emphasis supplied. The quoted language is actually
from an earlier GATT panel decision, which the 1997 panel adopted “as our own findings.”
WT/DS27/R/USA22 at 1 7.180.

8 WT/DS27/R/USA22 at 1 7.185.

6 See undated submission by Canada during the November, 2000 hearings, Response to
request from Tribunal Member Murray J. Belman (“Response”) at 2-5. Canada also relies on
other elements of the panel’s decision on the EC bananas regime: “activity functions” and
“hurricane licenses.” Id. at 2-4.

20

52.

53.

29

30

The GATS contains a national treatment provision identical to NAFTA Article
1102(2). That is, the Agreement entitles covered services and service suppliers
to “treatment no less favourable” than that accorded by a host country to its
own services and service suppliers.?” Unlike NAFTA, however, the GATS
specifies an important exception to the general rule:
A Member may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by according to
services and service suppliers of any other Member, either formally
identical treatment or formally different treatment to that it accords to its
own like services and service suppliers.”
This exception is in turn limited by the following:
Formally identical or formally different treatment shall be considered to
+= be less favorable if it modifies the conditions of competition in favour of
services or service suppliers of the Member compared to like services or
service suppliers of any other Member.”
Thus, the GATS permits formally different treatment of foreign entities,
provided that that treatment does not result in a modification of the conditions
of competition to the detriment of those entities.*°
In the event, the Bananas panel found that the EC’s operator category rules were
formally identical, in that both EC origin and non-EC origin suppliers could

qualify for Category A and Category B treatment. The panel therefore addressed

GATS Article XVIL.1.
GATS Axticle XVIL2.
GATS Article XVIL3.

This, of course, is an important difference, since, as conceded by Canada (see fn. 17

above) de jure discrimination of the kind countenanced by GATS would violate NAFTA (and,
as the Bananas panel found, the GATT) without any showing of disproportionality.

21

54.

55.

31

32

33

the question whether, applying the test of GATS Article XVII.3,2! those rules
nonetheless modified the “conditions of competition” to the detriment of the
foreign origin suppliers. It was in this context that the panel considered
whether, despite their facial neutrality, the operator categories in fact functioned
neutrally. In finding that they did not, the panel ascertained that most non-EC
origin suppliers fell within Category A and most EC origin suppliers fell within
the favoured Category B. In other words, the natural affinity that one would
expect between the country of origin of the bananas and the country of origin of
wholesalers of those bananas was confirmed by the evidence.

It-was for this reason that the panel found that non-EC origin suppliers received
less favourable conditions of competition.** In reaching this conclusion, the
panel made no analysis whether the effect the regime was disproportionately
unfavourable to one group or the other,” but found, in essence, that Category A
could be fairly described as “mostly non-EC wholesalers” and Category B as
“mostly EC wholesalers.”**

Recall that Canada urges that no denial of national treatment may be found in a

de facto case, unless the measures in question disproportionately disadvantage

Bananas { 7.332.
Bananas { 7.336.

Indeed, the word “disproportionate” or any of its forms appears only once in the

Bananas decision and then in a context (use of private attorneys before WTO panels) wholly
unconnected with the national treatment issues we address here. See Bananas at {1 7.12(e).

“a

The panel added that its conclusions were supported by the fact that the EC intended

its marketing system to “cross subsidize” and otherwise benefit operators that previously
marketed traditional ACP and EC bananas. See Bananas 117.352.

22

foreign investors. The Bananas panel’s analysis does not support that theory.
While the panel found that “most” Category A operators were of third country
origin and “most” Category B were of EC origin, that exercise was aimed at
determining whether, behind iacially neutral labels, stood groups predominantly
composed of foreign owned or domestically owned operators. ** That exercise
was a matter of identification, not quantification, and does not equate to the
panel’s establishing that the national treatment to which a foreign entity is
entitled is that treatment accorded to the largest group, the arithmetic average,
the arithmetic mean, or some other proportion of domestic like entities.

56. “Another factor makes a case under Article 1102 of NAFTA quite different from
Bananas. NAFTA plainly contemplates a single investor invoking the national
treatment requirements to obtain damages from a Party, where particular
govermmental measures have accorded its investment less favourable treatment.
As Canada admits, if that measure is de jure discriminatory, it will violate
Article 1102. If the measure is facially neutral, the question becomes whether,
behind that neutrality, the measure disadvantages the foreign owned
investment. In addressing that question, there is no need to identify the foreign

owned investment — it is right there urging its rights.

 

38 As mentioned above, Canada raises two other aspects of the EC’s Bananas regime:

allocations of licenses based on activity functions and allocations to alleviate consequences of
hurricanes. As in the analysis of operator status, the panel concluded that categories labeled
neutrally were, in fact, composed principally of EC or non-EC entities. See Bananas at 11
7.354 — 7.368, 7.386 — 7.393.

57.

58.

59.

36

37

38

As Bananas shows, the same is not true under GATS. There, the vindication of
rights is left to the national government of those companies allegedly
disadvantaged, and the analysis of the challenged measures is, perforce, made on
a sector basis (“services or service providers”). Finally, at bottom, the prohibited
activity is, unlike in NAFTA, a modification in the conditions of competition, a
standard that may under certain circumstances require comparative analysis of
how the various competitors are being treated. For these reasons, the Tribunal
finds that Bananas does not support Canada’s theory of disproportionate
disadvantage as applied to NAFTA.

b:~ European Communities ~ Measures Concerning Asbestos and Asbestos
Containing Products.**

The “Asbestos” proceeding considered a French law prohibiting the import,
production and sale of asbestos and asbestos-containing products.*” Canada
challenged the law under, among other things, the national treatment provisions
found in Article IiI:4 of the GATT.

The GATT provision in issue zequired member states to accord products of
other members treatment “no less favorable” than that accorded its own like
products. Since, as a result of the law in dispute, no asbestos or asbestos-
containing products were made or sold in France,** the panel had to determine

whether a like product to asbestos existed in France. After considering the

WT/DS135/R, September 18, 2000.
Decree No. 96-1133, December 24, 1996.
Asbestos 1 8.91.

24

physical characteristics, end uses, customer expectations and the like, the panel
concluded that certain “PVA,” glass and cellulose fibers were “like” asbestos
fibers and that fibro-cement products were “like” asbestos fiber products.*?
Having found the existence ot domestic like products not similarly banned, the
panel concluded that the French law was a de jure violation of Article I11:4,*
adding that it was consequently unnecessary “to determine whether there is any
de facto discrimination between these products.”**

60. Canada reads this run of the mill analysis as supporting its disproportionate
disadvantage standard. In order to do so, Canada first recharacterizes the
Frérich law as a de facto violation of national treatment, presumably since it did
not mention any other products or refer to Canada, the world’s primary source
of asbestos fibre.** Then Canada argues that the effect of the prohibition on
asbestos disproportionately disadvantaged the foreign product, since, while
France produced a substitute, it did not mine asbestos or make asbestos

39

Asbestos {1 8.112 — 8.150; those findings of “likeness” were reportedly reversed on
appeal. See Financial Times March 12, 2001.

40

Asbestos 91 8.154 - 8.157.
‘al Asbestos { 8.156 (see also 1 8.155). Nonetheless, the panel found that the ban of
asbestos from France was justified as a public health measure under paragraph (B) and the
introductory clause of Article XX of the GATT 1994.

a Response at 4-5.

3 The panel's finding of de jure discrimination seems to have been based on the fact that
the law specifically addressed asbestos, the allegedly injured product. See Asbestos at 1 8.155.
The very uncertainty about whether some measures would be de facto or de jure violations
must at least raise doubts about the efficacy of the proposed disproportionate disadvantage
standard, which, Canada has stated, would only apply in de facto cases.

25

61.

62.

45

46

products.“* That statement is true, but there is nothing in the panel’s report
that suggests any reliance whatsoever on that disproportionality as an element
of its analysis of the requirements of national treatment. Once the panel found
domestic like products to asbestos, the imports from Canada could lay claim to
treatment accorded those products.

c. United States — Measures Affecting Alcoholic and Malt Beverages
(“Beer” 5

The “Beer” matter involved the regulation of sales of beer, wine and cider by the
states of the United States Canada refers to the panel’s analysis of one of
those state laws, Alaska’s licensing fees for beer and wine, which were applicable
only to sales through wholesalers. Domestic breweries could avoid those fees by
selling directly to retailers; although the only two domestic Alaskan brewers did
use wholesalers and paid the fee.‘”

The panel found that Alaska’s requirement that imported beer and wine be sold
through wholesalers violated GATT Article I1I:4. The fact that in-state
brewers could avoid the fee, even if they chose not to do so, made the mandatory

use of wholesalers by foreign suppliers a discriminatory denial of national

Phase 2 Supplemental Counter Memorial, at 1 97.
DS23/R - 398/206 March 16, 1992.

Under the 21" Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, states are given authority to

regulate importation and possession for sale of alcoholic beverages.

a7

48

Beer 19 5.53 — 5.54.

Beer 1 5.54.

26

treatment. Since the discrimination was on the face of the measure, it may
fairly be said to represent a case of de jure denial of national treatment.”

63. Far-from supporting Canada’s *heory of di:proportionate disadvantage, the Beer
panel’s decision found a denial of national treatment despite the fact that both
of the Alaskan brewers were in precisely the same position, i.e., using
wholesalers and paying the fee, as the foreign brewers. To arrive at its holding,
the panel compared the treatment accorded imported beer with a hypothetical
Alaskan brewer taking advantage of its right not to use a wholesaler. It is hard
to think of a case more appropriate for applying the theory Canada asserts,
which, after all, is posited on an alleged requirement that actual disadvantage be
measured before a denial of national treatment can be found. The Beer panel
did not do so.

d. S. D. Myers v. Canada.

64. Canada also relies on the recent NAFTA Chapter 11 decision in S. D. Myers v.
Canada* to support its position on national treatment. That case involved
Canadian measures prohibiting export of PCBs and PCB wastes.®” The investor,

a corporation organized in the United States claimed, among other things, that

69

The Tribunal notes, however, that Canada considers the measure to be “facially
neutral” and the case to be one of de facto discrimination. See Response at 5. This stance
shows again that there can be uncertainty in discerning into what camp borderline cases may
fall.

so See, e.g. Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 1 441; Phase 2 Supplemental Counter Memorial

at 1105.
sl “Partial Award” dated November 13, 2000 (“Myers”).

$2 Myers 1126.

27

65.

66.

the Canadian export restrictions violated the national treatment provisions of
Article 1102. The claimant asserted that the export ban effectively barred it
from competing for PCB wast? disposal business in Canada, while Canadian
companies, which had access to processing facilities located in Canada, were not
similarly restrained. The tribunal agreed.**

Canada places reliance on the Myers tribunal’s statement that —

in assessing whether a measure is contrary to a national treatment norm,
the following factors should be taken into account:

. whether the practical effect of the measure is to create a
disproportionate l‘enefit for nationals over non nationals;

ae aweeSS
Specifically, Canada asserts that the tribunal’s finding of de facto discrimination
“clearly” was based on the disproportionate effect of the export ban, which
applied only to non-nationals.**
The Tribunal disagrees. Once the Myers tribunal found that the claimant and
its Canadian competitors were in “like circumstances,”*” the finding of a denial
of national treatment was a foregone conclusion. That is, the situation at that

Point was that two Canadian companies were free to operate, while their

Myers 1 131.
Myers 1 256.
Myers 1252.
Response at 1.

Myers 17 243 — 251.

28

67.

68.

58

American competitor was effectively out of business.** Weighing of
proportionate advantages and disadvantages was not required, and in the context
of the Myers fact situation, the word “disproportionate” in the passage quoted
above was wholly unnecessary.» Whatever the meaning of the phrase as used
by the Myers tribunal, there is nothing in that case to support the contention of
Canada that, where domestic companies are receiving varying treatment from
the host government, foreign companies (of NAFTA origin) are entitled only to
the treatment accorded the preponderance of those domestic companies.
Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects Canada’s assertion that WIO/GATT and
NAFTA precedents support its position on disproportionate disadvantage.
e. Other precedents
Indeed, precedents exist for the contrary position. For example, in United States
— Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930, the United States argued that the law
under dispute contained elements that might, in practice, provide advantages to
imported products that were not available to domestically produced competitive
products. The panel rejected that approach, stating:
The Panel therefore considered that, in order to establish whether the “no
less favourable treatment standard of Article III:4 is met, it had to assess
whether or not Section 337 in itself may lead to the application to
imported products of treatment less favourable than that accorded to

The tribunal was confronted with arguments that the discrimination was justified

(Myers 9% 152-153, 255), but these issues had no bearing on whether Canada had denied the
claimant national treatment.

59

That is, once the tribunal found any kind of significant benefit for nationals over non-

nationals, the predicate for a violation of Article 1102 was satisfied.

60

1/6439 — 368/345, January 1989.

29

products of United States origin. It noted that this approach is in
accordance with previous practice of the CONTRACTING PARTIES in °
applying Article III, which has been to base their decisions on the
distinctions made by the laws, regulations or requirements themselves
and on the potential impact, rather than on the actual consequences for
specific imported products.

The Panel further found that the “no less favorable” treatment
requirement of Article II:4 has to be understood as applicable to each
individual case of imported products, The Panel rejected any notion of
balancing more favourable treatment of some imported products against
less favourable treatment of other imported products. If this notion were
accepted, it would entitle a contracting party to derogate from the no less
favourable treatment obligation in one case, or indeed in respect of one
contracting party, on the ground that it accords more favourable
treatment in some other vase, or to another contracting party. Such an
interpretation would lead to great uncertainty about the conditions of
competition between imported and domestic products and thus defeat the
“purposes of Article IIT.

69. The Beer case ruled on matters beyond the state distribution laws to which
Canada has drawn attention. One such ruling related to the U.S. federal excise
tax on beer, which provided a lower rate for the first 60,000 barrels produced by
brewers making less that 2,000,000 barrels per year. The lower rate was not
available to imported beer. In defense of this treatment, the United States
pointed out that the lower tax rate applied to a very small portion of domestic
beer production.. The panel stated —

[T]he fact that only approximately 1.5 per cent of domestic beer in the
United States is eligible for the lower tax rate does not immunize this
United States measure from the national treatment obligations of
[GATT] Article II.
al Section 337 11 5.13-5.14, emphasis added. Accord, Canada ~ Term of Patent
Protection, where the panel rejected Canada’s contention that, because its law complied with

the WTO rules on the average, there was no violation of TRIPS Agreement requirements.
WT/DS170/R May §, 2000, ff 6.99 - 6.100.

a Beer at 15.6.

30

70.

71.

Canada’s disproportionate disadvantage theory would have required a different
result. The panel would have been obligated to find that the predominate
treatment accorded to U.S. brewers called for the higher tax and that the
Canadian imports would thus have no right to any better treatment.

Canada contends that these cases are distinguishable because they involve de
jure, rather than de facto, discrimination. We have already seen that it is not
always clear whether a measure is a de jure or de facto case, but even if it were,
Canada has presented no reasons to justify treating the two forms of
disadvantage differently. Indeed, the recognition that national treatment can be
denied through de facto measures has always been based on an unwillingness to
allow circumvention of that right by skillful or evasive drafting. Applying
Canada’s proposed more onerous mules to de facto cases could quickly
undermine that principle. That result would be inconsistent with the
investment objectives of NAFTA, in particular Article 102(1){b) and (c), to
promote conditions of fair competition and to increase substantially investment
opportunities.

These views are strengthened by consideration of the practical implications of
Canada’s position. In this case, Canada’s disproportionate disadvantage
approach would require the Investor to ascertain whether there are any other
American owned lumber producing companies among the more than 500

softwood lumber quota holders operating in Canada. If so, the treatment

 

63

See text at fn. 43 and fn. 49 above.

31

72.

73.

accorded those companies as a whole would have to be measured and then
weighed against the predominant treatment, whatever that might mean,
accorded Canadian companies operating in like circumstances. A violation of
Article 1102 could then only be found if the differing treatment between the
class of American investments and their Canadian competitors in like
circumstances is “disproportionately” in favour of the domestic investments,
whatever that might mean.
Simply to state this approach is to show how unwieldy it would be and how it
would hamstring foreign owned investments seeking to vindicate their Article
1702 rights. Only in the simplest and most obvious cases of denial of national
treatment could the complainant hope to make a case for recovery. The
Tribunal is unwilling to take a step that would so weaken the provisions and
objectives of NAFTA and, for the reasons stated, rejects Canada’s
disproportionate disadvantage test.
3. Determination of "in like circumstances."

a. Introduction
As noted, NAFTA Article 1102(1) and (2) require a Party to accord another
Party’s investors and investments treatment no less favourable than it accords
its own investors and investments that are “in like circumstances.” Thus, in
determining whether Canada has violated Article 1102, it is necessary to
identify the domestic entities whose treatment should be compared with that

accorded the Investor and the Investment.

32

74. The measures under consideration in this case limit, in one way or another, the
Investment’s ability to export and sell softwood lumber to the United States. “
Some Canadian sellers of the product are similarly limited. Not surprisingly, it
is those entities that Canada argues are in like circumstances to the Investment.
The Investor, also not surprisingly, argues that any Canadian softwood lumber
producers not limited or less restrictively limited than the Investment should be
considered in like circumstances.*

75. The Tribunal must resolve this dispute by defining the meaning of “like
circumstances.” It goes without saying that the meaning of the term will vary
according to the facts of a given case.®* By their very nature, “circumstances” are
context dependent and have no unalterable meaning across the spectrum of fact
situations.” And the concept of “like” can have a range of meanings, from

“similar” all the way to “identical.” In other words, the application of the like

se We address below the details of these limitations.

$s Initial Phase Memorial, at 11 78 - 79.
a Both the Investor and Canada agree that the “circumstances” pertinent to Article 1102
must be determined in light of the surrounding facts. See, ¢.g., Initial Phase Memorial at 1 66;
Initial Phase Counter Memorial at 1 189; Initial Phase Supplemental Memorial at 1 57.

7 Webster defines “circumstance” to include: "a specific part, phase, or attribute of the
surroundings or background of an event, fact or thing or of the prevailing conditions in which
it exists or takes place,” and “the total complex of essential attributes and attendant adjuncts
of a fact or action.” Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1986).

8 Id. These definitions must, of course, be considered in the light of the Vienna
Convention, particularly Article 31(1), which provides that “the ordinary meaning [is] to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”
Accordingly, the analysis and interpretation of Article 1102 of NAFTA is initially informed by
the ordinary meaning of its terms. As the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization
expressed it: ”... interpretation must be based above all on the text of the treaty". Japan -

33

circumstances standard will require evaluation of the entire fact setting
surrounding, in this case, the genesis and application of the Regime.”

76. Animportant element of the surrounding facts will be the character of the
measures under challenge. In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with the NAFTA
Chapter 11 tribunal in Myers v. Canada, which stated: “In considering the
meaning of ‘like circumstances’ under Article 1102 of the NAFTA, it is similarly
necessary to keep in mind the «»verall legal context in which the phrase
appears.””” The Tribunal addresses that legal context first and then turns to the
other facts of this case.

~~ b The legal context of “like circumstances.”

77. The Investor submits that the legal context of Article 1102 includes “the trade

and investment-liberalizing objectives of the NAFTA." The Tribunal agrees.

Canada argues that the legal context also includes the entire background of its

Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, WT/DS8/AB/R, WT/DS10/AB/R, WT/DS11/AB/R, October 4,
1996, at 12.

° The SLA itself is not the object of the claim here. The Investor cannot and does not
challenge the SLA; it is a treaty between two of the NAFTA Parties and not a "measure"
covered by Chapter 11 of NAFTA. The Investor's attack is directed at and limited to Canada's
implementation of the SLA via the Regime, its planning, design, development, content,
preparation, implementation and administration. As discussed below, the Tribunal does not
reach the question whether amendment of the SLA could properly be considered to be a
measure under the Regime.

70 Partial Award dated November 13, 2000 at 1 245.

a Initial Phase Memorial, at {1 64.

34

disputes with the United States concerning softwood lumber trade between the
two countries.” Again, the Tribunal agrees.

78. In evaluating the implications of the legal context, the Tribunal believes that, as
a first step, the treatment accorded a foreign owned investment protected by
Article 1102(2) should be compared with that accorded domestic investments in
the same business or economic sector.”* However, that first step is not the last
one. Differences in treatment will presumptively violate Article 1102(2), unless
they have a reasonable nexus to rational government policies that (1) do not

distinguish, on their face or de facto, between foreign-owned and domestic

 

72

See, e.g., Phase 2 Counter Memorial at {1 498-514.
3 The OECD's analysis, National Treatment for Foreign-Controlled Enterprises, declared
in considering language similar to Article 1102(2):

As regards the expression "in like situations”, the comparison between foreign-
controlled enterprises established in a Member country and domestic
enterprises in that Member country is valid only if it is made between firms
operating in the same sector.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (1993; OECD, Paris) at 22. This is
not to say, however, that the economic sector will be determinative. The OECD declaration
went on to state:

More general considerations, such as the policy objectives of Member countries,
could be taken into account to define the circumstances in which comparison
between foreign-controlled and domestic enterprises is permissible inasmuch as
those objectives are not contrary to the principle of National Treatment. In any
case, the key to determining whether a discriminatory measure applied to
foreign-controlled enterprises constitutes an exception to National Treatment is
to ascertain whether the discrimination is motivated, at least in part, by the fact
that the enterprises concerned are under foreign control.

35

companies, and (2) do not otherwise unduly undermine the investment
liberalizing objectives of NAFTA.”

79. Inone respect, this approach echoes the suggestion by Canada that Article 1102
prohibits treatment that discriminates on the basis of the foreign investment's
nationality.”> The other NAFTA Parties have taken the same position.’
However, the Tribunal believes that the approach proposed by the NAFTA
Parties would tend to excuse d3crimination that is not facially directed at
foreign owned investments. A formulation focusing on the like circumstances
question, on the other hand, will require addressing any difference in treatment,
demanding that it be justified by showing that it bears a reasonable relationship
to rational policies not motivated by preference of domestic over foreign owned
investments. That is, once a difference in treatment between a domestic and a
foreign-owned investment is discerned, the question becomes, are they in like
circumstances? It is in answering that question that the issue of discrimination

May arise.

ied The Tribunal believes that the latter test will rarely apply and does not think it useful
now to speculate on the kind of fact situations that would bring it into play. Nonetheless, it is
important to recognize that the fundamental purposes of NAFTA, as expressed in its Article
102, may need to supplement the former test.

7% Initial Phase Counter-Memorial, at 1 8, Canada's Submission of June 1, 2000, at 11 6,
8,9 &10; Phase 2 Counter-Memorial at 17 440, 462, 466; Phase 2 Supplemental Counter-
Memorial, at 17 94, 98.

76 United States First Article 1128 Submission, April 7, 2000, at 1 3; United States
Second Article 1128 Submission, May 25, 2000, at 1 3; Mexico’s Supplemental Article 1128
Submission, May 25, 2000, at Section A.1, pp. 2 and 3 of 11.

36

81.

82.

83.

For its part, the Investor raises another important question relating to the legal
context of the measures to be evaluated:
If the measure is applied in a manner that has the effect of providing a
less satisfactory competitive position to a foreign company, can the state
applying the measure use the very same elements of the measure that
leads to the discriminatory treatment in question to justify why the
competitors are actually not in "like circumstances"? The answer must
be no. Otherwise a state could merely manipulate the definition of what
is a "like investment” through the design of the measure itself. National
treatment would be rendered meaningless as a principle. ””
In other words, does NAFTA permit the Parties to reach an agreement that is
not a “measure” under Chapter 11, and then permit one of those Parties to use
the substance of that agreement to create an unchallengeable basis for
discrimination? The Tribunal believes that if the situation were to arise, it
could be evaluated as stated above, i.e., whether there is a reasonable nexus
between the measure and a rational, non-discriminatory government policy,
whether those policies are embodied in statute, regulation or international
agreement.
With this analysis of legal context in mind, the Tribunal will now address the
facts of this matter pertinent to the like circumstances issue.
c. Factual determinations.
The history of the softwood lumber dispute between the United States and
Canada prior to the SLA and the evolution of the softwood lumber Export
Control Regime under the SLA are described elsewhere in this Award and in the

Tribunal's Interim Award in this case dated June 26, 2000. What follows is an

Initial Phase Supplemental Memorial, at 1 56.

37

84.

85.

86.

87.

analysis of the cases where the Investment was accorded treatment different
from that of other softwood lumber producers in Canada.

1) Treatment of softwood lumber producers in the non-covered provinces
The softwood lumber Export Control Regime did not apply in the non-covered
provinces, that is all the provinces other than B.C., Alberta, Ontario and
Quebec. Under the SLA, producers in those non-covered provinces could freely
export softwood lumber to the United States in unlimited quantities, without
the payment of any export fees. That was the case for all softwood lumber
producers in those non-covered provinces, Canadian and foreign-owned alike.
Consequently, all softwood lumber producers in the non-covered provinces were
afforded more favourable treatment than producers in the covered provinces,
including the Investment.

Canada argues that in negotiating the SLA, both parties determined which were
to be the covered provinces and that that determination was reasonably based
upon the approximately twenty-year ongoing softwood lumber trade dispute
between Canada and the United States. Specifically, at the time the SLA was
negotiated, B.C., Alberta, Ontario and Quebec accounted for 95% of Canada's
softwood lumber exports to the United States, and only those provinces faced a
real threat of countervailing duty (“CVD”) actions by the U.S. Department of
Commerce.

The Investor asserts that all Canadian softwood lumber producers faced such a

threat, but the evidence shows that, although a number of CVD cases addressed

38

Canadian softwood lumber imports, the United States never made a final
determination against producers in the non-covered provinces. Consequently,
the Tribunal finds that the decision to implement the SLA through a regime
effecting controls only against exports to the United States from covered
provinces was reasonably related to the rational policy of removing the threat of
CVD actions. Since the decisioa affects over 500 Canadian owned producers
precisely as it affects the Investor, it cannot reasonably be said to be motivated
by discrimination outlawed by Article 1102.

88. Based on that analysis, the producers in the non-covered provinces were not in
like circumstances with those in the covered provinces. Accordingly, the
T. ribunal finds no breach by Canada of its national treatment obligations by
virtue of its treatment of producers in the non-covered provinces. ”
2) Treatment of softwood lumber producers in the covered provinces

89. The Investor argued that, since the advent of the SLA, B.C.’s relative proportion

of total Canadian softwood lumber production and total exports of softwood

78

Prior to the signature of the SLA, in addition to the four covered provinces, Canada had
placed lumber produced in Manitoba on the Export Control List. According to McDonald,
that measure reflected discussions between Canada and representatives of Manitoba and
Saskatchewan about whether it might be desirable to issue export permits for softwood lumber
originating from those provinces for monitoring purposes only. There had never been any
question of those two provinces being included in the Softwood Lumber Quota Regime as such,
since the forest management programs of those two provinces had never been determined by
the U.S. Department of Commerce to confer countervailable subsidies. Monitoring exports
from Manitoba and Saskatchewan was viewed as a way to address possible circumvention of
the SLA by softwood lumber producers in the covered provinces. While Manitoba was willing
to opt into the export permit system, it wished to remain in tandem with Saskatchewan in that
tegard, and when Saskatchewan decided not to be included in the export permit system,
Manitoba also withdrew. Consequently, Manitoba was never a covered province and was never
included in the Softwood Lumber Export Permit System. McDonald Affidavit, March 24,
2000, at 11 37-38.

39

90.

91.

92.

lumber to the United States has steadily declined. In contrast, the Investor
notes, Quebec’s shares of that production and of those exports have steadily
increased. There have also been substantial percentage increases, albeit far
smaller quantitatively, in the shares of the other covered provinces, Alberta and
Ontario.

Canada has submitted that thee decreases and increases were but a
continuation of trends already in place prior to the SLA. The witnesses
Waverman (called by the Investor) and Vertinsky (called by Canada), each one
using different starting points, produced analyses showing trend lines, each
rising or descending at different degrees, depending upon which year was used as
the point of commencement. The Tribunal cannot reach any reasoned
conclusions based upon those analyses.

Notwithstanding that determination, it is true that, prior to the SLA, more
investments in new mills and to increase existing mills' capacity were being
made in Quebec than in B.C. Market conditions, including the availability of
mature forests for cutting and production and return on investment, were
factors that had caused and encouraged those pre-SLA trends.

These economic circumstances of the softwood lumber industries in the covered
provinces did have an important effect on one aspect of the Regime, the
assignment of quotas to new entrants. Like many quota programs restricting

production and sales, the Regime made a provision for new entrants, particularly

40

93.

9

where investments had already been made.” The Investor does not dispute that
accommodation for new entrants was necessary and reasonable.*°

The Tribunal does not accept the Investor's argument that new entrant quota
allocations should have followed the same percentage distribution among the
four covered provinces as did the EB and LFB allocations. The special nature
and character of new entrant provisions required that allocations be made based
upon where the qualified new entrants were located, and their locations were
necessarily inconsistent with a tidy percentage distribution among the covered
provinces. The effects of the decision to set aside quota for new entrants were
shaped by those economic factors, but the Regime did not create them.
Consequently, it cannot be fairly asserted that the Regime accentuated or
otherwise enhanced the underlying effects of the economic changes. It was the
underlying economics of the softwood lumber industry in Canada that placed
the Investment and other producers in B.C. in unlike circumstances to those in
the other covered provinces. For those reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the
new entrants’ allocation choice by Canada had a reasonable nexus with the
rational policy of providing for new entrants and it had no elements of

discrimination against foreign-owned producers.

Canada treated all applications for new entrant allocations of quota on the basis of an

established and known list of criteria that were objectively applied to all applicants, without
regard to whether they were Canadian or foreign-owned. The Investment did not qualify as a
new entrant and made no request for new entrant quota. See discussion at 11 120-121 below.

80

See, e.g. Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. XII at 57:20 - 58:8.

41

94.

95.

96.

97.

below.

For the same reasons, the Tribunal cannot determine that B.C.’s decreasing
shares of total Canadian production and exports to the United States (as well as
Quebec’s increased shares of both) can be laid at the doorstep of the Regime; nor
can those facts constitute a breach by Canada of its national treatment
obligations under Article 1102(2).

Similarly, the Tribunal concludes that there is no violation of Article 1102
arising from Canada’s other allocations for new entrants or measures it took to
address errors and omissions or hardship cases. The Investment was not in like
circumstances to the new entrants, and it never made application for
consideration under the Regime of any alleged errors, omissions or hardships
affecting its interests.”

3) Treatment of softwood lumber producers in British Columbia.

The Investment's three lumber mills, situated at Castlegar, Grand Forks and
Midway, are all located in B.C., within what is commonly referred to as the
“interior” of that province. Softwood lumber producers in the province are also
located in the “coastal” region.

Based upon evidence produced by the parties, the Tribunal firstly concludes that,
at least until the advent of the stumpage reductions discussed below, the
Investment received treatment no less favorable than that accorded Canadian-

owned producers throughout B.C. Indeed, the Investor has not contended

These aspects of the Regime are further addressed in the discussion of Article 1105,

42

98.

99.

100.

otherwise, apart from its allegations of discrimination allegedly inherent in the
Regime, which the Tribunal addressed above.

The Super Fee was introduced to settle a dispute between Canada and the
United States concerning reductions in stumpage fees charged by B.C., which
‘were instituted on June 1, 1998. For coastai jroducers, the reduction was Can
$8.10 per cubic metre; for interior producers it was Can $3.50.

The difference in the stumpage reductions for interior and coastal producers
arose from the decision of the BC government to divide the total dollar amount
budgeted for stumpage reduction evenly between the two regions. (That
decision was apparently made upon the recommendation of the B.C. industry.)
Since there was more timber harvested from Crown lands in the interior, the
reduction per cubic metre was smaller in that region." At that point, one might
have questioned whether the Investment, being in the interior, was being
treated less favourably than lumber producers in the coastal area. But that
question would relate to a measure taken by the B.C. govemment, a matter that
is not before this Tribunal.

In the event, the B.C. stumpage reductions provoked a complaint and then a
request for arbitration by the United States. Those proceedings in turn led to a
negotiated settlement, which provided for increased fees on some B.C. exports as

described above. That settlement arguably disadvantaged the Investment in

See George 3" Affidavit, October 4, 2000 at 1 124.

See discussion at 11 129-155 below.

43

101.

&%

two respects: (1) it (like other producers in the interior region) continued to
receive a lower benefit per cubic metre from the stumpage reductions than
producers in the coastal region and (2) its exports were subject to higher fees
than those of producers not using the UFB and LFB quotas to the same degree.
The Tribunal considers that neither of these putative disadvantages would
entitle the Investment to relief under Article 1102(2).

It is true that the settlement with the United States that led to the imposition
of the Super Fee did not differentiate between exports from the two regions of
B.C. That is, the settlement did nothing to rectify the imbalance, if there was
one,** between the treatment of coastal and interior producers under the
stumpage reductions. However, the discrepancy was not due to any action by
Canada; it was entirely the result of actions by the B.C. government.®* Because
the settlement was struck against this status quo of arguably different treatment
between coastal and interior producers, those producers cannot be said to have
been in “like circumstances” at the time of the settlement. Instead, the
Investment was in the arguably disadvantaged class that existed before anything
Canada did under the settlement or its implementation. As noted, a claim

based on that possible disadvantage is not before this Tribunal.

It is not entirely clear that a lower stumpage rate equates to an advantage over

producers in other areas who must pay a higher rate. There are other factors, like ease of
access and quality of timber, that will make timber for which the stumpage rate is higher still
cheaper in the long run to the producer. See Campbell testimony, May 2000 Tr., Vol. III
72:12 — 74:5,

85

Prior to 1998 different stumpage rates had been struck by B.C. between the two regions.

44

102.

103.

86

The second basis for possibly considering the Investment to be disadvantaged is
the settlement’s more onerous effects on producers, like the Investment, that
used LEB and UFB extensively. In effect, Canada chose to settle the dispute with
the United States by burdening only users of LFB and UFB, rather than the
entirety of those producers benefiting from the B.C. stumpage reductions.
Applying the legal considerations discussed above, the Tribunal finds that the
choice made by Canada to resolve the B.C. stumpage fee controversy in this
manner bears a reasonable relationship to a rational choice of remedies aimed at

avoiding a threat to the SLA.

‘The settlement undoubtedly had a greater adverse effect on some B.C. producers

than others, but there is no cci.:vincing evidence that it was based on any
distinction between foreign-owned and Canadian owned companies. Indeed,
there were some 132 B.C. companies using LFB quotas, each of which was
affected by the settlement and only one of which (as far as the Tribunal knows)
is owned by NAFTA investors. When it is recalled that this proceeding is to
evaluate measures to implement the SLA (and any amendment thereto) rather
than the SLA itself, the Tribunal cannot say that placing the burden exclusively

on users of LFB and UFB was not a rational choice of solution.”

The Tribunal does not suggest that there are no cases where the requirements of

NAFTA Chapter 11 would circumscribe the freedom of NAFTA parties to enter agreements
that would impinge on those requirements. Certainly, in construing such agreements, it
would be proper to give as much life to the Chapter 11 requirements as the language would
permit. But, this is not such a case, since there is no hint that the decision to place the burden
on the many users of LFB and UFB was motivated by the nationality of one of those users, the
Investment.

45

104.

105.

106.

107.

a7

Consequently, the Tribunal determines that implementation of the Super Fee
settlement did not deny the Investment national treatment in contravention of
Article 1102.
THE CLAIM UNDER ARTICLE 1105

Interpretation of Article 1105
The Investor claims that Canada’s implementation of the SLA violated NAFTA
Article 1105(1), which provides:

Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party

treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and

equitable treatment and full protection and security.
‘The Investor and Canada agree that this provision establishes a minimum
standard of treatment that applies apart from the treatment a NAFTA party may
accord to its own or to other countries’ investors and investments.*” They do
not agree, however, on the content of that minimum standard.
For its part, Investor asserts that the “international law” requirements of Article
1105 include (1) all the sources of international law found in Article 38 of
Statute of the International Court of Justice,** (2) the concept of “good faith”
(including pacta sunt servanda),® (3) the World Bank’s guidelines on foreign

direct investment,” (4) the NAFTA Parties’ other treaty obligations,®! and (5)

See, e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. I at 33:3-8 (Investor) and Vol. II at 20:7-15

(Canada).

See, e.g., Phase 2 Memorial at 1 103; November 2000 Tr., Vol. I at 25:24 - 27:11.

Article 38 of the Statute identifies treaties, custom, general principles, decisions and teachings
of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations as sources of international law.

89

”

See, e.g., Phase 2 Memorial at 11 109 - 125.
See, e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. I at 29:10 - 30:8.

46

108.

109.

»

92,

93

the body of domestic law of each NAFTA Party that addresses the exercise of
domestic regulatory authority.”

Canada disputes the suggestion that Article 1105 imports this broad range of
standards and argues that, before a violation of international law can properly be
found, the conduct in question must be “egregious.”** That word is not used in
NAFTA or, indeed, in the precedents on which Canada relies; Canada believes
the word “encapsulates” what it sees as an element recurring in those
precedents.

The precedents relied on by Canada addressed the content of the requirements
of international law, rather than the other factors referred to in Article 1105,
namely, “fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.”** The
language of Article 1105 suggests that those elements are included in the
requirements of international law, and both the Investor and Canada subscribe
to that reading,® albeit with vastly different views of the implications of that
reading, Canada sees its concept of the international law requirement (only
“egregious” misconduct covered) being applicable to the fairness elements, so
See, e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. I at 42:18-23.

See, e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. I at 42:24 — 43:3.
See, e.g., Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 1 309, where the threshold is described as

requiring “gross misconduct, manifest injustice or ”** an outrage, bad faith or the wilful
neglect of duty.” The use of “egregious” came at the November 2000 Hearing. See, e.g.,, Vol.
I at 40:06 - 41:13, 49:16-23, and 54:01-04, Vol. XIII at 59:01-17.

94

See November 2000 Tr., Vol. II at 54:01-04 and 58:8-20. In another instance, Canada

described the standard as getting to “the level where you are shocked by the actions, that when.
you're dealing with reprehensible conduct ***”. Id., Vol. XIII at 116:15-20.

95

For the sake of brevity, these elements collectively are called the “fairness elements.”

47

that, for example, a denial of fairness would have to be shocking to be a
violation of Article 1105.” The Investor sees the incorporation of the fairness
elements into international law as support for its view that international law
standards have progressed and have liberalized the “egregious” conduct
threshold that Canada finds in the older cases.

110. Another possible interpretation of the presence of the fairness elements in
Article 1105 is that they are additive to the requirements of international law.
That is, investors under NAFTA are entitled to the international law minimum,
plus the fairness elements. It is true that the language of Article 1105 suggests
otherwise, since it states that the fairness elements are included within

international jaw.” But that interpretation is clouded by the fact, as all parties

See, e.g., Phase 2 Memorial at § 102; Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 11 221, 224.
See, e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. XIII at 116:10-20.
., Novernber 2000 Tr., Vo}. XII at 51:13-25, 53:7 ~ 56:26.

This facially sound approach appears to be the basis for the comments of the NAFTA
Chapter 11 tribunal in Myers rendered in its Partial Award dated November 13, 2000. It
stated:

See, e.

 

The phrases ... fair and equitable treatment.., and ...full protection and
security... cannot be read in isolation. They must be read in conjunction with
the introductory phrase ...treatment in accordance with international law.

The Tribunal considers that a breach of Article 1105 occurs only when it is
shown that an investor has been treated in such an unjust or arbitrary manner
that the treatment rises to the level that is unacceptable from the intemational
perspective.

Myers at 11 262-263. As the majority in Myers found that Canada violated Article 1105
because it violated Article 1102, the tribunal’s quoted observations on the interpretation of
Article 1105 must be viewed as dicta. See id. at 11256, 266, 268. In any case, for the reasons
set out below, this Tribunal adopts a different interpretation.

48

agree, that the language of Article 1105 grew out of the provisions of bilateral
commercial treaties negotiated by the United States and other industrialized
countries. As Canada points out, these treaties are a “principal source” of the
general obligations of states with respect to their treatment of foreign
investment.’

lll. These treaties evolved over the years into their present form, which is embodied
in the Model Bilateral Investment Treaty of 1987.'°? Canada, the UK, Belgium,
Luxembourg, France and Switzerland have followed the Model.’ It provides as
follows:

s+. Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment,
shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be accorded
treatment less than that required by international law.'*
The Tribunal interprets that formulation as expressly adopting the additive

character of the fairness elements. Investors are entitled to those elements, no

The Tribunal also considered the decision rendered by the Chapter 11 tribunal in
Metalclad Corp. v. Mexico dated August 25, 2000. That tribunal determined that Mexico had
failed to accord the claimant fair and equitable treatment in accordance with international law,
but did not make any finding that the conduct in question had to meet any threshold standard
of egregiousness, outrageousness or the like.

The Tribunal also reviewed the Chapter 11 tribunal’s recent interim decision in
Loewen v. U.S. dated January 5, 2001. That decision did not address the issues before us.

The Tribunal understands that the Myers and Metalclad cases are under judicial review.
See, e.g., Phase 2 Memorial at 1 127; Phase 2 Counter Memorial at 1 252-254.

Jor Phase 2 Counter Memorial 1 2.46.
102 Reprinted in J.J. Vandenvelde, United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice.
R. Dolzer & M. Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties at 58.

toa Article 1.2.

49

matter what else their entitlem=nt under international law. A logical corollary
to this language is that compliance with the fairness elements must be
ascertained free of any threshold that might be applicable to the evaluation of

measures under the minirnum standard of international law.’

105 Accord, F. A. Mann, British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments,

52 The British Year Book of International Law (1981), 241, 244:

The terms “fair and equitabic treatment” envisage conduct which goes far
beyond the minimum standard and afford protection to a greater extent and
according to a much more objective standard than any previously employed
form of words. A tribunal would not be concerned with a minimum, maximum.
or average standard. It will have to decide whether in all the circumstances the
conduct in issue is fair and equitable or unfair and inequitable. No standard

‘~" defined by other words is likely to be material. The terms are to be understood
and applied independently and autonomously.

Also accord, UNCTAD, Fair and Equitable Treatment (1999) at 39-40 (citations omitted and
emphasis supplied):

This approach ~ fair and equitable treatment with full protection and security
on the one hand and treatment no less favourable than that required by
international law on the other — suggests that the two sets of standards are not
necessarily the same. To be sure, the reference to treatment no less favourable
than that required by international law could possibly be made ex abundante
cautela, but its presence in most bilateral treaties involving the United States
suggest that it is not perceived as verbiage.

Generally, therefore, the law on this point is characterized by some degree of
contradiction and uncertainty. If the fair and equitable standard is the same as
the international minimum standard which is traditionally una by capital-
exporting countries, then ref to fair and equi

instruments will incorporate by reference an established body of case se law on the
minimum standard for foreigners: States would fail to meet the minimum
standard, and, by this reasoning, the fair and equitable standard, if their acts
amounted to bad faith, wilful neglect, clear instances of unreasonableness or
lack of due diligence. [Citing Neer.] On the other hand, the instances in which
States have indicated or implied an equivalence between the fair and equitable
standard and the international minimum standard are sparse. Also, as noted
above, bearing in mind that the international minimum standard has itself been
an issue of controversy between developed and developing States for a
considerable period, it is unlikely that all States would have accepted the idea
that this standard is fully reflected in the fair and equitable standard without
clear discussion.

 

50

112. The Fourth Submission of the United States to this Tribunal, November 1,
2000, discusses the use of the fairness elements in the BITs. The United States
suggests that the term arose out of the OECD Draft Convention on the
Protection of Foreign Property proposed in 1963 and revised in 1967. The
commentary to that document stated that —

The phrase “fair and equitable treatment” *** indicates the standard set
by international law for the treatment due by each State with regard to
the property of foreign nations. *** The standard required conforms in
effect to the “minimum standard” which forms part of customary
international law.!°

It should be noted that the OECD Draft did not contain any reference to
treatment required by “international law.” Thus, the question how to interpret
the faimess elements where, as in the BITs and NAFTA, both concepts are

expressly included, was not an issue before the drafters of the OECD Draft.

These considerations point ultimately towards fair and equitable treatment not
being synonymous with the international minimum standard. Both standards
may overlap significantly with respect to issues such as arbitrary treatment,
discrimination and un bl but the of a provision assuring
fair and equitable treatment in an investment instrument does not
automatically incorporate the international minimum standard for foreign
investors. Where the fair and equitable standard is invoked, the central issue
remains simply whether the actions in question are in all the circumstances fair
and equitable or unfair and inequitable.

Also accord, Dolzer & Stevens, supra, at 60:

It is submitted here that the fact that parties to BITs have considered it
necessary to stipulate this [faix and equitable treatment] standard as an express
obligation rather than relied on a reference co international law and thereby
invoked a relatively vague concept such as the minimum standard, is probably
evidence of a self-contained standard. Further, some treaties refer to
international law in addition to the fair and equitable treatment, thus appearing
to reaffirm that international law standards are consistent with, but
complementary to, the provisions of the BIT.

OECD 1967 Draft Convention of the Protection of Foreign Property, reprinted 7 Int'l L.
Materials 117, 120 (1968).

106

$1

113. The United States acknowledges that “a few scholars” have concluded that the
faimess elements in the BITs are distinct from customary international law
standards.’ The Tribunal considers that those scholars and other authorities
are correct and that the language and evident intention of the BITs makes the
discrete (i.e., additive) standards interpretation the proper one. A contrary
reading would do violence to the BIT language.

114, The United States asserts that,:whatever the meaning of the BITs, the drafters
of NAFTA Chapter 11 “excluded any possible conclusion that the parties were
diverging from the customary international law concept of fair and equitable
treatment.”! The United States supports this contention solely by pointing to
the language of Article 1105; it offered no other evidence to the Tribunal that
the NAFTA parties intended to reject the additive character of the BITs."”°
Consequently, the suggestions of the United States on this matter do not enjoy

the kind of deference that might otherwise be accorded to representations by

107___- United States Fourth Submission at 1 6. In fact, there seems to be at least as much

authority for the “distinct concept” interpretation as for the contrary.

108 While the tribunal in the Myers case recognized that there is a relationship between
Article 1105 and the BITs, it apparently interpreted the BITs as simply establishing a
minimum standard of conduct. See Myers at 1259. By not appreciating the plain language of
the BITs, the Myers tribunal did not address the implications of that language on the proper
interpretation of Article 1105. For that reason, this Tribunal does not consider the Myers
Partial Award to be a persuasive precedent on this matter and will not be bound by it.

109‘ United States Fourth Submission at 1 7. Neither Mexico nor Canada has subscribed to
the version of the intent of the drafters put forward by the United States

no The Tribunal requested Canada and the other NAFTA parties to produce any evidence

to support the contention of the United States. See November 2000 Tr., Vol. II at 4:16 - 5:1
and Vol. V at 2:3 — 4:20. None was provided. See id. Vol III at 4:16-23. Both Mexico and the
United States made post-hearing submissions to the Tribunal; both were silent on this issue.

52

parties to an international agreement as to the intentions of the drafters with
respect to particular provisions in that agreement.

115. Indeed, notwithstanding the position espoused by the United States, there are
very strong reasons for interpreting the language of Article 1105 consistently
with the language in the BITs. First, there is the basic unlikelihood that the
Parties to NAFTA would have intended to curb the scope of Article 1105 vis a
vis one another when they {at least Canada and the United States) had granted
broader rights to other countries that cannot be considered to share the close
relationships with the NAFTA parties that those Parties share with one another.

NAFTA begins by stressing “the special bonds of friendship and cooperation
among their nations.” Article 103(2) expressly provides that, in the event of a
conflict, NAFTA prevails over GATT and “other agreements to which [the
NAFTA] Parties are party.” ”! hus, on general principles of interpretation, it
would be difficult to ascribe to the NAFTA Parties an intent to provide each
other’s investments more limited protections than those granted to other
countries not involved jointly in a continent-wide endeavor aimed, among other
things, at “increas{ing} substantially investment opportunities in the territories

of the Parties.”""* The Tribunal views these factors to be relevant to the

ut NAFTA Preamble, clause 1.

12 The quoted language appears in Article 103(1). It can be admitted that, under ordinary
principles of treaty i the i of a later 1 would prevail
over earlier ones. See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 30(3). Nonetheless,
by including Article 103, the Parties were emphasizing the special importance to themselves of
the NAFTA undertakings.

ua NAFTA Article 102 (1) (c).

53

116.

1s

interpretation of NAFTA as describing its “context, object and purpose.” Those
factors are, of course, pertinent to definition of the “ordinary meaning” of Article
1105,'* and Article 102(2) of NAFTA itself requires the Parties “to interpret and
apply the provisions of this Agreement in the light of the objectives set out in
paragraph 1” thereof, which include “increas[ing] substantially investment
opportunities.”

It is doubtful that the NAFTA parties would want to present to potential
investors and investments from other NAFTA countries the possibility that they
would have no recourse to protection against anything but egregiously unfair
cotiduct. The aim of NAFTA seems to be quite the opposite, that is, to present
to investors the kind of hospitable climate that would insulate them from
political risks or incidents of unfair treatment. Yet Canada’s reading of Article
1105 would raise just those concems — it would permit a NAFTA Party to take
measures against investors and investments from other NAFTA countries that
its domestic law would prevent it from taking against its own investors and
investments and that BITs would preclude taking against investors and
investments from a number of other countries. It is difficult to believe that the
drafters of NAFTA consciously intended such a result, and, as noted, Canada,
Mexico and the United States have provided no evidence whatsoever that they

did.

See Vienna Convention Article 31 (3). Canada agreed with the importance of context

in the interpretation of NAFTA. See e.g., November 2000 Tr., Vol. II at 19:17 — 20:5.

54

117.

118.

us

us

In addition to the context, object and purpose of NAFTA, there is a practical
reason for adopting the additive interpretation to Article 1105. As noted, the
contrary view of that provision would provide to NAFTA investors a more
limited right to object to laws, regulation and administration than accorded to
host country investors and investments as well as to those from countries that
have concluded BITs with a NAFTA party. This state of affairs would surely
tun afoul of Articles 1102 and 1103, which give every NAFTA investor and
investment the right to national and most favoured nation treatment. NAFTA
investors and investments that would be denied access to the fairness elements
untrammeled by the “egregious” conduct threshold that Canada would graft
onto Article 1105 would simply turn to Articles 1102 and 1103 for relief.

The Tribunal is unwilling to attribute to the NAFTA Parties an intention that
would lead to such a patently absurd result.!'* Accordingly, the Tribunal
interprets Article 1105 to require that covered investors and investments receive
the benefits of the fairmess elements under ordinary standards applied in the
NAFTA countries, without any threshold limitation that the conduct
complained of be “egregious,” “outrageous” or “shocking,” or otherwise

extraordinary."'* For this reason, the Tribunal will test Canadian.

See Vienna Convention Axticle 32.
Of course, the minimum standards reach of Article 1105 would protect NAFTA

investors and investments against such conduct, even in the unlikely event it was ordinary
within a NAFTA Party.

55

119.

120.

7

implementation of the SLA against the fairness elements without applying that
kind of threshold."”

Application of Article 1105

The Investor challenges several elements of the Regime under Article 1105:

1. New Entrants

As noted above, an important part of the implementation of the SLA was
provision for new entrants.!® In October 1996 Canada issued a new entrant
questionnaire to more than 2,000 primary producers and remanufacturers in the
covered provinces; 218 of those companies made application for new entrant
status. Those applicants requested approximately 8.3 billion board feet in quota,
which far exceeded the reserve of 628 million board feet that had been set aside
for new entrants by the minister, after consultation with the provincial
governments and the softwood lumber industry as a whole. Because of the
extreme disparity between the reserve and total allocations requested by new
entrant applicants, very rigorous qualifications for eligibility were established.
The Investor did not apply for new entrant status and consequently received no

new entrant quota.

Under the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal’s determination makes it

unnecessary to review the many precedents stretching back into the early days of the
Twentieth Century to divine the current content of the international minimum standard. It is
also unnecessary to consider separately the claims advanced by the Investor (described in
paragraph 107 above) as to the contents of that standard.

1g

This provision came from a set-aside of a portion of the year 1 EB and LFB quotas and

from trigger price bonuses subsequently earned.

56

121.

122.

ns

The Investor complains that the result of the allocation of new entrant quota
‘was to move quota away from B.C. and in particular to remove it to Quebec. It
is correct that the higher share of new entrant allocations went to Quebec. But
as the Tribunal notes above,"’® this was the result of the fact that, when the SLA
came into effect, various economic factors had been causing greater investment
in new manufacturing capacity in Quebec than in B.C. Accordingly, the grant of
new entrant quota allocations reflected the pattern of where the new capacity
had been created. To have restricted the grant of quota according to historically
agreed patterns for existing production would have prevented many new
entrants from receiving an appropriate share of what was a relatively small
quota. The Tribunal does not consider that, by acting in this way, Canada
behaved unfairly or inequitably to the Investment.

2. Transitional Adjustment

The one-time transitional adjustment quota was devised in order to deal with
the problem created by the fact that, while the SLA came into effect on April 1,
1996, quotas were not allocated until October of that year. As a result, some
companies had almost fully used their quota allocations in the first part of the
year. The transitional adjustment enabled a company to borrow against its year
2 quota, effectively using more quota in year ] and suffering a reduction in year
2. This was a once only adjustment, and the quota allocated in this manner

‘was retumed to the pool for distribution in year 2 amongst companies that had
See 11 89 - 93 above.

57

123.

124.

not borrowed in this way. The Investor did not request or receive any allocation
of transitional quota in year 1. It did receive its share of the returned quota in
year 2.

The Investor complains that these transitional provisions benefited companies
that “rushed the border” during the early months of the SLA and thereby
reduced the year 1 quota for companies, like itself, that exercised restraint. The
Tribunal considers that Canada’s operation of the transitional adjustment to the
quota system was a reasonable response to the circumstances described above
and did not deny the Investment fair and equitable treatment.

3.... Wholesaler Issue

The Investor also alleges that Canada acted in an unfair and arbitrary manner
with respect to allocation of quota to the Investment by reason of its dealing
with the wholesaler issue. The matter arises in this way. When Canada
decided not to assign quota allocations directly to wholesalers, it had to devise a
method to ensure that exports by wholesalers were properly allocated to primary
producers and remanufacturers. Primary producers and remanufacturers could
and did report sales to Canadian wholesalers on their questionnaires; they could
not, however, know how much of their lumber Canadian wholesalers actually
exported to the United States. Canada relied on the questionnaires of
wholesalers for that information and developed a system of allocating those sales

to the various supplying primary producers and remanufacturers.!”
Valle 2™ Affidavit, October 6, 2000 at 1175-77.

58

125.

126.

127.

The Investor complains that Canada’s approach did not achieve accurate
numbers for wholesaler exports and that, in applying the wholesaler data to
modify quotas held by primary producers and remanufacturers, Canada took the
lower of the amounts reported by the wholesalers and the producers. The
Tribunal notes that, in the case-of the Investment, neither alleged defect in the
program had any adverse effect, since the Investment had reported on its
questionnaire responses all exports, directly or through wholesalers, as direct
exports.'*"_ In any event, the Tribunal finds that the approach taken by Canada
was a reasonable response to the difficulty with which it had to deal and cannot
be-characterized as unfair or inequitable.

4. B.C. Adjustment

In 1997, the Minister approved a special reallocation for 13 B.C. companies,
which was taken from the EB quota of other B.C. producers, including the
Investment. The reallocation was to offset certain errors and omissions, which
the B.C. Softwood Lumber Advisory Committee characterized as principally due
to wholesaler error and the Canadian government officials considered to be
largely related to the application of the B.C. averaging criteria. It appears to the
Tribunal that what gave rise to the need to adjust was a vaiiety of errors and
other factors applicable to the individual companies involved.

The Investor complained that the adjustments meant a reduction in the

Investment’s EB quota of some %foryear and that that reduction was not
See Tab 39.

59

128.

129.

122

justified by the alleged errors, omissions and hardships. The Investor also
asserts that the effects of those adjustments should have applied to all producers
in the covered provinces, not just to those in B.C.’

The Tribunal concludes that the adjustments were a reasonable response to
perceived errors, omissions and hardships, and cannot be said to violate
principles of fairness and equitable treatment. The application of the effects of
those adjustments to B.C. producers only was also reasonable, given the view
that at least a significant element of the justification was considered to be the
B.C. averaging criteria (which were not applicable in other provinces) and that,
to.confine those effects to B.C. producers, was what the B.C. Committee had
recommended.” For these reasons, the Tribunal does not consider that Canada
acted in an unfair and inequitable manner in making the B.C. adjustments.

5. Super Fee

The background is that in each province charges, known as stumpage fees, are

made for timber cut on Crown lands. The rates were fixed by the provincial

The Investor also suggests that the Investment should have been accorded treatment no

less favorable than that given to the beneficiaries of the adjustments. The Tribunal finds that,
since the Investment never argued that it was the victim of any error, omission or hardship, it
is not in like circumstances to those beneficiaries.

123

The Tribunal notes that the application of the B.C. averaging formula to the

Investment was in fact to its advantage since it, unlike others who were involved in the
adjustment exercise, had not suffered a significant drop in exports to the United States
between 1994 and 1995.

60

130.

131.

12a

governments and varied considerably. In B.C. different stumpage rates were
fixed for the coastal region and the interior.’

It will be recalled that the Regime operated initially on the basis that softwood
lumber producers in the four cuvered provinces were entitled to export lumber to
the United States at three leveis.'* First at EB in which case no fee was

charged. Above that was the LFB in which category a fee of $50 per thousand
board feet was charged. Beyond that, at UFB a fee of $100 per thousand board
feet was payable. Both fee levels were.subject to change to take account of
inflation. Relevant producers were assigned EB and LFB quota, but there was no
limit on UFB exports. Further suota allocations were made to the relevant
companies in respect of return: i allocations and also for Trigger Price Bonuses,
when the price of lumber in the United States exceeded specified levels.!7
Producers in the covered provinces that produced Jess than 10,000,000 board
feet annually were not exempt from paying LFB and UFB fees but were not
subject to the “speed bump” provisions designed to even out exports.'””

Overall, the SLA permitted annual exports of 14.7 billion board feet of softwood
lumber at EB level from the covered provinces, not including any trigger price

bonuses. The LEB level applied to the next 650 million board feet. In the event,

Smyth, Impact of U.S. and Japanese Consumption and North American Supplies on

Softwood Lumber Price 1991 to 2001, Tab 293, Table 81.

125

George 2nd Affidavit March 27, 2000 11 10-16; McDonald Affidavit March 24, 2000 1

53. See also Notice to Exporters 94 October 31, 1996, Tab 227.

126

127

George 2nd Affidavit 11 66-69.

George 2™ Affidavit 19 45-48.

61

132.

133.

128

EB was reduced to 14,186,000,000 board feet after making deductions for new
entrants’ reserve, transitional adjustment and ministerial reserve, and LFB was
similarly reduced to 490,000,000 board feet.!?* B.C. was allocated a 59% share of
the adjusted totals at each level.!”°

On June 1, 1998 the BC government reduced stumpage fees for timber cut on
Crown lands both on the coast and the interior. The U.S. government invoked
the dispute resolution provisions of the SLA, making the claim that this
reduction had the effect of subsidizing the production and export of lumber from
BC and was thus inconsistent with the SLA. Canada disputed this and claimed
that.changes in forest management practices were not covered by the SLA.'°
The dispute was taken before an arbitration panel, which conducted an oral
hearing in March 1999.

On August 26, 1999, just prior to the panel’s scheduled decision, Canada and
the United States reached an agreement to end the dispute by amending the SLA
to (a) reprice 90 million board feet of B.C. lumber from the LEB rate of $52.93
per 1000 board feet to the UFB rate of $105.86; (b) limit B.C. export of UFB

(including the repriced LFB) to 110 million board feet and (c) create a new Super

Ministerial Announcement of September 10, 1996, Tab 52; Valle 2™ Affidavit October

6, 2000 at 1 96; Smyth, op. cit., at 232 and Table 56.

129

130

See Valle 1* Affidavit, March 27, 2000 at # 107.

Submission of United States before SLA Arbitral Panel, Tab 261 at 11 21-22; Counter

Submission of Canada,Tab 262 at If 30-33.

62

Fee Base for all additional exports by B.C. companies at the level of $146.25 per
1,000 board feet.!*!

134. On October 21, 1999 the Governor General of Canada in Council promulgated
an Order in Council issuing Regulations amending the Softwood Lumber
Products Export Permit Fees Regulations.” The effect of the amendment was
that, with respect to softwood lumber products first manufactured in B.C. and
exported on or before March 31, 2000, the fees to be paid by the exporter for a
permit were:

(a) for LFB exports of 90,000,000 board feet, at a rate equivalent to UFB ; :
oe and
(b) for UFB exports in excess of 110,000,000 board feet, $146.25 per 1,000
board feet.

135. In relation to softwood lumber products first manufactured in B.C. and exported

during the year beginning April 1, 2000 the fee to be paid for a permit was:
(a) at a rate equivalent to the UFB for the greater of:
(i) LEB exports of 90,000,000 board feet or
(ii) LEB exports that exceed 272,000,000 board feet.
(b) for UFB exports in excess of-110,000,000 board feet, the sum of the UFB

and $40.39 per 1,000 board feet.

131 Exchange of letters Canada - United States dated August 26, 1999, Tab 179.

132 Regulations amending the Softwood Lumber Products Export Permit Fees Regulations
October 21, 1999, Tab 191.

63

136. The result of the amendment made in October 1999 can be summarized as

follows:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(a)

(e)

EB levels were unaffected by the amendment.

LEB quota was divided. Approximately 75% was treated as LEB at the
previously fixed rate.

As to the remainder, LFB quota up to the level of 90,000,000 board feet
was repriced at what had been the UEFB level (“RLFB”).

For exports between that figure and 110,000,000 board feet (available on
a first-come, first-served basis except for a small reserve) the UFB level
remained as before.

Above that level a new super fee price was imposed amounting to

$146.25 per 1000 board feet.'*

These arrangements applied only to softwood lumber first manufactured in B.C.

137. The allocations actually made to the Investment (taking into account the

modifications introduced by the Super Fee Regime) were as follows (Year 1 is the

period from April 1, 1996 to March 31, 1997).!*

133

1s¢

Notice to Exporters No. 120 September 3, 1999 Tab 233.
George 3rd Affidavit, October 4, 2000, Annex A.

64

 

138. Over that period the actual fee payable in respect of each category was raised

so that it had reached $52.93 per thousand board feet for LEB and $105.86

per thousand board feet for UFB by Year 4.1%

139. In year 4, the Super Fee regime reduced the Investment’s LFB allocation by

board feet. The remaining board feet became
repriced LFB (or RLFB). Those allocations remained the same for year 5.
The financial consequence for year 4 was to impose a further fee of some
on the Investment if it exported lumber up to the level of its year 3

LFB allocation of board feet.

140. The Press Release issued by the Government of Canada headed “B.C.

Stumpage Fees: Canada - U.S. Settlement” dated August 30, 1999 stated “At
current volumes these changes will affect about 1 per cent of B.C.’s total

lumber exports to the United States.”!*

Press release by Canada August 30, 1999, Tab 249.

Tab 249.

65

141. B.C.’s changes made to its stumpage fees that took effect from June 1, 1998
reduced the rate payable at the coast by an average of Can $8.10 per cubic
metre and in the interior by Can $3.50 per cubic metre.!*” As at the first
quarter 2.000 the average stumpage rate for softwood sawtimber was at the
coast Can $26.67 and in the interior Can $31.12.'** The Investment was an
interior producer.
142. Inits answer to the questions posed by the Tribunal in relation to Super Fee,
Canada stated:
Neither Canada nor the BC government contemplated allocating the
super fee based [on] the relative reduction in stumpage charges

see between coastal and interior producers. The super fee base, like the
LFB and UEFB, was intended to act as an export restraint for all
exporters of softwood lumber first manufactured in BC - not as a
direct offset to stumpage decreases. None of these fees differentiates
between coastal and interior BC producers.’

143. In each of the first three years of the SLA the Investment fully used its
allocation of EB and LFB quota. In year | it exported board feet at
UFB rates, In year 3 it exported : at UFB rates.’ In that year the
total exports from B.C. at UFB levels amounted to board feet.

The Investment thus exported approximately of all UFB exports from

137 George 3" Affidavit 1 124.
us Smyth, Tab 293, Table 81.

id Canada’s submission of documents responding to the Tribunal’s Document Requests

made on June 26, 2000, at 16.

40 See George 3" Affidavit, Annex A.

66

141

142

143

146

145

B.C. in that year. One other company, exported at a higher level. It
was a producer on the coast and was Canadian owned.'*!

144. In August 1999 Canada was aware that the repriced LFB was set at a level at
which it was uneconomic for many B.C. companies to ship lumber. To
address this problem in year 4 producers were allowed to return up to 25% of
their LFB quota in order to bring their entire LFB shipments within 75% of
their original LFB quota, thus enabling them to avoid paying for any lumber

exported at the RLFB level.*? The Investment did not return any quota at

any stage.'* In year 4 it exported 1 board
feet. It received an allocation of ° board feet as its share of trigger
price bonus. In addition it exported board feet at Super Fee
Level!

145. Canada estimated that the overall effect of B.C.’s sturmpage reduction, across
coastal and interior producers combined, amounted to a reduction of $14.44
per thousand board feet. The negotiated increase in relation to the Super Fee

was of the order of $40.00 per thousand board feet.'*

George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VI 22:2-15; Vol VII 50:14-25.
See George 2™ Affidavit 1 121. In prior years the limit was set at 10%.
George 2™ Affidavit 1111.

George 3" Affidavit Annex A.

George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VI 40:4-15; see also Canada’s Submission of

Documents Requested by the Tribunal Tab 72.

67

146.

147.

148.

Canada was aware of the concerns of non-quota holders in B.C. who had
always been required to export lumber at the UFB level and were now faced
with fees of $146.25 if required to export at the Super Fee Base. Accordingly,
in respect of year 4, out of the 20,000,000 board feet permitted to be
exported at UEFB level (being the difference between 90,000,000 repriced LFB
and the maximum UFB of 110,000,000 board feet), 2,000,000 board feet
were reserved for those who had no quota.!

Canada was also aware that the Investment’s UFB shipments in year 3 were

over of the B.C. total and that, therefore, the: methodology adopted

. would have a particularly adverse effect upon it should it continue to make

UEB shipments at those levels. The other large shipper at UFB levels in year
3, being a coastal producer benefited from the greater reduction in
stumpage rates applicable to its timber. Canada consulted neither company
about the imposition of the Super Fee; although Canada did consult with the
industry associations of which they were members.’*”

Canada did consider whether certain types of companies should be exempted
from the operation of the Super Fee altogether, including the Investment, but

decided not to do so.'**

George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VI 42:1-3, 49:20 ~ 50:2 and 52:6-25.

George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., at Vol. VI 22-31, 37.

George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., at Vol. VI 42 - 45.

68

149.

150.

In briefing the Minister in relation to the settlement of the stumpage fee
dispute between Canada and the United States, Canada’s officials drew the
his attention to the existing Chapter 1 larbitration between the Investor and
Canada and suggested that the Investor might seek to include the Super Fee
issue. It was there stated that if so, Canada’s defense would be based on the
fact that the Investment was being treated on the same basis as other B.C.
companies.” In the November 2000 hearing Canada stressed that point.'§°
Canada also pointed out that the settlement was supported by B.C.’s

softwood lumber industry.'*!

“Fhe Investor, on the other hand, argues that the effect of the Super Fee

measures was to act as an export restraint in a manner that was unfair and
inequitable. It was directed against a small proportion only (1% on Canada’s
estimate) of the B.C. softwood lumber industry’s exports to the United
States. It had no effect at all on those who confined their export of lumber
within the EB base and the 75% of the LFB base that was not repriced.
Companies in that category remained able to export at the fixed fees
previously set and with the advantage of the reduction in their costs due to

the stumpage reduction.

Action Memorandum for the Minister for International Trade, August 18, 1999, Tab

255 at 1:12.

Phase 2 Counter-Memorial 19 164-165.

Phase 2 Counter-Memorial 9 172.

69

152

183

151.

The Investor also argued that the Investment was one of 132 B.C.
companies liable to be affected by the repricing of a portion of the LFB quota.
In the whole of Canada it ranked in terms of the size of its quota
allocation.'*? It held approximately  % of the B.C. LFB quota allocation.
In year 3 it was much the largest exporter at UFB level from the interior
region. In year 3, the Investment was responsible for over °% of exports
from B.C. for which a fee was exigible, i.e., both LFB and UFB rates. Against
this background the Tribunal believes that Canada must have been aware of
the special significance to the Investment of the choices it made to settle the

-B.C. stumpage dispute with the United States

152. Canada’s further response to the Investor’s argument was in the first place

that the Investment’s history of UFB exports showed no consistency. It was
in any event for a particular company to choose whether to export and pay
the relevant fee or not to do so. Further, the level of fee was fixed as part of
the U.S.-Canada agreement to settle the stumpage dispute between them
and it was not for Canada to vary that agreement. That last argument
however does not accord with the evidence of George!®* that Canada did
consider exempting certain classes of exporter, including the Investor, but
decided not to do so, except to a limited extent in relation to those who had

no quota.

Vertinsky Affidavit { 9.

George testimony, Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VI at 42:11 - 46:20.

70

153. The question is whether the treatment accorded to the Investment in
relation to the Super Fee was fair and equitable. All softwood lumber
producers in B.C. benefited to some extent from the reduction of stumpage
rates in the province, but the only producers who were to a degree penalized
were those who had been allocated quota at LFB rates or who for whatever
reason exported in excess of quota, amounting in all to some 1% of B.C.
lumber exports.

154. The fact that only a very small percentage of the exports would attract the
new Super Fee level is not an argument for disregarding those exporting at

-that fee level. Quite to the contrary. Similarly, the fact that the B.C. lumber
industry as a whole supported the settlement should carry little weight, since
only 1% of exports was to be affected.

155. The choice made to resolve the B.C. stumpage dispute through the Super Fee
undoubtedly required certain exporters to pay a price for a benefit accorded
by B.C. to all producers in that province. Therefore, Canada might have
chosen another approach to settlement, one that shared the burden more
equitably across the range of B.C. producers that received the benefits of the
stumpage reductions. However, it is not the place of this Tribunal to

substitute its judgment on the choice of solutions for Canada’s, unless that

ise Some 40% of all the producers in B.C. fell into the category of users of LFB; the Super

Fee settlement required them to pay a fee of approximately double on 2.5% of their LFR exports.
Two producers, of which the Investment was one, accounted for about °% of UFB shipments
in year 3, and they would be required by the Super Fee settlement to pay in year 4 an
additional $40 per thousand board feet to make those shipments if they wanted to do so.

71

choice can be found to be a denial of fair and equitable treatment. Given the
large number of B.C. producers affected by the settlement as well as the
hierarchical treatment of shipment levels under the SLA itself, the Tribunal
cannot conclude that Canada’s decision to apportion the costs as it did was a
denial of fair and equitable treatment to the Investment.**
6. Verification Review Episode

156. On December 24, 1998, the Investor served upon Canada a Notice of Intent
to Submit a Claim to Arbitration under Article 1119 of NAFTA. That filing
triggered a review by Canada’s Softwood Lumber Division (“SLD”}!** of the

- Investor's claim that its Investment had not received the quota allocation to

which it was entitled.'6” That review discerned that the Investment’s
questionnaire responses (submitted as required by the Regime) stated that it

had sold about. % more lumber than it produced for the years 1994 and

185 Because the Tribunal reaches this conclusion, it is unnecessary to address the question

whether, in the case of the Super Fee settlement, the Investor's challenge is to the
implementation of the SLA or to the SLA itself.

156 The SLD is a division of the Export and Import Controls Bureau within Canada’s
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade. The SLD assists in the administration
of the Softwood Lumber Export Restraint Program, which is the implementation for Canada of
the Softwood Lumber Agreement with the United States; that implementation is known as the
Softwood Lumber Regime (the “Regime”). See Affidavit of Douglas George dated November
26, 1999 (“George 1”) at $9 1-2.

157 Id. at 144. While George refers to the filing of the “Statement of Claim,” that
document was not filed until March 25, 1999. Since he acknowledges that his earliest letters
on the issue (sent in January and February, 1999) were triggered by his awareness of the
Investor’s Claim, he must be referring to the December 24, 1998 notice of intent. See George
testimony, Nov. 2000 Tr. Vol. VI 95:22 — 98:25. Indeed, he said he was first made aware of
the Investor's “NAFTA complaint” around Christmas 1998. See id., Vol. VIII at 9:25 - 10:8.

72

1995.!** That difference was viewed as a discrepancy by the SLD, and, by
letter dated January 26, 1999, it asked the Investment for an explanation.’

157. That letter was, in fact, the second inquiry the Investment had received from
the SLD concerning the production/sales imbalance. Well before the
December 24, 1998 Notice of Intent, the SLD had raised the matter by
telephone with the Investment, which, in response, explained that the
imbalance was due to invasions of inventory. The then Director of the SLD
took the “explanation at good faith and did nothing further.”"°
Consequently, it is not surprising that the Investment’s response to the

-~January 26, 1999 letter was to reiterate its earlier explanation that

“inventories were significantly reduced during the periods covered in the
questionnaire.” The response also pointed out that Arthur Andersen had
audited the company’s sales and production data.

158. The next communication from the SLD could hardly have been more
different from the earlier telephonic exchange, when the Investment’s

assurances were taken in good faith. By letter dated February 25, 1999, the

ss Id, at 145.
139 Id. at 1 48. At that time, the perceived discrepancy between production and sales was
the sole question in the minds of the SLD officials in reviewing the Investment’s questionnaire
responses. See George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VIII at 13:12-23.

160 See Valle testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. IX at 115:17 — 117:6.

16 Letter from McGrath to George, dated February 5, 1999. This letter and the others
cited in this section of the Tribunal’s decision were submitted as exhibits to the Affidavit of
Douglas George dated November 26, 1999, which, in turn, was attached to Canada’s Reply to
Claimant’s Motion for Interim Measures, dated the same day.

73

SLD stated that the February 5 reply did not provide sufficient information to
address the government’s “concems” and reminded the Investment that its
data could be subject to verification and access by government officials to
company information. It requested responses to a series of questions,
including shipments made through wholesalers, information not strictly
pertinent to the production/sales discrepancy. The letter requested a two-
week turnaround, as the SLI? was “preparing allocations for Year 4.”

159. The Investment replied by fax on March 12, 1999, providing answers to each
of the questions posed by the SLD. The response also volunteered that total
shipments had been overstated (by less than % for each of 1994 and 1995)
in the company’s questionnaire responses, due to the inclusion of intra-mill
transfers. On the other hand, shipments to the United States had been
understated, based upon the Investment’s refinement of its allocation of
shipments to wholesalers based upon historical performance. Overall, these
two “oversights” yielded a small understatement of shipments for both 1994
and 1995 in the questionnaire responses, i.e., to the Investment’s
disadvantage. The letter stated that the company had “reams and reams of
voluminous sales reports which you are welcome to review,” and it closed by
reiterating, “if you need access to the above reference (sic) sales reports please

do not hesitate to call.” '** The Investment's response did not change its

162 Letter from George to McGrath, dated February 25, 1999.

163 Letter from McGrath to George, dated March 12, 1999.

74

explanation of the production/sales discrepancy that had triggered SLD’s
inquiry, i.e., that it was due to invasion of inventory.

160. Despite the purported urgency of the matter, the SLD did not respond for
almost a month. On April 7, 1999, it faxed a letter to the Investment,
notifying it of the decision to institute a “verification review” with respect to
the questionnaire responses. The verification was scheduled for April 28-30
and was to include a review of the responses, related systems, procedures,
supporting documentation and quota transfers.'* On April 12, the Investor
responded by inviting the verification team to its head office in Portland

..Oregon, where the records to be reviewed were located, thereby implicitly
confirming the verification dates.'*

161. At that juncture, one could not reasonably conclude that the Investment had
been anything less than fully cooperative with the SLD. It made no
complaints that the production/sales issue had been resolved previously, it
promptly responded to broad inquiries going beyond that issue, it
volunteered minor corrections to its questionnaire responses and it willingly
accepted a very extensive verification exercise.'* Unfortunately, matters

thereafter took a substantial turn for the worse.

let Letter from George to McGrath, dated April 7, 1999.

16s,

Letter from Gray to George, dated April 12, 1999.

166 The head of the SLD acknowledged that, at that time, the Investor was unaware of any
policy that verification had to take place in Canada and that the Investor's April 12 letter was
just pointing the SLD to the location of the documents. See George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr.,
Vol. VI at 105:25 ~ 106:9.

75

167

168

169

170

162.

163.

On April 13, 1999, the SLD wrote the Investment stating that “we require
this information to be made available in Canada.” Further, the requested
information expanded to include bank statements and accountants’ working
papers.’ At that point, the Investment turned the matter over to its lawyer
in this NAFTA Chapter 11 proceeding and asked that further discussion of
verification be through him.’ The SLD responded that there was no linkage
between verification and the NAFTA claim and requested confirmation by
April 23, 1999 that the requested documents would be on hand in Grand

Forks, B.C. on the appointed date of April 28, 1999.1 The following day,

.the Investment’s lawyer wrote to the SLD questioning the agency’s authority

to conduct a verification review or to require records to be made available in
Canada. He stated that “[nlonetheless, we are prepared to deal with your
request through a NAFTA Axticle 1118 consultation.”"”°

SLD rejected every element of the proposals by the Investment’s counsel. It
again denied any relationship between the NAFTA claim and verification, it
rejected the request to discuss verification though the Investment’s counsel,
it rejected the proposed Article 1118 consultation, and it reasserted its

demand that the documents be produced in Canada. It strongly suggested

Letter from George to McGrath, dated April 13, 1999.

Letter from Gray to George, dated April 20, 1999.

Letter from George to Gray, dated April 21, 1999.

Letter from Appleton to George, dated April 22, 1999.

76

that failure to cooperate could be disastrous for the Investment: “Otherwise,
the Minister could either determine a new quota allocation *** or, because it
[sic] cannot verify the answers in the questionnaire, and the correctness of
the allocation based upon them, it is possible that the Minister may not be
able to award any additional quota to the company” when allocations were
made for Year 4 of the program.'”

164. What followed during the remainder of April, 1999, was a flurry of
correspondence between the Investor’s counsel and elements of the
Canadian government, including the SLD. For present purposes, only two

-~points from these letters is material. First, counsel for the Investor stated:
At no time have we or our clients refused your Ministry’s
request for a review of Pope & Talbot’s relevant records.
Rather, we have attempted to find a solution that satisfies your
Ministry’s request in an expeditious manner that is also fair
and reasonabie to our clients.!7*

165. For its part, the SLD stated that that comment and other points would be
brought to the attention of the Minister, as would any further comments
submitted by May 4, 1999.'”3 The Investor’s counsel accepted that offer and
submitted a letter protesting the requirement that the records be shipped to

Canada and the use of a threat to deny the company any quota for Year 4.

He also asked for a copy of the “policy and regulations under the [Softwood

Letter from George to Appleton, dated April 23, 1999.
Letter from Appleton to de Pencier, dated April 29, 1999.

Letter from George to Appleton, dated April 30, 1999.

77

175,

176

Lumber] Agreement” that the SLD asserted as justification for its verification.

demands.!

166. After further extensive correspondence on modalities and parameters,

verification took place in Vancouver on July 13-16, 1999. One of the agreed
bases for agreement on verification was the willingness of Canada to provide
an explanation of:the.alloca:ion system since 1996. Both sides agreed that
the verification team did not include someone knowledgeable on that matter,
and attempts were made to schedule a meeting to that end.!> On October 6,
1999, almost 12 weeks after the verification review, the SLD wrote the
Investment, advising that the verification “revealed a number of systemic
errors” and “discrepancies between amounts shown on invoices and the
amounts reported on your ai2stionnaire as well as a possibility that there
may have been double counting.” These problems necessitated that the

Investment submit a revised questionnaire. '’6

167. The Investor protested, noting its expectation that the SLD would have

provided preliminary findings from the review before taking action. The
Investor asked to know the exact nature and magnitude of any errors and
requested copies of the various reports and working papers that supported the

conclusions summarized in the communication requiring a new

Letter from Appleton to George, dated May 3, 1999.
See letter from George to McGrath, dated August 5, 1999.
Letter from George to McGrath, dated October 6, 1999.

78

168.

169.

170.

questionnaire response.!”” The SLD replied by offering to make further
explanation by telephone, but stating that, unless the revised questionnaire
was received by November 8, 1999, the matter would be referred to the
Minister for International Trade.’”*

The Investor replied by asserting that it had not refused to submit a revised
questionnaire, but was only seeking the information that had been promised.
It asked for a meeting with the Minister to discuss the matter.'”? The SLD
replied by advising that they would recommend that the Minister revise

quota allocations with or without the Investment’s new questionnaire, that a

-“new questionnaire would have to be filed by end of business on November

15, 1999 and that the Minister would be informed of the request for a
meeting.’*

On November 11, 1999, the Investor filed a Motion for Interim Measures to
this Tribunal asking for a standstill order preventing any changes to the
Investment’s quota allocation until the final determination of all matters in
this arbitration.

After extensive submissions by the parties and testimony received at a

hearing on January 6-7, 2000, the Tribunal concluded that the interim

 

Letter from Appleton to George, dated October 25, 1999.

Letter from George to Appleton, dated November 3, 1999.

Letter from Appleton to George, dated November 5, 1999.

Letter from George to Appleton, dated November 9, 1999.

79

171.

measures requested were beyond its jurisdiction. The Tribunal went on to
observe, however, that “the verification review and the report thereon were
seriously flawed and are not a reliable basis for further action [by Canada].”"*"
As far as the Tribunal is aware, the SLD has taken no action based upon the
verification.

The Investor contends that ’anada’s conduct during this “verification
episode” was a denial of fair and equitable treatment in violation of Article

1105.’ For the following reasons, the Tribunal agrees.

172. A major sticking point on verification was the unwillingness of the SLD to

...conduct its review at the place where the documents were located. As both
sides agree, the volume of the requested documents was large, a number of
truckloads; moving them would be a substantial and disruptive burden. The
SLD simply advised the Investment that the proposal to conduct verification
in Portland was “not acceptable,” but gave no reasons why.'** During the
November 2000 hearing the head of the SLD during 1999 stated that he had
no authority to conduct verification outside Canada, but he could point to no

regulation, written policy or other credible basis for that proposition. '**

Ruling on Claimant’s Motion for Interim Measures, dated January 7, 2000.

See Phase 2 Memorial of the Investor at 1 220.

See letter from George to Appleton, dated May 4, 1999.

See George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. VI at 105:5 ~ 116:24.

80

186

187

Indeed, the former head of the SLD saw no legal reason preventing

verification outside Canada."

173. The Tribunal finds that the SLD’s position on this issue cannot be explained

by reasonable legal concerns and that, even if there were legitimate concerns
about its authority to conduct a review outside Canada, the SLD made no
effort to deal with the problem with an intent to alleviate the admitted
burden that verification in Canada would cause the Investment. What
comes through the communications is, instead, the SLD's imperious

insistence on having its way.

174. . As noted, the Investment was initially willing to undergo a verification

review in Portland; however, in correspondence after the SLD rejected that
approach, the Investment began to ask whether the SLD had the authority to
require verifications in the first place. The SLD refused to provide any
Kind of legal justification, relying instead on naked assertions of authority'®”
and on threats that the Investment’s allocation could be canceled, reduced or

suspended for failure to accept verification.’

175. However, on the very day the SLD was telling the Investment that the

“Government acts under lawful authority” in requiring verification

See Valle testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. IX at 120:2 — 121:20.
See, e.g., letter fom Appleton to George, dated April 22, 1999.
See letter from George to Appleton, dated June 2, 1999.

See, e.g., letter from George to Appleton, dated April 29, 1999.

81

176.

reviews, }*? it was telling the Minister: “As neither the FIPA nor the EIPA
regulations authorize verifications specifically, the Department of Justice is
preparing a legal opinion on the question.”™ While good faith reliance on
the SLD’s legal authority was not improper, it appears to the Tribunal that,
before seeking to bludgeon tke Investment into compliance, the SLD should
have resolved any doubts on the issue and should have advised the
Investment of the legal bases for its actions.

The SLD told the Investment that verification was intended “to develop a

clear understanding of the type and scope of the errors in the original

-questionnaire, in order that a revised and corrected questionnaire can be

submitted as soon as possible.” Shortly before verification took place, the
Investment sought to confirm that purpose,’ and the SLD made no change
to its earlier formulation. After verification was completed on July 16, the
SLD did nothing for 12 weeks to apprise the Investment of its findings
concerning the results of the review. Even then, instead of informing the

Investment of specific problems that arose in the review, the SLD gave only

Letter from George to Appleton, dated June 2, 1999.

Memorandum from SLD to Minister, dated June 2, 1999, at 1 19. The Tribunal and

the Investor received this document and a later one (November 25, 1999) on the same subject
only on November 16, 2000, well into the Phase 2 hearings. Canada offered no explanation
why they had not been produced earlier, particularly prior to the hearing on interim relief in
January 2000, where they were extremely material. The head of the SLD admitted that he was
aware of the document at that time. George testimony Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. X at 17:9-18.

Letter from George to Laird, dated May 13, 1999.

See letter from Appleton to George, dated July 2, 1999.

82

general comments, like the conclusion that the verification “revealed a
number of systemic errors,” and that the “verification team discovered
discrepancies between amounts shown on invoices and the amounts reported
on your questionnaire.’ The only specific comments were directed towards
intra-mill transfers, which the Investment had detected and voluntarily
reported eight months before.'*

177. In appraising the fairness of the SLD’s position on verification, the Tribunal
is also troubled by the tenor and lack of forthrightness of its internal
communications with the Minister. For example, at a critical juncture in the

-~verification controversy, the SLD recommended to the Minister that he
reduce the Investment’s qucta on the ground that it “continues to refuse to
cooperate in providing original documentation necessary to conduct a
verification visit."

178. In the view of the Tribunal, that memorandum to the Minister contained a
number of questionable statements:

« Conceming the Investment’s explanation of the production/sales
discrepancy, the SLD told the Minister: “The company’s first written

reply to our January 26, 1999 request for clarification gave no

193 Letter from George to McGrath, dated October 6, 1999.
198 Letter from McGrath to George, dated March 12, 1999.

198 Memorandum from SLD to Minister, dated June 2, 1999, at opening 91 1-4,

“Recommendation.”

83

196

7

198

explanation of the discrepancy.” %° In fact, that reply dated February
5, 1999 (which was not included in the 18 letters attached to the
memorandum to the Minister}, gave the same explanation that had
been accepted, without more, by the former head of the SLD and the
same explanation that was found to be correct during verification.

e Inanother passage, the SLD informed the Minister that the
Investment had “refus{ed] to divulge information.”’” In fact, there
had been no such refusal, and the basis for the allegation was that the
Investment had (at that time) asserted its request that verification

os take place where the documents were located.’

e¢ The memorandum suggested that verification could provide
justification for a customs investigation into whether the Investment
had willingly provided false or misleading information. The
Tribunal finds this hint of possible criminal misconduct was wholly
unjustified, particularly since the Investment had, in fact, volunteered

the specific errors it had discovered in its questionnaire responses.?”

Td., at 97.

Id., at $20.

See George testimony, Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. X 34:7 - 35:25.
Memorandum from SLD to Minister, dated June 2, 1999, at 120.

See George testimony, Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. X 36:19 — 38:16.

84

179.

These were not trivial matters. As noted, in this same memorandum to the

Minister, the SLD recommended that the Investment’s allocation be

reduced, and the Minister’s reaction could be expected to be coloured by

the several misleading statements made about the Investment’s behaviour.

Again in November, 1999, the SLD referred matters to the Minister, and,

again, its memorandum contained serious misstatements and omissions:

The background provided the Minister suggested that the
production/sales discrepancy was “serious,” that the Investment “gave no

satisfactory explanation,” and that verification “clearly demonstrated” “a

- number of systemic errors.” The Minister was not informed that

verification had cleared up the production/sales discrepancy by accepting
the Investment’s original explanation.”

Contrary to assurances given the Investment, the memorandum did not
inchide documents it had submitted or otherwise fairly represent the
positions it was taking. Instead, the Investment is said to have “refused”
to make information available, has “repeatedly tried to delay” verification,
and is “not complying with requests to provide revised data.”

The memorandum does mention the Investment’s request to know the

details of the verification review but dismisses that request with the

Memorandum from SLD to Minister, dated June 2, 1999, Recommendation in { 1.

Discussion of the recommendation did, however, accept the possibility that later review could
result in an increase or decrease of the quota. See id., at 11 22(b) and 23.

Nor was the Minister advised that the matter had been addressed to the satisfaction of

the SLD long before the Investor filed notice to institute this proceeding.

85

statement that granting it “would undermine the purpose of the review,
i.e., for the EICB to have its own data as a benchmark against which to
evaluate the validity of revised data provided by the company.” The
Minister was not told that the purpose of verification, as the SLD earlier
espoused to the Investment, was “to develop a clear understanding of the
type and scope of the errors in the original questionnaire, in order that a
revised and corrected questionnaire can be submitted as soon as
possible.”
It is difficult for the Tribunal to perceive how the verification report

+= would assist in creating a clear understanding of the errors if it was never
to be shown to the Investment. Nor does the Tribunal comprehend why
the SLD would seek to act without getting the comments of the regulated
company on its findings or to use its report solely to check on the validity
of the Investment’s later submissions,” unless the SLD was more
devoted to catching the Investment in further errors than to its professed
aim of assuring that accurate data be used by the SLD in administering
the Regime.

180. Implementation of the Regime was a complicated matter, involving complex
quota allocations to over 500 softwood lumber producers in the covered
Provinces, acquiring information from numerous sources and providing

direction and guidance to governmental and private entities. Even in the face of

 

203 As noted, the verification review and report were “seriously flawed;” permitting the

Investment to comment on the findings might have mitigated this result.

86

these difficulties, the program apparently was administered, in most instances,
in an open and cooperative spirit.»

181. Against that background, within the context of the verification review process,
the treatment of the Investment stands in stark contrast. The relations between
the SLD and the Investment during 1999 were more like combat than
cooperative regulation, and the Tribunal finds that the SLD bears the
overwhelming responsibility for this state of affairs. It is not for the Tribunal to
discern the motivations behind the attitude of the SLD; however, the end result
for the Investment was being subjected to threats, denied its reasonable requests
for pertinent information, required to incur unnecessary expense and disruption
in meeting SLD’s requests for information, forced to expend legal fees and
probably suffer a loss of reputation in government circles. While

204

This approach was effectively described by the head of the SLD during the initial phases
of the Regime:

I called hundreds of people, anybody who was concerned about some aspects,
who wanted to speak to me. I made myself available. And we extended the
hours of the division to be accessible to everybody. We did not want to be seen
not to be accessible.

***[I}t’s common administrative practice. Somebody raises a problem or asks a
question, you get back to him as quickly as you can and see what the concern is.

Valle testimony, Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. IX at 7:20 - 8:8. This passage is a typical description of
the work of the SLD under Mr. Valle, and the Tribunal has seen no evidence, apart from the
treatment of the Investment in respect of the verification review process, that it changed under
his successors.

87

182.

183.

205

14-38,

administration, like legislation, can be likened to sausage making, this episode
goes well beyond the glitches and innocent mistakes that may typify the process.
In its totality, the SLD’s treatment of the Investment during 1999 in relation to
the verification review process is nothing less than a denial of the fair treatment
required by NAFTA Article 1105, and the Tribunal finds Canada liable to the
Investor for the resultant damages.

7. Administrative fairness

The Investor also complains that in its general operation of the Regime, Canada
breached its Article 1105 obligation of administrative fairness. It points out that
there was no internal appeal mechanism against decisions on such matters as
allocation of quota. Furthermore, it asserts that those with best access to the
Minister or his officials had the best chance of having their concerns addressed.
The Export and Imports Controls Bureau of the Department of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade of Canada (“the Bureau”) is responsible for the
administration of the Export and Import Permits Act 1985. It carried out
extensive consultations about the softwood lumber export permit system and
the allocation of quota which the operation of the SLA required. In relation to
B.C., the Bureau consulted trade organizations in the B.C. softwood lumber
industry, B.C. government officials and many others.” It sent out

questionnaires and collated responses in order to devise a quota allocation.

Valle 1* Affidavit, March 27, 2000 11 46-69; George 3" Affidavit, October 4, 2000, 11

88

184.

185.

206

207

system that operated fairly among the various quota holders.” The Tribunal
has seen no evidence that the quota allocation system operated at any stage on
the basis of the nationality of the parties. While there was no internal appellate
system, the Investment, like any other softwood lumber producer in the covered
provinces, was able to resort to judicial review if it chose. Several producers did
seek judicial review in the courts of Canada.”

The Bureau sought to explain the operation of the Regime to all softwood
lumber producers in the covered provinces affected by it. Quota allocation
letters contained a special telephone number for those with questions about
quota. The Bureau answered all requests made to it whether by telephone or in
meetings. If the circumstances justified it, the Bureau recommended some form
of redress to the Minister. Discretionary reserves were used to give redress to
some of those who sought it, without regard to political connections."

The Tribunal considers that in administering its responsibilities as it did, the
Bureau (and, therefore, Canada) did not breach any obligation under NAFTA
Article 1105 in respect of administrative fairness, save in the case of the

verification review episode discussed above.

Valle 1* Affidavit 11 70-77.
Valle 2 Affidavit October 6, 2000 91 186-195.

Valle 2* Affidavit 11 199-212.

89

186.

187.

189.

209

FINAL MATTERS

In a Preliminary Motion dated November 12, 1999, Canada requested that the
Tribunal strike from the record paragraphs 34 and 103 of the Statement of
Claim. Those two paragraphs alleged damages sustained by the Investor arising
from its ownership interest in Harmac Pacific Inc. ("Harmac”).”°

At the time the Statement of Claim was filed, in addition to the three hamber
mills operated in B.C. by the Investment, the Investor controlled Harmac, a
publicly traded pulp and paper company operating a facility at Nanaimo, B.C.
With effect from December 31, 1999, the Investment and Harmac effected an
amalgamation, approved by the Supreme Court of B.C. on December 15, 1999,
whereby the two companies were merged into one. The new company, which
was continued under the name Pope & Talbot, Ltd., took over the entire assets
and liabilities of both former companies.

The issue of the then absence of a waiver under Article 1121(1)(b) in respect of
the claim concerning Harmac was raised by the Tribunal, addressed by the
parties and resolved to the Tribunal’s satisfaction by the filing of a waiver by the

amalgamated entity on January 10, 2000.

P. h 103 of the S of Claim declared: “The d ing supply of wood

chips due to lost production on the British Columbia coast has resulted in economic loss for
Investor's Investment (sic) in Harmac Pacific Inc., which must purchase increasingly expensive
wood chips for its pulp and paper operation.”

90

190.

191.

192.

193.

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal dismissed Canada’s motion on February
24, 2000. Consequently, the Investor’s claim in regard to Harmac has remained
before the Tribunal.

Since, except for the verification review episode, the Tribunal has not found any
liability on Canada’s part arising from Articles 1102 and 1105, it need say
nothing further regarding the Investor's claim relating to Harmac.

For the same reason, the Investor's argument that multiple violations of Article
1105 might have cumulative consequences greater than the individual
components”° becomes moot.

As noted,” during the course of discovery in this proceeding, Canada objected
to producing certain items on the ground that, as Privy Council documents,
their disclosure was prohibited by the Canada Evidence Act. The Tribunal ruled
that that Act by its terms did not apply to a Chapter 11 tribunal, and Canada
did not contest that ruling. However, it nonetheless refused to produce or even
identify the documents in order to permit the Tribunal to make a reasoned
judgment as to their relevance and materiality.74* In the result, this refusal did
not appear prejudicial to the Investor, and the Tribunal proceeded upon the
basis of the materials actually before it. However, the Tribunal deplores the

decision of Canada in this matter. As the Tribunal noted in its decision on this

See Nov. 2000 Tr., Vol. II 6:17 — 9:3.
See 1 4-5 above.

See Letter to the Tribunal from M. Kinnear, dated September 27, 2000.

91

194,

195.

196.

matter dated September 6, 2000, Canada’s position could well be a derogation
from. the “overriding principle” found in Article 15 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, under which these proceedings have been conducted, that all
Parties should be treated with equality. Moreover, Article 1115 of NAFTA
declares that there shall be “equal treatment among investors of the Parties.” As
Canada’s refusal to disclose or identify documents in these circumstances is at
variance with the practice of other NAFTA Parties, at least of the United States,
that refusal could well result in a denial of equality of treatment of investors and
investments of the Parties bringing claims under Chapter 11.

ve CONCLUSIONS
For the reasons given above, the Tribunal determines that Canada has not been
in breach of its obligation to the Investor under Article 1102 of NAFTA.
For the reasons given above, the Tribunal determines that Canada has breached
its obligation to the Investor under Article 1105 of NAFTA in relation to the
Verification Review Episode. In all other respects, it determines that Canada
has not been in breach of its obligations to the Investor under Article 1105.
The Tribunal will be inviting the disputing parties to make submissions on the
quantum. of damages to be awarded, as well as with regard to the questions of
interest on that quantum and assessment of the costs of the Arbitration.
Shortly after issuing the present Award, the Tribunal will organize a telephone
conference with counsel to schedule such submissions, as well as any further

hearing that may be required.

92

 

Honourable Benjamin J. Greenberg, Q.C., Arbitrator

 

Dated: April 10, 2001

93

TOTAL P.48

