IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN AND THE REPUBLIC
OF CHILE ON THE RECIPROCAL PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF
INVESTMENTS DATED 2 OCTOBER 1991
-and-

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”)

PCA CASE NO. 2017-30

-between-

“PRESIDENT ALLENDE” FOUNDATION, VICTOR PEY CASADO,
CORAL PEY GREBE (Spain)

(“Claimants”)

-and-

THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE

(“Respondent”)

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR BIFURCATION
dated: 27 June 2018

 

The Arbitral Tribunal

Prof. Bernard Hanotiau (Presiding Arbitrator)
Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri
Mr. Stephen L. Drymer

Tribunal Secretary
Ms. Iuliana Iancu

IL
IL.

Se oS)

i.

VI.

. CLAIMANTS’ POSITION ON BIFURCATION ....

Table of Contents

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
THE BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

The expropriation of El Clarin and Chile’s return to democracy...

 

The initiation of the ICSID arbitration and of local proceedings in the Santiago courts...

 

The Santiago civil court judgment of 24 July 2008 and the ensuing abandonment proceedings.......

The first annulment and the ensuing ission pr dings before ICSID

 

The second annulment proceedings before ICSID

 

Claimants’ arguments in these p

 

The Parties’ requests for relief.
RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON BIFURCATION.........

 

Objection No. 1: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant Claimants’ requests for relief..................

 

Objection No. 2: the BIT does not apply to any of the claims asserted

 

Objection No. 3: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims for the alleged non-
performance of the First Award

Objection No. 4: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims related to the Essex Court
Chambers issue

 

Objection No. 5: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims based on the Goss Machine

 

case

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS.

Objection No. 1: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant Claimants’ requests for relief..................
26

 

Objection No. 2: the BIT does not apply to any of the claims asserted

 

Objection No. 3: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims for the alleged non-
performance of the First Award

Objection No. 4: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims related to the Essex Court
Chambers issue

 

Objection No. 5: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims based on the Goss Machine

 

case

DECISION

 

19

21

23
24

26

27

27
27

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

By Notice of Arbitration dated 12 April 2017, Claimants commenced arbitration
proceedings against Respondent pursuant to Article 10 of the Agreement between the
Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Chile on the Reciprocal Protection and
Promotion of Investments dated 2 October 1991 (the “Treaty” or the “BIT”).

On 12 April 2017, Respondent received the Notice of Arbitration.

On 18 October 2017, the Tribunal and the Parties participated in the first procedural
hearing, which took place by means of a telephone conference. During the procedural
hearing, Respondent made a request for the bifurcation of these proceedings (the
“Request for Bifurcation”).

On 3 November 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, concerning the
languages of the proceedings, the applicable procedural rules and the case
administration.

On 8 November 2017, the Parties filed simultaneous submissions in which they set
out their positions with regard to the possible bifurcation of these arbitration
proceedings.

On 20 November 2017, the Parties and the Tribunal signed the Terms of
Appointment.

On 29 November 2017, the Tribunal rendered Procedural Order No. 2, postponing a
decision on Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation until after the Parties had filed their
first round of submissions on jurisdiction and the merits. The Tribunal justified its
decision as follows:

“67. At this time, the Tribunal only has before it Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration,
which does not present with a sufficient degree of detail what Claimants’ contentions
in this arbitration are. Respondent accepts this and states that Claimants’ ‘specific
claims are not entirely discernible, since they are described only in cursory and
opaque terms in the UNCITRAL Notice’. Nevertheless, at the same time, Respondent
is arguing that the substance of Claimants’ claims before this Tribunal, while
purporting to challenge events which post-date the First Award, is in actuality a
transparent attempt to reverse legally binding conclusions of prior ICSID tribunals
that settled the same dispute. Respondent adds that ‘various issues relating to the
[Santiago civil court proceedings] had already been submitted to the First Tribunal’
and that Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration purports to challenge various but apparently
not all — binding conclusions of prior ICSID awards. Finally, Respondent reserves the
right to raise additional jurisdictional objections at a future point in these proceedings,
which means that, possibly, Respondent could file a second request for bifurcation.

68. At this initial stage of the arbitration proceedings and with the limited information
before it, the Tribunal cannot make an informed decision as to whether bifurcation

would assist in, or effectively hamper, the efficient conduct of this arbitration. In
addition, the Tribunal is reluctant to decide on Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation
now, considering that any decision risks being only a partial solution if further
jurisdictional objections are raised and a second request for bifurcation is filed.”
[internal citations omitted]

The Tribunal directed the Parties to agree on a procedural calendar and to set out their
complete case on both the merits and jurisdiction in their submissions.

On 30 November 2017, Claimants communicated to the Tribunal that they would file
their Memorial at the latest on 6 January 2018 and argued that Respondent should file
its Counter-Memorial within a 40-day deadline following receipt of the Memorial.

On 7 December 2017, Respondent indicated that it had no objections to Claimants’
proposed deadline for the submission of the Memorial, but that it objected to the 40-
day deadline proposed by Claimants for the Counter-Memorial. Respondent requested
that the Tribunal fix the deadline for the Counter-Memorial to 3 July 2018.

On 9 December 2017, the Tribunal decided that Claimants’ Memorial should be filed
on 6 January 2018, and that Respondent’s Counter-Memorial should be filed on 21
May 2018.

On 6 January 2018, Claimants filed their Memorial, accompanied by exhibits, witness
statement and expert reports.

On 21 May 2018, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial, accompanied by exhibits
and expert reports.

On 24 May 2018, the Tribunal invited the Parties to update their submissions
concerning the possible bifurcation of these proceedings.

On 31 May 2018, Respondent filed its supplementary submission concerning
bifurcation.

On 7 June 2018, Claimants filed their supplementary submission concerning
bifurcation.

This Procedural Order deals with Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation. The Tribunal
first summarizes certain elements of the background of the dispute, as it now appears
to result from the Parties’ submissions. This summary is not intended to be exhaustive
and is limited to matters deemed relevant for purposes of the Request for Bifurcation.
The Tribunal makes no findings with regard to any possible disputed facts or legal
issues (II.). The Tribunal then presents Respondent’s arguments in support of its
Request for Bifurcation (III.), followed by Claimants’ arguments in opposition (IV.).
Finally, the Arbitral Tribunal sets out its considerations and its ultimate decision (V.).

4

IL.

20.

21.

22.

THE BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

The expropriation of El Clarin and Chile’s return to democracy

Claimants contend that they are the shareholders of the Chilean company Consorcio
Publicitario y Periodistico S.A. (“CPP”), which in the early 1970s was the owner of
the Chilean newspaper El Clarin, a publication established in 1952! and incorporated
under the name Empresa Periodistica Clarin Ltda. (“EPC”). Claimants state that El
Clarin was the most widely read newspaper in Chile in 1973 and a vocal supporter of
former Chilean president, Dr. Salvador Allende, elected on 4 September 1970.

In September 1973, a military coup d’Etat toppled the Allende government and de
facto seized the assets of CPP and EPC. The military government then enacted Decree
Law No. 77 in which it declared unlawful, and legally dissolved, all Marxist entities,
political parties and their affiliates, and transferred title of their property to the State.
Subsequently, by means of Decree No. 165 of 10 February 1975 (“Decree No. 165”),
the military government applied Decree Law No. 77 to El Clarin. Decree No. 165
dissolved CPP and EPC and transferred their assets to the Chilean State. Mr. Pey
Casado left Chile for Spain.

Following the fall of the military regime, Chile adopted a series of measures in order
to make reparations for the crimes and illegal acts committed during the dictatorship,
including for politically motivated takings of property. In April 1990, the newly-
elected President Aylwin created “the National Truth and Reconciliation
Commission”, the purpose of which was to disclose the human rights violations under
the Pinochet regime. Around the same time, the Chilean Parliament adopted a law
creating a National Office for Returning Exiles.

Mr. Pey Casado returned to Chile in May 1989 and began focusing on obtaining the
restitution of his properties, both his personal properties and E/ Clarin property. He
successfully obtained the restitution of personal property in the Chilean courts.

The initiation of the ICSID arbitration and of local proceedings in the Santiago
courts

In September 1995, Mr. Pey Casado initiated judicial proceedings before the First
Civil Court of Santiago against the Chilean Treasury, seeking restitution of a Goss-
brand printing press that had been seized by the military authorities in 1973. Also in
September 1995, Mr. Pey Casado made a request with the President of Chile for the
restitution of several other E/ Clarin assets. This request was forwarded by the
Chilean President to the Chilean Ministry of National Assets, who responded to Mr.
Pey Casado in November 1995. According to the Ministry, a bill seeking to establish

' Notice of Arbitration, at 8.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

the appropriate remedy (compensation or restitution) for the expropriations during the
Pinochet regime was at that time before the Chilean Parliament. The Ministry of
National Assets represented that, until such time as the law was adopted, it was not
possible to order the restitution of the requested assets.

On 3 November 1997, Mr. Pey Casado and the President Allende Foundation (the
“Foundation”) commenced arbitration proceedings against Chile before the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis
of the Treaty (the “First Arbitration”). In these proceedings, Mr. Pey Casado and the
Foundation invoked the seizure in February 1975 of the entirety of EPC’s and CPP’s
rights, interests and assets. However, they carved out of the proceedings the seizure of
the Goss Machine printing press.

In July 1998, Chile passed Law No. 19,568 which established a reparations program
for the expropriations which had occurred during the Pinochet regime.

In June 1999, Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation wrote to the Chilean Ministry of
National Assets declaring that they were waiving their right to apply for reparations
under Law No. 19,568. Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation referred in this respect to
their submission of an arbitral dispute before ICSID and the existence of a fork-in-
the-road clause in the BIT.

In April 2000, by means of Decision 43, the Chilean Ministry of National Assets ruled
on an application filed by six individuals seeking compensation for the expropriation
of El Clarin. The Ministry of National Assets concluded that, under Chilean law, the
genuine owners of CPP at the time of the military coup had been four individuals
whose names appeared in the shareholder registry. By means of Decision 43, the
Ministry of National Assets awarded compensation to these four individuals. Decision
43 did not mention either Mr. Pey or the Foundation.

In November 2002, Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation submitted to the ICSID
tribunal constituted to hear their claims (the “First Tribunal”) an ancillary claim
seeking damages for the seizure of the Goss printing press.

On 8 May 2008, the First Tribunal rendered its award (the “First Award”). The First
Tribunal ruled that it lacked jurisdiction ratione temporis over Mr. Pey Casado’s and
the Foundation’s expropriation claim, finding that the expropriation of their
investment had consummated in 1975 upon the entry into force of Decree No. 165,
and thus before the entry into force of the Treaty. The First Tribunal dismissed the
claimants’ continuing expropriation theory and stated that, to its knowledge, the
validity of Decree No. 165 had not been successfully contested in the Chilean courts
and Decree No. 165 thus remained a part of the Chilean legal order. The First
Tribunal dismissed the claimants’ contention that Chile’s refusal to award
compensation in 1995 had been part of a composite expropriatory conduct. The First

6

29.

30.

31.

Tribunal however upheld jurisdiction and found in favor of the claimants in respect of
their claim for breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment standard. In this latter
regard, the First Tribunal concluded that Chile had committed a denial of justice as a
result of its delay in rendering a judgment on the merits in Mr. Pey Casado’s case
before the Santiago civil court, coupled with its decision to award compensation by
means of Decision 43 to individuals who in the Tribunal’s view were not the real
owners of El Clarin. The First Tribunal however found that the claimants had not put
forward any evidence for the damages relating to this FET breach and stated that it
would proceed to an evaluation of damages based on objective elements. The First
Tribunal determined that the compensation to be awarded the claimants for the FET
breach would be equal to the amount that Chile had awarded to third parties under
Decision No. 43.

On 2 June 2008, Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation commenced revision
proceedings against the First Award, arguing that they had uncovered new evidence
and requesting that the First Tribunal revise the First Award by accepting their
“continuing expropriation” theory and awarding them USD 797 million in damages
for the expropriation of El Clarin.

On 18 November 2009, the Revision Decision was rendered, dismissing Claimants’
application for revision of the First Award as inadmissible on the grounds that it was a
disguised appeal.

The Santiago civil court judgment of 24 July 2008 and the ensuing abandonment
proceedings

On 24 July 2008, the Santiago civil court seized with Mr. Pey Casado’s request for
restitution rendered its judgment on the merits. The precise extent of the court’s
findings is disputed by the Parties. However, it is not disputed by the Parties that the
Santiago court dismissed Mr. Pey Casado’s claim for restitution of the Goss printing
press due to his lack of standing to sue and on account of the expiry of the applicable
statute of limitations. While Claimants take issue with the courts’ decision on the
question of statute of limitations, they add that the Santiago court, in making its
findings on ius standi, “n’a donc pas pu éviter de mettre en cause le Décret n° 165 en
constatant ... la nullité de droit public en écartant tacitement l’exception principale du
Fisc quant 4 la prétendue validité du Décret n° 165, la propriété de l’Etat et, par
conséquent, le droit a agir de celui-ci”.’ Claimants consider that the judgment
conclusively established that Decree No. 165 is inoperative, did not legally dissolve
EPC and CPP, which continue to exist, and did not lawfully transfer title over these
entities’ assets to the State. For its part, Respondent argues that Mr. Pey Casado
explicitly declared that it was not seeking a ruling on the Decree No. 65’s nullity
before the Santiago court due to the fork-in-the-road clause included in the BIT and in

° Memorial, at 109.

32.

33.

34.

light of the ICSID arbitration.’ Further, Respondent is of the view that the 24 July
2008 judgment “did not declare, or in any way recognize, the nullity of Decree No.
165” and said decree remains in force to this day, as part of the administrative order
of Chile.

In June 2009, the Chilean State agency representing the Chilean Treasury in court
proceedings filed a request with the Santiago court for a declaration of abandonment
of the proceeding by the claimant, invoking his failure to notify the judgment to the
defendant for more than six months. The Santiago first instance court rejected the
request in August 2009, but this decision was overturned by a court of appeals in
December 2009. In the present arbitration, Claimants complain that, due to
machinations by the Chilean Government, they were not notified of the Santiago
court’s judgment of 24 July 2008 or made aware of the abandonment proceedings.
They submit that the abandonment proceedings were conducted without notice thereof
being given to Mr. Pey Casado and without Mr. Pey Casado having had an
opportunity to present his case. Claimants submit that Mr. Pey Casado only found out
about the Santiago civil court judgment’s existence in January 2011. Claimants add
that, despite Mr. Pey Casado’s subsequent efforts to exercise and obtain damages for
the forty-year long deprivation of the rights that had been recognized by the Santiago
civil court, those efforts were systematically rejected by Respondent.

For its part, Respondent argues that it is implausible that Claimants were not aware of
the 24 July 2008 Santiago civil court judgment considering their eagerness to pursue
their claims. In its view, the far more likely scenario is that Mr. Pey Casado viewed
the judgment as unfavorable so decided not to move the case forward by notifying it
to the defendant, as would have been required under Chilean law. Respondent adds
that, in any event, following the decision of the court of appeals finding that the
proceedings had been abandoned, the Santiago civil court judgment no longer has any
effect under Chilean law.

Claimants submit that they only learned of both the existence of the 24 July 2008
Santiago civil court judgment and the ensuing abandonment proceedings on 24
January 2011 and, four days later, filed an appeal against the decision finding that the
proceedings had been abandoned. This appeal was dismissed by the Santiago Tribunal
on 28 April 2011, and was subsequently maintained on appeal by the Court of Appeal
on 31 January 2012. A subsequent effort by Mr. Pey Casado to have this latter
judgment set aside was dismissed by the Chilean Supreme Court in July 2012.

> Counter-Memorial, at 136, citing from Revision Request, 2 June 2008, at 30 (Exhibit R-0025): “En effet, ayant
choisi de faire valoir leurs droits devant un tribunal arbitral international, comme leur en donnait le droit I’ API
signé entre I’Espagne et le Chili en 1991, Monsieur Pey Casado et la Fondation ne pouvaient plus, en
application de l'article 10.2 de l’API, saisir les jurisdictions chiliennes pour demander la nullité ex officio de ce

Décret”.

* Counter-Memorial, at 311.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

 

The first I and the ing r ission pr dings before ICSID

In parallel with these developments before the Chilean courts, on 5 September 2008,
Chile submitted a request for annulment of the First Award before an ICSID ad hoc
Committee (the “First Committee”). On 15 October 2010, Mr. Pey Casado and the
Foundation also submitted a claim for annulment of the First Award, arguing that the
First Award had neglected provisions of the Chilean Constitution that supported the
argument of Decree No. 165’s nullity ab initio. In support of this argument, in March
2011, Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation submitted a number of exhibits, including
the July 2008 Santiago court judgment. On 18 April 2011, the First Committee issued
Procedural Order No. 2, declaring these new documents inadmissible and directed Mr.
Pey Casado and the Foundation to resubmit their Rejoinder without any reference to
any exhibit that had not been part of the original record of the arbitration.

On 18 December 2012, the First Committee rendered its decision on annulment (the
“First Annulment Decision”), partially annulling the First Award and specifically the
section on damages. The First Committee found that Chile had been denied the right
to be heard on the issue of damages and that the First Tribunal gave contradictory
reasons for its damages findings.

On 1 February 2013, Chile requested that the First Committee supplement the First
Annulment Decision by identifying the interest that was due by Chile to Mr. Pey
Casado and the Foundation on the portion of the costs that had been incurred in the
First Arbitration by Mr. Pey and the Foundation.

On 18 June 2013, Mr. Pey Casado, the Foundation and Ms. Coral Grebe filed a
request for resubmission with ICSID (the “Resubmission Proceedings”). Claimants
appointed Mr. Philippe Sands and Respondent appointed Mr. Alexis Mourre as party-
nominated arbitrators. On 18 December 2013, Chile requested the disqualification of
Prof. Sands, who then resigned. Claimants then appointed Mr. V.V. Veeder as
replacement arbitrator. On 24 December 2013, Mr. Franklin Berman was appointed as
president by the Chairman of ICSID Administrative Council.

On 11 September 2013, the First Committee issued its Supplementary Decision,
identifying the amount of interest due.>

In the Resubmission Proceedings, Claimants argued that Respondent had committed a
denial of justice by concealing the existence of the 24 July 2008 Santiago Civil Court
judgment and requested compensation for the expropriation of their assets, which had
occurred in 1973.

* Respondent submits that it has paid both the portion of the costs that it was ordered to pay by the First Tribunal
and the interest on this amount that was determined by the First Committee (Counter-Memorial, at 168).

9

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

On 13 September 2016, the Resubmission Award was issued by the Resubmission
Tribunal. The Resubmission Tribunal concluded that Ms. Pey Grebe could not be
considered an independent Claimant because she had not been a claimant in the first
arbitration. The Resubmission Tribunal found that the only issue properly before it
was the nature of the compensation due for the breaches established by the First
Award. The Resubmission Tribunal ruled that Claimants’ allegations pertaining to the
24 July 2008 Santiago Civil Court judgment were outside of its jurisdiction, which
was limited to the dispute that had originally been submitted to ICSID arbitration. The
Resubmission Tribunal confirmed that the First Tribunal’s ruling that it lacked
jurisdiction ratione temporis over Claimants’ expropriation claim had res judicata
effects and that Claimants’ request for damages resulting from the original
expropriation were to be rejected on that basis. Finally, the Resubmission Tribunal
concluded that Claimants had only put forward evidence that sought to calculate
damages based on the expropriation claim, but not on the violation of the FET
standard. The Resubmission Tribunal thus concluded that the only relief to which Mr.
Pey Casado and the Foundation were entitled was satisfaction.

On 20 September 2016, Claimants wrote to ICSID, submitting that they had just
discovered that barristers who were members of the same set of chambers as Messrs.
Berman and Veeder (viz., Essex Court Chambers) had worked on a number of other
matters involving Chile. Claimants argued that this issue raised questions about Mr.
Berman’s and Mr. Veeder’s independence and impartiality and requested a detailed
account of any relationships that any Essex Court Chambers barristers may have had
with Chile.

On 27 October 2016, Claimants initiated a Rectification Proceeding and asked the
Resubmission Tribunal to suspend the Rectification Proceeding so that they could
pursue interpretation proceedings in relation to the First Award. The Resubmission
Tribunal dismissed this request.

On 22 November 2016, Claimants requested the disqualification of Messrs. Berman
and Veeder, invoking Chile’s representation by other barristers from Essex Court
Chambers in other proceedings.

On 21 February 2017, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, Dr. Kim
issued a decision rejecting Claimants’ challenges to Messrs. Berman and Veeder,
finding that the challenges were untimely. Dr. Kim concluded that the information
which formed the basis for the challenges had been publicly available in the media
since 2012 but that no concerns had been raised at that time in the arbitral
proceedings.

On 23 February 2017, Claimants filed a second challenge against Mr. Veeder. The
following day, Claimants asked Mr. Berman to recuse himself from deciding the
challenge against Mr. Veeder. Mr. Berman recused himself on 1 March 2017. On 4

10

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

55.

March 2017, Claimants also challenged Mr. Berman and requested that the two
challenges be submitted to the Permanent Court of Arbitration for a decision.

On 6 March 2017, ICSID informed the parties that it would treat Claimants’ second
requests to disqualify Messrs. Veeder and Berman as a proposal to disqualify the
majority of the Tribunal, to be decided by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative
Council.

On 13 April 2017, Dr. Kim issued a second decision dismissing Claimants’ challenges
to Messrs. Berman and Veeder.

On 21 April 2017, Claimants requested the discontinuance of the Rectification
Proceeding but, following Chile’s opposition, the request was dismissed.

On 9 June 2017, Claimants (i) asked the Resubmission Tribunal to order Chile to
disclose any information not publicly available relating to any payments made to
Essex Court Chambers barristers by Chile’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and (ii)
asked the Resubmission Tribunal and ICSID to investigate this issue and disclose the
results to the Parties.

On 15 June 2017, the Resubmission Tribunal rejected Claimants’ request on the basis
that it lacked any connection with the rectification requested.

On 29 June 2017, the Foundation initiated legal proceedings in the Santiago Civil
Court seeking documents regarding the retainer by Chile of barristers from Essex
Court Chambers.

On 6 October 2017, the Resubmission Tribunal issued its Rectification Decision in
which it corrected three clerical errors in the Resubmission Award.

The second annulment proceedings before ICSID

On 10 October 2017, Claimants submitted an annulment request to ICSID in respect
of the Resubmission Award. In their application, Claimants also requested that the
Second Committee suspend the Resubmission Award’s binding effect.

On 15 March 2018, the Second Committee dismissed Claimants’ application for a
stay of the Resubmission Award’s binding effect, finding that an award remains
binding and its res judicata effect remains untouched unless the award is annulled.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

6l.

° Memoria
7 Memori
* Memorial
° Memoria

Claimants’ arguments in these proceedings

The Tribunal summarizes below Claimants’ arguments in these proceedings. This
summary is not meant to be an exhaustive or detailed account of Claimants’
contentions and is focused solely, and briefly, on matters directly germane to the issue
of bifurcation.

Claimants argue that Respondent breached the Treaty in several respects.

First, Claimants contend that Chile breached Articles 10(5), 3, 4 and 5 of the BIT by
failing to comply with its obligations under the First Award. Claimants argue that
Respondent refused to accede to their requests, dated February 2013 and April 2017,
that Respondent enforce the First Award, recognize their ownership over their
investment and pay damages for the Treaty violations it had committed.°

Second, Claimants take the view that Respondent breached Article 4 of the Treaty on
account of its failure to put an end to the Treaty violations established in the First
Award, including denial of justice.’

Third, Claimants contend that Respondent breached Articles 3, 4 and 10(5) of the
Treaty through its conduct concerning two of the members of the Resubmission
Tribunal, Messrs. Berman and Veeder, members of the Essex Court chambers. In
particular, Claimants take exception to what they allege are close and secretive
financial connections between Chile and several members of Essex Court chambers,
and to Respondent’s alleged refusal to disclose such connections. Claimants consider
that this amounts to fraudulent conduct which had the direct effect that the
Resubmission Award « a entiérement, radicalement, altéré le sens litéral, le contexte,
l’intention et la finalité systématiques des paras. 1, 2 et 3 du Dispositif et de tous les
paragraphes de la Sentence du 8 mai 2008 ayant I’autorité de la chose jugée ».* In
Claimants’ view, this conduct by Respondent consolidated the denial of justice
established by the First Award and is a separate breach of the Treaty.”

Fourth, Claimants argue that Respondent breached Articles 3(1), 4, 5 and 10 of the
BIT by dismissing Mr. Pey Casado’s claim before the Santiago Civil court for the
restitution of the Goss Machine printing press on account of the expiry of the
applicable statute of limitations. Claimants submit that this holding stands in marked
contrast with other decisions taken in similar cases by the Chilean courts with respect
to Chilean investors, where the statute of limitations was not an issue. Claimants add
that the application of the statute of limitations in circumstances where Mr. Pey

at 15-31.
at 44-48.
at 63.

at 49-68.

5

l,
l,
l,
l,

62.

63.

Casado was prevented by the restrictions imposed by the military regime to return to
Chile and enforce his rights is in breach of principles of international law.”

Fifth, Claimants submit that Respondent breached Articles 1, 3(1), 4, 5, 10(2) and
10(5) of the BIT through a complex and composite act consisting of a series of actions
and omissions in relation to the Santiago civil court judgment and the ensuing
abandonment proceedings. Claimants submit that a first element of this composite
legal act is a procedural fraud committed by Respondent, which consisted of
Respondent unilaterally changing the cause of action of the claim submitted by Mr.
Pey Casado before the Santiago court in order to then dismiss the claim for lack of ius
standi and expiry of the applicable statute of limitations. In Claimants’ view, a second
element of this complex and composite act consisted of Respondent’s machinations
that prevented the notification of the 24 July 2008 judgment of the Santiago civil
court to Mr. Pey Casado, in breach of the requirements of Chilean procedural law.
Due to these machinations, Mr. Pey Casado only learned of the existence of this
judgment in January 2011. A third element of this act, in the view of Claimants, is
represented by the subsequent decisions of the Chilean courts finding inaudita parte
that Mr. Pey Casado had abandoned the proceedings, despite the fact that the legal
requirements had not been met, and subsequently dismissing his efforts to have those
judgments set aside.'!

The Parties’ requests for relief
Claimants request that the Tribunal render an award in which:

« (1) Qu’il condamne la République du Chili 4 payer aux Demanderesses une somme
comprise entre 315,7 et 385,9 millions USD, valeur au 31 aoiit 2017, a actualiser au
jour de la Sentence a intervenir, au titre de la réparation intégrale du préjudice
matériel subi du fait des violations des articles 3(1), 4, 5 et 10(5) de l’API par la
République du Chili.

(2) Qu’il condamne également |’Etat du Chili a restituer aux Demanderesses la valeur
de tous les fruits naturels et civils de la chose possédée de mauvaise foi, avec les
intéréts correspondants, actualisée au jour de la Sentence a intervenir.

(3) Qu’il condamne la République du Chili a restituer aux investisseurs demandeurs
la valeur des dommages consécutifs, en particulier tous les frais encourus dans la
défense des droits au titre de l’API relatifs 4 leur investissement auprés des cours de
justice et des Tribunaux d’arbitrage relatifs aux procédures arbitrales, celle ot a été
prononcé [sic] la Sentence arbitrale du 8 mai 2008 et celle requise pour |’exécution
forcée des paras. 5 a 7 du Dispositif de cette derniére, de méme qu’a la procédure
arbitrale initiée en juin 2013 en vue de |’exécution des paras. 2 et 3 du Dispositif (cfr
§ 530 supra) ;

'° Memorial, at 32-43, 118-159.

"' Memorial, at 185-240.

(4) A titre subsidiaire, qu’il condamne |’Etat du Chili a payer aux Demanderesses la
somme de 75,6 millions USD, valeur 31 aoiit 2017, a actualiser au jour de la Sentence
a intervenir, au titre de l’enrichissement sans cause de |’Etat du Chili a leur
détriment ;

(5) A titre trés subsidiaire, qu’il condamne |’Etat du Chili 4 payer aux Demanderesses
la somme indiquée au § 540 supra, au titre d’indemnisation des préjudices résultant
du manquement a l’obligation pour laquelle il a été condamné dans la Sentence
arbitrale du 8 mai 2008 en rapport avec le 3°" alinéa de l’article 1553 du Code civil
chilien ; subsidiairement, la somme indiquée au § 545 supra, au titre d’indemnisation
des préjudices causés pour son manquement continu 4 |’obligation de mettre fin au
traitement des investisseurs demandeurs de maniére injuste et inéquitable, en ce
compris le déni de justice, établis dans la Sentence arbitrale du 8 mai 2008, en rapport
avec les 2° et 3°™ alinéas de l’article 1555 du Code civil chilien ;

 

(6) Qu’il condamne |’Etat du Chili 4 payer 4 Mme. Coral Pey Grebe et a la Fondation
espagnole Président Allende une somme non inférieure 4 US$5.000.000 et
US$500.000, respectivement, au titre de la réparation intégrale du préjudice moral
subi par M. Victor Pey Casado et la Fondation espagnole du fait des violations de

VAPI par l’Etat du Chili ;

(7) A titre subsidiaire, dans le cas ot le Tribunal ne serait pas prét a accorder un
dédommagement au titre de la réparation intégrale du préjudice moral, le Tribunal est
prié de tenir compte des faits allégués comme dommage moral pour accroitre le
montant destiné 4 compenser les dommages matériels et financiers subis par les
Demanderesses.

(8) Qu’il dise que le montant alloué sera majoré a hauteur de |’éventuelle différence
entre l’imp6t payé, le cas échéant, sur |’indemnisation recue par l’une ou |’autre des
Demanderesses, et tout autre impét qui étant légalement exigible aurait été versé si,
en l’absence de manquement aux obligations établies dans |’API Espagne-Chili, les
biens saisis avaient fait |’ objet d’une indemnisation, afin que, aprés la taxe applicable,
le patrimoine des Demanderesses soit effectivement rétabli ;

(9) Qu’il dise que l’Etat du Chili devra effectuer le paiement des sommes dues aux
parties Demanderesses a la banque indiquée par celles-ci dans un délai de 60 jours au
plus tard 4 compter de la réception de la Sentence a intervenir ; 4 défaut, dire que le
montant de la réparation alloué aux parties Demanderesses portera intéréts capitalisés
mensuellement a un taux au moins égal 4 5% a partir de la Sentence jusqu’a complet
paiement ;

(10) Qu’il condamne |’Etat du Chili 4 supporter l’intégralité des frais de la présente
procédure, y compris les frais et honoraires des Membres du Tribunal, les frais de
procédure (utilisation des installations, frais de traduction, etc.) et, en conséquence,
qu’il condamne 1’Etat du Chili 4 rembourser, dans les 90 jours qui suivent l’envoi de
la Sentence & intervenir, les parties Demanderesses les frais et cofits de procédure
avancés par elles, et qu’il rembourse aux parties Demanderesses |’ensemble des frais
et honoraires des avocats, experts, témoins et autres personnes dont elles ont sollicité
V’intervention pour la défense de leurs intéréts, portant, en cas de non remboursement
dans ce délai, intéréts capitalisés mensuellement 4 un taux de 5% ) compter de la date
de la Sentence a intervenir jusqu’a complet paiement, ou a toutes autres sommes que
le Tribunal arbitral estimera justes et équitables. »'?

Memorial, at 717.

64.

Ill.

65.

66.

67.

For its part, Respondent requests that the Tribunal:

a. Immediately dismiss all of Claimants’ claims (for lack of jurisdiction,
inadmissibility, lack of legal merit, and/or lack of a basis upon which relief can be
granted); and

b. Order Claimants to pay all costs of this UNCITRAL proceeding (including
arbitrator and institutional fees and expenses), as well as the totality of the fees and
expenses incurred by Chile in connection with this proceeding (including, but not
limited to, legal fees and expenses, expert fees and expenses, and translation costs),
with compounded interest until the date of payment.

390. In the event that the Tribunal declines to dismiss the totality of Claimants’
claims immediately, Chile asks, alternatively, that the Tribunal (1) suspend its
consideration of the merits, and (2) order the immediate bifurcation of the
proceeding, for the purpose of having the Parties and the Tribunal address Chile’s
jurisdictional and admissibility objections in a separate, preliminary phase.”"*

RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON BIFURCATION

Respondent argues that Claimants cannot establish jurisdiction in respect of any of the
core strands of their case. In this respect, Respondent raises the following
jurisdictional objections:
i. Objection No. 1: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant Claimants’
requests for relief;
ii. | Objection No. 2: the BIT does not apply to any of the claims asserted;
iii. | Objection No. 3: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims for the
alleged non-performance of the First Award;
iv. Objection No. 4: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims related
to the Essex Court Chambers Issue;
v. Objection No. 5: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims based
on the Goss Machine case.

The Tribunal will briefly summarize Respondent’s arguments with respect to each
one of these objections in the paragraphs below, it being noted that, as with
Claimants’ arguments, this summary is not intended to be a comprehensive or detailed
restatement of all of Respondent’s arguments. However, before doing so, the Tribunal
notes that Respondent bases its objections on the following three arguments.

The first is the exclusivity of ICSID proceedings established in Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention. Respondent argues that, once consent to ICSID arbitration has
been given by the parties to a dispute, the parties have lost the right to seek relief in
another forum, be it national or international, and are restricted to pursuing their
claims through ICSID. Respondent considers that the Parties in this arbitration have

8 Counter-Memorial, at 389, 390.

68.

69.

70.

71.

not opted out of the ICSID exclusivity rule by means of Article 10(3) of the BIT. In
Respondent’s reading, Article 10(3) of the Treaty (“If the dispute is submitted to
international arbitration, it may be brought before one of the following arbitration
bodies...”) in effect reinforces the exclusivity of ICSID proceedings. '*

Respondent’s second argument is that Article 10(3) of the BIT, a forum selection
clause employing the wording “one of the following arbitration bodies”, necessarily
implies that an investor cannot submit a particular dispute to both ICSID and
UNCITRAL arbitration, but must choose between them. Respondent considers that
this reading is supported both by the authentic Spanish version of the Treaty (“En
caso de recurso al arbitraje internacional la controversia podra ser Ilevada ante uno de
los 6rganos de arbitraje designados a continuacién”), as well as by the French
translation (“devant I’un des organismes”).'>

Respondent’s third argument is that, pursuant to Article 53(1) of the ICSID
Convention and Article 10(5) of the BIT, once an ICSID award has been rendered, the
award is final and binding upon the parties and not subject to an appeal.'°

Objection No. 1: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant Claimants’ requests for
relief

Respondent argues that Claimants are seeking four types of relief in this arbitration,
all four of which the Tribunal cannot grant.

First, Respondent notes that Claimants are seeking compensation under the BIT for
the expropriation of El Clarin. In Respondent’s view, such a request for compensation
must necessarily be based on a valid expropriation claim. Respondent considers that,
however, Claimants are not permitted to argue that the expropriation of El Clarin
amounted to a violation of the BIT because the First Award conclusively determined
that such expropriation was outside the temporal scope of the Treaty. Respondent
adds that res judicata principles preclude Claimants from challenging the conclusion
in the First Award that the expropriation of E/ Clarin occurred instantaneously in the
1970s and was not the result of a continuous act. Respondent further submits that
Claimants cannot divorce the value of the expropriated property from the expropriated
property itself by claiming that the value of the property was not lost until
compensation was denied by Chile. The First Award likewise prevents this argument
from being made, since it found that a post-BIT refusal to indemnify Claimants for an
expropriation which had occurred prior to its entry into force is not an independent
basis for an expropriation claim.'”

'* Counter-Memorial, at 224-231.
'S Counter-Memorial, at 233, 234.

'

'® Counter-Memorial, at 235.
Counter-Memorial, at 241-245.

72.

73.

74.

Second, Respondent considers that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear
Claimants’ claim that Chile failed to comply with the obligations imposed upon it by
the First Award, a claim which they classify as “shockingly abusive”.'* In this respect,
Respondent argues that the exclusivity rule that attaches to ICSID proceedings
precludes Claimants from arguing before an UNCITRAL tribunal that Respondent
failed to comply with a final ICSID award. Respondent considers that such a claim
can only be made — and was made — before an ICSID tribunal and Claimants should
not be allowed to appeal before an UNCITRAL tribunal the findings of that ICSID
tribunal. Respondent adds that, in any event, the Resubmission Award concluded with
res judicata effect that Claimants were owed no compensation.”

Third, Respondent notes that Claimants are requesting reimbursement of their costs
incurred in the First Arbitration, the Revision Proceeding, the First Annulment
Proceeding, the Supplementation Proceeding and an enforcement proceeding in Spain
relating to the First Award. Respondent states that Claimants have already requested
this remedy from the Resubmission Tribunal. In Respondent’s view, Claimants’
claims relating to these ICSID proceedings are barred by the res judicata effects that
attach to the decisions on costs rendered in each proceeding by the respective ICSID
tribunals. These decisions may not be revisited here. The claim for costs of the
Spanish enforcement proceedings are, in Respondent’s opinion, likewise barred by the
res judicata principle, as the relevant Spanish court ruled that only a portion of the
attorneys’ fees were recoverable. Respondent adds that it has already paid to
Claimants the cost amounts that were established by the ICSID tribunals, as well as
by the judgment of the Spanish court.”

Fourth, Respondent notes that Ms. Pey Grebe and the Foundation are seeking moral
damages for acts that are either outside the temporal scope of application of the Treaty
(the expropriation of E/ Clarin) or for various other acts (the treatment of Mr. Pey
Casado by the military dictatorship; statements by Chilean officials that Mr. Pey
Casado was not the true owner of El Clarin; the conduct found by the First Award to
be in breach of the Treaty; Chile’s alleged attempt to conceal the 24 July 2008
judgment; and the alleged non-performance of the First Award) for which similar
claims for moral damages were submitted before ICSID. Respondent argues that these
claims are barred by the exclusivity of ICSID proceedings and the BIT’s forum
selection clause.”!

'§ Counter-Memorial, at 246.

° Counter-Memorial, at 246-251.
°° Counter-Memorial, at 252-260.
*! Counter-Memorial, at 261-264.

75.

76.

77.

Objection No. 2: the BIT does not apply to any of the claims asserted

Respondent argues that the Treaty texts relied upon by Claimants (Articles 3, 4 and
5)” all presuppose the existence of an investment in Chile’s territory on the date of
the BIT violations alleged. Respondent submits that, based on Claimants’
characterization of their claims, it appears that the events which give rise to the
present arbitration occurred after 24 July 2008, the date of the Santiago civil court
judgment. However, in Respondent’s submission, Claimants did not have a qualifying
investment as at 24 July 2008.73

In this respect, Respondent argues that the First Award established with finality that
that the assets of CPP and EPC were definitively expropriated in 1975, when CPP and
EPC were dissolved. Respondent maintains that, according to the First Award, these
events occurred prior to the entry into force of the BIT. In Respondent’s submission,
no investment of Mr. Pey Casado remained after the definitive confiscation of E/
Clarin in the 1970s. Respondent takes issue with Claimants’ submission, according to
which their investment consists of the protections set forth in the BIT. In
Respondent’s view, such an interpretation is untenable, particularly in light of the
express definition of an “investment” in the Treaty. Finally, Respondent disputes that
the 24 July 2008 Santiago civil court judgment resurrected Mr. Pey Casado’s
investment in El Clarin.*

Objection No. 3: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims for the
alleged non-performance of the First Award

Respondent notes that Claimants seek to establish in these proceedings that Chile
breached the Treaty by failing to comply with the obligations imposed upon it in the
First Award. Respondent argues that this Tribunal lacks the authority to decide the
issue of what relief was due by Chile for the BIT violation identified in the First
Award, as this was the purpose of the Resubmission Proceeding before ICSID. The
Resubmission Tribunal concluded with res judicata effect that Claimants were not
owed compensation for the breaches identified in the First Award, and_ that
satisfaction was sufficient reparation. Respondent argues that this conclusion cannot
be revisited here.”°

~” Respondent contends that Article 10 of the BIT, the dispute resolution clause, cannot form the basis of a BIT
merits claim (Counter-Memorial, at 269).

°5 Counter-Memorial, at 267-271.

*4 Counter-Memorial, at 272-277.

* Counter-Memorial, at 279-283.

78.

79.

80.

81.

Objection No. 4: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims related to the
Essex Court Chambers issue

Respondent argues that Claimants’ contentions pertaining to the Essex Court
Chambers issue have already been submitted to ICSID in the Rectification Proceeding
and in the Second Annulment Proceeding. Respondent is of the view that the
exclusivity which attaches to ICSID proceedings and the BIT’s forum selection rule
preclude Claimants from seeking a second opinion here, as do the principles of lis
pendens and ne bis in idem2*

Objection No. 5: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims based on the
Goss Machine case

Respondent takes the view that Claimants are prevented from advancing before this
Tribunal the argument that the 24 July 2008 Santiago civil court judgment was
favorable to them but that Chile prevented them from reaping its attendant benefits.
Respondent bases this argument on Claimants having already raised this argument
before several ICSID tribunals: during the First Annulment Proceeding, the
Resubmission Proceeding and the Second Annulment Proceeding.””

In Respondent’s submission, the exclusivity of ICSID proceedings and the BIT’s
forum selection clause act as bars to the reiteration of these claims. In this respect,
Respondent notes that, in 2002, Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation amended their
claims before the First Tribunal by transferring the substance of the Goss machine
case before ICSID. Respondent considers that the First Tribunal accepted jurisdiction
over this claim, which permitted it to then find that Chile had committed a denial of
justice in the Santiago civil court proceedings. Respondent adds that the First Award’s
finding that Chile had denied Mr. Pey Casado justice in the Santiago civil court
proceedings amounts to a finding of a complete failure by the Chilean justice system.
Consequently, in its view, any subsequent deficiencies in the same proceeding cannot
amount to a new BIT claim, as unfair and inequitable treatment and discrimination are
lesser offences encompassed within the more serious finding of a denial of justice.”*

As a remedy, Respondent first requests that the Tribunal exercise its authority under
Article 22 of the UNCITRAL Rules allowing it to limit written submissions to one
round of pleadings, and dismiss Claimants’ claims outright, without any further
submissions from the Parties.””

°° Counter-Memorial, at 284, 285.
>? Counter-Memorial, at 286-289.
*8 Counter-Memorial, at 290-299.
»° Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 3.

19

82. Second and in the alternative, Respondent requests the bifurcation of the above-listed
objections from the merits of this case.

83. Respondent notes that, in Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal concluded that “in
deciding whether to hear jurisdictional objections with priority or to join them to the
merits, the following considerations are notably relevant: (a) whether the objections to
jurisdiction are prima facie substantial and not frivolous; (b) whether bifurcation
would result in substantial cost savings and efficiency gains and the sound
administration of these proceedings; (c) whether the jurisdictional objections are
closely intertwined with the merits of the case; and (d) whether bifurcation would
preserve the Parties’ procedural rights.”*’ Respondent considers that its jurisdictional
objections above warrant the bifurcation of these arbitral proceedings.*!

84. First, Respondent contends that its objections are serious and not frivolous.”

85. Second, Respondent argues that bifurcation would greatly increase efficiency in the
present case. In its submission, each one of its objections has the potential to dispose
of the entire case and dispense with the need to discuss a multitude of complex factual
issues and merits theories that would require a full-fledged merits proceeding.
Respondent adds that bifurcation would not generate inefficiencies in light of the fact
that the jurisdictional objections need to be heard in any event.*®

86. Third, Respondent contends that bifurcation would not be inefficient, as the
jurisdictional objections above are not closely intertwined with the merits. In its
submission, each objection poses a threshold question that can be separated from the
merits without difficulty: (i) whether the Tribunal has authority to grant the relief
requested; (ii) whether Claimants had an investment on the critical dates; and (iii)
whether Claimants are permitted to assert specific claims.*4

87. Fourth, Respondent maintains that bifurcation would have the effect of preserving
Chile’s procedural right to immunity from repeat and parallel litigation. In
Respondent’s submission, this principle holds especially true in the case of
UNCITRAL proceedings, which expressly contain a presumption in favor of
bifurcation, but no screening mechanism or express opportunity for summary
judgment to protect against abusive claims.*°

* Procedural Order No. 2, at 66.

+! Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 3.
*» Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 4.
*3 Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 5.
* Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 6.
*5 Chile’s Supplementary Submission on Bifurcation, at 7-9.

 

 

20

IV.

88.

89.

90.

 

” POSITION ON BIFURCATION

Claimants are of the view that the Request for Bifurcation should be dismissed, as the
dispute submitted to arbitration in the present proceeding is conceptually distinct from
the First Arbitration. In this respect, Claimants refer to the Second Committee’s
holding of 15 March 2018, according to which:**

«Le Comité confirme que les effets de l’autorité de la chose jugée et de la
litispendance interdisent aux Demanderesses d’exercer « tout autre recours » en
rapport avec les demandes soumises 4 l’arbitrage CIRDI, comme le prévoit
expressément l’article 26 de la Convention. (...) Toutefois, ces principes ne
s’appliquent pas a de nouvelles demandes, c’est-a-dire 4 des demandes qui résultent
prétendument de violations du TBI qui se sont produit aprés le début de la procédure
arbitrale dans la présente affaire. Pour reprendre les termes employés par le Tribunal
du Nouvel Examen, la « date critique » est la date de la requéte d’ arbitrage initiale
des Demanderesses, soit le 3 novembre 1997. »””

First, Claimants argue that the jurisdictional objections raised by Respondent are in
breach of Article 26 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and the
principles of international law codified in Article 30 of the ILC Articles on the
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (the “ILC Articles”).
Claimants maintain that the Resubmission Tribunal confirmed that it lacked
jurisdiction to hear disputes that arose between the Parties after the date when the
Request for Arbitration was filed with ICSID, i.e., November 1997. Claimants submit
that, in conformity with Article 31 of the ILC Articles and the First Award,
Respondent was under an obligation to make full reparation for the damage it caused
by means of its unlawful acts. In their view, the present Tribunal has jurisdiction to
entertain such a claim.**

Second, Claimants argue that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear claims based on
breaches that are subsequent to the First Award. Claimants submit that their claims in
this arbitration are based on Treaty breaches posterior to 8 May 2008, the date of the
First Award. Claimants argue that Article 10(3) of the Treaty does not prevent them
from bringing new claims before an UNCITRAL tribunal. Claimants add that, in any
event, Article 10(3) of the Treaty does not represent a fork-in-the-road clause, as the
word “uno” in Spanish is intended to be an indefinite article.”

°° Observations sur la demande complémentaire de procéder a une bifurcation, at 3, 4.

7 Victor Pey Casado et Fondation Président Allende c. République du Chili (Affaire CIRDI ARB/98/2

Deuxiéme procédure en annulation), Décision sur la demande de suspension de l’exécution de la sentence, 15
mars 2018, paragraphes 79, 80 (Piéce C-461).

*8 Observations sur la demande complémentaire de procéder a une bifurcation, at 5-9.

* Observations sur la demande complémentaire de procéder a une bifurcation, at 12-14.

21

91.

92.

93.

94.

 
  

Third, Claimants submit that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear a new claim against
Chile, which is based on the fact that Respondent did not put an end to the breaches
established in the First Award. Claimants consider that such a claim is founded on
Article 10(5) of the Treaty and customary international law.”

Fourth, Claimants add that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to set the quantum of the
damages owed by Respondent for its breaches of Article 4 of the Treaty and that
Articles 26 and 52(6) of the ICSID Convention do not act as a bar to this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. In this respect, Claimants argue that the question of the damages owed by
Respondent for the breaches committed in 2000 and 2002 has not been decided on the
merits by ICSID tribunals. Claimants consider that the First Commission annulled the
damages section of the First Award on account of the fact that the parties had not been
heard on the question of « l’équivalence du montant du dommage pour les violations
commises 4 l’article 4 de API en 2000 et 2002 — infraction au traitement juste et
équitable — avec ce qu’aurait été le montant pour violation a l’article 5 — expropriation
indirecte des droits des investisseurs existant en 2000 et 2002 ».*! According to
Claimants, the Resubmission Tribunal made it impossible for Mr. Pey Casado and the
Foundation to demonstrate this equivalence when it concluded that the issues that had
intervened between the parties subsequent to 3 November 1997 were outside of its
jurisdiction. Claimants contend that, for this reason, when determining the
compensation due to Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation, the Resubmission Tribunal
did not take into consideration the evidence put forward by the claimants on the
damage suffered beginning with May 2000. Claimants thus conclude that Articles 26
and 52(6) of the ICSID Convention are inapposite in this case.?

Fifth, Claimants maintain that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to establish the damages
suffered as a result of the indirect expropriation of their investment and of other
breaches that occurred after 8 May 2008. In this respect, Claimants argue that, after 8
May 2008, Respondent engaged in a series of actions and omissions meant to
indirectly expropriate «de droits qui sont actuellement couverts par l’API avec
Vautorité de la chose jugée ».** As support, Claimants refer to a series of rights which
they argue were established by the First Award and the First Annulment Decision.*

Sixth, Claimants argue that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the dispute which
arose on 28 January 2011 as a result of the delay in the notification of the 24 July
2008 Santiago civil court judgment and the subsequent denial of justice in the ensuing
court proceedings.*°

la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 16, 17.
la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 19.
la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 18-22.
la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 23.
la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 23, 24.

  

45 Observations sur la demande complémentaire de procéder A une bifurcation, at 25-29.

22

95.

96.

97.

98.

“© Observation:
* Observation:

Finally, Claimants submit that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear a claim for denial

of justice which resulted from Respondent’s concealment of the extent of its

connections with barristers from Essex Court Chambers, including two arbitrators on

the Resubmission Tribunal. Claimants contend that this concealment has prevented

them from having access to an impartial international arbitral tribunal, a question
: . 46

which has not been decided so far.

Turning more specifically to the issue of bifurcation, Claimants argue that
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation should be dismissed as Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections are too closely intertwined with the merits. In Claimants’
view, Respondent is responsible for the overlap between the questions pertaining to
jurisdiction and the questions going to the merits of the case, on account of its
concealment of certain elements of fact and the manipulation undertaken by its State
institutions. Claimants maintain that bifurcating these proceedings would lead to a
waste of time and financial resources, whereas joining Respondent’s jurisdictional
objections to the merits would preserve the rights of both Parties to the dispute.*”

For these reasons, Claimants request that the Tribunal decide the following:

“1. Qu’il rejette les exceptions 4 la compétence du Tribunal que souléve |’Etat au
motif qu’il enfreigne a) les principes de droit international cités supra (§§8-11, 13), b)
la forclusion, c) la res judicata, c) les articles 2(2), 10(1), 10(3), 10(5) de l’API, d)
pour abus de procés, e) et mauvaise foi ;

2. Qu’il rejette la demande de bifurcation compte tenu que celle-ci, loin d’entrainer
des économies de temps et de ressources, favoriserait des confusions requérant le
recours 4 des considérations réitérées sur le fond, et augmenterait la durée et les frais
de la procédure,. Alors que la non-bifurcation préserverait les droits procéduraux de
toutes les Parties.

3. Qu’il condamne |’Etat 4 supporter |’intégralité des frais de l’incident relatif 4 sa
demande de bifurcation, de méme qu’a rembourser aux parties Demanderesses
l'ensemble des frais et honoraires des avocats et des personnes dont elles ont sollicité
V’intervention pour la défense de leurs intéréts, portant, en cas de non remboursement,
intéréts capitalisés jusqu’a complet paiement, ainsi qu’a toute autre somme que le
Tribunal arbitral estimerait juste et équitable. »“*

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYS

 

First, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s request to dispense with further submissions
from the Parties and dismiss the case outright. The written submissions of the Parties
filed thus far have made it abundantly clear that the present dispute involves a number

la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 30-34.
la demande complémentaire de procéder & une bifurcation, at 35.

 
 

48 Observations sur la demande complémentaire de procéder A une bifurcation, p. 10.

23

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

of complex legal and factual issues that require further development. The Tribunal is
not prepared to limit the Parties’ right to make submissions as requested by
Respondent.

Turning now to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, the Tribunal reiterates that its
task at this stage of the proceedings is not to decide or take any position on the merits
or lack thereof of Respondent’s preliminary objections. The Tribunal’s task is to
determine whether it would be conducive to an effective administration of these
arbitral proceedings to hear Respondent’s objections separately from the merits.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules”
creates a presumption in favor of treating the issue of jurisdiction as a preliminary
question:”

“(4) In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as
a preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the
arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final award.”

However, as accepted by Respondent, that presumption is not absolute. The Tribunal
retains a significant degree of discretion when determining whether the efficient
administration of the proceedings counsels in favor of hearing an objection to
jurisdiction separately from, or joined to, the merits.

The Tribunal has already established in Procedural Order No. 2 that the following
considerations are to be weighed in deciding for or against bifurcation: (a) whether
the objections to jurisdiction are prima facie substantial and not frivolous; (b) whether
bifurcation would result in substantial cost savings and efficiency gains and the sound
administration of these proceedings; (c) whether the jurisdictional objections are
closely intertwined with the merits of the case; and (d) whether bifurcation would
preserve the Parties’ procedural rights.

Objection No. 1: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to grant Claimants’ requests for
relief

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ positions and, in light of the
circumstances of this case, finds that it is appropriate and would promote procedural
efficiency to bifurcate Objection No. 1 from the merits of this case.

* The Tribunal notes that the 2010 version of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules no longer includes such a
presumption.

” See, Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. The United States of America (UNCITRAL), Procedural Order No. 2 (Revised), 31
May 2005, at 9; Cairn Energy PLC and Cairn UK Holdings Limited (CUHL) v. Government of India (PCA
Case No. 2016-7), Procedural Order No. 4 — Decision on the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation, 19 April
2017, at 70.

24

104. In this respect, the Tribunal first observes that Objection No. 1 is prima facie serious
and substantial, as it goes to the very basis of this Tribunal’s power to award the relief
sought by Claimants.

105. Second, if upheld, this objection will result in the dismissal of Claimants’ entire case,
thereby ensuring that economies of time and costs are made. The Tribunal
acknowledges that, because the Parties have already submitted their first round of
pleadings on jurisdiction and the merits, the efficiencies gained by bifurcation will
necessarily be more limited than in a situation where bifurcation would have been
ordered at the outset of the proceedings. However, the Tribunal considers that, if
efficiencies can be gained in terms of time and costs by deciding at least some of the
issues in this complex case with priority bifurcation is warranted. Bifurcation will
permit the Parties to better structure their pleadings and carefully distill the salient
issues that need to be decided by the Tribunal.

106. Third, the Tribunal considers that deciding Objection No. 1 will involve answering
legal questions which are not closely intertwined with the merits of this case. Indeed,
the Tribunal will not have to decide whether Claimants’ requests for relief should be
granted, or, in other words, whether inter alia Respondent failed to comply with the
obligations imposed upon it by the First Award, or whether Respondent committed a
denial of justice in the Santiago civil court proceedings. The Tribunal will only have
to determine whether it has the legal authority to grant the relief requested. The
Tribunal does not exclude that, in this analysis, it will have to examine some evidence
that is also relevant to the merits of this case, for instance some findings made by the
First Tribunal, the First Committee or the Resubmission Tribunal. However, the
Tribunal is of the view that the existence of some degree of overlap between the
evidence relevant for answering jurisdictional questions and evidence relevant for
answering questions pertaining to the merits is not an obstacle to bifurcation. What
would be required in order to join an objection to the merits is a more substantial
overlap”! such that a jurisdictional question could not be decided efficiently without
also ruling on the merits of the case.

107. Finally, the Tribunal considers that bifurcation does not affect the principle of
equality of the Parties. The jurisdictional objections raised by Respondent would need
to be decided whether the Tribunal bifurcates or not. Both Parties will have
opportunities to present their arguments and evidence, and will be heard by the
Tribunal.

108. As aresult, the Tribunal will deal with Objection No. | as a preliminary question.

5! See, Lao Holdings N.V. and Sanum Investments Limited v. Lao People's Democratic Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/16/2) (ICSID Case No. ADHOC/17/1), Procedural Order No. 2 (Decision on Respondent's
Applications of 18 September 2017), 23 October 2017, at 45.

25

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

Objection No. 2: the BIT does not apply to any of the claims asserted

The Tribunal considers that Objection No. 2 can and should also be heard separately
from the merits.

The Tribunal finds that this objection is prima facie serious and substantial as it
questions the very basis of Claimants’ claims before this Tribunal. Second, this
objection, if upheld, will result in the dismissal of Claimants’ entire case, thus
resulting in economies of time and costs.

The Tribunal also finds that this question can be answered separately from the merits
of the case. Indeed, in order to rule on Objection No. 2, the Tribunal will only have to
determine whether the Treaty required that Claimants have an investment at the time
of the alleged breaches and, only in the eventuality of an affirmative answer to this
question, determine whether Claimants are correct that the 24 July 2008 Santiago civil
court judgment established the nullity of Decree No. 165. The Tribunal will not have
to establish whether Respondent failed to comply with its obligations under the First
Award, whether Respondent committed a denial of justice in the Santiago civil court
proceedings or in the subsequent abandonment proceedings. Those inquiries will
properly be left for the merits of the case, should the proceedings advance to that
stage. The Tribunal reiterates that it is not altogether excluded that some of the
evidence that is pertinent for deciding the merits of this case will also be pertinent to
rule on Objection No. 2. However, the Tribunal is of the view that the two questions
can be sufficiently separated from each other so that hearing Objection No. 2 with
priority will not also involve deciding Claimants’ claim for denial of justice.

Finally, the Tribunal considers that bifurcation does not affect the principle of
equality of the Parties, as the jurisdictional objections placed before the Tribunal by
Respondent would need to be decided whether the Tribunal bifurcates or not.

For these reasons, the Tribunal will thus address Objection No. 2 as a preliminary
question.

Objection No. 3: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims for the
alleged non-performance of the First Award

The Tribunal shall deal with Objection No. 3 as a preliminary question. The Tribunal
finds that this objection is prima facie serious and substantial, as it goes to the power
of the Tribunal to hear one of Claimants’ claims. Moreover, hearing Objection No. 3
separately would result in efficiencies of time and costs, as the objection, if admitted,
would result in a decrease of the number of claims that the Tribunal needs to address.
Finally, the Tribunal is persuaded that the objection can be heard without implicitly
ruling on the merits of this case.

26

115.

116.

117.

VI.

118.

iii.

Objection No. 4: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims related to the
Essex Court Chambers issue

The Tribunal shall deal with Objection No. 4 as a preliminary question. The Tribunal
considers that this objection is prima facie serious and substantial, as it goes to the
power of the Tribunal to hear one of Claimants’ claims in this arbitration. Moreover,
hearing Objection No. 4 separately would result in efficiencies of time and costs, as
the objection, if admitted, would result in a decrease of the number of claims that the
Tribunal needs to address. Finally, the Tribunal is persuaded that the objection can be
heard without touching on the merits of this case.

Objection No. 5: the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain claims based on the
Goss Machine case

The Tribunal decides to join Objection No. 5 to the merits of this case.

The Tribunal considers that this objection is very closely connected to the merits of
Claimants’ claims such that it would be difficult to separate the substance of
Claimants’ claims pertaining to the Santiago civil court proceedings from the various
arguments made by Mr. Pey Casado and the Foundation before prior ICSID tribunals
and the decisions taken by those prior tribunals. Moreover, in order to answer
Respondent’s jurisdictional objection, the Tribunal would also have to assess
Respondent’s argument pursuant to which the denial of justice identified in the First
Award encompasses what Respondent deems to be the lesser offences of unfair and
inequitable treatment and discrimination. The Tribunal considers that this inquiry
goes to the heart of the substance of Claimants’ Treaty claims and requires the
Tribunal to make a decision on the contents of various standards of protection under
the Treaty. These are analyses that are better suited to the merits stage of the
arbitration.

DECISION

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:
Determines to deal with Objections Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 as preliminary questions;

Rejects Respondent’s application to deal with Objection No. 5 as a preliminary
question and joins it to the merits of the dispute;

Rejects Respondent’s request to dispense with further submissions from the
Parties and to dismiss the case outright;

27

iv. Reserves all other issues to a further order, decision or award, including any
question as to costs;

v. Directs the Parties to confer and agree on a procedural calendar dedicated to
hearing Objections Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 and revert back to the Tribunal by 9 July
2018.

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

Professor Bernard Hanotiau
Presiding Arbitrator

28

