Representing the Claimants
Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm,

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
PSEG Global Inc., The North American Coal Corporation, and Konya Ilgin Elektrik
Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi
(CLAIMANTS)
and
Republic of Turkey

(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Respondent
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny and

Mr. Lee A. Steven
White & Case LLP

Messrs Daniel M. Price,
Stanimir A Alexandrov,
Samuel Boxerman and
P. David Richardson
Sidley Austin Brown & Wood LLP

Mr. Serdar Paksoy, Paksoy & Co

-2-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I PROCEDURE 4

A. REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION.....cssssssssssssseesesssneeseessnneeseessnees 4

B. CONSTITUTION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL AND COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS

 

C. WRITTEN AND ORAL PROCEEDINGS ..........cscseseseesessseeseseseseeeeeeeeeseseeeeeeesnetenseeneeeeenes 5
II. CONSIDERATIONS. 8
A. THE FACTS OF THE DISPUTE. 8

 

The early start-up of the Project, the Feasibility Study and the Implementation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contract. 8
The Revised Mine Plan and the corporate Structure..c.c.cccccccecceeseesete sete 10
The Concession Contract. il
The aftermath of the execution of the CONtIACE. ....ccccccccseese eee ee estes teteeeeeeeeees 14
The parties’ expl ion of the disput I5
The Claii ’ views. 16
The Respondent’s views. 17
III. RESPONDENT’S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS. .........cccsscscssessesseseeteseeteseenes 19
A. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING THE EXISTENCE OF AN INVESTMENT......... 20
Respondent's ar, 4 20
The Claimants’ argument. 23
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the existence of the investment. .........0.00000 25

B. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING THE QUESTION THAT THE DISPUTE DOES NOT

ARISE DIRECTLY OUT OF AN INVESTMENT. ......0:ccsccesseeseesseeeseeeseeeeeenseeeseecsseeseeeseeeeeeennee 31

 

 

The Respondent’s argument. 3]
The Claimants’ argument. 32
The Tribunal’s findings on the dispute arising directly out of the investment......... 33

C. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING RESPONDENT’ S NOTIFICATION UNDER

 

The Claimants’ approach 37
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of consent qualified by notification under the

Ce ion. 38

 

D. OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION ON THE BASIS OF THE CLAIMANTS NOT HAVING

 

RESORTED TO PREVIOUSLY AGREED DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES.

The Respondent’s argument. 42

 

The Claimants’ view. 43
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the previously agreed dispute settlement

procedure. 44

 

E. OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION ON THE BASIS OF LACK OF STANDING..........2655
Re lent’s objection. 48

The Claimants’ view. 49

 

The Tribunal’s findings on the question of standing.

IV. DECISION. 54

I Procedure

A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

1. On March 22, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a request for arbitration against the Republic of Turkey
(‘Turkey” or the “Respondent’) from PSEG Global Inc. (PSEG), a company incorporated
under the laws of New Jersey in the United States of America (USA); the North American
Coal Corporation (“North American Coal”), a company incorporated under the laws of the
state of Delaware in the USA; and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi (the
“Project Company”), described in the request for arbitration as a special purpose limited liability
company incorporated under the laws of Turkey and wholly owned through several subsidiaries

by PSEG (together referred to as the “Claimants”.

2. The request invoked the ICSID arbitration provisions in the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments (the “Treaty’””), which was signed on December

3, 1985 and entered into force on May 18, 1990.

3. The Centre, on March 25, 2002, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“Institution Rules”)
acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day transmitted a copy to the Republic of

Turkey and to the Embassy of Turkey in Washington, D.C.

4. On April 12, 2002, the Centre requested further information from the Claimants, with
regard to (i) the investment of each requesting party, for purposes of the ICSID Convention and
the Treaty; (ii) the dispute of each requesting party, including further information as to the date
on which the dispute arose; (iii) each claimed violation of the Treaty in respect of each
requesting party; and (iv) the efforts on the part of each requesting party to settle the dispute
through consultations and negotiations in good faith. The Claimants responded by a letter of
April 18, 2002.

-5-
5. The request, as supplemented by the Claimants’ letter of April 18, 2002, was registered
by the Centre on May 2, 2002, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, and on the
same day the Secretary General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the
registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.
B. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of Proceeding

6. Following the registration of the request for arbitration by the Centre and the invitation
to the parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal, the Claimants reiterated the proposal
in their request for arbitration that the Tribunal be composed of three arbitrators, one appointed
by each party and the third, who shall be the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by
agreement of the parties. Pursuant to Rule 2(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), the Centre communicated this proposal to the
Republic of Turkey by letter of May 9, 2002 and by letter of May 24, 2002, the Republic of

Turkey notified the Centre of its acceptance of the proposal.

7. The Claimants, by a letter of June 6, 2002, appointed Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.,
a national of Canada, as arbitrator and by letter of June 25, 2002, the Respondent appointed
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as arbitrator. By agreement, the
parties in a joint letter of October 22, 2002 appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a

national of Chile, as the presiding arbitrator.

8. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre by a letter of
October 25, 2002, informed the parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, consisting of
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., and Professor Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler, and that the proceeding was deemed to have commenced on that day,
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

Cc Written and Oral Proceedings

9. After consulting with the parties and the Centre, the Tribunal scheduled a first session
for January 8, 2003, and the parties, by a joint letter of December 23, 2002, communicated to
the Tribunal their agreement on procedural matters identified in the provisional agenda for the
first session, which had been sent to them by the Tribunal’s Secretary. In that letter, the parties

notified the Tribunal that the Respondent intended to raise objections to jurisdiction, which the

-6-
Tribunal would be required to rule on before proceeding to the merits of the case in accordance
with Article 41 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. They also notified the Tribunal of their agreed
schedule for the submissions and hearing on jurisdiction. Further, the parties in the same letter
informed the Tribunal that in the event that the Tribunal were to reach the merits of the dispute,
the Respondent intended to submit a counterclaim and the Claimants reserved their rights to
raise objections as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over any such counterclaim, which objection

would be heard at the same time as the merits of the claims and counterclaims.

10. The first session of the Tribunal was held as scheduled on January 8, 2003, at the seat
of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The parties reiterated their agreement on the points
communicated to the Tribunal in their joint letter of December 23, 2002, and the remainder of
the procedural issues on the agenda for the session were discussed and agreed. All the
conclusions were reflected in the written minutes of the session, signed by the President and

Secretary of the Tribunal and provided to the parties, as well as all Members of the Tribunal.

11. In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Respondent on April 3, 2003, filed its
Memorial on Jurisdiction, and on June 27, 2003, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction.

12. On July 11, 2003, the Respondent requested the Tribunal, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 26, to extend by 45 days the time for the Respondent to file its Reply on
Jurisdiction. The Respondent cited as the reasons for this request, the volume of the Claimants’
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (121 pages) and the number of exhibits thereto (300); and
the fact that “a substantial portion of the materials in [the] Claimants’ Counter-Memorial ...
including 13 of the witness statements and expert opinions, [were] in English only” and needed
to be translated into Turkish. The Claimants in a letter of July 15, 2003 objected to the
Respondent's request, suggesting instead that if an extension of time was of critical importance,
it should be for no more than 30 days to minimize the delay to the originally agreed schedule,
and that, in such an event, a similar extension should also be allowed the Claimants for their

Rejoinder.

-7-

13. Following a further letter of July 15, 2003 from the Respondent, the Tribunal by its
Secretary’s letter of July 17, 2003, communicated to the parties its decision to extend the
deadline for the filing of the Reply on Jurisdiction by 30 days and to allow a similar extension to
the Claimants for the submission of the Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal also decided to
reschedule the hearing on jurisdiction, originally set for November 3 to 6, 2003, to take place
no earlier than the second half of January 2004 on dates to be agreed by the Tribunal in

consultation with the parties and the Secretariat.

14. In compliance with the new schedule, the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction was duly
filed on September 10, 2003, and the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction was duly filed on
November 24, 2003.

15. Also, in accordance with a new schedule, agreed after several exchanges of
correspondence between the Tribunal and the parties, and in consultation with the Centre, the
hearing on jurisdiction was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., from February
22 to 25, 2004. The parties were represented by their respective counsel who made
presentations to the Tribunal and examined witnesses and experts from their side and the
opposing side. Seven witnesses and experts testified on behalf of the Claimants and six testified

on behalf of the Respondent. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal: Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, President, Mr. L. Yves
Fortier, CC, QC and Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler.

ICSID Secretariat: Mr. Ucheora O. Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal.

Attending on behalf of the Claimant: Carolyn B. Lamm, Abby Cohen Smutny, Lee A.
Steven, Lee M. Caplan, Noyan K. Goksu, Petr Polasek, Katherine F. Price, Matthew N.
Drossos, Erica M. Preiss, and Darryl S. Lew of White & Case LLP; Mesut Cakmak and
Tugba Bayman of Cakmak Ortak Avukat Biirosu; Matthew J. McGrath and Halil E. Sunar
PSEG Global, Inc.; Clark A. Moseley of North America Coal Corporation; Sarah P. Voll and
Carlos A. Pabén-Agudelo of National Economic Research Associates; as well as William
VanHerwarde, Michael B. Rosenzweig, Metin Gunday, Sait Guran, and Ata Sakmar.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent: Selahattin Cimen, Sevim Argun, and Oguzhan
Ertugrul, Representatives; Daniel M. Price, Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Stephen M. Schwebel,
Samuel Boxerman, P. David Richardson, Marinn F. Carlson, Lesley Foxhall, Jennifer Haworth
McCandless, Banu Demiralp, Serdar Paksoy, Duygu Limnili, Elvan Aziz, and John P. Wintrol,
Counsel; Selda Bilgig¢, Osman Emed, Ahmet Oktay Kavas, Carlos Lapuerta, Ergun Ozsunay,
Rutherford B. Poats, Robert Sansom, and Mumtaz Soysal.

-8-
16. Following the hearing, the Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of

communication, including a meeting for deliberations in London on May 4, 2004.

17. The Tribunal considers it unnecessary to describe the numerous procedural issues that it
was called upon to resolve, or to recount the parties’ many submissions, requests and
applications relating to these issues. Suffice it to say that throughout the written phase of this
jurisdictional phase of the arbitration, the Tribunal was required to consider and determine a

myriad of questions relating to the disclosure of documents and the availability of one witness.

II. Considerations.

A. The facts of the dispute.

The early start-up of the Project, the Feasibility Study and the Implementation Contract.

18. In the past two decades Turkey has undertaken an important expansion of its energy
sector with a view to ensuring the overall development of its economy. In 1984, Parliament
enacted Law No. 3096 authorizing private companies to build and operate generation facilities
and to sell the generated electricity to TEAS, the Turkish state-owned electric entity. Under this
Law a “Build-Operate-Transfer” (“BOT”) model was established, allowing private investors to
undertake the generation project with the requirement of transferring to the Government the
ownership of the site and plant at the end of the authorization period. This legal framework was
perfected in 1994 with the enactment of Law No. 3996, which in essence provided for the

BOT contracts and agreements to operate subject to private law.

19. Foreign investment was expected to be a key feature in this energy expansion program.
In April 1994, PSEG requested the Ministry of Energy to wdertake the negotiation of a
contract with a view to developing a lignite-fired electric power plant in the Turkish Province of
Konya. The development of an adjacent lignite mine that would supply the plant’s fuel was also
envisaged in the proposal. After some initial negotiations and revisions, the Ministry in

November 1995 approved the Feasibility Study of the project prepared by PSEG.

-9-
20. The Feasibility Study considered a plant with a generating capacity of 425 MW gross
and 375 MW net. The average annual price per kilowatt-hour was US$0.0498 cents,' the
operational period 38 years, the annual availability factor 85.08% and the total investment
US$804. 8 millions. The net capacity, the price and the availability factor are the key
commercial terms and are set out in a “tariff” which establishes the terms and conditions for the

provision of and payment for power on a yearly basis.

21. In March 1996, the Turkish Constitutional Court ruled that BOT power projects could
not be subject to private law and had to follow the traditional model of concession contracts
subject to the approval of the Turkish Council of State (the “Danistay”). Upon approval of the
project by the State Planning Organization, the parties in August 1996 initialed an
Implementation Contract” based on the same factors as the Feasibility Study. This contract was

then submitted to the Danistay for review and approval in the form of a Concession Contract.*

22. A few weeks before the Implementation Contract was initialed, PSEG advised the
Ministry that an additional site exploration had to be conducted before preparing the final Mine
Plan, a step that could have an influence in the operation plan and coal production costs. Article
5.1 of the Implementation Contract allowed the Claimants to conduct additional studies
concerning the mine site and, if necessary, to prepare a Revised Mine Plan; it also allowed for

the submission of a revised energy tariff reflecting such cost increases.

23. The Implementation Contract also provided for a Long Term Energy Sales Agreement
to be entered into by the Claimants and TEAS and for a Fund Agreement with the Electrical
Energy Fund, as well as for the project to benefit from a Treasury guarantee under Article 11 of
Law 3996.* Discussions on the Energy and Fund agreements made progress but ultimately
were not finalized. The Treasury guarantee experienced other problems as will be mentioned

below.

' All references to currencies made in this Decision are to dollars of the United States of America.
? Hereinafter the “Implementation Contract”.

* Hereinafter the “Concession Contract” or the “Contract”.

* Hereinafter the “Treasury guarantee”.

-10-
The Revised Mine Plan and the corporate structure.

24. The Revised Mine Plan was submitted by the Claimants in December 1997,
incorporating conditions for the mine that were different from those originally envisaged. As a
result, it was estimated by the Claimants that a capital investment of US$361.6 million would
have to be made in addition to the US$804.8 million investment envisaged in the Feasibility
Study, thus totaling US$1.166 billion. Furthermore, the Revised Mine Plan called for an
additional US$557 million that would be needed for the mine during the life of the Project and
an additional US$20 million yearly operating and maintenance costs. It was also proposed that
these increased costs could be met by increasing the generating capacity of the plant to 500
MW gross and 433.5 MW net with an average availability of 87%, the price per kilowatt hour
remaining unchanged. Additional energy would have to be bought by TEAS under this proposal.

The overall cost of the project would increase by approximately US$1 billion.

25. The negotiations between the parties that followed in 1998 were of an increasingly
complex nature. Part of it was related to the implications of the Revised Mine Plan and part to

the proposed corporate structure.

26. At first, a Turkish joint stock company was envisaged as the corporate vehicle, but as a
result of amendments of the Turkish law and tax issues PSEG later proposed that it be changed
to a Turkish branch Office of the foreign investor. The Ministry favored the first choice although
there would be adverse tax implications for the project. In this context, the Ministry apparently
requested the Claimant to prepare alternative proposals that would take into account variations
in the plant capacity and other factors that could affect the tariff structure, including the question
of the corporate structure. Consequently, the Project Company was first established & a
Turkish branch Office of a Dutch corporation created to handle the investment and later

incorporated as a limited liability company.

27. The North American Coal Company (NACC) began assisting with the mining aspects
of the project in 1996 and in 1998 entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with PSEG

so as to become an equity investor.

28. In so far as the settlement of disputes was concerned, the Implementation Contract had

provided for ICSID arbitration. The relevant clause was, however, deleted from the

-1l-

Concession Contract in the review process before the Danistay and as a result the Contract did

not contain any specific provision on dispute settlement.

29. Three proposals were submitted by the Claimant to take account of the changed costs
in February 1998. These proposals ranged from 433 MW gross/375 MW net to 500 MW
gross/433.5 MW net; from an average availability factor of 85% to 87%; and all had in
common an increase in price from the original US$0.0498 cents to: US$0.0571 cents/Kwh,
US$0.0523 cents/Kwh and US$0.0634 cents/Kwh, respectively.

30. The parties have different views about what was agreed in this respect. The Respondent
is of the view that the proposals were rejected because they would increase the cost to the
Turkish Government and consumer, but that it was prepared to accommodate the 500/433.5
MW alternative provided the price remained unchanged and that a limited liability company was
established. The Respondent also submits that this was agreed at a meeting held on February
13, 1998. The Claimants have a different view, believing that no agreement was reached at this
time and that the Ministry would continue to examine the various proposals and to consider the

Revised Mine Plan.

31. The discussions continued at another meeting held on February 19, 1998, where it was
agreed that a draft amended Contract would be submitted to the Danistay, including the changes
agreed. Exactly what changes and amendments would be submitted remained unclear in the light
of the continuing discussions about the Revised Mine Plan and the plant capacity and other
associated elements. The Revised Mine Plan was later approved by the Turkish Coal Enterprise
in May 1998.

The Concession Contract.

32. The fact is, however, that the Danistay approved the Implementation Contract
in the frm of a Concession Contract on March 30, 1998. The economics of the project as
envisaged in the Feasibility Study were not changed as no agreed amendment had been
submitted. It follows that a plant capacity of 425 MW gross/375 MW net, on a 38-year term,
an annual average availability factor of 85.08% and an average price of US$0.0498 cents/Kwh,

were approved.

-12-
33. One of the amendments introduced by the Danistay concerned the revised tariff
and its approval. Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract had provided for the possibility of
submitting a new tariff to the Ministry covering the increased fuel production wsts. This

resulted in the amended Article 8, paragraph 3, of the Contract, which provides:

“Tf necessary, the Company will prepare a revised mine plan based on such
additional research and exploration conducted in the mine site prior to the
construction start date. If such revised mine plan increases the Company’s
estimated fuel production cost, the Company shall submit to the Ministry a
revised tariff reflecting such cost increase, which the Ministry shall approve or
disapprove in no later than sixty days after the submission by the Company. In
the event the Ministry withholds its approval for the revised tariff on the basis of
reasonable grounds and if the Company abandons the project prior to the
construction start date, the Company and the Ministry shall have no claims

against the other”.

34. Additional meetings were allegedly held in May 1998, although the Respondent has
explained that it has no official records of any such meetings and the officials allegedly
participating do not recall attending such meetings. In the Claimants’ version, at a meeting held
on May 18, 1998 the Ministry orally accepted a proposal for a S00 MW gross/465 MW net
plant capacity and an 87% availability factor so as to include the increased costs and the added
tax burden resulting from the limited liability company corporate structure. Furthermore, a letter
from the Claimant followed on the same date confirming the alleged understandings. The
Respondent, however, does not believe that any such agreement was reached and that the letter
remained unanswered as it was beyond the scope of the agreement allegedly reached in
February. In any event, the Respondent argues, the Claimant itself believed that the May terms

were only a proposal, as reflected in a letter of June 3, 1999.

35. Other crucial steps in the process of negotiation took place in June 1998, but again the
views of the parties on such events are different. Following the approval of the Revised Mine
Plan by the Turkish Coal Enterprise, the Ministry approved on June 19, 1998 the commercial

terms of the project. The Respondent believes these are the terms agreed to in February 1998,

-13-

that is, a plant capacity of 500 MW gross/433.5 MW net, the availability factor and the tariff
remaining unchanged. The Claimant, for its part, submits that as a result of the May meetings
and another meeting held on June 16, 1998, the Ministry through its approval of June 19, 1998
accepted the 500 MW/gross and 465 MW net plant capacity as the means to cover the
increased costs, although admittedly no reference was made to the net factor. The Respondent
further argues that the 465 MW net capacity was not feasible and that in any event the Ministry
alone could not approve new commercial terms. It also does not agree with the Claimants that

a meeting was held in this context.

36. After further exchanges of correspondence between the Claimant and the Ministry
concerning the Danistay approval of the Contract and the Claimant’s reservations in respect of
arbitration and other issues, PSEG executed the Concession Contract as issued by the Danistay
on December 10, 1998. A ground breaking ceremony took place on December 17, 1998. In
February 1999 the Claimant issued a performance bond for US$8.848 millions and on March
8, 1999 the Ministry signed the Concession Contract.

37. ‘Whether the Contract included a final agreement on key commercial terms and what
those terms were has also been a matter of controversy. The Respondent is of the view that the
Contract did not include a final agreement on essential commercial terms as the original cost
estimates turned to be inaccurate md no amendments were submitted to the Danistay. A
reference to 425 MW was made in the Ministry’s transmittal letter of the executed Contract and
later a reference to 500 MW gross/465 MW net was included in a draft Protocol that the

parties discussed in connection with the amendments that could be submitted to the Danistay.

38. Each party argues that this Protocol was drafted by the other. In Respondent’s view
the reference to 465 MW net is a mistake that originated in the draft being prepared by the
Claimant; conversely, the Claimant argues that this was drafted by the Respondent and
therefore constitutes further evidence of the revised commercial terms having been agreed to
and that in any event the alleged mistake, even if such, was never corrected. New meetings
were held and correspondence exchanged in March and April 1999 concerning the terms of the
Protocol and again the parties dispute whether the 465 MW figure was accepted or even

discussed at this other stage.

-14-
The aftermath of the execution of the Contract.

39. Various meetings that followed the execution of the Contract and the discussion of the
draft amendment Protocol showed that the parties were entrenched in their views of the facts.
The Ministry considered in particular that the final figures had been agreed to in February 1998
and that any increase in the net capacity above 433.5 MW would inevitably result in an
unacceptable increase of the envisaged tariff of US$0.0498 cents. In addition, the Ministry’s
engineers believed that the increased tariff would not only cover the costs but would also result
in a higher profit for the Company. The Claimants insisted that only by increasing the net
capacity to 465 MW, as agreed in May 1998, could the tariff be kept at that level and at the

same time offset the additional costs imposed by a limited liability company structure.

40. Additional proposals were made by the Claimants in June 1999 but none of them were
acceptable to the Ministry if it resulted in a higher cost to the Government and, eventually, to the
consumer. The alternative of a 545 MW gross/465 MW net was also considered at this stage.
On February 10, 2000, the Claimants made what they considered their final offer: a 500 MW
gross/433.5 MW net plant capacity with a higher availability factor for the first twelve years of

the project, but this was not acceptable to the Ministry.

Al. Several important steps were taken as from mid-1999 in respect of the corporate
organization of the project and the governing legal framework. A Permission Certificate
authorizing the Project Company to invest and do business in Turkey was issued on July 5,
1999. The Company was incorporated as Konya Ilgin Ltd. on August 19, 1999. Also in
August 1999 the Turkish Constitution was amended to enable Parliament to authorize certain
public services to be provided under private law contracts and to permit the Republic of Turkey
to consent to international arbitration. Following the enactment of Law No. 4493 in December

1999, BOT contracts could be concluded as private law contracts.

42. Also with the enactment of Law No. 4501 on January 22, 2000, parties to existing
concession contracts could convert these instruments to private law contracts or could agree to
submit disputes to international or domestic arbitration. The Claimants applied to the Ministry

within the deadline given to convert the Concession Contract to a private law contract or,

-15-

alternatively, to amend the Contract agreeing to submission of disputes to international

arbitration.

43. This application led to a new round of disagreements between the parties as to the
commercial terms of the Contract. According to the Claimants, the Ministry demanded six
changes in the Contract before forwarding the application to the Council of Ministers. In the
view of the Claimants the Ministry was seeking to obtain financial concessions which it did not

have authority to demand under the law.

44, On December 22, 2000, the Claimants indicated that they would demand
reimbursement of the expenses made and payment for its losses. It appears that no further
negotiations took place thereafter. The performance bond expired on February 23, 2001 and

was not extended.

45. An additional amendment of the legal framework took place in March 2001 with the
enactment of Law No. 4628 on the Electricity Market. The Claimants believe that Article 8 (1)
of this Law, by eliminating the possibility of obtaining a Treasury guarantee, effectively
terminated the Concession Contract as this was one of its essential components. The
Respondent believes that the law had no impact on the project as the Claimant had ended the

negotiations before its adoption.

46. A decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court of February 13, 2002 invalidated the
provision of Law No. 4628 eliminating the rights of a company to the Treasury guarantee,
because this was a right created by the concession contract and hence had to be protected
under the contract, the rule of law and the Turkish Constitution. The Claimants believe that their
right to this guarantee has thus been revived, but no governmental action was taken in this

respect.

47. As noted, the Claimants introduced a request for arbitration before ICSID on March
22, 2002, thus beginning this proceeding.
The parties’ explanation of the dispute.
48. The parties also offer different explanations about the reasons for their disagreements

and, ultimately, for submitting their dispute to arbitration. A number of the issues raised are

-16-
connected more to the merits than to jurisdiction in this case, but it is necessary to keep them in
sight in order to better understand the nature and extent of the jurisdictional objections made by
the Respondent and the views of the Claimants thereon.

The Claimants’ views.

49. The Claimants have argued that the Respondent took action and engaged in deliberate
inaction to destroy the Claimants’ investment in the Republic of Turkey. After having authorized
the investment and concluded a valid and binding Concession Contract, it is argued, the
Respondent took steps to deprive the Claimants of the Treasury guarantee, the long-term
power purchase agreement and the Fund Agreement that were essential to the success and
feasibility of the project. In this context, the Claimants argue that various contractual
undertakings were breached, in particular the revision of the tariff structure so as to
accommodate increased costs. It is also claimed that other rights provided to investors by law

were denied.

50. Given the fact that the project was organized along the lines of a BOT model, the
actions and inactions were particularly detrimental to its feasibility. The Claimants explain that
the significant level of investment required involves both equity and loan resources, including
international debt financing, which is dependent on a tariff structure that is able to generate
sufficient income to repay lenders, meet the operational expenses and offer sufficient returns on
equity. Although regulations in force at the time provided that a BOT project’s rate of return
should be capped at 16%, most of the alternatives discussed with the Ministry ended up in

lower figures that led, in the Claimants’ view, to an inadequate and unreasonable rate of return.

51. In the Claimants’ understanding these difficulties stemmed from the changing priorities of
the Turkish Government and particularly from the pressure to reform the country’s economy in
the light of the negotiations for access to the European Community and World Bank policies. It
is alleged that these policies were contrary to the BOT model as it was thought that the
profitability of the project would be artificially ensured through government guarantees and other
mechanisms, including a subsidized tariff structure resulting in uncompetitive generation costs.
The Government was required to impose limits on the new projects included in the public

investment program and to limit the issuance of new guarantees.

-17-
52. The end result was that the Government abandoned the large-scale BOT projects, with
the exception of 29 small projects that did not include the Claimants’ project. Treasury
guarantees were effectively eliminated under the Electricity Market Law, noted above, and
power purchase agreements could not exceed one year. These measures led to the effective
termination of the project. Notwithstanding the fact that the Constitutional Court ruled that such
restrictive provisions of the Electricity Market Law were unconstitutional, as explained above,
no government action ensued to remedy the situation. Moreover, it is argued by the Claimants
that both the Energy Sales Agreement and the Fund Agreement had been substantially
completed with the technical bodies involved but the Ministry never extended the necessary

authorization.

53. The Claimants also explain that all the major components of the project had been
completed prior to financial closing. These components included the preparation of an
Environmental Impact Assessment, the selection of the engineering, procurement and
construction contractor, the conduct of hydrological studies, a mining license and operation
permit for the mine, loan applications and appointment of financial agents, zoning changes and
preparatory steps for the necessary expropriations.

The Respondent’s views.

54. The Respondent rejects all of the above explanations and believes that the dispute arises
from the project never having moved off the drawing board or the negotiating table. Since the
Claimants had dramatically underestimated the costs of the project in the Feasibility Study, it is
argued, there simply was no agreement on the commercial terms. It follows in the Respondent’s
view that all the activities undertaken were merely preparatory to the investment and did not

involve any legal expectation or right.

55. Before any Concession Contract was approved by the Danistay, the Claimants knew
that the original commercial terms were unfeasible as they had changed dramatically in the light
of the Revised Mine Plan. The Respondent believes that the Claimants have constantly sought
to pass on to the Turkish Government and consumer the higher costs involved by selling more
electricity, resulting in a burden to the public of US$2 billion. The Ministry repeatedly advised

the Claimants that the original commercial framework was not feasible as neither were many

-18-
additional proposals that differed substantially from the original. In particular it is asserted that
the Ministry never agreed to and the Danistay never approved a 500 MW gross/465 MW net

plant capacity.

56. Even after the Danistay approved the Concession Contract, both parties clearly
understood that new commercial terms would have to be agreed to and submitted for the
approval of this body. This was the reason for the many negotiations that took place and the

draft amendment Protocol that was discussed after the approval of the Concession Contract.

57. In addition, the Respondent is of the view that the Claimants never completed the steps
required to make an investment in Turkey. The initial framework setting was not followed up
and as a result the Claimants did not obtain the necessary authorizations from the Treasury to
proceed with the investment, did not obtain approval from the Turkish Coal Enterprises to mine
certain needed reserves, never concluded the Energy Sales Agreement or the Plant
Performance Report and never obtained a host of other permits nor took other steps required,
including loan agreements, insurance, plant permission, construction license and others. The
activities undertaken by the Claimants are all pre-investment steps and in a number of cases do

not even fall in this category. The ground-breaking ceremony was merely symbolic.

58. As to the question of the Treasury guarantee, the Respondent explains that there was no
obligation in this connection as the issuance of such guarantees is a discretionary power of the
Treasury and there was no obligation to this effect under the Concession Contract. Neither did
the restrictions introduced by the Electricity Market Law have any consequence for the project
as the commercial terms had failed much earlier and the project had in fact been abandoned. In
any event, it is argued, as the Constitutional Court held these restrictions unconstitutional, the
Claimants could have pursued an agreement and applied for the guarantee at any time, but this

was not done.

59. The Respondent also explains that the Ministry worked diligently at all times and that its
responses to the various proposals were reasonable in the light of the need to protect the public
interest. So was the requirement to organize the project company as a Turkish capital company

as PSEG had obtained a windfall by changing the structure to a branch office of a reign

-19-
company. At all times the Ministry instructed the various public services involved to cooperate
in the obtaining of permits, agreements and elements required for the beginning of the project,
but the Claimants were remiss in their own action to this effect while they waited for more

favorable legislation to be enacted.

60. The Respondent opposes in particular any connection with World Bank policies, as
these were discussed much later than the date when disagreements emerged as a result of the
increased costs of the Revised Mine Plan. Neither did the Ministry interfere with the Claimants’
rights to obtain the benefits of a private law regime under Law No. 4501 as it only asked for the
introduction of standard conditions required to improve all projects.

III. Respondent's jurisdictional objections.
6l. Based upon its views of the facts and the meaning of the dispute, the Respondent has

made the following objections to jurisdiction:

a) There is no jurisdiction in this case because there is no investment or an investment

dispute under the ICSID Convention or the Treaty.

b) Even if there was an investment, the Government of Turkey has not consented to
jurisdiction.

c) The obligation under the Treaty to resort to any previously agreed dispute settlement

procedure has not been met.

d) The North American Coal Corporation (NACC) and the Project Company do not

have standing in this case.

62. The parties have raised as a preliminary point an aspect that the Tribunal wishes to

dispose of at the very outset.

63. The Claimants have argued that the Tribunal needs only to be satisfied that if the facts
alleged by Claimants are ultimately proven true, they would be capable of constituting a violation

of the Treaty. The Claimants have invoked in support of this proposition the prima facie test

-20-

applied in UPS v. Canada* and the assumption relied upon in Methanex v. United States®
that, for purposes of jurisdiction, the Claimants’ factual contentions are deemed correct. In the
Respondent’s view, however, when the jurisdictional challenge involves disputed questions of
fact, as in this case, the Tribunal has the duty to consider the facts alleged by both parties and

make its own findings of fact for deciding the jurisdictional aspects.

64. The Tribunal is aware that the prima facie test has been applied in a number of cases,
including ICSID cases such as Maffezini’ and CMS*, and that as a general approach to
jurisdictional decisions it is a reasonable one. However, this is a test that is always case-specific.
Tf, as in the present case, the parties have views which are so different about the facts and the
meaning of the dispute, it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to rely only on the

assumption that the facts as presented by the Claimants are correct.

65. The Tribunal necessarily has to examine the facts in a broader perspective, including the
views expressed by the Respondent, so as to reach a jurisdictional determination, keeping of
course separate the need to prove the facts as a matter pertaining to the merits. This is what the

Tribunal will do.

A. Jurisdictional Objection concerning the existence of an investment,

Respondent’s arguments.

66. The Respondent argues first that the Treaty protection extends only to the investments
defined therein and as neither the proposed project nor the Concession Contract are an
investment the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. Article I (1) (c) of the BIT defines “investment” as

follows:

““Tnvestment’ means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or

controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals or companies of the other Party,

‘United Parcel Service of | America v. Government of Canada, available at
http://www. state. gov/s/l/c3749.htm

® Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, available at http://www state. gov/s/V/c5818.htm

” Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision on Request for
Provisional Measures of October 28, 1999 and Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000, 16
ICSID Rev.—FILJ 212 (2001); Award of the Tribunal of November 13, 2000; 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 248 (2001).
Rectification of the Award of January 31, 2001; 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 279 (2001).

* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, 42 ILM 788 (2003).

-21-

including assets, equity, debt, claims and service and investment contracts; and

includes

(i) _ tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as mortgages, liens and

pledges;

Gi) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests in the

assets thereof;

ii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value and

associated with an investment;

(iv) _ intellectual and industrial property rights, including rights with respect to
copyrights, patents, trademark, trade names, industrial designs, trade secrets

and know-how, and goodwill;

(v) _ any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits pursuant to

law; and

(vi) reinvestment of returns, and of principal and interest payments arising under loan

agreements.”

67. As noted above, the Respondent believes that the project never moved beyond the
drawing board and the lengthy negotiations undertaken did not mature into an investment. As
the parties never agreed to the essential commercial terms of the project, such as gross and net
plant capacity, availability factor and purchase price, there was simply no “meeting of the
minds”.” Even if there had been an agreement, the Respondent adds for the sake of argument,
no amendments or revisions were submitted to the Danistay for approval, an essential step

under Turkish law, nor were a number of other key agreements concluded, notably the Energy

Sales Agreement.

° Legal Opinion of Professor Dr. Ergun Ozsunay. September 10, 2003, at 14.

-22-
68. The Respondent further argues that the situation in this case is analogous to that in
Mihaly v. Sri Lanka,'° where a number of preliminary expenditures and steps undertaken by
the Claimant were ruled not to be an investment as no binding and effective concession contract
was concluded by the parties. It alleges that there is no investment in this case either; there are

only some expenditures on a project that never materialized.

69. The Respondent argues next that, while it is not disputed that the Concession Contract
was approved by the Danistay and executed by the parties, this Contract does not constitute an
investment because it did not contain the essential agreed commercial terms. In the best of
circumstances there was a framework for an agreement to negotiate further. The parties knew
this before the Contract was submitted to the Danistay and this explains why the Contract
contains provisions for a revised mine plan and a revised tariff. However, it is explained, the
Danistay provided the Ministry with broad discretion to withhold its approval of the revised

tariff and did not fix the commercial terms to be negotiated.

70. In the Respondent’s view nothing prevented the Claimants from implementing the
Contract in the terms that it contained reflecting the early agreement of the Feasibility Study, but,
before submission to the Danistay, the Claimants advised that the Contract was not feasible in
those terms and that it had to be renegotiated. The amendments requested by the Claimants

were ultimately not acceptable to the Respondent.

71. The end result is that the Contract, the Respondent asserts, is not a valid and binding
agreement to which both parties have expressed their consent to be bound. The original terms
were repudiated by the Claimants and there are no new terms agreed to. In addition, under
Turkish law a contract is null and void if its subject matter is impossible to carry out, this being
the case here from a technological and economic point of view unless entirely new terms were
introduced. Neither was the Contract financially feasible without the financial incentives that the
Claimants never obtained nor sought. Such situation of uncertainty made it impossible for any
tribunal to fill the gaps concerning the essential commercial terms, which are thus clearly

unenforceable.

© Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/2), Award of March 15, 2002, 17 ICSID Rev—FILJ 142 (2002).

-23-

72. Also the Respondent opposes in this context the characterization that the Claimants
have made of the Branch Office and Konya Ilgin Ltd, the Project Company, as an investment
within the meaning of the Treaty or that any of the claimed assets of this Company qualify as
investments. First, because in the Respondent’s argument the Branch Office established in
January 1998 is not an investment under any definition and, in any event, this would not be an
investment out of which the dispute arises. The dispute in this case concerns the proposed
project and not the activities of a branch Office which did not even sign the Concession
Contract submitted to the Danistay. The fact that a limited liability Company was incorporated
in August 1999, long after the relevant events invoked by the Claimants in support of their

argument, does not in Respondent’s view alter the situation as this is still not an investment.

73. Relying on the criteria set out in Mihaly'' and Zhinvali (R1907),'* the Respondent
argues in particular that the Feasibility Study, the Revised Mine Plan, the Transfer of Mining
Rights Agreement and other permits and licenses claimed to be part of the assets of the Project
Company are mere development activities undertaken in preparation of an investment that never

came about.

The Claimants’ argument.

74. In making their argument the Claimants rely on the accepted fact that the ICSID
Convention deliberately omitted the definition of investment and left this definition to the
parties.'* Broad definitions were embodied in numerous treaties and agreements and a broad
interpretation has also been upheld by ICSID tribunals, particularly Fedax'* and CSOB.'> The
Treaty concerned in this case is no exception as the Parties thereto have agreed to a broad
definition of investment. The Claimants assert that the Concession Contract clearly constitutes
an investment which is listed in Article I (1)(c) to include service and investment contracts, claim

to performance and intangible property.

" Mihaly cit.

"° Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/1), Award of January 24, 2003,
unpublished but introduced in the arbitration record.

'S Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, June 27, 2003, at 2-5.

“4 Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
July 11, 1997, 37 ILM 1378 (1998); Award of March 9, 1998, 37 ILM 1391 (1998).

'S Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction (May 24, 1999), available at

-24-

75. The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts are invoked by the
Claimants in support of their view that it is not always necessary to reach an agreement on all
the essential terms of a contract as long as the parties have the intention of forming a contract'®
and the obligation to proceed to negotiate the pending terms in good faith. It is further invoked
that civil law systems also allow the parties to leave open many terms of the contract to be
determined later in good faith and that, particularly in long-term concession contracts, it is often
the case that adjustment clauses will allow for change to basic terms in order to remain within

the economic parameters of the contract. It is also stated that the validity of adjustment clauses

and their enforceability have been upheld by arbitral tribunals.'”

76. The Claimants also argue that the Contract is unequivocally a valid and binding legal
agreement between the parties, as reflected in a precise legal language and the use of all the
solemnities of a contract, all of it far from a mere statement of intention. In the Claimants’ view
there is no possible analogy with Mihaly, where mo contract was signed and all preliminary
documents of intention expressly contained disclaimers that no binding rights were being
created. Moreover, the Concession Contract in the present case expresses its binding legal
character and was executed by the parties, authorizing the completion of further contracts but

not depending itself on these other contracts.

77. Expert opinions introduced by the Claimants also examine in detail the validity of

contracts under Turkish law,!®

concluding in this respect that once a concession contract is
approved by the Danistay and executed by the parties it constitutes a legally binding and valid
instrument. It is also concluded that in this particular case the Contract includes more
comprehensive terms than most contracts approved by the Danistay, even the essential
commercial terms the Respondent argues to be missing. Adjustment clauses, such as Article 8
of the Contract, constitute an integral part of the agreement and are also binding under Turkish

law. In any event, as explained in connection with the facts, the Claimants believe that an

agreement on the new essential commercial terms was reached with the Ministry.

 

http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/csob_decision.pdf; Decision of the Tribunal on the Further and
Partial Objection to Jurisdiction of December 1, 2000, 15 ICSID Rev—FILJ 530 (2000).

‘6 UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, 1994, Article 2.14.

7 Aminoil Award, 21 ILM 976, (1982).

-25-
78. In the Claimants’ argument the Project Company is in itself an investment that was duly
incorporated under Turkish law and granted the necessary Permission Certificate to operate and
do business in that country. In particular, it is further affirmed, all of its assets are investment in
the meaning of the Treaty, including the Feasibility Study and the Revised Mine Plan as well as
intangible property and industrial property rights, the Transfer of Mining Rights Agreement as
both intangible property and licenses and permits, and the Environmental Impact Assessment
Report and other permits and licenses. Even if it were correct to observe that the project does
not constitute an investment, all the agreements, legal rights, licenses, authorizations, assets and
property of the investor do qualify as investments under the Treaty.

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the existence of the investment.

79. The Tribunal must first note that the facts alleged by the parties are not always
consistent with the very views in support of which they are invoked. A number of contradictions
can be noted in this respect. This is not surprising in a highly complex operation and negotiation

that on many occasions were handled by technical staff not familiar with the legal language.

80. The essential point that the Tribunal must establish, however, is a legal one. Does the
Concession Contract exist? The answer to this question is not difficult as the parties do not
dispute the fact that the Concession Contract does exist, was duly signed, submitted to the
Danistay and approved by this body and later executed with all the legal formalities and
requirements. It is not disputed either that both parties unequivocally believed that the Contract
had become effective on the date of the signing by the Ministry. The Contract is couched in
proper legal language.

81. Numerous documents in the record evidence this understanding of the parties. Letters
from the Ministry of March 11, 1999, April 9, 1999 and July 20, 1999, for example, refer to
the Contract having become effective. This in itself is a substantive difference with the facts in
Mihaly where, as explained above, the parties never signed a concession contract and
expressly disclaimed any legal obligations arising from the preparatory work undertaken. The
same is true of Zhinvaly where the parties expressly acknowledged that the Claimant did not

have an investment.

 

'S Rejoinder Opinion of Prof. Dr. Metin Giinday, November 24, 2003, par. 13; Legal Opinion of Prof. Dr. Sait

-26-
82. The question that the Tribunal must answer next is a more difficult one. Is the Contract
valid? Herein lies the fundamental dispute between the parties. The answer is related to the
question of whether the Contract omitted essential terms and conditions that make it a nullity or

a different kind of instrument.

83. The Tribunal must first note in this respect that the Contract did not ignore the essential
commercial terms of the transaction as the terms originally agreed to in the Feasibility Study
were incorporated in the Contract. Technical formulas to define the tariff structure and the price
were thus included in Annex 2 of the Contract. To this extent there is not a blank or a vacuum
in the Contract. Theoretically, on the basis of the Contract as signed and executed, the
Claimants could still undertake the project on the commercial terms therein specified, which the
Respondent has admitted was a possibility. The Claimants could also seek either to amend

those terms, under both Articles 8 and 32 of the Contract or to ultimately abandon the project.

84. The parties to the Contract knew before its submission to the Danistay in draft form that
costs would increase as a result of the Revised Mine Plan.'? This Revision entailed significant
changes to the earlier economic estimates and to the work envisaged in the mine site. Letters
pointing to the need for accommodation and tariff restructuring were abundant. This is precisely
why the Implementation Contract included a rebalancing mechanism in Article 5.1, which later
led to Article 8 of the Concession Contract. This is also why the Claimants repeatedly made
reservations of their rights under the Implementation Qontract and stated that amendments

included in the draft submitted to the Danistay did not constitute a waiver of such rights.

85. The fact that economically the project might be difficult to execute or even become
unfeasible does not render the Contract invalid. Neither does the fact that the project could
become impossible to perform. As Professor Giiran stated in his Legal Opinion, “...economic
hardship does not constitute a valid excuse to escape a party’s contractual obligations, whether

> 20

under the doctrine d impossibility of performance or any other principle of Turkish law’.

 

Giiran, November 24, 2003, par. 6.
° Witness Statement of Halil L. Sunar, June 27, 2003, par. 59.
?° Legal Opinion of Prof. Dr. Sait Giiran, November 24, 2003, par. 23.

-27-

Professor Giinday offered a similar opinion. He said that ‘‘...economic hardship is not

recognized as impossibility as that concept is understood by Turkish law”.”!

86. Moreover, the repudiation that the Claimants have allegedly made of the original terms
stems from its economic and financial feasibility. It does not alter the legal validity of the
Contract, particularly since both parties foresaw that there would be a need for an economic
adjustment as a result of the Revised Mine Plan and other issues intervening in the negotiation.
The need for an economic adjustment informs Article 8 of the Contract. Article 8 of the
Contract allows the Claimants to seek an economic rebalancing of the Contract terms in case of

significant change in that balance.

87. An additional consideration arises because the Contract contains a mechanism for
renegotiating the commercial terms and the tariff as a result of the Revised Mine Plan. Again,
this does not affect the validity of the Contract; it only means that the terms therein defined can

be reopened in the light of certain events.

88. This is not an unusual feature in contracts dealing with highly complex concessions of
services of long duration or other types of long-term transactions. Faced with the possibility of
renegotiation of certain contract terms, the parties’ intent is dispositive of the question whether
the Contract nevertheless came into existence. In the present case, both the language of the
Contract as well as the circumstances, as they are reviewed below, demonstrate an intent by the
Parties to be bound in spite of the fact that certain terms still needed to be agreed upon at a later

date.

89. The Tribunal also notes that several experts on Turkish administrative law have opined
that the Concession Contract is binding on the Turkish State and meets all the conditions to

become effective under Turkish administrative law.

90. The conclusions reached by the Tribunal on the existence and the validity of the
Contract would suffice to affirm jurisdiction on this point. The issue whether the parties
undertook the required negotiations on the amendment and rebalancing of the commercial terms

of the Contract in good faith and its eventual legal consequences pertains to the merits.

*! Rejoinder Opinion of Prof. Dr. Metin Giinday, November 24, 2003, par. 26.

-28-
91. The Tribunal cannot ignore, however, the related question whether the commercial
terms were actually agreed as this question is also of the essence of the dispute between the
parties. The documentary evidence offered by the parties in support of their respective
arguments is not generally conclusive on this matter. Whether the terms were agreed to in
February 1998, as the Respondent believes, or in May and June 1998, as the Claimants
believe, and what those terms were, is not sufficiently documented. In fact, there are indications
pointing both ways and again many contradictions. The same is true of the statements of fact

witnesses.

92. The Respondent argues in particular that the Claimants in a letter of June 3, 1999,”
characterized as a proposal what they now argue was an agreement referred to in an earlier
letter of May 18, 1998,” thus acknowledging that an agreement was never reached. While
grammatically that may be so, the Tribunal cannot draw from this fact a legal conclusion since it
is perfectly possible that the Claimants were referring to the proposal on the basis of which the
alleged agreement of May 18, 1998 was reached. The ongoing submission of cash flow tables
and tariff alternatives up to the year 2000 suggests, however, that no firm agreement was in

place but that it was being explored and negotiated.

93. The Respondent has also invoked minutes of the Claimants conceming, for example,
meetings held on May 14, July 19, September 21 and October 13, 1999, suggesting that a
number of issues were not considered sufficiently clarified, agreed to or settled. The
Respondent also argued that the Claimants stated clearly that the project could not move
forward without an agreement on the tariff, as reflected in minutes of meetings held on

December 16, 1999, January 27, March 3 and April 10, 2000.

94. The Claimants have also bolstered their arguments with documentary evidence. The
letters sent by the Claimants to the Ministry on May 18 and June 23, 1998 make specific
reference to agreements on amendments discussed at meetings, as does the draft Protocol that
was prepared but not actually sent to the Danistay. Furthermore, various notes of meetings

appear to corroborate the Claimants’ view that an agreement was in fact reached. On this

» Sunar to Ministry, June 3, 1999.
> Sunar to Ministry, May 18, 1998.

-29-
question, Claimants refer to notes of meetings held on May 15 and 18 and June 16, 1998, filed
late in the proceedings. The Claimants also refer to documents allegedly evidencing that the
Respondent’s view that a different agreement was reached is not tenable. Some documents do
indeed point to the specific figures of 500 MW gross/465 MGW net or to the 500 MW

alone.”

95. Considering the conclusion on jurisdiction which the Tribunal reached on the basis of the
intent of the Parties, there is no need at this stage for the Tribunal to elaborate on the fact that
some of these documents were indeed filed very late in the proceedings. This may be a matter

to be considered during the second phase of the arbitration.

96. There are, however, other documents which the Tribunal believes are particularly
important in establishing the intent of the parties to conclude and be bound by the Contract.
The most fundamental of these is evidently the Contract itself. There are many provisions in the
Contract which evidence the intent of the parties to be bound. The main one is Article 8 which
specifically allows for a rebalancing of the Contract where a Revised Mine Plan introduces
substantial changes in the economics of the Contract, such as in the present case. The wording
of Article 8 is very clear. The pertinent terms of this Article, reproduced above, are clearly

indicative of the central role played by the economic rebalancing which is envisaged.

97. While much has been discussed about whether the 60-day period the Ministry had to
approve or disapprove the Article 8 amendments on reasonable grounds entails a mandatory
action, or the opposite conclusion that if no action is taken it simply means the rejection of the
amendments under Turkish law, this does not alter the fact that the Claimants could avail
themselves of this mechanism and indeed did so in order to seek to rebalance the Contract. The
long negotiations between the parties with respect to a new tariff so indicates and the very terms
of the draft Protocol discussed by the parties also show that commercial elements were being

debated pursuant to the mechanism set out in Article 8 of the Contract.

98. Tn turn, this mechanism is related to Article 15 of the Contract which refers to a number

of agreements or protocols to be concluded by the Company. The fact that this was seen as an

* Ministry to TEAS, 30 June 1998; Letter by Technical staff to Ministry, 19 June, 1998.

-30-
obligation is clearly expressed by the use of the term “shall”. This very obligation also assumes

that the Respondent’s institutions will concur in these agreements which will supplement the

Contract.

99. Article 35 of the Contract is also significant in this context. This Article provides that the
Contract shall be effective on the date of execution upon review by the Danistay, all of which
happened in fact. It provides next for the Company to complete other related steps concerning,
in particular, financing, executing the Contracts envisaged in Article 15, obtaining required
authorizations and permits and obtaining the final approval of projects by the Ministry.
Paragraph 2 of Article 35 begins with the expression “However”. This word does not condition
the effectiveness of the Contract under paragraph 1 because termination only arises in case of

“default” of the Company. Otherwise the Contract remains in force and is effective.

100. The Danistay Decision of 11 March 1998 approving the Contract refers to the
fulfillment of a number of additional transactions by the Company as “‘an obligation arising from
the contract”, thus indicating that the obligations would be in effect as soon as the Contract was
approved and executed. Clearly, these obligations were to be fulfilled once the Contract had

become effective.

101. Although, as noted, the witness statements are contradictory, it is well established that
there were meetings held by the Company officials with the Ministry’s representatives in charge
of negotiations, in particular Mr. Basli. The correspondence that followed these meetings
indicates clearly that discussions were progressing on the commercial terms, including the plant
capacity. Although witnesses for the Respondent have stated that they were not aware of any
such meetings, that no official records were prepared and that, at the most, these should be

considered simply as visits, the fact is that a certain number of meetings were held.

102. The Tribunal need not find during this phase of the arbitration whether or not the parties
reached agreement on any amendment to some of the commercial terms of the Contract.
However, in weighing the totality of the evidence submitted by the parties, the Tribunal does find
that amendments to the Contract terms were pursued. This finding further confirms the

existence, validity and binding nature of the Contract.

-31-
103. In reaching its conclusion on this matter the Tribunal is also persuaded by the argument
that if the parties did not intend to bind themselves by means of a Contract, why would they
then have signed, submitted for approval and executed a Contract? Letters of intention or other
instruments would have sufficed to provide a general framework to continue negotiations until an
agreement was reached or not without any legal consequence for either party, as the events in
Mihaly show. The view of the Respondent that the Contract was signed as a mere courtesy or
sign of good will is not tenable, nor is the view that this is nothing but a framework devoid of

legal significance.

104. A contract is a contract. The Concession Contract exists, is valid and is legally binding.
This conclusion is sufficient to establish that the Tribunal has jurisdiction on the basis of an
investment having been made in the form of a Concession Contract. A different question, again
pertaining to the merits, is whether all or some of the activities undertaken qualify as a part of the
investment or are to be regarded as merely preparatory. The same holds true of whether the

assets of the Project Company constitute an investment.

105. The objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on this count is therefore dismissed.

B. Jurisdictional objection concerning the question that the dispute does mt arise
directly out of an investment.

The Respondent’s argument.

106. — Intertwined with the arguments on the jurisdictional objection concerning the existence
of an investment, the Respondent has also raised the question that if there is no investment, there
cannot be an investment dispute under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention. But even if there
is an investment, the argument follows, the dispute does not arise directly from such investment

in terms of Article 25 (1) of the Convention.
Article VI (1) of the Treaty defines an investment dispute as

“a dispute involving (a) the interpretation or application of an investment
agreement between a Party and a national or company of the other Party;
(b) the interpretation or application of any investment authorization granted by a

Party’s foreign investment authority to such national or company; or (c) an

-32-

alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to

an investment.”

107. The Respondent believes that none of these three situations arise in the present case.
There is no investment agreement or authorization in this case, avers the Respondent, and there
are no Treaty rights associated with an investment. If the activities undertaken do not qualify as
investments under the Treaty the dispute cannot be said to arise directly out of an investment as
required under Article 25 (1) of the Convention, particularly since the Convention left the

definition of investment to the parties.

108. The CSOB decision invoked by the Claimants in connection with the definition of an
investment is, according to the Respondent, to be distinguished from this case. The dispute and
the investment in the CSOB case were held to be sufficiently connected since the specific
transaction involved was an integral part of an overall operation qualifying as an investment, but

in this case the proposed project does not qualify as an investment nor does the Contract.

109. The Respondent submits further that there can be no investment authorization because
at the time the project was under discussion there were three foreign investment permissions
required under Turkish law, the Claimants having obtained only one. These permissions were
the “permission certificate” (or pink certificate) that the Claimants did obtain both for the branch
office and later for the limited liability company; the “investment permission certificate” (or green
certificate) and the “investment permission and incentive certificate” (or blue certificate - usually
encompassing also the green certificate), which the Chimants failed to apply for. It follows, in
the Respondent’s view, that there is no proper investment authorization under Turkish law and
Article VI (1) of the Treaty.

The Claimants’ argument.

110. The Claimants are of the view that the dispute in this case involves in essence the
interpretation or application of the Concession Contract and also the interpretation or
application of the investment authorization granted, just as Treaty rights associated to the
investment are also involved. As the dispute falls within the terms of Article VI of the Treaty, the
jurisdictional requirement of Article 25 (1) of the Convention has been met as the dispute arises

directly from the investment.

-33-
111. In this connection, the Claimants rely in particular on the decision in CSOB and its
precedents to the extent that an investment is frequently a complex operation the elements of
which ought not to be examined in isolation but cumulatively,” and the Holiday Inns approach
emphasizing “the general unity of an investment operation”.”° Lanco is also invoked to the extent

that a concession contract was characterized as such as an investment,”’ as also is SGS v.

Pakistan in recognizing intangible property as an investment.**

112. The Claimants also argue that since the Concession Contract is a valid and binding
instrument it is properly characterized as an investment agreement and can also be characterized
as an investment authorization from the State to pursue the project defined. The Claimants also
assert that even the authorization granted to conduct the Feasibility Study was a foreign
investment authorization by the Turkish Government. The Claimants further submit that the
discussion about obtaining a green and a blue certificate is not relevant. The blue certificate
refers to non-mandatory economic incentives for which the investor may or may not apply, and
the green certificate is not a part of the requirements for foreign investment authorization in

Turkey.

113. The Claimants conclude that the dispute arises directly from the investment made and

that both the Treaty and the Convention requirements are met.

The Tribunal’s findings on the dispute arising directly out of the investment.

114. The Tribunal has held above that the Concession Contract is valid and binding. By its
very nature and specific terms the Contract embodies an investment agreement under which the
investor is authorized to undertake the power generation activities therein specified. The
Contract refers repeatedly to the investment, its amount, financing, period of implementation and
a host of other investment connected questions. Article 4 of the Contract provides in particular

for a detailed investment schedule.

5 CSOB cit., par. 72.

*° Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1), Yes, Lalive’s article, p. 84.

* Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6), Decision of the Tribunal of
December 8, 1998 (English text), 40 ILM 457 (2001).

** SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13),
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003; 18 ICSID Rev—FILJ 301 (2003).

-34-
115. The foreign investor is a party to the Contract in its own right. The investor was
specifically encouraged to undertake the project and assurances were apparently given at the
time of signing of the Contract that any pending problems would be accommodated. The
investment operation as a whole was related to the activities to follow the delivery of the site as
is evident from both Articles 4 and 35 of the Contract, which refer to such step among many

others to be undertaken by the Company.

116. The Tribunal also concludes that, in addition, the proper authorization has been granted
by the foreign investment authority to the company, first in the form of a branch office and later
as a limited liability company. The Turkish law governing foreign investments does not require a
string of authorizations” nor does the Foreign Capital Framework Decree of 1995.*° More
specifically, the Communiqué explaining this last decree only requires one authorization issued in
the form of a permit by the Foreign Investment General Directorate, Undersecretary of the

Treasury.*!

117. The terms of the authorizations given in this case are also self-contained, in that a permit
is granted for the Company to “conduct its activities by having equal rights and responsibilities

32

with local institutions acting in the same field...”.°~ The field of activity permitted is broad as it
allows the Company to “...plan, construct and operate energy power plants, to exploit mining
reservoirs, to trade electric energy and conduct all types of electricity, mining and other activities

in accordance with the current related legislation”.

118. It is quite common that countries, host to an investment, will require a number of other
authorizations to permit the investment to operate a number of specific activities, but in so far as
the authorization to invest is concerned only one decision by the pertinent government service
suffices. This authorization has been duly given by the Foreign Investment General Directorate,

as noted.

119. The so called green and blue certificates may be necessary to undertake given activities
or acquire certain rights, but these elements are not an essential part of the investment
» Law Concerning the Encouragement of Foreign Capital, No. 6224 Jan 18, 1954.

* Decree No. 95/6990, June 7, 1995.
*! Communiqué No. 95/2, August 24, 1995.

-35-
authorization. The Tribunal notes that the information required by both the green and blue
certificates is in essence the same, this probably being the reason why in practice both are
combined. Moreover, as the Claimants have argued, the blue certificate elates to a non-
mandatory incentive the investor may or may not apply for. The very Communiqué noted above
requires the activity to be undertaken to be listed in “permits and/or incentive certificates granted

by the General Directorate of Foreign Investment...”; the incentive is evidently not compulsory.

120. There is yet another aspect that convinces the Tribunal that an authorization was duly
given by the Respondent. The Concession Contract could not have been approved by the
Danistay if the foreign investment had not been authorized. Neither could it have been submitted
to this body by the Ministry or even signed. Moreover, the very Contract provides in
connection with the transfer of authorization in Article 27 that shareholders shall be free to
transfer, assign, pledge or sell the Company shares in whole or in part subject to the Ministry’s
approval and in cases required by the legislation, “the permit to be issued by the
Undersecretariat of Treasury, Foreign Investment General Directorate”. If other authorizations
would have been required in connection with the original investment, there is every reason to

conclude that they would have been required for subsequent activities.

121. The dispute that has been described above, in the view of both parties, involves
questions of interpretation or application of both the investment agreement and the investment
authorization. This is also the case in respect of the Respondent’s argument that there is no
investment, agreement or authorization as these very claims involve the interpretation of the
Contract and the authorization. The dispute therefore arises unequivocally directly out of the
investment subject, of course, to the same proviso made above that the issue of what constitutes

precisely an investment as opposed to mere preparatory activities pertains to the merits.

122. There is yet another element in Article VI (1) concerning a dispute involving an alleged
breach of any right conferred or created by the Treaty with respect to an investment. The
Claimants have argued in the Request for Arbitration that, in addition to having failed to fulfill its

obligations under the Contract and the authorizations given, the Respondent has also violated

 

» Permission Certificate No. 6014, 5 July 1999, replacing certificate No. 4492 of 5 May 1997.

-36-

the Treaty. In particular, Claimants submit that there haven been breaches of Article II of the

Treaty, concerning treatment of the investment, and Article III, concerning expropriation.

123. Although it is not possible at this jurisdictional stage to decide whether breaches have
been committed, the history and terms of the dispute described are indicative that the investment
is in principle subject to protection under the Treaty and that the Claimants are entitled to have

their complaint examined.

124. The Tribunal accordingly finds that it has jurisdiction under this heading as the dispute
concerned arises directly out of an investment in terms of the interpretation and application of
the Contract and the investment authorization, as well as in terms of Treaty rights connected to

this investment that could have been compromised.

C. Jurisdictional Objection Concerning Respondent’s Notification under Article 25 (4)

of the Convention.

Respondent’s arguments.

125. Article 25 (4) of the Convention allows any Contracting State to “.. notify the Centre of
the class or classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. ..”. On the basis of this provision, the Republic of Turkey notified the
Secretary-General of ICSID on February 23, 1989 that “only the disputes arising directly out of
investment activities which have obtained necessary permission, in conformity with the relevant
legislation of the Republic of Turkey on foreign capital, and that have effectively started shall be

subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre”.

126. The Respondent argues in this connection that the notification made qualifies the consent
to arbitration contained in the Treaty, admittedly not as a reservation to the Convention but with
the effect of informing the limits and scope of its subsequent consent to arbitration under the
Treaty. As in the Respondent’s view the project never “effectively started”, the consent to
arbitration is absent. Effective start is generally identified by the Respondent with the beginning
of construction of either the mine or the power plant. As discussed above, the Respondent has

also argued that the Claimants lacked the necessary investment permits.

-37-
127. In support of its objection, the Respondent first notes that unilateral declarations of
States can have legal effects in spite of not technically being reservations. Internal documents of
the Turkish Government describe the notification as a “condition” to becoming signatory to the

Convention.

128. CSOB and Fedax are relied upon in support of the Respondent’s understanding of the
effects d a notification under Article 25 (4) of the Convention. The first case refers to the
declarations made under this Article as limiting the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction, while the
second, in the Respondent’s view, puts investors on notice as to the disputes envisaged and that
in the context of that case it was recognized that such notification would have qualified the
State’s consent under the pertinent treaty. The Respondent further alleges that Aguas del

Aconquija accepted a similar exclusion effect of notifications.

129. The Respondent also argues in this context that the terms of the notification are more
specific than those of the Treaty and, therefore, in the event of a conflict the more specific terms

would prevail.

130. As to the timing of the various instruments concerned, the Respondent argues that
although the Treaty was signed on December 3, 1985 and the notification made on March 3,
1989 upon ratification of the Convention, the entry into force of the Treaty only took place on
May 18, 1990. It follows in the Respondent’s arguments that the notification preceded the
consent and that the terms of the notification are presumed to be incorporated into the meeting
of the minds when the consent is later given. As the United States was fully aware of the
notification made by Turkey and did not object to it before making the Treaty effective, the
Respondent believes that the United States accepted those qualifications to Turkey’s consent as
notified.

The Claimants’ approach.

131. |The Claimants have argued in respect of this objection that notifications under Article 25
(4) of the Convention do not have a binding legal effect. That very Article explicitly provides
that “Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1)”. In the light of

the drafting history of the Article, the World Bank Executive Director’s Report on the

-38-
Convention and scholarly writings, the Claimants conclude that this notification only serves
information purposes in terms of letting prospective investors or their respective governments
know that the terms of the notification will be relied upon or called up at the time of expressing
the consent to arbitration. As the Convention does not deal with the question of consent neither
can it deal with a qualification or condition to consent, a matter to be taken up in agreements or

treaties. Both parties agree that the notification is not a reservation to the Convention.

132. The Claimants are also of the view that the consent expressed in the Treaty is far more
specific than the general qualifications contained in the notification and that, as the Treaty
entered into force after the notification, both the United States and Turkey could have qualified
their consent as expressed in the Treaty, just as they did in a Protocol to the Treaty in respect of

other matters, but kept silent in connection with the terms of the notification.

133. In any event, the Claimants are of the view that the investment activities had all
effectively started and that there is no reasonable basis to equate this requirement with the start
of construction. A long list of activities that had effectively started is referred to by the
Claimants, who further submit that if activities did not go beyond a certain stage it was because

the Respondent prevented the project from proceeding further.

134. The Claimants also submit a different interpretation of ICSID cases in this respect,
particularly of Fedax which clearly stated that Article 25 (4) allows Contracting States “to put

investors on notice” as to the disputes they would or would not consider consenting to.

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of consent qualified by notification under the
Convention.

135. The Tribunal has examined the important question raised by the Respondent in respect
of the legal extent of notifications under Article 25 (4) of the Convention, with particular
attention to the most thorough and learned discussion of the subject by Judge Schwebel in his

presentation on the matter at the hearing held in this case.™*

136. It must first be noted that Article 25 (4) in itself does not assign any particular legal

effect to notifications as it refers to the disputes that the Contracting State “would or would not

* Christoph H. Schreuer: The ICSID Convention. A Commentary, 2001, at 342.
* Hearing, February 22, 2004, at 37-57.

-39-

consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre”. This is quite natural as the whole issue of
consent was left to instruments other than the Convention, for example investment agreements
and bilateral investment treaties. This is also the reason why that very Article clearly separates
notification from consent by providing that “Such notification shall not constitute the consent

required by paragraph (1)”.

137. The Claimants have invoked the travaux préparatoires of this provision, noting in
particular that Mr. Broches, the architect of the Convention, conceived the notification system
as one allowing Contracting Parties to “make declarations under the Convention in which they
could define in advance, if they so desired, the scope within which they would be willing to
consider, always subject to the specific consent on their part in any specific case, making use of
the Center”.** The Report on the Convention by the Bank’s Executive Directors also clarified
that notifications would “serve for purposes of information only” and not constitute reservations

36

to the Convention.*° Scholarly opinions have also supported this interpretation. *”

138. Most pertinently, following a question from the Tribunal, Judge Schwebel emphasized
that notifications must necessarily have a purpose as otherwise they would be a meaningless
exercise. There is no doubt that this is true. In fact, at the time the Convention was negotiated it
was envisaged that the Contracting States would normally express their consent in investment
agreements concluded with the private investors, which were later supplemented by the massive
network of bilateral investment treaties in force today. Notifications were a useful means to
inform beforehand the kind of disputes to which consent for arbitration might or might not be
expected by the prospective investor or its State of nationality. To this extent the notification

has a specific purpose.

139. In this connection the Tribunal does not share the Respondent’s interpretation of the
CSOB and Fedax cases. Although the language in CSOB appears to support the interpretation
that notifications can limit the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction, that Tribunal concluded that by

not making such a declaration the Contracting Party has “submitted itself broadly to the full

* ICSID, History of the Convention, Vol. II, at 567.

* Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention, 1 ICSID Reports 29.

* Legal Opinion of Professor W. Michael Reisman, June 27, 2003, at 25; Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Dr.
Rudolf Dolzer, June 27, 2003, par. 39; Schreuer, at 342.

-40-

scope of the subject matter jurisdiction governed by the Convention”.** Yet it remains that the

“subject matter” jurisdiction is determined by the consent of the Contracting State expressed in

 

a separate instrument and by the definition of investment included in that expression of consent.
True, it is governed by the Convention but it is not defined by it. It follows that notifications
under Article 25 (4) do not have a life of their own and are wholly dependent on the consent

mechanism.

140. Similarly, Fedax was also explicit in referring to notifications as putting “investors on
notice”, but it does not follow that the Tribunal accepted a qualification of consent by means of
a notification under Article 25 (4). Evidently, in case of doubt, the notification will help the

interpretation of the parties’ consent but it does not have an autonomous legal operation.

141. — The discussion above still does not answer the key question concerning the legal nature
or effect of notifications. Both parties have agreed that notifications are not reservations. This is
also the view of the Tribunal. An autonomous legal effect of notifications has been ruled out for

the reasons explained above.

142. The view that unilateral acts of States have legal effects under international law is
accurate as evidenced by the decisions of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the
Eastern Greenland case* and of the International Court of Justice in the Nuclear Tests
case."° There is no doubt that notifications qualify as unilateral acts under international law*',
although in the present case it is not an autonomous act as it depends on the Convention.
However, in the cases mentioned above the essence of the legal effects admitted has been that

the unilateral acts in question create obligations for the State concerned on which other States

can rely.

143. In the instant case, the notification does not create an obligation for the Contracting
State, but rather it is associated with the claim to a right. In fact, States making notifications will
always wish to remain free to either follow or not follow the terms of the notification when
expressing their consent. No State would believe that by making a notification it has become
*8 CSOB cit., par. 65.

* Permanent Court of International Justice, Eastern Greenland case, 1933, PCI, Ser. A/B, No. 53, at 52.
* International Court of Justice, Nuclear Tests case, ICJ Reports 1974, at 253.

-41-
bound by its terms as in that case there would be no difference between notification and
consent, thus contradicting specific provisions of the Convention. In this context, the Contracting
State is in fact claiming a right to later exclude certain disputes from consent, if it so wishes, and

it is always free not to adhere to the terms of its notification.

144. It has become increasingly common for treaties to exclude reservations and allow for
declarations instead. These declarations do not alter the legal rights and obligations under the
treaty nor do they amend any of its provisions. They are simply an instrument that allows States
to express questions of policy to which they are not bound and that do not create rights for the
other parties. It is a matter of information, normally resorted to for domestic needs. This is also
the legal nature of the declarations made by States in the form of notifications under Article 25
(4) of the Convention. Interestingly Mr. Broches, quoted above, referred to these notifications

as “declarations”.

145. — It follows that to be effective the contents of a notification will always have to be
embodied in the consent that the Contracting Party will later give in its agreements or treaties. If,
as in this case, consent was given in the Treaty before the notification, that treaty could have
been supplemented by means of a Protocol to include the limitations of the notification into the

State’s consent. Otherwise the consent given in the Treaty stands unqualified by the notification.

146. Although the practice of the Contracting Parties in this connection under Article 25 (4)
of the ICSID Convention is not easy to establish in view of the fact that few notifications have
been made, it must be noted, for example, that the terms of the notification made by the
People’s Republic of China are reproduced in various bilateral investment treaties entered into
with other countries.” It follows that the legal effects of those terms arise from the treaties and

not from the notification as such.

 

*! Patrick Daillier et Alain Pellet: Droit International Public, 2002, 359-366.

* See, for example, the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the
People’s Republic of China, 11 July 1988, Article XII, 2, b; Agreement between the Government of Lithuania
and the Government of the People’s Republic of China, 8 November 1993, Article 8, 2, b; Agreement between
the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Korea, 30 September 1992, Article 9.
10. The text of the notification of the People’s Republic of China is found in www.
Worldbank.org/icsid/pubs/icsid-8-d.htm

-42-
147. The Tribunal accordingly holds that the objection to jurisdiction on this count is also
dismissed.

D. Qbjection to Jurisdiction on the basis of the Claimants not having resorted to
previously agreed dispute settlement procedures,

The Respondent’s argument.

148. The Respondent has invoked in the alternative the lack of jurisdiction of this Tribunal in
view of the fact that under the Treaty the parties are required to exhaust any previously agreed
upon dispute settlement procedures before they may resort to international arbitration. The
Respondent refers to the question as one requiring the parties to resort to those procedures but

not necessarily to exhaust them.

149. In this connection, the Respondent relies on Article VI (2) and its relationship with
Article VI (3) (a) of the Treaty. The first clause provides that if the dispute cannot be solved by
consultations and negotiations, “the dispute shall be submitted for settlement in accordance with
any previously agreed, applicable dispute settlement procedures”. The second clause provides
that after one year a party may resort to ICSID arbitration if “the dispute has not, for any
reason, been submitted by the national or company for resolution in accordance with any

applicable dispute settlement procedure previously agreed to by the parties to the dispute”.

150. The Respondent is of the view that the Claimant has the obligation to resort to the
agreed procedure before arbitration since Article VI (2) so mandates by using the verb “shall”.
Tf this was not so, the second clause would result in the cancellation of the first. It follows that
only if the Claimant had a compelling reason, not just “any reason”, for not submitting the

dispute to the previously agreed procedure could it resort to the ICSID arbitration.

151. The Respondent further believes that the parties in this case have agreed to a dispute
settlement procedure. Although the draft Contract submitted to the Danistay had an ICSID
arbitration clause, this clause was expressly deleted by that body on the understanding that the
Danistay had exclusive jurisdiction over disputes concerning Concession Contracts under
Turkish law. This was in particular the result of the Constitutional Court’s decision that

concession contracts were administrative contracts. As the Claimants failed to submit the

-43-

dispute to the Danistay and did not offer any reason for it, they are precluded under the Treaty

from resorting to ICSID arbitration.

152. It is further argued by the Respondent that if Turkey had envisaged giving an option to
the Claimants it would have included in the Treaty the typical “fork-in-the-road” clause that it
has used in many other treaties. Neither could any most favored nation clause argument affect
this conclusion as the requirement of Article VI (2) embodies a fundamental policy consideration
not subject to the operation of the clause, as established by the Tribunal in Maffezini, a case
also relied on by the Claimants. In any event, it is asserted, the Treaty in this case contains a
more restricted most favored nation clause than the one in the treaty concerned in Maffezini

and does not allow for the application of the clause to dispute settlement mechanisms.

153. |The Respondent also argues for distinguishing this case from that of Lanco, invoked by
the Claimants, because in that case the Claimants had a typical choice of procedures that is
absent in the present case.

The Claimants’ view.

154. The Claimants argue that Article VI of the Treaty does not require that a dispute be
referred first to a previously agreed, applicable dispute settlement procedure as a condition for
submitting the dispute to ICSID. In the light of Article VI (3)(a)(i), the investor may choose to
submit the dispute to ICSID if it has not otherwise been submitted for resolution in accordance
with a previously agreed procedure. This means in Claimants’ view that the investor may submit
the dispute to the previously agreed mechanism if it so wishes, but that it would by so doing lose

its right to resort to ICSID. This would be the equivalent of a “fork-in-the-road” provision.

155. |The most favored nation clause is also invoked by the Claimants in support of their view
and they argue that a number of bilateral investment treaties to which Turkey is a party do not
include a mechanism for resorting to a previously agreed mechanism and investors are free to
choose. In the light of Maffezini the Claimants argue they are entitled to benefit from a more

favorable treatment included in those treaties.

156. The Claimants are also of the view that, in any event, there was no previously agreed

procedure in this case because they never accepted that the Contract was subject to the

-44-

exclusive jurisdiction of the Danistay and an express reservation was made to safeguard their
right to resort to ICSID when that body deleted the ICSID clause from the draft Contract.
Moreover, the ICSID clause was not replaced by another clause with the result that the
Contract does not contain a dispute settlement mechanism. As in Lanco, there was no choice
freely available to the investor and therefore there can be no agreement to submit disputes to

domestic jurisdiction.

157. It is further argued that not even under Turkish law does the Danistay have exclusive
jurisdiction, among other reasons because international law is part of the domestic legal order
and prevails over municipal law. Therefore, the rights of the investors under treaties have to be

observed, including the right to resort to ICSID.

158. Even if there had been an agreement to submit disputes to the Danistay, this would not
have prevented ICSID arbitration since, as in Aguas del Aconquija,** the Vivendi annulment,"*
Salini v. Morocco, SGS y. Pakistan® and other recent cases, contract based disputes are
different from treaty based disputes and arise out of separate causes of action. Treaty based
disputes can always be submitted to international arbitration from this point of view.

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the previously agreed dispute settlement procedure.
159. Following the detailed examination of the issues discussed above, the Tribunal
concludes that there is no incompatibility between the provisions of Article VI (2) and Article VI
(3) (a) and that they respond to a step by step search for a dispute resolution mechanism. First,
consultations and negotiations are envisaged as an initial step. If this fails, third party non-
binding procedures can be attempted f agreed between the parties. If these procedures fail,

then the dispute shall be submitted to the previously agreed mechanism.

160. If no submission had been made pursuant to the previously agreed mechanism, then,

after one year, the investor can apply to ICSID. This sequence of dispute settlement

* Compaiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Award of
November 21, 2000, 16 ICSID Rev—FILJ 641 (2001)

* Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Application for Annulment of July 3, 2002, 41 ILM 1135 (2002).

* Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4),
Decision of July 23, 2001, [French original] 129 Journal du droit international 196 (2002); English translation
in 42 ILM 609 (2003).

*° SGS v. Pakistan cit.

-45-
procedures is quite typical of dispute settlement arrangements under international law, beginning
with political alternatives, followed by third party non-binding intervention and ultimately by
binding procedures, which can include a method agreed to or lead to binding international

arbitration.

161. The fact that Article VI (2) provides that the dispute “shall” be submitted to the
previously agreed mechanism does not entail an obligation on the part of the investor. The
investor may well choose to live with the dispute and never attempt a settlement. This is always
a choice of the claimant party. If the investor chooses to resort to the previously agreed
mechanism, the dispute must then be submitted to that procedure. It is obligatory and the other
party has no further option. It is in this context that the “shall” becomes mandatory for the other

party.

162. This is the reason why Article VI (3) (a) expressly provides that the ICSID alternative
will not be available if the “national or company” has submitted the dispute to the previously
agreed procedure, thereby clearly indicating that the choice belongs to the investor. Any other
interpretation would mean that the principal feature of the Treaty, which is to make ICSID

arbitration available to the investor, would be nullified and impaired by Article VI (2).

163. In the light of this finding, based on the interpretation of the Treaty, the Tribunal does
not consider it necessary to discuss the issue in terms of the operation of the most favored
nation clause. If the right to resort to ICSID arbitration in the terms discussed is embodied in

the Treaty itself, there is no need to look for it under other treaties.

164. The Tribunal is not convinced either that in the light of the facts of the case there was a
procedure previously agreed to. This is not because of the rather elliptic Lanco argument that a
party cannot select a jurisdiction which by law is not subject to agreement or waiver, such as an
administrative court, but because of an entirely different reason. The decision of the Danistay to
delete the ICSID clause contained in the draft Contract certainly does not have the effect of
precluding ICSID jurisdiction provided by consent in treaties. Otherwise treaties would be
subject to unilateral derogation by one party. The Respondent has argued in this connection

that the Danistay has exclusive jurisdiction over contract disputes as a consequence of the

-46-
Constitutional Court ruling of 1996 not allowing private law contracts for BOT power projects
and requiring instead concession contracts approved by the Danistay. This view, however,

cannot be imposed upon the investor who seeks to rely on an arbitration established by treaty.

165. The Claimants’ argument to the effect that the Danistay’s deletion of the ICSID
arbitration clause did not really mean that the clause was rejected is not tenable. As expressed

in paragraph 10 of the Danistay’s approval decision of March 11, 1998

“the Council of State has jurisdiction on disputes between parties arising from
concession contracts. Therefore, Article 28 regarding arbitration and pre-

arbitration, which is a private law tool, has been removed from the text”.

166. The submission of the Respondent that such deletion was accepted by the Claimants on
signing the Contract and that, in any event, the Danistay also has jurisdiction to hear treaty-
based claims does not convince the Tribunal. On the contrary, this discussion evidences that

there was no agreement on an exclusive dispute settlement mechanism.

167. But even assuming for the sake of argument that the Danistay jurisdiction could be
exclusive under Turkish legislation, there are two additional considerations to be had. The first
is that the Turkish legislature came later to the conclusion that concession agreements could be
submitted to international arbitration and that investors could request their conversion to private
law contracts, as noted above. This new approach entailed recognition that international
arbitration was not to be regarded as incompatible with Turkish legislation. Claimants believe

this to be the case since the very outset.

168. The second consideration is the place of treaties under Article 90 of the Turkish
Constitution. The last paragraph of this Article provides that “International agreements duly put
into effect carry the force of law...”. In the Turkish Constitutional system this means that at the
very least treaties rank equally with the law. A number of opinions are of the view that treaties
even prevail over the law. In this context, whatever jurisdiction the Danistay might have had or
still has in respect of administrative acts and concession contracts yields to treaty provisions

which, in the instant case is the investment protection Treaty and associated arbitration.

-47-

169. The discussion about a forum selection clause is also associated to the question of
contract-based and treaty-based rights that have haunted many ICSID tribunals, which if
applicable to the present case would mean that some disputes are capable of being submitted to
Danistay or Turkish jurisdiction and some other kind of disputes could be submitted to

international arbitration.

170. The difference between contract-based claims and treaty-based claims has been
discussed by various international arbitral tribunals as evidenced by the decisions in Lauder,”
Genin,’ Aguas del Aconquija,° CMS* and Azurix*! and by those of the Annulment
Committees in Vivendi? and Wena. The Tribunal held in CMS, referring to this series of
decisions, that “as contractual claims are different from treaty claims, even if there had been or

there currently was a recourse to the local courts for breach of contract, this would not have

prevented submission of the treaty claim to arbitration”.**

171. | Where to draw the line, however, is not easy in practice as has been evidenced by the
discussion of these various cases. The Vivendi Annulment Committee explained that “[iJn a

case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal is a breach of

contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in the contract’.*°

However, to the extent that the basis for the claim is a treaty violation, the existence of an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant and the respondent state “cannot
operate as a bar to the application of the treaty standard”.** To the extent that there are valid

concurrent alternatives, the choice will then depend on the nature of the dispute submitted.

*’ Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Final Award (Sept. 3, 2001).

* Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of the Tribunal (June 25,
2001); Decision on Claimants’ Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification (April 4, 2002),
available at: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/conclude.htm

* Aguas cit.

© CMS cit.

*' Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8,
2003, International Law in Brief available at: http://www.asil.org/ilib/azurix.pdf.

* Vivendi annulment cit.

* Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Application for Annulment rendered
on February 5, 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002).

* CMS cit., par. 80; Azurix cit., par. 89.

Vivendi Annulment cit., par. 98.

* Vivendi Annulment cit., par. 101.

-48-
172. In the recent case of SGS v. Pakistan, the Tribunal concluded in this respect that it did

not have jurisdiction over contract claims “which do not also constitute or amount to breaches

of the substantive standards of the BIT”.*”

173. In the instant case, however, it is not evident that there was such an alternative or an
agreed forum selection clause. The existence of a previously agreed procedure is questionable
and disputed. In any event, the dispute that has arisen in this case rather qualifies as a treaty-
based dispute as it is related both to the issue of interpretation and implementation of the
Contract as an investment agreement and to the allegation that the Government, through various
measures, impeded and ultimately destroyed the investment. The nature of the dispute is

therefore not that of a typical contractual dispute.

174. | The Tribunal accordingly affirms its jurisdiction and the objection based on the lack of

resort to a previously agreed dispute settlement mechanism is dismissed.

E. Objection to jurisdiction on the basis of lack of standing.

Respondent’s objection.

175. The Respondent also objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in respect of the North
American Coal Corporation (NACC) and the Project Company on the ground that these
entities lack standing. It is argued that NACC has no investment in Turkey nor any rights under
the Danistay approved Contract, which was not even signed by NACC. Moreover, the
Respondent believes that NACC owns no equity in the Project Company and owns none of the
assets that have been claimed as investments. The only link it has to the case is a Memorandum.
of Understanding signed on August 1, 1998 between NACC and PSEG, conferring the option
to acquire ownership interest in the Project Company by means of a Shareholders Agreement

to be negotiated later.

176. In Respondent’s view, the Memorandum in question is not valid because it is a
preliminary agreement which is not binding until the parties’ intention to be bound materializes, a
situation that never happened. The instrument was conceived as the expression of a desire to

“explore an arrangement”, the terms of which were never formalized or even agreed to.

*7 $GS v. Pakistan cit., par. 162.

-49-

However broad the definition of “investment” might be, it does not include mere options and,
therefore, this Memorandum does not qualify either as an investment under the Treaty or in any
other way. Even if some expenses were made by NACC in connection with the Revised Mine

Plan, these are not an investment subject to recovery.

177. In respect of the Project Company, the Respondent argues that it is not a company of
the United States as required by the Treaty. Under Article VI (6) a company incorporated in
Turkey must have existed before the events giving rise to the dispute for it to be considered a
national of the United States. In this case, the Project Company was incorporated in August
1999, two years after the disputed events. Moreover, the Respondent believes that the Project
Company cannot simply be considered the successor to the earlier Branch Office opened in
January 1998, as this was not a company of the United States; it was merely a component of a
foreign company not recognized in Turkey as a separate legal entity and, unlike other treaties
concluded by the United States, not included in the Treaty governing this case.

The Claimants’ view.

178. The Claimants’ view is that NACC owns a 25% interest in the Project Company and
25% of all its assets, including the Contract. Under the Treaty definition of investment it is not
necessary to own shares of stock as “other interests” are also included. In its view, the
Memorandum is valid and binding and currently in force, providing a clear intention of the
parties and establishing all the essential terms of the transaction, a situation that the legal opinion
of Mr. David Rivkin explains is sufficient under the law of New York to uphold the validity of
such an agreement. If there was an intent not to be bound, this would have to be expressed

clearly, as in Mihaly.

179. | The Claimants also argue that the NACC investments in the Project are clearly covered
by the Treaty and even if it were correct to characterize them as an option, this is also covered
by the Treaty definition as encompassing a present interest to acquire that property in the terms

of the option.

180. As to the Project Company, Claimants argue that it was established following long

negotiations with the Ministry as to the terms of the project and the corporate structure required

-50-
and that, in any event, the vast majority of the events giving rise to the dispute occurred after the
date of incorporation, such as the question of the Treasury guarantee and the application under
Law No. 4501. But even in respect of events that took place before 1999 Claimants are of the
view that, as held in Mondev,* events or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation
may be relevant in determining whether the Respondent has subsequently committed a breach of

an obligation.

181. In the Claimants view, the branch office of a foreign investor controlled by PSEG is
governed by the Treaty because under its Article I (1) (a) any kind of juridical entity qualifies as
a company, including any business association or other organization. The branch office under
Turkish law is distinct from the head office and a Permission Certificate was issued specifically
to such branch for the purpose of the investment.

The Tribunal’s findings on the question of standing.

182. The standing of PSEG to bring this arbitration is not disputed. The objection made
concerns only the standing as Claimants of NACC and the Project Company. The Tribunal will

now examine each of these objections, beginning with that relating to the Project Company.

183. It must first be noted that the establishment of a branch office of a foreign investor in
Turkey is done in accordance with Turkish legislation. The foreign company of which the branch
office was an integral part was owned and controlled by PSEG. This fact alone would provide
a clear link between this branch and the investment. However, other facts also strengthen this
link. The branch was known to the Turkish Government as the conduit for the proposed
investment and its establishment for this purpose was discussed at various times. More
importantly, the fact that the first Permission Certificate was issued to this branch is in itself
evidence that it was regarded by the Turkish Government as the entity authorized to operate
and do business in that country in the specific context of the mining and power project
envisaged. The Tribunal notes that the legal status of the Project Company is persuasively

explained in the Opinions of Professors Reisman and Dolzer.

 

*8 Expert Opinion of David W. Rivkin, June 27, 2003.
* Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of
October 11, 2002, 42 ILM 85 (2003).

-51-
184. It was later that the question of a new corporate structure arose in the light of tax
policies and other interests. This discussion resulted in long negotiations, including the impact of
the change on the tariff, and ultimately led to the incorporation of Konya Ilgin Ltd. There can be
no doubt that whatever rights or interests the branch office had were transferred to the new
company as its successor in law and business. The objectives of the Project Company as

stated in the act of incorporation are unequivocally linked to the investment.

185. Because of this continuity, the fact that the Company as such only came into existence
later is immaterial. Any right or dispute concerning the branch office was also the concern of the
successor as both entities were the legal vehicles of the investment made. Even if the Tribunal
were to accept a line separating events in time in connection with the date of incorporation,

there are still events after that date which involve a dispute between the parties.

186. On many occasions the critical date for the purpose of jurisdiction is whether the dispute
arose before or after the entry into force of the relevant treaty. This is the situation specifically
considered in Mondev, where events or conduct prior to that date were considered only for the
purpose of establishing breaches subsequent to the entry into force of the treaty. Similarly, in
Maffezini the Tribunal held that events before the critical date might be factors leading to the
legal dispute after that date. The critical date in this case is not the incorporation date of the
Project Company but again that of the entry into force of the Treaty. Every dispute affecting the

investment arose in this case after the Treaty had entered into force.

187. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is therefore not affected either because of the change of

corporate structure or because of the date of the events leading to the dispute.

188. The situation in respect of NACC is different. This company began participating in the
Project in the summer of 1996 to assist in developing the mining aspects of the power project
and later, in 1998, allegedly joined PSEG as an equity investor by means of the Memorandum
discussed above. NACC at all times participated as an auxiliary to PSEG and even though it
intervened actively in the preparation of the mining plans, the counterpart of the Turkish

Government was at all times PSEG. This explains why NACC is not a signatory to the

© Trade Registry Gazette, No. 4861, 27 August 1999.

-52-

Contract. Exhibit A to the Memorandum clearly outlines NACC functions as mainly those of a

service provider to the Project Company under a Management Services Agreement.

189. Whether the Memorandum is valid and in force is immaterial for the purpose of the
Tribunal’s decision. The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s argument that the definition
of investment does not include an option is persuasive as a general approach. Broad as many
definitions of investment are in treaties of this kind, there is a limit to what they can reasonably
encompass as an investment. Options such as this particular one can not, in the view of the
Tribunal, be interpreted as an “investment”. The Tribunal acknowledges that different

circumstances from those which obtain in the present case may lead to a different conclusion.

190. Professor Dolzer’s Rejoinder Opinion to the effect that the Treaty definition of
investment refers to any right, even one that can be exercised at any time in the future, is not
persuasive.°! The Tribunal is not persuaded either by the explanation that a Shareholders’
Agreement was not pursued by the parties to the Memorandum because it would not have been

a prudent business decision and a waste of time.

191. In the opinion of the Tribunal NACC was at best only a technical operator for the
investor in respect of the mining operations of the project and, later, an equity holder with a
standing no different from any other equity holder. In fact at some point another entity had the
same status as NACC since a similar Memorandum was signed between PSEG and Guris, a
Turkish corporation. Given the corporate structure of the project, only PSEG as the investor
and the Project Company as the conduit for this investment can be considered legally linked to
the Turkish Government for the purpose of the Contract and the operation of the Treaty,
including the consent given to arbitration. Other equity holders do not have an interest separate

from these entities and consequently cannot claim on their own.

192. The case may be different when minority shareholders are accorded a right to claim
independently from the project company because, for example, of questions of nationality or

other reason as in CMS® or Enron. In those cases the interest of the investor would be

°! Additional Expert Opinion, Professor Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, November 24, 2003, at 11.
e .
CMS cit.

-53-
nugatory if they were not allowed to claim in their own right. The operation of the respective
treaties would then be paralyzed. This is not the case here. Any interest, which the investor
may eventually have, may accrue, in part, to NACC, if the latter still has an ongoing equity
participation in the investor company. But this is a matter which concerns only intra-corporate
arrangements that are separate and distinct from any Treaty connection between NACC and
the Respondent. As such, while it may possibly result in a claim by NACC against PSEG, it

does not give rise to a Treaty claim by NACC against the Respondent.

193. As held in Enron, the corporate linkages can be recognized for the purpose of the
jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal to the extent that the consent to arbitration is considered to
extend to a given entity, but not beyond. NACC is beyond the reach of the consent to

arbitration as far as the Respondent is concerned.

194. The Tribunal accordingly finds that it lacks jurisdiction in respect of claims by NACC in

this case.

 

© Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, International Law in Brief, available at:
http://www.asil.org/ilib/Enron.pdf

-54-

IV. Decision.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal decides that:

1. The dispute submitted by PSEG and Konya Ilgin Ltd. is within the jurisdiction of the

Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

2. The dispute submitted by NACC is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the
competence of the Tribunal.

3. The costs of the jurisdictional phase of the arbitration are reserved.

So decided.

Date: June 4, 2004

Francisco Orrego Vicufia

President of the Tribunal

L. Yves Fortier Gabrielle Kaufmann- Kohler

Arbitrator Arbitrator

