Date of Dispatch to the Parties: January 19, 2007

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the Proceeding Between
PSEG GLosat INC. AND KONYA ILGIN ELEKTRIK URETIM VE TiCARET LiMiTED SiRKETi
(CLAIMANTS)

and

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants:

Carolyn B. Lamm
Abby Cohen Smutny
Francis A. Vasquez, Jr.
Lee A. Steven

White & Case LLP

Mesut Cakmak
Tugba Bayman Keskin
Cakmak Avukatlik Biirosu

Prof. Dr. M. Fadlullah Cerrahoglu
Cerrahoglu Avukathik Biirosu

John F. Doherty
PSEG Global

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Daniel M. Price

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Mr. Samuel B. Boxerman

Ms. Marinn F. Carlson

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Sidley Austin LLP
Washington, DC

Judge Stephen M. Schwebel
Washington, DC

Mr. Serdar Paksoy
Paksoy & Co.
Istanbul, Turkey

Table of Contents

 

 

 

I. Procedure 3
A. Procedure Leading to the Decision on Jurisdiction 0.00... cceeceeeeeeseeseseeeseeeseesseeteeeeseenees 3
B. Procedure Leading to the Award 4
II. Considerations. 6
A. The Claimants’ Participation in the Development of Turkey’s Energy Sector... 6
B. The Commercial Terms of the Contract. 8

 

C. The Claimants’ Understanding of the Commercial Terms of the Contract ....
D. The Respondent’s Understanding of the Commercial Terms of the Contract
E. The Benefits of a Private Law Framework under Law No. 4501
F. The Treasury Guarantee, Energy Sales Agreement and Fund Agreement .
G. The Completion of Pre-Construction Development of the Project.........ccseeseesseeeseeeeeeeees
H. The Tribunal’s Evaluation of the Fact:
. Was the Konya Ilgin Project Important to Turkey’s Energy Sector
or was it a Mere Gold Rush?
. Did the Implementation Contract Govern the Final Terms of the Project?
. Did MENR Accept the Cost Increase of the Revised Mine Plan
. For whom was the Tax Burden of the Project in Connection with the Corporate
Structure? 31
Was there Agreement on the Revised Tariff Structure Resulting from Increased Costs? ...35
Were the Parties Engaged in Subsequent Negotiations in Bad Faith? ...........0...
Did the World Bank and the IMF Apply Pressure on Turkey to Terminate the Project?....
Were the Claimants Arbitrarily Denied the Benefits of Law No. 4501? .eccscssssseceeereeee 50
Did the Respondent Interfere with the Issuance of the Treasury Guarantee and
Supplementary Agreements ?.
10. Did the Claimants Abandon the Project? .....c.100
11. Were the Technical and Economic Aspects of the Project Feasibl.
TII. Considerations on Liability
A. Was there a Breach of Fair and Equitable Treatment? 00.0.0... cccescseesesseseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 58
1. The Legal Arguments of the Parties
2. The Tribunal’s Findings
B. Was there a Breach of the Obligation to Provide Full Protection and Security?
C. Was there Arbitrariness or Discrimination?
D. Was there a Breach of Obligations Entered into with Regard to the Investment
E. Was the Investment Expropriated through Measures Tantamount to Expropriation?

    
 
   

 

N

Aw

 

 

CHMAAM

 

 

  
 
  
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV. D: ges and Ci
A. Claims ............000ee
1. The Claim for C ion of D

2. Fair Market Valu
3. Loss of Profits
4. Amount of In

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. The Respondent's Opposition to the Claim for DA€MAQeCS....s.csscsssscessssetetsetetietssteteseeeseeees 75

B. The Tribunal’s Findings 78

1. Fair Market Valu 79

2. Loss of Profits 80

3. Comp ion of In Expenses 82

4. Interest 87

5. Costs 89
AWARD 90

 

ANNEX (DECISION ON JURISDICTION)

I. Procedure

A. Procedure Leading to the Decision on Jurisdiction

1. On May 2, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) registered a request for arbitration against the Republic of
Turkey (“Turkey” or the “Respondent”) submitted by PSEG Global Inc. (PSEG), a
company incorporated under the laws of New Jersey, United States of America (USA);
the North American Coal Corporation (“North American Coal’), a company
incorporated under the laws of Delaware, USA; and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve
Ticaret Limited Sirketi (the “Project Company”), described in the request for arbitration
as a special purpose limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Turkey
and wholly owned through several subsidiaries by PSEG (together referred to as the

“Claimants”).

2. The request invoked the ICSID arbitration provisions in the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey Concerning
the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments (the “Treaty” or the
“BIT”), which was signed on December 3, 1985, and entered into force on May 18,
1990.

3. Following the registration of the request, pursuant to the agreement of the parties
on the method for constituting an arbitral tribunal, the Claimants appointed Mr. L. Yves
Fortier, CC, QC, a Canadian national, as arbitrator and the Respondent appointed
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as arbitrator. By agreement,
the parties appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a national of Chile, as the
presiding arbitrator. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre
by a letter of October 25, 2002, informed the parties of the constitution of the Arbitral
Tribunal (the “Tribunal”). By the same letter, the Centre also informed the parties that
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), the proceeding was deemed to have

commenced on that day.

4, The Tribunal held its first session on January 8, 2003, at the seat of the Centre in

Washington, D.C. In accordance with the agreed upon schedule, the Respondent filed

its Memorial on Jurisdiction on April 3, 2003, and the Claimants filed their Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction on June 27, 2003. In compliance with a revised schedule, the
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction was filed on September 10, 2003, and the
Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction was filed on November 24, 2003. The hearing on
jurisdiction was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., from February 22 to
25, 2004.

5. On June 4, 2004, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction in which it
unanimously decided that:
“(1) The dispute submitted by PSEG and Konya Ilgin Ltd. is within the
jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

(2) The dispute submitted by [North American Coal Corporation] is not
within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

(3) The costs of the jurisdictional phase of the arbitration are reserved.”
6. The procedure leading up to the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction is set out in
greater detail in the Decision, a copy of which is attached to the present Award as an

integral part of it.

B. Procedure Leading to the Award

7. Having dismissed the objections to jurisdiction with respect to PSEG and Konya
Ilgin Ltd., the Tribunal, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(4), invited the parties,
by letters of June 9 and July 19, 2004, to confer and advise the Tribunal on how to fix

the time limits for the remainder of the proceeding.

8. By a joint letter dated July 28, 2004, the parties informed the Tribunal that they
had agreed to a schedule for written submissions and for the hearing on the merits.
According to that schedule, the Claimants were to file their Memorial on the Merits by
February 18, 2005; Respondent was to file its Counter-Memorial by September 19,
2005; the Claimants were to file their Reply on the Merits by November 23, 2005; and
the Respondent was to file its Rejoinder by January 31, 2006 (with the understanding
that the deadline for the two latter submissions could be extended). In the event that the
Respondent was to file a Counterclaim, the Claimants’ Surreply, if any, was to be filed
by March, 20, 2006. According to that schedule, the Hearing on the Merits was set for
May 1, 2006.

9. The Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits on February 22, 2005, and the
Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on September 19, 2005. By a letter dated
November 9, 2005, the parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement that the
Claimants’ Reply would be filed by December 9, 2005, and the Respondent’s Rejoinder
by March 10, 2006. The Claimants filed their Reply on December 12, 2005. The
Respondent filed its Rejoinder on March 17, 2006, after having been granted a one-

week extension.

10. In accordance with a revised schedule agreed upon by the parties, the hearing on
the merits was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., from April 3 to April
12, 2006. The parties were represented by their respective counsel who made
presentations to the Tribunal and examined witnesses and experts from their side and

the opposing side. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal: Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, President, Mr. L. Yves
Fortier, CC, QC and Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler.

ICSID Secretariat: Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal, Mr. Tomas
Solis, ICSID Consultant.

Attending on behalf of the Claimants: as representatives Mr. Matthew J. McGrath, Vice
President, Chief Operating Officer and General Counsel, PSEG Global LLC, Mr.
Michael J. Thompson, President, PSEG Fossil LLC, Mr. John F. Doherty, Counsel,
PSEG Global LLC, and Mr. Thomas A. Koza, Vice President, Law and Administration,
The North American Coal Corporation (NACC); as counsel, Ms. Caroyln B. Lamm, Ms.
Abby Cohen Smutny, Mr. Christopher M. Curran, Mr. Francis A. Vasquez Jr., Mr.
Frank Panopoulos, Ms. Anne Smith, Mr. Lee A. Steven, Ms. Muge Onal, Ms. M.
Megan Smith, Mr. Matthew S. Leddicotte, Mr. Daniel Gilbert, and Ms. Katherine
Southwick;

Attending on behalf of the Respondent: as representatives, Mr. Sami Demirbilek,
Undersecretary, Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, Mr. Selahattin Cimen,
Deputy Undersecretary, Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, Ms. Sevim Argun,
Chief Legal Advisor, Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, Mr. Budak Dilli,
General Manager, Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, Mr. Osman Emed,
Deputy General Director, General Directorate of Foreign Investment, Undersecretariat
of the Treasury, Mr. Mustafa Boran, Acting Deputy General Director, General
Directorate of Foreign Economic Relations, Undersecretariat of the Treasury, Mr.
Murat Lutem, Embassy of the Republic of Turkey, and Mr. Mehmet Cagil, Embassy of
the Republic of Turkey; as counsel, Mr. Daniel M. Price, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov,
Mr. Samuel B. Boxerman, Mr. P. David Richardson, Ms. Marinn F. Carlson, Ms.
Jennifer Haworth McCandless, Ms. Sharon H. Yuan, Ms. Dara Levinson, Mr. Gus
Kryder, Ms. Vilma Belen-Pettorino, Ms. Rhonda Diggins, Mr. Serdar Paksoy, Ms.
Deger Boden, and Mr. Zeynel Tung.

11. As agreed with the Tribunal, the parties filed submissions after the hearing on
the merits. Also, following the hearing on the merits, the members of the Tribunal
deliberated by various means of communication, including a meeting in Washington,

D.C., on September 11 and 12, 2006.

12. The Tribunal considers it unnecessary to describe the numerous procedural
issues that it was called upon to resolve, or to recount the parties’ many submissions,
requests and applications relating to these issues. Suffice it to say that the Tribunal was
required to consider and determine a myriad of questions relating to the production of

documents, time limits as well as issues concerning witnesses and experts.

II. Considerations

A. The Claimants’ Participation in the Development of Turkey’s Energy Sector

13. Asa result of the growing demand for electricity that Turkey experienced in the
1980’s, the Government undertook measures to privatize the energy sector, including
the participation of foreign investors therein under the model of Build-Operate-Transfer
(“BOT”) projects. The Claimants in this case were specifically interested in the
generation of electricity in connection with coal reserves in the Konya Ilgin area of the
Central Anatolian region. The Decision on Jurisdiction of June 4, 2004, provides a
detailed explanation of this policy and the governing laws, as well as of the essential
elements of the relationship between the parties. These elements shall only be repeated
in this Award to the extent necessary for consideration of the parties’ arguments on the

merits.

14. The contractual arrangements for the organization of the BOT projects proved to
be difficult to conclude as there were shifting policies and models that came into play.
These difficulties had a very specific impact on the present dispute. In 1984, Law No.
3096 had envisaged that there would be concession contracts governed by Turkish
administrative law, subject to the approval and review of the Turkish Council of State
(the “Danistay”). The use of such a model, however, would have made the international
financing of projects and the consent to international arbitration of any dispute
problematic. Therefore, Law No. 3996, enacted in 1994, introduced in its Article 5 the

possibility of concluding implementation contracts governed by private law.

15. Two years later, however, Turkey’s Constitutional Court invalidated Article 5 of
Law No. 3996 because, in its view, BOT projects constituted a public service that had to
be organized under a concession contract subject to Turkish administrative law. Yet
another change was introduced on January 22, 2000, with the enactment of Law No.
4501, which allowed parties to existing concession contracts to convert these
instruments to private law contracts and submit disputes to domestic or international

arbitration.

16. Another legal difficulty that had a specific impact on the present dispute was one
related to the corporate structure of the Claimants’ investment in the Konya Ilgin BOT
project. A Turkish joint stock company was first considered as the corporate vehicle for
the investment. However, as a consequence of the changes in the law outlined above,
which had various tax implications, PSEG later proposed that the corporate structure
should be a Turkish Branch Office of a Dutch company that had been incorporated to
channel the investment. The Project Company was thus organized in accordance with

the latter option.

17. This alternative did not find favour with the Turkish Government and ultimately
the Project Company was incorporated in Turkey as a limited liability company, one of
the Claimants in this case. These various corporate structures had different tax
implications that had an impact on the Claimants’ expected return on their investment.
They also had implications in respect of the tariff that had to be agreed for the sale of
electricity.| As further discussed below, this proved to be a key element of the dispute

presently before the Tribunal.

18. | PSEG Global applied to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources
(“MENR”) in 1994 to built a lignite-fired thermal power plant in the area of Konya
Ilgin. Authorization was granted that same year to prepare a Feasibility Study which
was submitted in early 1995. The Feasibility Study was approved by MENR on
November 29, 1995. This was the first of the various documents that later became

central to the present dispute.

19. This Feasibility Study proposed a power plant with a net output of 375
megawatts (MW) of electric power and an average unescalated tariff of US$4.98

cents/kwh over a period of 38 years, with an average plant availability of 85%. This

' Expert Report of Mr. Faruk Sabuncu, March 15, 2006, paras. 9-40.

last figure also turned out to be a crucial element of the dispute. Pre-construction costs
were estimated to be in excess of US$10.5 million, including engineering and
consultant studies, development costs and legal fees. In addition, the Feasibility Study
set out in detail the benefits the project would bring to the Turkish economy by

increasing the availability of electricity.

20. The next step in the preparation of the project was the negotiation of the
Implementation Contract, which was concluded and initialed on August 9, 1996. At
this point, because of the ruling of the Constitutional Court noted above, the contract
could no longer be governed by private law as originally envisaged. It was accordingly
submitted for approval of the Danistay as a concession contract under Turkish
administrative law. Before giving its approval, the Danistay requested from PSEG a
Letter of Undertaking to MENR that the company would abide by the terms of the

Implementation Contract until the Concession Contract was executed.

21. The Damistay approved the Concession Contract on March 30, 1998. The
Project Company signed the Concession Contract on December 10, 1998 and MENR on
March 8, 1999, which thus became the date of execution. Intense negotiations and
discussions between the parties during this period account for this rather lengthy
process of execution. A performance bond for US$8.04 million was posted by the

Project Company on February 23, 1999.

B. The Commercial Terms of the Contract

22. One of the important issues debated between the parties concerns the
commercial terms of the Contract. The Tribunal will now set out the facts as submitted

by each Party.

C. The Claimants’ Understanding of the Commercial Terms of the Contract

23. According to the Claimants, the essential commercial terms of the Concession
Contract were the same as those envisaged by the Implementation Contract. This, in the
Claimants’ view, was further confirmed by the fact that PSEG was required by the
Danistay to submit the Letter of Undertaking mentioned above reaffirming its

commitment to those terms.

24. Those terms provided for a total installed capacity of 425 MW gross/375 MW
net, an average availability factor of 85.08% and an average unescalated tariff of 4.98
cent/kWh. The Project envisaged 38 years of commercial operation and a total
investment cost of US$804.8 million. In addition, the Implementation Contract
required the Project Company to conclude several agreements and protocols, including
most importantly the Energy Sales Agreement, the Fund Agreement and the Treasury

guarantee ICSID arbitration was also provided for.

25. | One clause which is also at the heart of this dispute is Article 5.1 of the
Implementation Contract. This provision authorized the Project Company to conduct
further studies at the mine site and, as a result of such studies, to prepare a Revised
Mine Plan. The Project Company would then submit to MENR a revision of the tariff
structure to cover any increase in the Project’s fuel production costs that may have
resulted from the Revised Mine Plan. The Claimants stress that under this provision,
MENR “shall approve such revised energy tariff if it reasonably incorporates the
Company’s increased fuel production cost and results in a reasonable cost of energy and

capacity based on the Facility’s cost of production.”

26. During the review and approval of the Concession Contract by the Danistay,
Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract became Article 8 of the Concession
Contract. However, as noted in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the new provision, while
maintaining the authorization to prepare a Revised Mine Plan, introduced amendments
to the language concerning the eventual revision of the tariff. Article 8, paragraph 3,
provides as follows:

If such revised mine plan increases the Company’s estimated fuel

production cost, the Company shall submit to the Ministry a revised

tariff reflecting such cost increase, which the Ministry shall approve or

disapprove in no later than sixty days after the submission by the

Company. In the event the Ministry withholds its approval for the

revised tariff on the basis of reasonable grounds and if the Company

abandons the project prior to the construction start date, the Company
and the Ministry shall have no claims against the other.

27. In the Claimants’ submission, Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract meant
that unless the cost of fuel production proved to be unreasonably high in light of the
Revised Mine Plan, the agreement to develop the power plant and the mine would be

binding on the parties.

28. The Claimants explain that on the basis of technical studies conducted at the
mine site and the evaluation done by North American Coal, which later became one of
the Project sponsors, the cost per ton of lignite would be US$31.05, a figure which was

within the range accepted by the Turkish Coal Enterprise in other mines in Turkey.

29. The Revised Mine Plan was submitted to MENR on December 3, 1997, together
with a revised tariff proposal resulting from the increased cost of fuel. Investment cost,
would also need to be increased by US$361.6 million which, according to the
Claimants’ explanation, could be accommodated through the tariff structure “either by
raising the energy tariff rate, or by increasing plant output, or by adjusting both

variables.”*

30. | The Claimants also aver that, because the Project needed to service debt in a
period shorter than the term of the energy project, the different tariff structures proposed
to MENR had to be “front-end loaded.” Those structures envisaged a tariff rate that was
higher for the first 12 years and thereafter declined significantly. MENR had insisted
on an overall average tariff of 4.98 cents/kWh for the 38-year term of the Project. In
addition, the Project Company had to ensure a return on equity that was satisfactory
both to international lenders and the investors. The long-term Energy Sales Agreement,
the Fund Agreement and the Treasury guarantee were also key factors in ensuring the

economic viability of the Project.

31. The Revised Mine Plan was formally approved by MENR on June 19, 1998 (the
“Ministerial Approval”), following the favorable opinion of the Turkish Coal Enterprise
issued on May 4, 1998. The Tribunal notes at this stage the significance of these dates

in the context of the present dispute, as it evolved.

32. The first tariff proposal was made in conjunction with the presentation of the
Revised Mine Plan in December 1997. In order to meet the increased costs, it was at
this point proposed to build a power plant of 500 MW gross and a net dependable
capacity for sale to TEAS of 433.5 MW. In this proposal, the average availability factor
was 87% (increased from 85% in the Feasibility Study), while the average tariff was
kept at 4.98 cents/kWh as required by MENR.

33. The Claimants also state that in February 1998 MENR requested that the Project

Company submit a cash flow table for the December 1997 proposal. This was done on

? Claimants’ Memorial, para. 37.

the basis that the Project Company would operate as the Turkish Branch Office of the
Dutch investment company incorporated by PSEG for this purpose (Konya Ilgin
Electric Production B.V.), which was the structure then in place. In a proposal made on
February 10, 1998, using this corporate structure, the Claimants submitted a tariff table
to accommodate the increased costs that maintained the plant capacity at 425 MW

gross/375 MW net, but raised the average selling price per kWh.

34. The Claimants explain that at that point MENR demanded that the Project
Company be incorporated as a Turkish limited liability company. The Claimants add
that such a change would increase the tax burden by approximately US$256 million
during the life of the Project which had to be compensated with an adjustment of the
tariff. Three new proposals were made by the Project Company on February 13, 1998,
accounting for both the increased costs reflected in the Revised Mine Plan and the
additional tax burden. As will be noted below, the Respondent denies that it agreed that
the higher tax costs could be absorbed by means of the revised tariff structure, as argued

by the Claimants.

35. In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal noted that these proposals ranged
from 433 MW gross/375 MW net to 500 MW gross/433.5 MW net; from an average
availability factor of 85% to 87%; and all involved an increase in the average tariff from
4.98 cents/kWh: to 5.71, 5.23 and 6.34, respectively. Meetings to discuss these various
alternatives were held on February 19, 1998, and May 15, 1998. The Tribunal notes
that the parties have very different recollections about what was or was not agreed

during these meetings. In fact, these disagreements later became irreconcilable.

36. | The Claimants further explain that after the meeting of May 15, 1998, a new
proposal was made on the basis of a 465 MW net capacity, an average availability factor
of 87% and an unchanged tariff of 4.98 cents/kWh. According to the Claimants, they
presented this proposal to Respondent at a meeting on May 18, 1998. They then
informed the Respondent that with a 465 MW net capacity the gross capacity would
have to exceed 500 MW. The Respondent denies that such meeting ever took place.
However, according to the Claimants, this proposal was accepted by the Respondent
and further confirmed by them in a letter delivered the same day. A draft amendment
protocol to the Concession Contract, reflecting the new tariff structure, was prepared by
the Project Company on June 12, 1998. The Claimants assert that additional

confirmations were obtained at a meeting held on June 16, 1998.

11

37. The crucial element of the dispute turns on the Ministerial Approval of the
Project on June 19, 1998, which provided that “in order to ensure that the average sale
tariff of 4,98c/kWh shall remain unchanged. ..the installed capacity of 425 MW shall be
increased to 500 MW, the amount of electricity generation shall also be increased and
the cost increases arising from such additional investments shall also be financed.” The
Tribunal notes that the Approval did not refer specifically to any net capacity. The
Claimants concluded that the Approval implicitly referred to and accepted the 465 MW
net capacity envisaged in the May 18, 1998 proposal. This was not the Respondent’s
understanding, as will be explained later. It believed that the approved structure was the

one discussed in February 1998.

38. The Project Company followed-up this Ministerial Approval with a new draft
amendment protocol on June 25, 1998, which included its understanding about a 465
MW net capacity and a total investment cost of US$1,166.4 million. After the
Concession Contract entered into force on March 8, 1999, the parties scheduled a
meeting for March 24, 1999, in order to finalize the written amendments to the
Concession Contract. As explained in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the parties had
different understandings and explanations on why the 465 MW net figure was set out in

the draft amendment protocol prepared by MENR.

39. The Claimants believe that by that time the Government of Turkey had begun to
have second thoughts about the desirability of BOT projects in light of a difficult
domestic economic situation and alleged pressure from the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund to liberalize the energy market as a condition for much

needed financial support.

40. The Claimants explain that, as a result, BOT projects under negotiation were
delayed and ultimately abandoned, just as Treasury guarantees were discontinued.
Although the Government approved a list of eligible BOT projects in May 2000, Konya
Ilgin was not included; its inclusion at a later date did nothing to change the end result

as none of the projects ultimately materialized.

41. The Claimants also allege that Article 8(1) of the Electricity Market Law No.
4268, enacted on February 20, 2001, eliminated the Treasury guarantees and that the
law further restricted energy sales agreements with TEAS to terms not exceeding one

year, as opposed to the previous practice of being in effect for the whole duration of the

project. The Electrical Energy Fund was also abolished by Law No. 4684 and projects

not having yet executed a fund agreement no longer qualified for this benefit.

42. In the Claimants’ view, this background explains why MENR changed its
position in May 1999. MENR now took the position that it had never approved a 465
MW net capacity, either on May 18, 1998, or in the Ministerial Approval of June 19,
1998. On May 6, 1999, a MENR official observed that the revised tariff table submitted
was not the same as that accompanying the Revised Mine Plan in 1997 and later

expressly stated that such figures had never been approved.

43. After additional exchanges, the Claimants aver that, on October 26, 1999, they
accepted what they understood to be MENR’s position at the time, namely a 500 MW
gross/433.5 MW net plant. This alternative they allege had again become viable as a
result of the fact that the adverse tax consequences arising from the limited liability
company structure had been neutralized by further changes in the law. The Tribunal
also notes at this point that this tax issue, including the content of the letter of October

26, 1999, has become relevant in the context of the present dispute.

44. The Claimants submit that MENR then required that the same availability factor
indicated in the Feasibility Study (85%) be used by the Project Company with its
500/433.5 MW proposal, in spite of the fact that every single proposal made to
accommodate the Revised Mine Plan had been based on an availability factor higher
than that of the Feasibility Study. The Claimants believe that the figure of 85% did not
allow for the generation of an amount of electricity sufficient to make the Project viable.
They also state that this figure had already been changed to 87% in the February 1998
proposal and that the Ministry had accepted it. Additional discussions did not lead to an
agreement, not even in the terms of another proposal made by the Project Company on
February 10, 2000, which was described as the “final possible situation of what can be
done with the project economics.” The Tribunal notes that a dead end was reached at

this point.

D. The Respondent’s Understanding of the Commercial Terms of the Contract

45. The Respondent alleges that all difficulties that have characterized the

implementation of the Concession Contract stem from the fact that the Claimants badly

underestimated the costs and risks of the Project, as reflected in particular in the
Revised Mine Plan. As a result, there was no agreement about the renegotiation of the
commercial terms envisaged in the Contract. Many efforts directed at securing an
amendment to the Concession Contract to accommodate the increased costs did not bear

fruit and no new terms or amendments were ever approved by the Danistay.

46. The Respondent also explains that the BOT model envisaged at the time under
Turkish legislation involved a complex process of negotiation, financing and execution
of many different contracts, obtaining of permits and financing. Very often,

Respondent says, applicants never reached a financial closure.

47. According to the Government of Turkey, and contrary to the Claimants’
position, the country was not facing imminent electricity shortages and there was no
need to develop electricity generating capacity to serve a particular region as the
interconnected grid was continuously expanding and had an efficient transmission
system. This issue was different from that of the distribution of electricity by means of
local infrastructure, to which the Project would not have added anything as it was only

conceived to contribute electricity to the national grid.

48. The Respondent asserts that at the time the Claimants applied for a BOT project
in April 1994, Turkish legislation required that contracts to generate and supply
electricity had to be in the form of a concession contract issued by the Danistay.
Shortly after, in June 1994, Law No. 3996 mandated the form of a private law contract
for such projects. However, one year later, in June 1995, the Turkish Constitutional
Court held such a provision to be unconstitutional. The Respondent submits that the
Claimants knew well that unless the Constitution was amended the contract for this
project had to be reviewed and approved by the Danistay. The Government did nothing
to encourage the Claimants’ proposal and this responded only to the Claimants’ search

for business opportunities the world over.

49. The Feasibility Study submitted by the Claimants proposed to build and operate
a 425 MW gross capacity power plant with two units of 212.5 MW each using
circulating fluidized bed technology (“CFB”) with an internal load of 50 MW that
would supply 375 MW net. According to Respondent, there was no 425 MW CFB

plant yet in commercial operation.

50. The first tariff proposal made by PSEG envisaged an unescalated average price
of 5.20 cents/kWh, with an annual availability factor of 81% and a total investment of
US$920.7 million. This tariff was based on the assumption that the Project Company
would be a Turkish capital company. After initial negotiations, the tariff that
accompanied the Feasibility Study arrived at the figures set out above: 4.98 cents/kWh,
85.08% availability, and an US$804.8 million investment. The Respondent’s
submission is that the approval of the Feasibility Study issued by MENR on November
29, 1995, only authorized the Parties to proceed to negotiate a contract based on the

amended commercial terms.

51. | The Respondent adds that shortly thereafter the negotiations became very
difficult when PSEG requested that the Project Company be structured as a branch
office of a foreign company. This type of structure, unknown to MENR, would have
resulted in a US$250 million windfall for the Company at the expense of the Turkish
Republic. Furthermore, PSEG demanded the inclusion in the contract of an
international arbitration clause, knowing that this could not be accepted by the Danistay
in the context of a concession contract. More importantly, additional mine studies
would have to be conducted by Claimants because the Feasibility Study had been based
on scant information. Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract was intended

precisely to take into account the increased costs that could result from the new studies.

52. | The Respondent indicates that Article 5.1 left little or no discretion to the
Government with respect to the approval of the tariff resulting from increased costs.
Therefore, the Danistay decided to replace this provision with Article 8 of the
Concession Contract which gave MENR discretion to reject the proposed tariff on
reasonable grounds.* The Project Company was required to be structured as a Turkish

capital company, as PSEG had originally proposed.

53. | The Revised Mine Plan reflected the drastic increase in costs and risks of the
Project. According to the Respondent, the mining costs alone would have increased by
more than US$1 billion because the mine would have to be much deeper, enormous
amounts of non-coal material would have to be removed, dewatering would have to be
intense and the soil stability would require flattening the mine slopes, among many
other geological and operating problems. The cost per ton of coal mined would have

increased from US$21.5/metric ton to more than US$31/metric ton.

> Affidavit of Judge Harun Getintemel, September 9, 2006, paras. 9-12.

15

54. Because of the conclusions of the Revised Mine Plan, the Respondent submits
that the terms of the draft Concession Contract then before the Danistay were no longer
feasible and the Claimants, it says, have never offered to implement the commercial
terms that were ultimately approved by that body. The Respondent also states that since
these fundamental changes were not reasonable, MENR was not under any obligation to
approve the resulting revised tariff structure. In any event, any change had to be

reviewed and approved by the Danistay. This was never done.

55. Despite the cost increase, MENR continued the negotiations and tried to come to
an agreement with PSEG on new terms. After consideration of various tariff proposals,
including those discussed in February 1998, the Respondent submits that the parties had
agreed at that point a tariff structured on a 500 MW gross/433.5 MW net, as proposed in
the Revised Mine Plan.* The Respondent also alleges that it was under no obligation to
compensate PSEG for the costs it incurred as a result of changes to the corporate
structure of the Project Company from a foreign branch office to a Turkish capital
company, on which it had insisted. Respondent points out that PSEG had not changed
the tariff when the foreign branch office option was adopted and enormous tax savings

had ensued.

56. — The crucial divergence of position in this case, as noted earlier, arises from the
fact that, according to Respondent, the June 19, 1998 approval was based on the
February agreement. The Respondent submits that nothing different was agreed to in
the alleged May 18, 1998 meeting, of which MENR has no official record. Even
assuming that the meeting did take place, Respondent pleads that the officials allegedly
involved had no authority to agree to such a fundamental change in the commercial
terms of the Project. Moreover, the Respondent explains that a 500 MW gross/465 MW
net tariff structure was not feasible as that net can only be supported by a 545 MW gross

which PSEG itself had acknowledged.

57. The Respondent also explains that the June 19, 1998 Ministerial Approval was
only an internal authorization to proceed with the negotiations. No amendment to the
Concession Contract could be decided without the review and approval of the Danistay.
The parties, however, never agreed to such an amendment. Neither were there any

underlying promises made by MENR, as the Claimants now assert, that led to their

* Testimony of Mr. Ahmet Oktay Kavas, April 10, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 8, at 1960-61, 2014.

16

signature of the Concession Contract. The various proposals considered between March

1999 and March 2000 entailed commercial terms that were not acceptable to MENR.

58. The Respondent explains that, in fact, the Claimants’ proposed tariff structure
would have placed an unacceptable financial burden on Turkey, as much as US$15.6
billion over the life of the Project. Moreover, the real rate of return expected by the

Claimants was over 20% and not the 15.4% that was mentioned in every proposal.

59. Various other proposals were considered in June 1999, but MENR believes that
all of them would have shifted cost increases to the public and were thus not acceptable.
The October 26, 1999 proposal was based on the 500 MW gross/433.5 net structure the
parties had agreed upon in February 1998. It used an availability factor of 87% instead
of the 85% of the Feasibility Study which, in the Respondent’s submission, had not
been changed and thus made the proposal unacceptable. As noted above, the Claimants

believed that the February 1998 structure had included the 87% availability factor.

60. The Respondent complains that the October 26, 1999 proposal also took into
account the need to compensate the Project Company through the tariff for the corporate
change to a limited liability company and the resulting additional tax burden of US$256
million at a time when the Claimants knew the tax law had changed again and the
heavier burden had, in fact, been offset. According to the Respondent, this was never
disclosed to MENR and hence a higher tariff was sought for a tax burden that no longer

existed.

61. | Neither was the February 10, 2000 proposal acceptable to MENR because,
although lowering the average availability factor to 82.70%, a much higher availability
factor would have been used during the first twelve years of commercial operation of

the Project. This envisaged solution thus also failed to lead to an agreement.

62. The Respondent believes that MENR acted at all times within the discretionary
authority granted by Article 8 of the Concession Contract as it was under no obligation
to accept commercial terms proposed by the Claimants that were, in its sole judgment,
disadvantageous to the Turkish Republic and its consumers. The grounds on which the
various tariff proposals were rejected were “reasonable” from the Ministry’s

perspective, even if the Claimants did not agree.

E. The Benefits of a Private Law Framework under Law No. 4501

63. The parties have also made extensive submissions to the Tribunal in respect of
the parallel issue of the benefits provided by Law No. 4501 enacted in January 2000 in
order to implement a prior constitutional amendment allowing once again a private law
regime for concession contracts. Under this law, a BOT project company with an
executed concession contract had the right to apply to conclude an arbitration agreement
or, alternatively, to convert its contract into a private law contract which also allowed
for arbitration, with a view to facilitating international financing of such projects. The
Claimants applied for the benefits of this law within the deadline of February 22, 2000
by first requesting the conversion of the Concession Contract and immediately after, in
the alternative, requesting the inclusion in the Contract of an international arbitration

clause.

64. — The Claimants submit that MENR demanded terms and conditions that were not
within its authority under this law. These terms and conditions concerned, in particular,
the requirement to revise the procedure for determining the escalation of the price set
out in the tariff, the requirement to pass on to Turkey cost savings realized in financing
the Project by lowering the energy tariff, the requirement to lower the tariff in the early
years of the Project, the requirement to agree to comply with any future changes in
Turkish law, the requirement to commit to reach financial closure of the Project within a
fixed period of time and the requirement to bear the risk of unforeseeable geological

conditions.

65. According to the Claimants, all of these terms and conditions fundamentally
changed the equilibrium of the Project and, except for certain amendments that the
Claimants were willing to accommodate, the end result was unacceptable. The
Claimants also submit that such requests interfered with and threatened their ongoing
negotiations to secure international financing for the Project. The Claimants further
explain that MENR, notwithstanding its obligation, refused to forward the application to

the Council of Ministers.

66. The Respondent, on the other hand, answers that, according to the law, MENR
was not expected merely to transmit PSEG’s request to the Council of Ministers and

that PSEG did not have an automatic right to convert the Concession Contract. MENR

acted within its authority in requesting that all project sponsors share with the Ministry

the advantages the project would receive under the new law.

67. The Respondent adds that the terms MENR defined were addressed to all project
sponsors who were all treated alike. In rejecting such terms, PSEG would have
benefited unfairly from the improved loan conditions resulting from the conversion or
would have imposed risks on the Ministry that were not justified. Neither, it says, could
there have been any interference with international financing, since the process,

according to Turkey, had not even begun.

F. The Treasury Guarantee, Energy Sales Agreement and Fund Agreement

68. The parties also have different views with respect to the facts and issues
pertaining to the Treasury guarantee, the long-term Energy Sales Agreement and the
Fund Agreement. All these additional contracts were contemplated by Articles 15 and
20 as well as Annexes 2 and 3 of the Concession Contract as key elements of the

commercial terms of the Project.

69. The Claimants submit that the Electricity Market Law (Law No. 4628), enacted
on March 3, 2001, had the effect of cancelling the Project Company’s contract rights to
a Treasury guarantee and to the long-term Energy Sales Agreement, just as Law No.
4684, in July 2001, cancelled their rights to the Electrical Energy Fund and all Fund

Agreements related thereto.

70. In February 2002, the Constitutional Court invalidated Article 8(1) of the
Electricity Market Law that had cancelled the right to a Treasury guarantee for all but
29 BOT projects, since such guarantees were part of the concession contracts
concluded. Konya Ilgin was not one of the 29 projects. MENR requested a clarification
from the Treasury and asked if it could begin to honor the contractual provisions for
those guarantees in respect of a list of 30 BOT projects that had signed concession
contracts; this time, the list included the Konya Ilgin Project. The Claimants allege that
no action was taken because the Respondent was, at that time, pressured by the World

Bank to change its policies in respect of such Treasury Guarantee.

71. The Respondent answers that there were never any external pressures affecting
the conduct of negotiations in respect of concession contracts and that, in fact, the

dispute in this case originated in late 1997 when the Revised Mine Plan was submitted.

This, says Turkey, was much earlier than the discussions that took place later with the
World Bank and the IMF. The Respondent adds that the Government repeatedly issued
instructions to various ministries to proceed with the negotiations of the supplementary
agreements needed. It refers, in this connection, to a letter from the General Secretariat

for the President to MENR dated May 13, 1999.5

72. The Respondent submits that, in fact, the Project never reached the stage where
it could have received a Treasury guarantee. The Treasury, says Respondent, can only
evaluate the financial risks of a project once the contracts and approvals, including
financing, are completed. With such a Guarantee, the Treasury guarantees in particular
that the payments for energy sales are made in the terms of an Energy Sales Agreement.
It also guarantees payments under a Fund Agreement. None of these agreements had
been concluded in the present case nor was there an agreement on the commercial terms
of the Project. Many other agreements relating to insurance, contractors, loans,
investment authorization, mining, plant performance and other matters had not been

concluded either.

23. It follows, in the Respondent’s view, that this benefit was never denied. In fact,
the Respondent asserts, PSEG never applied for the guarantee. In any event, the
Respondent asserts that there is no “right” to such a guarantee as the Government has
full discretion to decide whether or not to issue it. This discretion was not fettered by
the Concession Contract or the decision of the Constitutional Court. Respondent also
explained that the limits the Government placed on Treasury guarantees for BOT
projects were only introduced in May and June 2000, and that the Electricity Market
Law was passed in March 2001, after the Project had failed since PSEG had abandoned
it in early 2001.

74. The Claimants also allege that some of the amendments introduced by the
Danistay in respect of the Implementation Contract, particularly the elimination of the
arbitration clause and the change of risk allocation concerning geological conditions of
the mine, had negative implications since it made the financing of the Project more
difficult to obtain. The Project Company, as recommended by MENR, worked
diligently with TEAS and the Electrical Energy Fund in order to incorporate the

5 Letter from General Secretary for the President to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, May
13, 1999, Exhibit 74 to Respondent’s Counter-memorial on the Merits, R 6690-91; and discussion in
Respondent's Counter-memorial, para. 170, n. 320.

20

necessary safeguards for debt financing into the Energy Sales Agreement and the Fund

Agreement.

75. These safeguards included, among others, broadening the scope of what
constituted a force majeure and reinstating the arbitration clause. As a result, the draft
agreements which followed had corrected many of these problems, including provision
for ICSID arbitration. It is on this basis that the Project Company signed the Contract in
December 1998. Soon thereafter the groundbreaking ceremony took place with the

participation of Turkish dignitaries and U.S. officials.

76. According to the Claimants, all that remained in late 1999 to finalize these
supplementary agreements was the incorporation of the revised tariff structure; as
explained earlier, there was an ongoing process. Yet, the Claimants submit that, as a
result of policy changes within the Turkish Government, TEAS and the EEF were not
authorized to include the revised tariff figures which, they maintain, had been approved
on June 19, 1998. In the end, the relevant agencies would not sign these agreements

without the written approval of MENR, which was never granted.

77. The Respondent’s view of these agreements is very different. Negotiations
between TEAS and the Company they say were carried out in good faith for many
months and a number of matters were settled, but the Claimants never concluded the
negotiations. Among the various unresolved issues was the dispute settlement
provision. TEAS could not insert in the Sales Agreement a mechanism which was
different from that found in the Concession Contract; there could be no reference to

ICSID arbitration in the drafts if such a clause was not included in the Contract.°

78. According to the Respondent, the situation was similar with respect to the Fund
Agreement, which was never finalized. There were many unresolved issues when the
Claimants abandoned the process. Prominent among these issues was the fact that the
Agreement could not include a risk allocation clause found in private law contracts
which the Claimants demanded, unless it was also included in the Contract.

Furthermore, as noted earlier, there could not be any ICSID clause.

® Affidavit of Mr. Abdulkadir Demirci, September 13, 2005, para. 11; Affidavit of Ms. Serpil Serdar,
September 14, 2005, para. 13.

21

G. The Completion of Pre-Construction Development of the Project

79. A last factual question at issue between the Parties concerns the stage of
development that the Project had reached when the process came to a standstill. In the
Claimants’ submission, the financial close of the Project after seven years of efforts was
imminent. Construction was ready to commence. A lengthy list of authorizations,
permits and contracts was included in the Claimants’ pleadings to demonstrate that the
Project was on the verge of financial close when the Respondent changed course and,

without prior notice, decided to terminate the Contract.

80. The Respondent, on the other hand, alleges that the Government had enabled the
conclusion of numerous authorizations and permits required to allow the Project to go
forward. The Respondent submitted a list detailing the steps which it had taken.
However, the Respondent concludes that by January 2000 the Project was no longer
feasible as a consequence of the increase in diesel fuel costs, the unproven CFB
technology offered and other factors. As a result, the Claimants were a long way from
obtaining international financing. Numerous risks remained unmitigated, such as
shareholders arrangements, fuel supply questions, technology and the absence of an

arbitration clause.

H. The Tribunal’s Evaluation of the Facts

81. The Tribunal is grateful to the parties’ counsel who provided detailed
explanation of the facts, together with a myriad of documents and the statements of
numerous witnesses and opinions of learned experts. The Tribunal will now undertake
the difficult task of considering and weighing these statements and opinions, as well as

the evidence of the many witnesses in order to reach its own conclusions with respect to

 

the facts of the case in terms of the rights and obligations of the parties.

1. Was the Konya Ilgin Project Important to Turkey’s Energy Sector
or was it a Mere Gold Rush?

82. The explanations given by the parties are based on totally different assumptions

concerning the significance of this Project. For the Claimants, this Project was crucial

22

for the development of Turkey’s energy sector in light of both a growing demand and
the need to diversify the energy fuel sources. For the Respondent, this Project was
simply part of a gold rush type of U.S. domestic power companies looking for new
investment opportunities around the world. These different perspectives have, of
course, a real impact on the way each party explains today the developments that took

place in this case.

83. The Tribunal has no difficulty in concluding that Turkey was, in fact, faced with
a growing need for electricity at that time in direct relationship with the expansion of its
economy and industrial output. There is no doubt either about the fact that the BOT
program was conceived to meet such needs in the medium and long-term. The
Claimants recall in this respect that the very approval of the Konya Ilgin Project by the
State Planning Organization in 1996 was expressly related to the need to “meet the

increasing electricity demand of our country ina reliable manner.””

84. For the Tribunal, the question whether the location of the power plant in Central
Anatolia was crucial for this development, as Claimants maintain, or whether it was just
another input into an efficient national grid system, as the Respondent asserts,* is not a
significant factor for the interpretation of the rights and obligations of the parties
pursuant to their contractual arrangements. The location of the power plant has, of
course, an incidence on the costs of the project having regard in particular to the losses
of electricity transmission for long distances. However, it does not change the
commitments that the parties did or did not undertake in respect of the Project in the

negotiation and execution of the Concession Contract and related instruments.

85. It is therefore easy for the Tribunal to conclude that both parties undertook
negotiations with a genuine interest in attaining a result conducive to the fulfillment of
their respective expectations. Only this common interest can explain the many
authorizations, approvals, proposals, meetings and discussions that continuously took
place over many years in order to complete preparations for the Project, both legally and
technically. Yet, it is also a fact that these efforts failed. The Tribunal must
accordingly examine why this happened and who and to what extent was responsible for

this failure.

7 Letter from the Undersecretariat of the State Planning Organization to the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources, April 12, 1996, Exhibit C141 to Claimants’ Memorial; see also discussion in
Claimants’ Reply, para. 50, n. 88.

* Affidavit of Mr. Budak Dilli, September 14, 2005, para. 4.

23

2. Did the Implementation Contract Govern the Final Terms of the Project?

86. The Claimants argue that the Implementation Contract represented a fully
formed understanding between the parties and that this instrument, as the Protocol to the
Implementation Contract recites, had been “negotiated, exchanged, and agreed upon as
the final form.”? It follows, in the Claimants’ view, that the subsequent Danistay
review process was not meant to allow a rewrite of the commercial and technical terms
of the Implementation Contract but simply to ensure its legal sufficiency and validity, a

process which the Claimants characterize as an “imprimatur.”

87. The Claimants assert that the Danistay review was only made necessary because
of changes in the law concerning the legal status of BOT projects that resulted from the
Constitutional Court decision of June 28, 1995, that invalidated private law contracts.
The Implementation Contract had been negotiated under a private law framework.
Because the Constitutional Court decision came into effect in March 1996, the Contract,
completed in August 1996, could only be implemented under the new framework of

concession contracts approved by the Danistay.

88. — The Project, however, was only one. According to the Claimants, this explains
why the Respondent directed and encouraged many of the technical services of the
Turkish Government, including TEAS, the Electrical Energy Fund and the Treasury, to
implement the Project as defined in the Implementation Contract while the Damstay
undertook its process of review. The Claimants invoke in support of their view many
instances where MENR referred to the draft Contract agreed by the Parties including the
June 19, 1998 Ministerial Approval.

89. The Respondent does not deny that the Implementation Contract represented the
negotiated terms the parties had reached at the time, but argues that such terms had not
finalized the key issue of the tariff structure as evidenced by Article 5.1 of the
Implementation Contract and subsequently by Article 8 of the Concession Contract.
The Respondent argues that this was the important issue which was never resolved as a
result of the Revised Mine Plan and that, in any event, as noted above, an agreement on

the commercial terms of the Project had to be approved by the Danistay.

° Protocol to Implementation Contract, August 9, 1996; and discussion in Claimants’ Reply, para. 64, n.
123.

24

90. | The Implementation Contract was undoubtedly an important milestone in the
process of completion of the Project and its terms were clearly agreed by the parties.
The Claimants’ explanations to this effect are convincing and supported by both the text
of the Implementation Contract itself and the Letter of Undertaking of November 27,
1996 which PSEG was requested to provide while the Danistay proceeded with the
review. In fact, the Project Company declared in this letter that it “shall be

1 Tt also

unconditionally bound by the presently existing terms of the Contract.
specified very clearly that the Project Company would be entitled to refuse to sign the
Concession Contract if it incorporated provisions materially different from the

Implementation Contract which could impede international financing.

91. However, in the view of the Tribunal, there are two important elements which
weaken the Claimants’ interpretation of the Implementation Contract. Firstly, although
the Implementation Contract contained the agreed commercial terms and corresponding
tariff structure, this matter was not considered closed as the parties agreed on a possible
adjustment in light of the pending Revised Mine Plan. Article 5.1 of the
Implementation Contract so provides unequivocally, as did subsequently Article 8 of

the Concession Contract.

92. Thus, the commercial terms of the Project could not be considered final.
Otherwise, the Claimants would have been bound by the commercial terms originally
envisaged by the Feasibility Study, including the question of the availability factor that
later became so prominent in their dispute with Respondent. It is quite evident from the
totality of the whole process that, important though it was, the Terms of the
Implementation Contract were not cast in stone. The Respondent argues rightly, in the
opinion of the Tribunal, that the Claimants had never agreed to develop the Project

according to the terms of the Implementation Contract.

93. Secondly, there is the key role of the Danistay. As the highest administrative
body in Turkey, it is clear that its role was mostly confined to the legal and
administrative issues arising from the Implementation Contract, particularly in light of
the evolving legal structure governing BOT projects. It follows that highly technical
issues would normally be resolved by MENR.

'° Letter of Undertaking from the Community Energy Alternatives Inc. to the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources, November 27, 1996, Exhibit C45 to Claimants’ Memorial; see also discussion in
Claimants’ Reply, par. 65, n. 126.

25

94. This does not mean, however, that the Danistay’s role was merely to rubber
stamp the Implementation Contract or grant an “imprimatur.” This important body has
the authority to review and approve concession contracts, including all the terms
contained therein, not just some of them. This is evidenced by the fact that among other
issues that were still pending, there was the question of the ICSID arbitration clause.
More importantly, any agreements the parties could have reached later had to be
submitted to the Danistay for final approval. There are numerous instances in the
record of discussions between the Parties, always at the initiative of the Claimants, of

amendments to the Concession Contract and the preparation of pertinent Protocols.

95. Important as the Implementation Contract was, it cannot be viewed by the

Tribunal as the final word in the process. Other equally important steps were to follow.

3. Did MENR Accept the Cost Increase of the Revised Mine Plan?

96. The parties do not disagree about the fact that the Revised Mine Plan resulted in

an increase in costs. The disagreement is whether such increase was “large,” as the
Claimants describe it, or whether it would have put the Project “among the most
expensive power projects anywhere in the world,” as the Respondent asserts. The
parties also disagree whether MENR was at all times fully informed and aware of this

increase and its magnitude or whether it came to the Ministry as complete surprise.

97. The Tribunal must first note that the parties have made different estimates in
support of their respective positions. Based on the technical studies of Norwest,'! the
Claimants assert that in January 2004, Konya Ilgin came in at a cost of US$2.75/Mbtu.
That is lower that the US$3.97/Mbtu weighted average cost of the six State-owned mine
mouth power plants in Turkey and, indeed, the second least expensive of all such

projects.

98. The expert report of Dr. Houser for Claimants estimated a fuel cost of
US$2.87/MBtu for January 2000, while the Respondent’s expert, Dr. Sansom, estimated
a cost of US$5.05/MBtu.’? In the Claimants’ view, the difference stems from the fact

that Dr. Sansom’s report adds various costs that would be incurred if the mine was

"| Expert Report of Norwest’s Messrs. Conrad Houser and Andrew Scrymgeour, December 6, 2005,
paras. 16-17.

" Testimony of Mr. Conrad Houser, April 7, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1105-06; Testimony of
Mr. Robert Sansom, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 6, at 1450-51.

26

separately managed and operated. However, the Claimants note that this Project was

vertically integrated as a part of the overall Project.'

99. The parties also disagreed about the comparable cost of the TKI operated mines.
The Claimants assert that TKI does not have to pay some taxes applicable to private
developers and is subsidized by the government. This lowers its costs.'* The
Respondent submits to the contrary that TKI has to bear the same costs as private

developers. '°

100. The Respondent also argued that the total costs kept increasing: US$361 million
more for the initial capital investment, US$557 million more in additional capital for the
mine and US$20 million more each year for operation and maintenance. These
increases in costs resulted by far, it says, in the most expensive thermal power project
then under consideration by MENR. In his expert statement, Mr. Carlos Lapuerta
concludes that each of the Claimants’ proposals would have resulted in a substantial
increase of the Project’s total cost and a resulting increase in the “levelized” price for

the electricity that the government would have to purchase. '®

101. The Claimants further assert that at no time did MENR inform them that the
price of electricity of the tariff proposals would be evaluated on a “levelized” basis.
They aver that they were only told there would be an unescalated simple average tariff
criterion. They say that their earlier suggestions to use a levelized price of electricity

were rejected.'7

102. The parties also disagree about the technical characteristics of the Project and
the incidence they could have had on the cost increase. While the Respondent believes
that the mine was “astonishingly complex,” for the Claimants it “would have been
reasonable easy to mine” and there was nothing particularly risky about it. On another
issue, the Respondent asserts that the dewatering program would have ended up
affecting a nearby lake, but the Claimants argue that the Environmental Impact
Assessment had concluded that this was impossible in view of the geology of the area.

For the Respondent, the area to be mined was so great that three towns had to be

'S Testimony of Mr. Conrad Houser, April 7, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1058-61.

' Claimants’ Response to Respondent’s new evidence, July 11, 2006, paras. 2-11.

'S Respondent's Post-hearing Brief, n. 1.

6 Expert Report of Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, September 19, 2005, paras. 47-48; Rejoinder Expert Report of
Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, March 15, 2006, para. 15; Testimony of Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, April 9, 2006,
Hearing transcripts, Vol. 7, at 1647-56.

"7 Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, paras. 44-49.

27

moved; for the Claimants this decision was entirely unrelated to the mine. While for the
Respondent the mine would have been the size of Manhattan and an amount of
overburden would have to be removed equaling that removed for the construction of the
Panama Canal, for the Claimants there was nothing unusual in this project as evidenced

by the existence of mines larger that Konya Ilgin throughout the world.

103. In the end, the Claimants argue that it did not matter that the investment or
operational costs were higher than those accepted by MENR under the Revised Mine
Plan as this was a risk of the Project Company; tariff adjustment and escalation were
exceptional and specifically regulated under the Contract and no minimum profits or
returns were guaranteed.'* The Claimants assert in this respect that they were not
seeking to recoup the extra costs of building a 500/465 MW plant or even a 545 MW
plant, and that “they would have constructed a power plant producing a larger output for
absolutely no additional investment cost.” Yet, as will be seen later, to accommodate
the higher costs of the Revised Mine Plan would have required TEAS to purchase more
electricity. This was thus an expenditure which concerned MENR and which it wanted

to limit.

104. While the Tribunal is not called upon to measure the real impact of the cost
increase of the Revised Mine Plan on the economics of the Project, it is quite evident
that this impact was significant. Clearly, it was inevitable that a series of factors would
have to change, beginning with the plant capacity, followed by the amount of electricity

that TEAS would have to buy and ending with the adjustment of the tariff.

105. The issue then becomes whether these changes were of the ilk envisaged in
Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract and Article 8 of the Concession Contract.
The Respondent asserts that the Project Company was to some extent negligent in not
having undertaken a complete mine study before the Feasibility Study and that MENR
was not aware of the scope of the cost increases that were finally revealed by the
Revised Mine Plan. The Tribunal must note in this respect that a witness for the
Claimants in responding to a question from the Tribunal concluded that the Feasibility
Study was an “educated guess” and that perhaps it should be more properly regarded as

a “pre-Feasibility Study.”!”

'S Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, paras. 25-31.
'° Testimony of Mr. Conrad Houser, April 7, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1135-36.

28

106. To this extent, the Respondent maintains that the articles of both the
Implementation Contract and the Concession Contract with respect to the Revised Mine
Plan were included, first, at the request of the Company and, secondly, with the
understanding that the resulting changes would be limited and not too significant. It

was on this basis that the Danistay was seized of the issue.

107. The Claimants maintain that, on the contrary, MENR knew from the very
beginning that the Feasibility Study would have to be supplemented by in-depth mine
studies and that it would have been imprudent to do this before a government
authorization to proceed with the Project was obtained. Moreover, the Claimants argue,
MENR never questioned the need for these subsequent studies during the discussions
held both before and after the Feasibility Study was completed. This explains why both
the Implementation Contract and the Concession Contract provided for the preparation
of the Revised Mine Plan. The Claimants explain that MENR was kept abreast of the
significance of the Revised Mine Plan much earlier than the date it was submitted and
still no objection was raised or even alluded to either directly or during the discussions

before the Danistay.

108. The Claimants submit that the Respondent accepted the new cost structure since
the Revised Mine Plan was approved by the Turkish Coal Enterprise without
amendment on May 4, 1998, and MENR issued its Ministerial Approval after a careful
review that included the increased costs and their effect on the tariff and the amount of
electricity needed to offset such costs. As noted above, the Respondent for its part has
argued that MENR proceeded at all times with a different understanding about what
would be acceptable in terms of a tariff adjustment resulting from such increase in the

mine costs.

109. The Tribunal is persuaded that in the context of the many discussions that
preceded the submission of the Revised Mine Plan, MENR, and to some extent, TKI,
were aware that this study would lead to a new situation in terms of the costs involved.
Yet, the Tribunal must note that when the Claimants informed MENR by letter of July
9, 1997, of the progress made in the preparation of the Revised Mine Plan and its likely
effects on the electricity tariff, they stated that “initial computation indicates that there

will be an impact to the electricity tariff’ and that there would be a need for an increase

29

in the net capacity of the plant, concluding that “[a] minor adjustment to the electricity

tariff may still be needed.”””

110. MENR was therefore under the impression that these changes would be “minor,”
and this was so reported to the Danistay. It is therefore plausible that this
characterization is reflected in both Articles 5.1 and 8 of the Concession Contract. The
reference in Article 5.1 to MENR’s approval of a revised tariff “reasonably”
incorporating the increase in fuel costs, seems to reflect this understanding. Article 8 of
the Concession Contract refers to “reasonable grounds” for withholding approval.
Major changes would appear to fall outside the scope of the standard of reasonableness

envisioned in those provisions.

111. As the real extent of the increase in costs and their likely effect on the other
factors in the process came to be fully known only with the submission of the Revised
Mine Plan in December 1997, it is justifiable for the Respondent to argue that MENR
was, to a certain extent, shocked by the results of the study. An expert for the
Respondent stated that the Revised Mine Plan involved changes that were so dramatic
that it resulted in “essentially presenting the Turkish Government with a second,
entirely different project... that... , if pursued, would have been one of the most
costly and risky power projects in the world.”?! However, the Tribunal notes that

MENR, at the time, did not voice objections to these findings.

112. After the submission of the Revised Mine Plan, the discussions appeared to
follow a two-track approach. First, there was the technical evaluation of TKI that led to
the approval of the Revised Mine Plan, although reservations were made about cost and
risk.” There was also the concern about the effects of the study on the commercial
terms of the Project. This is undoubtedly where the attention of MENR was
concentrated. In fact, while the Claimants’ assertion that the Revised Mine Plan was
approved is correct, this does not mean that the approval of the impact the increased

costs had on the commercial terms of the Project automatically followed.

113. The two-tracks came together with the Ministerial Approval of June 19, 1998.
However, this is where the differences between the parties become crucial. The
technical aspects of the Revised Mine Plan were indeed approved, as noted. But was
?° Letter from Mr. Halil Sunar to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, July 9, 1997, at 15,
Exhibit C143 to Claimants’ Memorial, see also discussion in Claimants’ Reply, para. 74, n. 143.

> Written Statement of Mr. Robert Sansom, September 10, 2003, paras. 5-6.
> Affidavit of Mr. Omer Unver, September 3, 2003, para. 6.

30

this also the case for the new tariff structure? The Claimants believe that it was. The

Respondent believes that this was not so. The Tribunal will discuss this issue later.

4. For whom was the Tax Burden of the Project in Connection with the Corporate
Structure?

114. The discussion about the incidence of the corporate structure on the tax burden
of the Project is a crucial factor in understanding the differences between the parties
with respect to the commercial terms of this Project. This discussion took place during
three different time periods: the negotiations concerning the Implementation Contract in
1996, the consideration of a change of structure in February 1998 and the disclosure

about the effects of tax changes in 1999.

115. As noted earlier, the Respondent explains that, at the early stage of negotiations
of the Project, a Turkish capital company was considered as the appropriate corporate
structure for the Project Company, but that this was changed to a branch office of a
Dutch incorporated company at the insistence of PSEG. The Respondent argues that
the Claimants intended to obtain a tax windfall as a result of a lower tax burden but

without disclosing it to MENR.

116. As also noted earlier, the Claimants explain that when the Feasibility Study was
submitted in 1995 the law required BOT project companies to be formed as joint-stock
companies. This law was amended in 1996 by Law No. 6224 allowing BOT project
companies to be structured as branch offices of foreign corporations in order to promote
foreign investments.”> In the Claimants’ view, it was only this consideration that led to

the change in corporate structure.

117. The Claimants argue that there was nothing sinister in this change. Firstly, the
Respondent must have been aware of the tax implications of the changes its own law
was authorizing. Secondly, and more importantly, the Respondent specifically agreed
to this change both in the Implementation Contract and in the Letter of Undertaking
from the Claimants required by the Danistay. The branch office was also authorized by
the Permission Certificate of the Foreign Investment General Directorate issued on May

5, 1997, which the Tribunal addressed in its Decision on Jurisdiction.

25 Claimants’ Reply, para. 98, n. 208.

31

118. The Tribunal has no difficulty in concluding that the change from a Turkish
joint-stock company to a branch office of a foreign company was both authorized by the
law as amended and duly agreed to and approved by the Respondent. Indeed, there
were tax advantages and such was the intent of the law, which was conceived as an
incentive to attract foreign investment capital. The Respondent cannot be heard to
argue that such advantages were unknown to MENR or, indeed, to the Turkish

Government generally.

119. The evidence submitted by the Claimants on this question is convincing. The
Implementation Contract made specific reference to Konya Ilgin Electric Production
B.V. Turkey Branch and to Law No. 6224 Concerning the Encouragement of Foreign
Investment Capital. The Letter of Undertaking made specific reference to the foreign
capital company and to the commitment of the foreign investment company to bring a

sufficient amount of capital to be determined by the Treasury.

120. The second time period when the corporate structure becomes relevant pertains
to the negotiations that took place in February 1998 following the submission of the
Revised Mine Plan. The Respondent alleges that because of the increase in the size of
the Project resulting from the Revised Mine Plan, MENR requested that it be structured
as a Turkish capital company, the corporate structure then in use for all BOT projects.
The Claimants had no objection to the change provided they were compensated for the
additional cost this change entailed, estimated at US$256 million. Compensation could

be made by way of an adjustment in the tariff.

121. The issue then became one of compensation and whether it was agreed by the
Parties. The Respondent avers that there should be no compensation for reverting to the
original corporate structure proposed in the Feasibility Study as there had been no
reduction in the tariff when the change to a branch office was made. The Respondent
also asserts that the real tax cost of the change, as evidenced by the Claimants’ financial

models, was only US$96 million.

122. The Claimants argue that, on the contrary, they were entitled to be compensated.
They claimed compensation from MENR by letter of February 10, 1998. The cash flow
tables discussed in connection with the February 1998 proposals were explicit; they
reflected the various corporate structures then considered. The Claimants assert that,
moreover, all tax benefits of the foreign branch status had been computed in the revised

tariff accompanying the Revised Mine Plan; there would have been no windfall, as the

32

internal rate of return under the Revised Mine Plan turned out to be lower than under

the Feasibility Study.

123. The Claimants argue that the Parties agreed in February 1998 to adjust the tariff
structure so as to compensate for the higher tax costs of the corporate change, and this
was the basis for the various proposals made on February 13, 1998. The Respondent

. . 2.
denies having so agreed.”

124. The evidence of the Parties on this issue is not very convincing. Their respective
positions rest mainly on the witness statements they have each submitted. There are,
however, two elements that the Tribunal finds helpful. First, according to two witnesses
for the Respondent, MENR agreed to consider different proposals from the Claimants
addressing the increased costs associated with the change in the corporate structure.”>
While this, in itself, is not dispositive, it does demonstrate that the Respondent was
aware of the problem at the time and, as the Respondent later argued, that one of these
proposals had been agreed as establishing the commercial terms of the Project. This
evidence lends weight to the Claimants’ argument that the agreement addressed the

effects of the new corporate structure.

125. This acknowledgment also responds to a legal reality since the Feasibility Study
in Section 11.1.1 and the Implementation Contract in Schedule 4 had envisaged a
specific list of assumptions which defined the commercial terms with the express
provision that if the bases for these assumptions changed, “the prices in the Tariff will
be adjusted accordingly.” The Claimants point out that these assumptions included

taxation issues and the incentive allowances.”°

126. A second element of evidence invoked by the Claimants is more direct and to

the point. The minutes of the meeting held on February 11, 1998 refer to the fact that

the new proposals “will be based on the establishment of a limited liability company,”?”

while those of the meeting held on February 12, 1998, refer to a consensus that there
would be a change in corporate structure if the Revised Mining Plan and the tariffs were

approved.” The discussion that followed in the Danistay does not reflect that this body

*4 Affidavit of Mr. Metin Basli, August 28, 2003, para. 8.

5 Affidavit of Ms. Selda Bilgig, September 13, 2005, para. 7; Affidavit of Mr. Ahmet Oktay Kavas,
March 27, 2003, para. 23.

?6 Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, paras. 59-61.

27 Resolutions of Meeting, February 11, 1998, Exhibit C583 to Claimants’ Reply.

°8 Minutes of Meeting, February 12, 1998, at 1, Exhibit C148 to Claimants’ Memorial.

33

required a specific corporate structure as the Respondent argues, since it referred to the

fact that the law provided for both “domestic or foreign companies.”””

127. The Tribunal can therefore conclude that it was reasonable for the Claimants to
proceed to further stages of negotiations on the assumption that in accepting the
corporate form of a limited liability company, the revised tariff would reflect this
particular choice of form and its associated costs. As it has not been established that the
change was required by law, it is also possible to conclude that the requirement for such

change was more a matter of preference for MENR than a legal obligation.

128. The third time period when the issue of the corporate structure became relevant
to this dispute was in late 1999. As noted earlier, additional tax changes made in early
1999 had the effect of offsetting the tax consequences that a limited liability company
structure would have incurred as a result of the Project. The Claimants assert that they
became aware of such results in October 1999. On this basis, they were prepared to
accept what they understood was MENR’s position at the time, which is what the
Ministry had interpreted as the commercial terms approved on June 19, 1998. Yet, in
the Claimants’ submission, the Respondent once again changed its position and

demanded the availability factor of the Feasibility Study.

129. The Respondent argues that the Claimants had ample time to consider the tax
changes introduced on January 1, 1999, and yet, in October 1999, they were still
proposing a tariff that included compensation for the effects of the limited liability
corporate structure that was no longer relevant. They insisted on compensation as late
as December 2000. The Respondent asserts in this regard that the new tax structure
would have resulted in a US$250 million tax reduction for the Claimants even if the
corporate structure had remained a Turkish capital company. The Claimants never
disclosed this benefit and this, argues Respondent, evidences a bad faith negotiation

strategy on their part.

130. The Tribunal is persuaded that it is quite possible that the Claimants became
aware of the offsetting effects of the tax change in October 1999. The Respondent has

pointed to convincing evidence showing that there were discussions earlier with

0

advisors and executives to assess the changes.*” However, it was not until October

*° Minutes of Meeting, March 11, 1998, at R 0915.
*° Letter from Deloitte and Touche to PSEG, October 8, 1999, Exhibit C571 to Claimants’ Reply;
Respondent's Post-hearing Brief, paras, 41-42.

34

1999 that firm conclusions emerged. The Tribunal finds plausible that, while at the
time the Claimants were still demanding compensation for the corporate tax changes,
the assessment of the tax situation was leading them to a different conclusion. A
witness for the Claimants explained that it was shortly after that letter was written that
PSEG learned of the offsetting effects of the tax changes.*! In the circumstances, this is

not evidence of bad faith negotiation.

131. But what might have been justified in October 1999 became less defensible later
on. On November 17, 1999, a further letter was sent to MENR by the Claimants.” The
Tribunal finds surprising that Claimants, by that date, would have been unaware of the
changes. A proposal from PSEG on February 10, 2000 which still ignored the change
in the tax law cannot be justified.> Even if the Claimants were under no obligation to
inform MENR of the effects of the changes in Turkey’s own tax laws,” in the context
of this particularly complex negotiation the Tribunal would have expected the

Claimants to proceed with greater transparency and to discuss the tax changes openly.

132. While the Tribunal will examine later the allegations of each Party concerning
good or bad faith of the other Party, it can now positively conclude that the many
successive changes that took place over the years in the law relating to the corporate
structure of BOT projects and their resulting tax effects, in addition to the changing
positions the parties adopted in the negotiations, whether or not these changes related to
these legal changes, quite naturally led to misunderstandings and disagreements. This is

one factor that contributed to the eventual total collapse of the negotiations.

5. Was there Agreement on the Revised Tariff Structure Resulting from Increased
Costs?

133. The differences between the Parties on this issue have been outlined earlier. The
Claimants assert that MENR had specifically considered two options after submission
of the Revised Mine Plan as evidenced by the approval of June 19, 1998. The first was

an installed capacity of 425 MW with an increase in the price of electricity to

3 Third Written Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, February 18, 2005, para. 57.

* See Letter from PSEG to Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, November 17, 1999, Exhibit 110
to Claimants’ Memorial; see also discussion in Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 103, n. 161.

*} See Letter from PSEG to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, February 10, 2000, Exhibit
111 to Claimants’ Memorial; see also discussion in Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 105, n. 163.

* Testimony of Mr. Halil Sunar, April 5, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 3, at 503.

35

accommodate the higher costs while, in the second option, the capacity would be

increased to 500 MW without changing the price per kWh.

134. The latter approach was the one the Claimants maintain was embodied in the
tariff structure of the Revised Mine Plan. It resulted in keeping the same price of 4.98
cents per kWh and in the increase in the net generation capacity of the plant and the
applicable availability factors from an average of 85.08% in the Feasibility Study to an
average of 87.19% in the Revised Mine Plan. The sum total of these figures would
yield “the amount of money in US dollars that TEAS would pay the Project Company in

each year of the Project for the generated electricity.”

135. The proposal accompanying the Revised Mine Plan was supplemented by the
cash flow table that the Claimants sent to MENR on February 5, 1998. Yet, as this
proposal was based on the corporate structure of a branch office of a foreign company
which was no longer acceptable to MENR, the three above-mentioned new proposals
submitted on February 13, 1998, envisaged an increase in the price which reflected the
limited liability company structure favored by the Ministry. The Claimants assert that
these various proposals were rejected by MENR in May 1998 only because of the
increase in the price of electricity, not because it would have shifted the costs to the

Republic as argued by the Respondent.

136. The Respondent, indeed, argues that such proposals would have resulted in an
unfair shift of the costs to the Republic and that MENR was not willing to proceed
regardless of the costs of building a larger plant that would be selling more electricity,
all of which, as noted earlier, would have resulted in the most expensive power project

in Turkey.*°

137. The Respondent asserts that on February 13, 1998, the parties agreed to proceed
on the basis of an increase in the installed capacity as proposed in the Revised Mine
Plan (500 MW gross/433.5 MW net) provided the tariff did not change.*° According to

the Respondent, this was precisely what was approved on June 19, 1998.

138. As explained earlier, the Claimants, on the other hand, argue that the June 19,

1998 approval was based on the 500/465 MW figures the parties had agreed on May 18,

*5 Expert Report of Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, September 19, 2005, para. 30.
% Affidavit of Mr. Ahmet Oktay Kavas, September 13, 2005, para. 12.

36

1998.37 A witness for the Respondent testified that the meeting when this agreement
was allegedly reached never took place: “These were not meetings per se. These were,
say, interviews...” within the many ongoing talks between the parties,** and if any
meeting actually took place on that date it was possibly because “PSEG’s

9939

representatives dropped by my office for an informal visit in those days,””” or possibly

“a courtesy” visit.”

139. An additional aspect of the dispute is what the parties understood as the “tariff.”
The discussion on this issue before the Tribunal has been somewhat confusing, but in
essence it appears that while the Claimants understood the electricity tariff as the price
of electricity (cents/kWh), the Respondent used the term in a technical sense that
includes also the net dependable capacity, the Annual Net Generation (ANG) and the
availability factors.*' It follows that when the Claimants referred to the tariff remaining
unchanged in its various proposals, they were only referring to the price of electricity
which remained the same while other commercial terms such as ANG and availability
factor were indeed changing. But for the Respondent if the tariff remained unchanged,

it meant that all the components remained the same, not only the price of electricity.

140. These differences became significant when the parties disagreed in respect of
which availability factor they were each relying on. The Claimants maintain that it
made no sense to leave out the ANG factor which determined a sufficient level of
generation to ensure enough revenue to cover the higher costs of the Project. The
Respondent asserts that such element was defined in the Feasibility Study and was not

open to change.

141. The parties have also disagreed about a number of other aspects of a technical or
legal nature associated with the approval of the commercial terms of the Project. The
Claimants assert that all the elements of such approval were finally agreed in a meeting
held on May 18, 1998, at which a specific cash flow table showing the ANG for a 500
MW/465 MW plant was made available. The Respondent does not even admit that the

meeting took place or that a cash flow table for that capacity was produced. In any

*’ Third Written Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, February 18, 2005, paras. 38-39; Written Statement of Mr.
Mesut Gakmak, February 18, 2005, paras. 6-9.

** Testimony of Mr. Metin Bashi, April 9, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 7, at 1864-67.

* Affidavit of Mr. Metin Basli, August 28, 2003, para. 11.

*° Second Affidavit of Mr. Metin Bash, August 22, 2005, para. 15; Testimony of Mr. Metin Bash, April
10, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 8, at 1896-98.

“! Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, para. 37.

37

event, the Respondent argues that a commitment of billions of dollars could not be
made at a meeting of which there is no record. A witness for the Respondent also
explains that no agreement could have been reached without defining precisely the net
capacity and the availability as the Ministry wanted to keep the cost as low as

possible.”

142. From a legal and administrative viewpoint, the parties also give very different
meanings to the June 19, 1998 MENR approval. The Claimants see it as a binding legal
commitment recognized as such by MENR until as late as January 2001 and on the
basis of which MENR instructed TEAS and the Electrical Energy Fund to finalize the
additional agreements required. The Respondent, on the other hand, regards such
approval by the Minister as a formal authorization for the staff to proceed with the
negotiations on the terms agreed to in February 1998 but which resulted in no
agreement to amend the Concession Contract. Eventually, the relevant Protocol would

have to be submitted to the Danistay.

143. Although the evidence on which the parties rely in support of their respective
positions is not always decisive as it is based for the most part on notes written by one
party or on witness statements produced by one or the other party, there is some
evidence which is persuasive. In particular, the Tribunal finds that a meeting did take
place on May 18, 1998, and that the relevant net equity buyout tables were submitted
with the corresponding ANG figures, as a letter was sent by the Claimants with such
information on the same date.** The notes of that meeting, which surfaced later in the
course of the document production phase of the present proceeding support the

Claimants’ assertion to this effect.

144. The Tribunal finds that the explanations as to whether or not this meeting took
place, as well as in respect of other events in the negotiations, given at the hearing by
Mr. Bashi, the then Deputy General Manager of Energy Affairs at MENR, who led the

discussions on the Ministry’s side, were elusive and vague. He did not recollect facts he

” Third Affidavit of Mr. Metin Bash, March 6, 2006, para. 16.

* See PSEG Letter to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, May 18, 1998, Exhibit 41 to
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction; Written Witness Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, June 26, 2003,
submitted in support of Claimants’ Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, para 67; Respondent's Memorial on
Jurisdiction, paras. 48-50; Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 36-46, 102; Affidavit of Ms. Selda
Bilgic, March 27, 2003, para. 39, Exhibit 1 to Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction.

38

should have remembered and he made himself appear not to be aware of key aspects of

the negotiations which he had responsibility for.**

145. What was agreed at the time or approved on June 19, 1998, is a different matter.
The Tribunal finds no convincing evidence of an agreement reached on February 13,
1998. There is no document in the record which evidences this alleged agreement.
Witness statements are contradictory on this question. A witness for the Respondent
explains that “there was never a final agreement with PSEG on terms that are essential
for any BOT power project, such as the net/gross capacities of the power plant and the
electricity tariff, which includes the price per kilowatt hour and the availability of the
electricity that would have to be purchased.”** Yet, another witness for the Respondent
contradicts that assertion and states that Energy Affairs and PSEG specifically agreed in
February 1998 “to increase the gross capacity of the proposed project to 500 MW (from
425 MW) and the net capacity to 433.5 MW (from 375 MW)... .”"°

146. True enough, many alternatives were discussed by the Parties during February
1998 and it is quite plausible that each Party may have come out of those meetings with
different understandings about the basis on which the negotiations were to proceed.

Yet, the Tribunal cannot conclude that an agreement was reached.

147. The evidence is also confusing with respect to the thrust of the negotiations
when they resumed in May 1998. It is quite clear that, at that point, MENR had decided
that any agreement necessarily had to be based on a price of 4.98 c/kWh and that no
increase in the price would be acceptable. To this extent, it also follows that none of the
proposals made in February that included a higher price were acceptable. It is also
evident from the June 19, 1998 approval that a 500 MW gross capacity was acceptable.
Leaving aside these two elements, what the Parties agreed with respect to the ANG and

the resulting net capacity is less than clear.

148. The letter sent by the Claimants on May 18, 1998, further corroborated by the
notes taken by the Claimants’ representatives at the meeting held on that date, are
however quite explicit about an agreement having been reached on the increase of the
ANG so as to attain an average of 465 MW net. A witness for the Claimants, Mr. Halil

Sunar, considers that this agreement was possible because “it met the Ministry of

“* Testimony of Mr. Metin Bash, April 10, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 8, at 1912-18.
“5 Written Statement of Dr. H. Yurdakul Yigitgiiden, August 25, 2003, para. 6.
“ Second Affidavit of Mr. Metin Bash, August 22, 2005, para. 12.

39

Energy’s primary concerns, that the Project was structured as a Turkish limited liability
company, the installed gross capacity was 500 MW, and the average tariff remained at
4.98 cents/kWh.”*” In the view of Mr. Sunar, the Claimants explained at this time that
the power plant output would possibly have to exceed 500 MW, but the proposal was
acceptable to MENR “because the only issue of concern for the MENR was the net

amount of electricity delivered to TEAS.”**

149. However, Respondent denies that this meeting ever took place and it has
produced no record evidencing that it was held. Furthermore, no net figure is
mentioned in the June 19, 1998 approval. The Respondent’s argument that no Turkish
official allegedly involved in these discussions had the authority to commit the Ministry
on such a major issue is persuasive given the hierarchical structure of the Turkish public
administration and MENR.”” But, in the opinion of the Tribunal, as a letter was later
sent by Claimants confirming their understanding, the Respondent had the obligation to
clarify the matter and to reply to the letter if it did not accept that such an understanding

had been reached. It never did so.

150. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ evidence in respect of the meaning of the
May 18, 1998 meeting was challenged at the hearing when it was revealed that the
meeting had been conducted in Turkish. The non-Turkish speaking PSEG
representatives participating in the meeting, according to the evidence of Mr. Clark
Moseley, understood that MENR officials had agreed because of “their body language,

5° This evidence is far from

their actions, nodding of heads, that sort of thing.
persuasive and, in the view of the Tribunal, does not support the statement of those

witnesses that MENR had unequivocally agreed to the 465 MW net figure.*!

151. The Claimants have submitted additional evidence about the acceptance of the
465 net figure by the Respondent. This evidence pertains to the amendment of the
Concession Contract that the Claimants proposed on June 12 and June 17, 1998, which
was discussed at a meeting with MENR on June 25, 1998. A cash flow table
corresponding to the 500/465 figures was also submitted by the Claimants on July 23,

“7 Written Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, June 27, 2003, para. 69.

“® Fourth Written Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, December 9, 2005, para. 34.

*° Affidavit of Mr. Ahmet Oktay Kavas, September 13, 2005, para. 5; Second Affidavit of Mr. Haldun
Atif Danisman, March 10, 2006, para. 11.

*° Testimony of Mr. Clark Moseley, April 7, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1046-47.

5! Rejoinder Statement of Mr. Clark Moseley, November 20, 2003, para. 13; Fourth Written Statement of
Mr. Clark Moseley, December 6, 2005, para. 17.

40

1998. The first draft of the TEAS agreement indicated a figure of 465 net, as did the
first draft of the Plant Performance Report. Yet, all these documents were prepared by
the Claimants and none was explicitly accepted by MENR. The evidence of Claimants

is to the effect that neither of these documents was, in fact, rejected.

152. On the basis of the evidence adduced, the Tribunal has to determine whether a
firm agreement had been reached as a result of the May 18, 1998 meeting and the June
19, 1998 approval. The Tribunal cannot so conclude. The fact that the Claimants did
not sign the Concession Contract until December 10, 1998, while some valid reasons
having to do with the arbitration and force majeure clauses were offered, denotes some
real, uncertainty about the commercial terms that would finally be included. The
Tribunal must note at this point that the Claimants’ argument that they did not become
aware of the Respondent’s position until a year later is not convincing. The Respondent
has demonstrated that this was not the case since the Claimants were aware of the

wording of the Ministerial Approval soon after June 19, 1998.

153. The fact that MENR included the 465 figure in a draft amendment protocol on
March 19, 1999, has also been invoked by Claimants as evidence of the Ministry’s
agreement. The Respondent answers that this was due to a mistake in a draft which had
been sent earlier by the Claimants. The Tribunal has difficulty in accepting the
evidence of Respondent that this was a mistake. However, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that there was an agreement on this crucial question between the parties. The
Tribunal cannot make a definitive finding on the basis of evidence that is less than clear
of an agreement between the parties. It is not irrelevant to note that the fact that the
Claimants did refer to a 433.5 net figure in letters they sent on January 23, 2001, does
not constitute evidence that they had agreed to such net capacity after submission of the

Revised Mine Plan.

154. The Tribunal thus concludes, based on the totality of the evidence which it has
reviewed, that the commercial terms of the Project were not finalized on June 19, 1998,
and that negotiations did not end at that time. This became only too evident in the
months that followed as well as through 1999 and early 2000. Changing circumstances,
legislation and information led to continuing negotiations in the midst of what can only

be described as a very confusing setting.

155. The June 19, 1998 approval was another milestone in the process. Yet, the

omission of the net capacity cannot be filled in simply by relying on what would have

41

been agreed on February 13, 1998, May 18, 1998, or at any other time if the terms of
such agreements, as the Tribunal finds were not explicit and unequivocal. No binding
effect can be given to a document that only defines some of the key elements of the

commercial terms.

156. While the parties have discussed at length the translation of the Approval, the
fact is that no reference to other key factors of the commercial terms were included.
Such essential elements of the contractual relationship cannot be replaced by

assumptions based on translations or confusing understandings.

157. This conclusion, however, does not excuse the Respondent’s lack of diligence in
clarifying the issue as the negotiations progressed. While the Claimants did attempt to
clarify on numerous occasions what their understanding of the commercial terms was,
the Respondent, in many instances, remained silent. The Respondent’s explanations of
their silence were not convincing. Bureaucratic paper shuffling is not a credible

59
explanation.”

158. |The Respondent has presented to the Tribunal a detailed list in order to rebut the
Claimants’ accusation that many of their communications and proposals went
unanswered. The Tribunal has no reason to disagree with the Respondent’s
explanation.*? That is not the issue, however. The issue is that when presented by
Claimants with information — documents, letters — that did not reflect the Respondent’s
understanding, it did not record its objections or otherwise invited further discussions.
This lends support to the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent was rewriting the

script of the negotiations, even if it is not the case.

6. Were the Parties Engaged in Subsequent Negotiations in Bad Faith?

159. During the second half of 1998, the Project progressed slowly. There were no
major surprises. As noted, in December 1998 the Claimants signed the Concession
Contract and shortly thereafter MENR also signed. The friendly state of affairs,
however, did not last long. Soon after the Contract was signed, according to
Respondent, it became clear to MENR officials that the parties had different

understandings about the significance of the June 19, 1998 approval. A meeting to

* Testimony of Dr. H. Yurdakul Yigitgiiden, April 9, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 7, at 1793-95.
*} Respondent’s Post-hearing Brief, Annex A.

42

discuss these differences was held on May 26, 19996 and another on June 9, 1999. Two
new proposals by the Claimants followed on June 15 and 16, 1999.

160. The Respondent asserts that new financial calculations on the basis of the
500/465 MW concept translated in cost nearly twice as high as the cost MENR had
considered in February 1998; the US$380 million Turkey was willing to spend in
buying additional power, would have been further increased by US$378 million. On the
other hand, the Respondent maintains that a 500 MW gross capacity does not allow for
a 465 MW net output because of the high demand for electricity needed to operate the
plant.** The Respondent asserts that the new proposals presented in June 1999 were not
acceptable to MENR, because one increased the gross capacity to 545 MW while the
other also changed the gross capacity but with a different formula. These, in the
Respondent’s view, were more than reasonable grounds on which to withhold its

acceptance.

161. The Claimants regard MENR’s attitude at the time as a bad faith effort to reject
what had been agreed on June 19, 1998. The Claimants recall that in submissions made
by the Respondent during the jurisdictional phase of the present case, further
corroborated by some of its witness statements, the 500/433.5 MW figure allegedly
agreed to in February 1998 was at all times based on the tariff structure of the Revised
Mine Plan. The Claimants argue that the Respondent had available and actually used in
the negotiations that followed through 1999 the very cash flow tables of the Revised

Mine Plan, which indicated a specific availability factor that could not be ignored.

162. In the Claimants’ view, the only element that would have remained unchanged
was the price of electricity of 4.98 c/kWh, understood strictly as the “sales tariff,’ and
this was the reason why the Ministerial Approval expressly referred to the objective of
ensuring “that the average sale tariff of 4,98c/kWh shall remain unchanged.” The
Claimants also assert that the financial estimates made by MENR in May 1999 were

completely distorted, perhaps even deliberately so.

163. In spite of these difficulties, the Claimants explain that they were willing to

consider further accommodation of the tariff structure as long as it would cover the

** Affidavit of Ms. Selda Bilgig, September 1, 2003, para. 8.

‘5 Written Witness Statement of Mr. Halil Sunar, June 26, 2003, submitted in support of Claimants’
Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 98, in reference to the meeting with Mr. Ahmet Oktay Kavas of
the Ministry of Energy held on May 26, 1999; see also Ministry’s Memorandum on Konya-Ilgin Thermal
Power Plant Subject to BOT Model, May 26, 1999, Exhibit 32 to Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction.

4B

increased costs of the Revised Mine Plan. To this end, the Claimants believe, a higher
gross output of MW discussed in May and June 1999 would have made no difference to
the Respondent as it would remain committed only to the purchase of a given amount of
electricity resulting from the ANG each contract year. This would not have required
any additional investment by the Respondent. The Claimants assert that, in any event, a
500/465 figure was technically feasible because the equipment was designed to allow
for substantial margins, sufficient to support the internal need of electricity and still

meet the net generation for sale to TEAS.*°

164. The negotiations reached a new stage in the fall of 1999. On October 26, 1999,
the Claimants wrote to MENR proposing a new approach to unlock the negotiations: the
Project could be based on the 500/433.5 MW figures that the Ministry had allegedly
approved in February 1998, adjusting the tariff to 4.98 c/kWh. The Claimants assert
that they still understood that the availability factor was as reflected in the cash flow
tables from the Revised Mine Plan they had made available to Respondent for the

February 1998 meetings.

165. The letter of October 26, 1999, referred to the need to solve the question of the
effects of the change of the corporate structure to a limited liability company. The
Respondent argues that this request was made in bad faith since at that point the
Claimants were aware of the changes in the law that had offset such effects, but ignored
the question in order to increase their benefits. This issue has been addressed by the

Tribunal earlier.

166. The Respondent’s understanding about the availability factor, as explained
earlier, was different as it asserts that it believed that factor to be the same as that found
in the Feasibility Study and not the one in the Revised Mine Plan. This position was
confirmed in a MENR letter to the Claimants on November 9, 1999.°” The Respondent
also asserts that the new proposal from the Claimants was not at all new and had in fact
been rejected in February 1998. The Claimants interpret this stated position of MENR
as an abrupt change, never before expressed and developed in bad faith in order to kill

the project.**

S Second Written Statement of Mr. William Van Herwarde, February 18, 2005, paras. 15-17.

57 Affidavit of Ms. Selda Bilgic, March 27, 2003, para. 37; Affidavit of Mr. Mustafa Mendilcioglu,
September 15, 2005, para. 11.

** Rejoinder Statement of Mr. Clark Moseley, November 20, 2003, paras. 15-16.

44

167. The Claimants, however, were not easily discouraged, if such was the objective
of Respondent. Indeed, on February 10, 2000, the Claimants made yet another proposal
that was based on the figures the Ministry had said was the basis of its acceptance, that
is 500/433.5, with an availability factor lower than that of the Feasibility Study at an
average of 82.70%.°° The difference was that this new proposal would result in a
higher generation capacity in the debt-service years so as to produce enough revenue to
satisfy the lenders. The Claimants add that, overall, the Respondent’s cash outlay for

the life of the Project would remain the same.

168. MENR was not persuaded of the merits of this approach and stated on April 12,
2000, that only the exact pattern of the tariff structure of the Feasibility Study was only
acceptable. The Respondent considers that such proposal would have shifted even more
of a burden onto the Government as the availability for the first ten years would have
been above 90%, when the price per kWh was much higher. The Respondent asserts
that this proposal would have imposed an additional cost of US$536 million on the
Turkish Government. The Respondent further explains that this proposal departed from
the stated requirement of the November 9, 1999 letter to the effect of the availability

ratios “being stable over the years.”

169. The Project’s internal rate of return (IRR) causes an additional exchange of
accusations of bad faith. The Respondent argues that every proposal made by the
Claimants indicated a 15.4% IRR in spite of the fact that each such proposal was based
on different commercial terms, and that this was done to conceal the real figures from
MENR. At the hearing it became clear that while only the Project’s IRR had been
discussed by the parties, the equity IRR showed different results in the area of 18-
20%. An expert for the Respondent stated in this respect that with the Contract’s
ANG levels, the equity IRR would have fallen to 14%. Accordingly, the Project failed

to meet PSEG’s minimum equity return expectations since the outset.*!

170. In the Claimants’ submission, the uniform reference to a 15.4% figure was never
an issue in the discussions and negotiations and MENR never inquired about the

Project’s return. Since the legal requirement to maintain IRRs in the range of 16% was

*° Written Statement of Mr. Julian Beere, December 9, 2005, paras. 15-16.

© Cross-examination of Mr. Julian Beere by Mr. Samuel Boxerman, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts,
Vol. 4, at 784-85.

°! Second Expert Report of Mr. Robert Sansom, September 19, 2005, para. 73.

45

eliminated in 1996, the question had lost relevance.” In any event, in the Claimants’
view, the Project never in fact exceeded a 15.4% IRR.

171. The Tribunal must note, however, that witnesses for the Claimants accepted at

the hearing that the Project IRR had to be necessarily different in every proposal® and

that it had to change according to the different sets of conditions of the proposals.“

172. Perhaps much to the disappointment of the parties, the Tribunal does not find
bad faith in the negotiations undertaken after June 19, 1998, particularly in the context
of the 1999 and 2000 discussions on the tariff structure. There was definitely an interest
on the part of the Claimants to ensure a revenue sufficient to cover the higher costs of
the Project and, preferably, to have this revenue at hand in the front-end years so as to
meet the debt service requirements and promptly reach the financial close still pending.
There was definitely an interest on the part of the Turkish Government to keep the costs
as low as possible and not to bear expenditures that might be considered excessive. The

two interests never came to meet.

173. It is also quite clear to the Tribunal that there was in this situation a lack of
transparency on the part of MENR, which is particularly troublesome in connection
with the June 19, 1998 approval. It has never been explained that there was a difference
in the parties’ understanding notwithstanding the large number of petitions containing a
contrary point of view that the Claimants sent. It is also most troubling in connection
with the November 9, 1999 statement that the availability factor would still be the same
as in the Feasibility Study, which had not been raised before, not even in connection
with the Respondent’s understanding of the June 19, 1998 approval or the alleged
February 1998 agreement. The argument that this was implicit in the negotiations is not

only unpersuasive but neither does it help the case of MENR.

174. There is thus a cumulative lack of transparency that, short of bad faith, comes at
the very least close to negligence, compounded by the fact that various witnesses
admitted not having read key documents or taken appropriate action on them for long

periods.®

© Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, paras. 52-53.

© Testimony of Mr. Julian Beere, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 4, at 760-63.

“ Testimony of Mr. Robert Dougherty, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 4, at 929-33; Testimony
of Mr. Michael Rozensweig, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts. Vol. 6, at 1431.

5 Closing Statement of Ms. Carolyn Lamm, making reference to Messrs. Metin Basli and Ahmet Oktay
Kavas, April 11, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 9, at 2202-03.

46

175. Yet, the Tribunal also finds that the Claimants were not fully transparent in
connection with the unfolding events. The Claimants’ position was fully and clearly
stated throughout the negotiations. There are, however, two events with which the

Tribunal is not comfortable.

176. The first event concerns the October 26, 1999 letter and subsequent references to
the need to obtain compensation for the change in the corporate status. As concluded
earlier, it is plausible that at the time this letter was written, the conclusion about the
offsetting effects of the law was not final, but was certainly being discussed in detail
internally. The issue could have been raised in that letter or at any other point, but it
was not. As concluded above, nothing justifies that references to this matter kept
appearing at later points in time, despite the fact that the parties also have different
understandings about the context in which these references were made.® The Tribunal
does not pass judgment on the parties’ intentions, but simply notes that full transparency

would have helped to reach a genuine understanding.

177. The second event by which the Tribunal is even more troubled emerged during
the hearing on the merits. The Claimants have relied on the witness testimony of Mr.
Halil Sunar, a leading company executive in charge of the Project’s negotiation, to
support the argument that they were not aware of the content of the June 19, 1998
approval until a year later and that in the meantime the Project’s expenses had
continued.®’ Yet, Counsel for the Respondent demonstrated at the hearing that there
was evidence proving the contrary, in particular the lawyers’ billings to the Claimants
for meetings held with Mr. Sunar to discuss the ministerial approval on June 26, 1998,
and additional expenses for translations of such approval and related communications of

June 29, 1998.°°

178. The conclusion that inescapably follows is that Mr. Sunar was quite aware of the
content of the approval a few days after it was signed. Irrespective of the evidence, it
would have been quite surprising if the Claimants had not made their best efforts to
learn about the content of a document of such importance in the process, to which they

even assign binding effect.

S Testimony of Mr. Halil Sunar, April 5, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 3, at 448-50.

© Testimony of Mr. Halil Sunar, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 4, at 710-11.

°* Respondent’s Post-hearing Brief, paras. 25-26; Closing Statement of Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov, April
12, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 10, at 2471-73.

47

7. Did the World Bank and the IMF Apply Pressure on Turkey to Terminate the
Project?

179. One of the main allegations of the Claimants as to why the negotiations on the
Project ultimately failed is that the Government of Turkey changed its position on the
BOT approach as a result of pressure from the World Bank and the IMF in the context
of the discussion and approval of stand-by agreements and other loans essential to the
country’s economic recovery. The Respondent asserts in this respect that no such
pressure related to existing Projects or negotiations underway existed and that the

approach suggested by those international agencies only concerned future contracts.

180. The parties do not disagree that both the World Bank and the IMF unequivocally
made their views known to the Government of Turkey about the need to develop a
competitive energy market. This would eliminate electricity purchases by TEAS at
prices that could be higher than those charged to the consumer, a policy which had a
strong impact on the financial health of the country and the Treasury. Neither do the
parties disagree about the fact that this policy related to future projects. The
disagreement is about whether the issue also affected BOT projects already in the

process of negotiation.

181. The Claimants have submitted persuasive evidence that the changes sought by
the World Bank and the IMF also applied to projects under negotiation.” In the
“Turkey: Country Economic Memorandum: Structural Reforms for Sustainable
Growth” of September 15, 2000, it is stated, for example, that the “authorities project
that, based on existing projects under construction and additional projects for which
government guarantees have already been issued, supply will be sufficient to meet
market demand in the period 2003 — 2004 . . . and no further take-or-pay guarantees are

expected for projects coming on stream after 2002.””°

182. Turkey’s Letter of Intent with the IMF of December 9, 1999, also included a
commitment to limit new Treasury guarantees in its 2001 budget. More specifically the
Treasury explained to MENR in April 2000 that under the Stand-by Agreement with the

IMF, the Turkish government had decided “not to continue the transactions regarding

© Expert Report of Mr. Rex Pingle, December 9, 2005, paras. 62-82.

” See Turkey: Country Reforms for i Growth (In Two
Volumes) Volume I: Main Report, September 15, 2000, The World Bank, para. 183, submitted as C16
(selected paras.).

 

48

any new Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) projects . . . in particular, the BOT projects of
which concession contracts have been signed by your Ministry but the other

agreements, including the Treasury Guarantee, have not been signed.””!

183. The new policy resulted in the preparation of the list of 29 projects mentioned
above for which Treasury guarantees would be considered. Konya Ilgin was later added
to that list, but the Claimants explain that none of these projects ultimately came to
completion. The Electricity Market Law enacted on March 3, 2001, also reflected that

policy in eliminating Treasury guarantees and long-term energy sales agreements.

184. The broad macro-economic changes introduced in Turkey to overcome the crisis
directly impacted on any specific policy running contrary to their goals, among which
were the BOT projects. While there was no specific directive issued either by the
World Bank or the IMF affecting concession contracts that had already been executed, it
is not surprising that the Turkish Government was greatly reluctant to implement

projects that had not yet been finalized and closed.

185. While a witness for the Respondent testified that MENR only checked the
compatibility of projects with macroeconomic policies of the State Planning
Organization and the Treasury at the outset of the process,” another witness clearly
conveyed the view that MENR was well aware of the World Bank macroeconomic

concerns and had the relevant information.”

186. Irrespective of the precise impact of the dealings of the Turkish Government
with the World Bank and the IMF on this very project, it is clear that the changes of
policy involved were not conducive to furthering negotiations that already encountered
various other difficulties. This state of affairs may well have been one of the factors
contributing to the failure of negotiations. The Tribunal thus accepts the Claimants’
contention that the Respondent should have raised the change of policy openly and

discussed any possible consequences or lack thereof.

” Letter from Undersecretary of Treasury to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, April 28,
2000, Exhibit C124 to Claimants’ Memorial; see also discussion in Claimants’ Reply, para. 216, n. 427.
” Testimony of Mr. Metin Bash, April 10, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 8, at 1947-52.

® Testimony of Mr. Haldun Atif Danisman, April 10, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 8, at 2092-99.

49

8. Were the Claimants Arbitrarily Denied the Benefits of Law No. 4501?

187. The differences of opinion between the parties concerning the application made
by the Claimants to convert the Contract to private law status under Law No. 4501 have
been explained earlier. The essence of the difference is whether Article 7 of this Law
provides an automatic right to conversion as Claimants argue, or whether the conversion
requires a renegotiation of certain terms to rebalance the Contract as the Respondent

believes.

188. Within the purview of its understanding of the Law, MENR defined various
conditions that the applicants had to meet in order for the application to be forwarded
for approval to the Council of Ministers. The Respondent argues that, as the projects
would benefit from the change in status, the Government was entitled to part of these
added benefits, which in the case of Konya Ilgin related principally to updating the

escalation formula.

189. The parties first discussed the question of MENR’s authority under the Law. In
spite of different interpretations the parties have invoked about the intention of drafters
of the Law, the Tribunal first considers it quite improbable that in a highly
bureaucratized system of administration, an application would be forwarded
automatically to a higher political body without a detailed discussion with the relevant
technical service, in the present case MENR. This reality lends support to the

Respondent’s argument that there was no automatic forwarding entailed in the process.

190. The terms of Article 7 of the Law also confirm this point in stating that the
Council of Ministers “may” decide on the application. In this case, the agreement was
to be restated “by considering the necessary criterion to secure international financing
and similar implementational contracts of the administration,” within specific datelines.
This mandate appears to involve a degree of discretionary authority and technical
evaluation that the Council of Ministers would unlikely exercise on its own. The
Claimants explain that MENR’s involvement was only required because private
companies have no standing to apply to the Council of Ministers, an argument which is

not quite convincing.

191. The extent of that discretion is a different question. The Respondent contends
that the mandate of Article 7 allowed MENR to seek improvements to existing

concession contracts that would benefit the Ministry, especially since the private law

50

status or international arbitration allowed under that Law would have resulted in lower
financing costs for the Project. This interpretation goes as far as to state that “the
Ministry had the authority to revise existing concession contracts when converting them
174

into private law contracts” under Law 4501” or even under Turkish administrative

law.”°

192. For the Respondent, the Claimants themselves envisaged the renegotiation of
certain aspects of the Contract on this occasion as reflected in a memorandum of Allen

& Overy, legal advisors to Citibank in respect of this Project.”°

193. The Claimants argue, on the contrary, that MENR had no authority to undertake
new negotiations as a condition of the submission of the application to the Council of

Ministers.”

The Claimants assert that, in any event, the proposed terms would have
resulted in making the Project wholly unfinanceable as explained by a witness for the
Claimants.”* This result contradicted the purpose of the Law. Moreover, the Claimants
assert that none of these advantages would have resulted in lower financing costs but

would only have made possible the obtaining of the required financing.

194. The Tribunal is persuaded by this last argument. If the whole purpose of the
Law was to improve conditions of international financing for BOT projects by means of
their conversion to private law status, following the long discussion about the status of
such projects outlined above, it would make no sense to allow for a renegotiation that
could have ended with the opposite result. This means that under Article 7 of the Law,
MENR indeed had a role to play. This role was to make sure that the conversion was in
harmony with the criterion to secure international financing and that the pattern of other
similar contracts was observed, a mandate which does not allow for a full-fledged
renegotiation as was apparently envisaged by MENR in this case. In any event, the full
revision of concession contracts was a prerogative of the Danistay which MENR could

not have supplanted.

™ Affidavit of Dr. H. Yurdakul Yigitgiiden, September 13, 2005, para. 20; Affidavit of Mr. Cumhur
Ersiimer, September 14, 2005, paras. 15~16.
*5 Legal Opinion of Mr. Miimtaz Soysal, September 4, 2003, paras. 33-35.
%6 “ Opening Statement of Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov, April 4, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 2, at 322-23.
7 Legal Opinion of Professors Mahmut Birsel and Arzu Aksag Yesilirmak, December 9, 2005, para. 25.
*® Written Statement of Mr. Julian Beere, December 9, 2005, para. 19.

51

9. Did the Respondent Interfere with the Issuance of the Treasury Guarantee and
Supplementary Agreements?

195. The Claimants’ argument about the issue of the Treasury Guarantee explained
above is mainly based on the February 2002 ruling of the Constitutional Court. This
tuling nullified Article 8 (1) of the Electricity Market Law because it eliminated the
right to have a Treasury Guarantee issued in pursuance of concession contracts. Since
the Treasury Guarantee is an integral part of the concession contracts, the Court indeed
found that there was no discretion on the part of the Treasury to deny such a guarantee

if MENR had made a binding commitment to this effect in the contract.”

196. Although the Respondent argues that Article 15 of the Contract in referring to
the Company as the entity which shall conclude agreements such as the Treasury
Guarantee, imposes an obligation only on the Claimants and not on MENR, the
Tribunal has no difficulty in finding that this Article can only be understood as
committing both parties to conclude such agreements. If the Government does not
fulfill its own obligation the Claimants cannot attain the result envisaged by the

Contract.

197. The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s argument that the Guarantee
could not have been denied because it was never requested. Even if this were true
formally, in light of the history of the case there can be no doubt that the administration
was moving towards a policy that aimed at the restriction and ultimate elimination of
the Treasury guarantees. The list of 29 projects speaks for itself, and the fact that

Konya Ilgin was added in May 2002 does not change the trend.

198. The Respondent also argued in this matter that the Treasury Guarantee was in
fact the last step after a series of other agreements,*’ beginning with the commercial
terms of the Project, followed by the Energy Sales Agreement and the Fund Agreement.
It has argued that the Guarantee could not be issued until the terms of such other
agreements were completed since the precise obligations and financial commitments to

be guaranteed were only known at that point.*! A witness for the Respondent stated

” Legal Opinion of Mr. Ergun Ozbudun, February 14, 2005, paras. 16-19.

*° Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 67, n.103, with reference to the Expert Report of Ms. Dianne Rudo,
March 15, 2005, para. 134-36; Affidavit of Mr. Arif Erden, September 13, 2005, para. 10.

S! Respondent’s Post-hearing Brief, paras. 54-55.

52

that the Treasury only intervened after the parties had reached an agreement on the basic

parameters of the project in the form of a firm draft.*”

199. This argument of the Respondent is convincing. The purpose of the Guarantee
is for the Treasury to back specific financial obligations which the State entities
undertake in light of those other agreements, with particular reference to the amount to
be paid for the electricity each year. A witness for the Respondent explained that one of
the “primary roles of Treasury guarantees in power projects is to guarantee payments by
TEAS under any ESA. Treasury guarantees also ensure that payments by the EEF to
the project company will be made pursuant to the terms provided in any Fund

Agreement.”*?

200. A witness for the Claimants admitted that, to the extent that the Project would be
producing more electricity, TEAS would have to pay more under the Energy Sales
Agreement.“ This is why the Treasury Guarantee is decisive in ensuring international

financing.** But it is obvious that no Treasury would issue a blank guarantee.

201. This conclusion does not discharge the Respondent from the obligations that it
might have had in pursuing the successful completion of those other agreements. It
does mean that the fact that the Guarantee was not issued at that time is not in itself a
breach of the Respondent’s contractual obligations if the required terms for so doing

were not available.

202. A similar pattern characterizes the negotiations concerning the Energy Sales
Agreement and the Fund Agreement. There can be no doubt either that, under the new
macroeconomic policy Turkey was pursuing to put an end to the crisis, these kinds of
agreements were not quite welcome. Yet, the issue here is whether these agreements
could be concluded in the event that the commercial terms of the Contract had not been

finalized.

203. The Tribunal concluded earlier that the commercial terms of the Project were not
completed in light of the parties’ different understandings. In such circumstances, it
was not possible to complete either a Sales agreement when the amount of electricity to
be purchased was not defined or a Fund agreement when the amount of money required
© Testimony of Mr. Sedat Gal, April 9, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 7, at 1826-29.

Affidavit of Mr. Sedat Cal, September 14, 2005, paras. 6, 15; Affidavit of Mr. Nurhan Uyduranoglu
Karaca, September 14, 2005, para. 8.

Testimony of Mr. Halil Sunar, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 4, at 718-23.
§5 Written Statement of Mr. John Watkins, February 18, 2005, para. 19.

53

by TEAS to that effect was not known. This is the chain of definitions and agreements
that ultimately ends up with the Treasury Guarantee. As noted by a witness for the
Claimants, the Treasury would guarantee payments by TEAS and EEF, thus making it

necessary to complete these arrangements beforehand.*°

204. The Claimants are right in arguing that progress was made with the technical
services responsible for those agreements, including questions relating to the arbitration
clause. It is also quite evident that such services would not finalize any agreement
without being specifically backed up by the terms previously defined by MENR in
respect of the commercial terms of the Project or even the Danistay in respect of the
amendment of the dispute settlement clauses of the Contract. As these definitions and
terms were not forthcoming, neither was the approval of the supplementary agreements

based on them.

205. Again this conclusion does not discharge the Respondent of its obligations
concerning the overall conclusion of the Project, but it does mean that in itself the
situation of the supplementary agreements cannot be considered a breach of the

Contract.

206. The Claimants also complained about MENR interfering with the Ministry of the
Environment so as to prevent the approval of the Project’s Environmental Impact
Assessment. However, as this approval was given on April 11, 2002, there is no point

in the Tribunal examining the complaint.

10. Did the Claimants Abandon the Project?

207. The parties also exchanged accusations as to which of them was ultimately
responsible for the failure of the negotiations. The Claimants argue that the Respondent
abruptly changed its policy and actively interfered with the agreements attained or under
negotiation in an arbitrary manner and made the ultimate completion of the Project
impossible. The Respondent asserts that at all times it pursued negotiations with
interest, diligence and good faith but that ultimately the Claimants decided to abandon
the Project because it had proved to be unfinanceable and technically unviable. In the
Respondent’s view, the Project was actually abandoned before the alleged expropriation

on March 3, 2001, namely the date of the enactment of the Electricity Market Law.

*© Fourth Written Statement of Mr. Mesut Gakmak, December 9, 2005, para. 13.

54

208. The Tribunal is convinced by the evidence adduced by the Claimants that they
did not abandon the Project or walk away from the negotiations. In fact, the record is
plentiful of letters, proposals, meetings and other activities that were conducted
throughout the year 2000 and early 2001 revealing that there was an ongoing effort to
unlock the negotiations. The Respondent incorrectly considered the Claimant’s
proposal of February 10, 2000, as a “final” one. That letter does refer to “final figures”
as every option appeared to have been exhausted, but there were many other subsequent
initiatives and which, if successful, would have ended up with different figures. Neither
was this an obstacle to the efforts made in achieving progress in many other matters

related to the Contract.

209. The fact of the matter is that by early 2001 the deadlock was total and there was
no point in taking additional initiatives. This was understood by both the Claimants and
the Respondent who at that time ceased to devote additional time and resources to a
project which obviously offering few or no perspectives. A witness for the Claimants
mentioned the numerous efforts made to persuade Turkey to reconsider its views, but to

no avail and in the end the only choice left was to begin this arbitration.*”

11. Were the Technical and Economic Aspects of the Project Feasible?

210. The discussion about who was ultimately responsible for the failure of the
Project also relates to its technical and economic viability, a matter on which the parties

also have very different views.

211. The Respondent asserts that by early 2000 the Project was no longer
economically feasible and quite likely would never reach financial close. This was the
result of the dramatic increases in mine costs discussed earlier, as well as of the increase
in diesel fuel costs. The Respondent contends that, moreover, the CFB technology of
the power plant was unproven and could not handle the necessary availability

requirements, a matter also discussed above.

212. In the Respondent’s submission, the Project could not obtain financing in these

conditions as it involved too many unmitigated risks,** including the absence of an

87 Written Statement of Mr. Michael Thomson, December 9, 2005, para. 21.
8® Rejoinder Expert Report of Mr. Robert Sansom, March 17, 2006, paras. 10-15.

55

arbitration clause and the technical risks associated with the mine and the power plant.”
The Respondent further asserts that the Project’s finance lacked the necessary

documents for it to be considered by international or national credit agencies.”

213. The Claimants have exactly the opposite view as they contend that the Project
was technically and economically viable. The technology had been proven in other
power plants, the rise in fuel costs was not as severe as depicted by the Respondent and
its effects would be mitigated by the adjustments based on the US Consumer Price
Index. In addition, the technology for the operation of the mine had various feasible
options. In these conditions, the Claimants further maintain that the Project would have

met without difficulty the ANG targets.”!

214. Were it not for the actions of the Respondent, the Claimants argue that the
financing of the Project would have been achieved without question and that the
necessary documents required by credit agencies would have been supplied as the
applications progressed in these institutions, in line with usual practice. According to
the Claimants, what mattered for financing purposes, was the adequate debt/equity ratio
of the Project, which was better than in other projects financed by EximBank. In any
event, the Claimants argue that there were alternative sources of financing if necessary.

The assessment of the financial advisors was equally encouraging.

215. The Claimants also argue that none of the risks the Respondent mentions as
obstacles to obtaining financing were an issue or could not have been resolved
satisfactorily. These include legal matters such as the shareholders’ agreement, as well
as technical or economic issues, such as the fuel supply risk, the price of diesel, the
mine technology and the plant CFB technology. The lack of an international arbitration
clause was the only real difficulty, the Claimants explain, but even there progress was

being made with TEAS and the Energy Fund, as discussed above.

216. Admittedly there were many unknown factors about the technical aspects of the

plant and the mine, and the experts have extensively discussed the feasibility of one and

® Rejoinder Expert Report of Ms. Dianne Rudo, March 15, 2006, paras. 88-91; Testimony of Ms. Dianne
Rudo, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 6, at 1543-52.

°° Expert Report of Ms. Dianne Rudo, September 19, 2005, paras. 44-62.

°! Written Statement of Mr. Dominique Chaniolleau, December 9, 2005, para. 4; Written Statement of
Mr. Scott Darling, December 9, 2005, para. 6; Expert Report of Mr. Robert Gamble, December 9, 2005,
para. 11; Written Statement of Mr. John Philipp, November 19, 2003, paras. 17-19; Second Written
Statement of Mr. John Philipp, February 18, 2005, paras. 11-15; Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, n. 30.

56

the other, including by way of the comparison with other plants.”

Nevertheless, the
Tribunal is persuaded that the project was feasible. The successful operation of the
Turow CFB plants manufactured by Foster Wheeler, the same manufacturer as in

°3 A witness for the Claimants also

Konya Ilgin, is sufficient evidence to this effect.
referred to the successful operation of various other plants of the same kind

worldwide.”

217. More convincing still is the Claimants’ argument that Foster Wheeler would
have provided significant performance guarantees to the Project, which in the
discussions underway with the Claimants would reach as much as 30% of the total EPC
contract price, or US$141 million in potential liability. As a witness for the Claimants
explained that Foster Wheeler would pay liquidated damages by means of “completion

guarantees” and “performance guarantees.””*

218. Many unknown factors also surround the question of international financing, but
the Tribunal finds the Claimants’ evidence to this effect persuasive. First, it would have
been impossible to secure the necessary capital contribution if the Project were not
financially sound. The same rationale would guide the decision of lenders.”* Although
a witness for the Respondent set out the risks which the Project faced, including the
difficult integration of the mine with the power plant,” the Tribunal is certain that no
one would have raised the necessary financing if such risks had remained unmitigated.

Thus this uncertainty factor would have been eliminated.

219. Next, experienced companies and advisors would have made sure that the
appropriate documentation were available at the right time for anyone deciding to
provide the necessary loans.** And lastly, witnesses have adequately described the

process of approval by lending agencies and shown by witness testimony evidencing

” Expert Report of Mr. Robert Gamble, December 9, 2005; Rejoinder Expert Report of Mr. Robert
Sansom, March 17, 2006, paras. 123 et seq.

°} Written Statement of Mr. Scott Darling, December 9, 2005, para. 13.

°* Third Written Statement of Mr. John Philipp, December 9, 2005, para. 12.

°5 Written Statement of Mr. Dominique Chaniolleau, December 9, 2005, paras. 21-24.

°° Reply Statement of Mr. Michael Austell, December 5, 2005, para. 9.

°7 Testimony of Ms. Dianne Rudo, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 6, at 1537-44.

°S Written Statement of Mr. Ian Catterall, November 21, 2003, paras. 6-7; Second Written Statement of
Mr. Ian Catterall, February 15, 2005, paras. 12-14.

57

that the Project was not misguided in this respect and followed a normal time

schedule.”
III. Considerations on Liability

220. As it is by now customary in investment arbitration, the aggrieved party invokes
the breach of every BIT clause dealing with the standards of the investor’s protection,
while the Respondent vehemently denies any breach. This the Claimants have done in
the present case, with the sole exception that they have not claimed direct expropriation

of the investment. The Government of Turkey denies any breach of the BIT.

221. The Claimants argue first that the Respondent violated the standard of fair and
equitable treatment, failed to provide full protection and security, impaired the
maintenance, use and enjoyment of the investment by arbitrary and discriminatory
measures and failed to observe the obligations it entered into with regard to the
investment. The Claimants also argue that the investment was expropriated through
measures tantamount to expropriation. The Tribunal will examine each of these claims

separately.

A. Was there a Breach of Fair and Equitable Treatment?

1. The Legal Arguments of the Parties

222. The Claimants argue that the fair and equitable treatment standard of Article II
(3) of the BIT has been breached. Under this Article “Investments shall at all times be
accorded fair and equitable treatment . . . in a manner consistent with international law,”
while the Preamble of the BIT recalls that such treatment is “desirable in order to
maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum effective utilization of

economic resources... .”

100

223. In light of recent decisions, ~ the Claimants assert that the standard specifically

imposes the obligation not to act arbitrarily, in a manner that is grossly unfair and

°° Testimony of Ms. Carol Hessler, April 7, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1175-77; Expert Report
of Ms. Carol Hessler, December 6, 2005, paras. 34-44; Testimony of Mr. Sikander Zaman, April 7, 2005,
Hearing transcripts, Vol. 5, at 1151-55; Written Statement of Mr. Sikander Zaman, December 9, 2005,
paras. 78-83; Expert Report of Mr. Frank Langhammer, December 8, 2005, paras. 88-98.

58

unjust, or that will be idiosyncratic and harmful. It also requires transparency and
candor, particularly in administrative proceedings, as well as observance of the
representations reasonably relied upon by the investor and sanctions acts performed in

bad faith.

224. The Claimants assert in this respect that the Respondent’s conduct was arbitrary,
particularly because, as in the Tecmed case, prior decisions relied upon by the investor
were revoked. In the Claimants’ view, such arbitrary conduct is apparent in the actions
of MENR when it denied the approval of the revised tariff structure of June 19, 1998,
and later insisted on the availability factors of the Feasibility Study. The Claimants
assert that there was also arbitrariness in the governmental disregard of the

Constitutional Court’s decision safeguarding vested contract rights.

225. Following the M7D and the CME cases, the Claimants next argue that their
legitimate expectations originating in government assurances were also entirely
disregarded, particularly since the legal and business environment of the investment was
dramatically altered, as held by the Tribunal in OZPC in connection with the violation
of fair and equitable treatment. The Claimants recall that Article 48 of the Turkish
Constitution provides that the State “shall take measures to ensure private enterprises

operate...under conditions of security and stability.”

226. The Claimants argue that the changes in the law directed at enabling the
development of BOT projects (courting foreign investors to this end) as well as the
approval of the Feasibility Study, the Implementation Contract, the required Letter of
Undertaking, the assurance that a Treasury Guarantee would be issued and that the
Energy Sales Agreement and Fund Agreement would be signed, together with further
legal changes in Law 4501, all gave rise to legitimate expectations. They also allege
that these expectations were later frustrated when the Respondent revoked agreements

and approvals and took away contractual rights.'°!

227. The Claimants also contend that the Respondent abused its sovereign
prerogatives and authority in using its regulatory power to deprive the Project in 1999
and 2000 of the June 19, 1998 approval of an increased capacity, when it prevented the

finalization of the supplementary contracts and attempted to force the Claimants to give

 

100 MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7), Award of
May 25, 2004; Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3),
Award of April 30, 2004.

'! T egal Opinion of Professor Sait Giiran, February 18, 2005, para. 2.

59

up concession rights in connection with the negotiations on the application under Law
4501. A legal opinion by Professors Birsel and Yegilirmak notes that “under the
principles of good faith and trust in the administration, it is our view that the Claimants
had justified grounds to rely on the agreement of the MENR to increase the net capacity

of the power plant to 465 MW.”!

228. According to Claimants, such abuse of regulatory power ultimately resulted in
the termination of the Project through a process characterized by a total lack of
transparency and candor, within the meaning of the Metalclad, Maffezini, Tecmed and
OEPC decisions. This failure, in the Claimant’s view, finally led to the unreasonable

rejection of all proposals aimed at breaking the deadlock in negotiations.

229. As a consequence, the Claimants argue that good faith, the most basic
component of fair and equitable treatment, was deliberately breached so as to obstruct
the completion of the Project, revealing in passing the complete lack of administrative

competence and effectiveness as required in recent awards.'°°

230. A legal opinion submitted by the Claimants also underlines that the duty of good
faith “includes refraining from behavior that may mislead the other party, the immediate
notice to the other party when that party is understood to be acting on the basis of a
misinterpretation of one’s statements or acts, and acting with a genuine intent and desire
to complete negotiations with the aim of reaching an agreement with the other party.”'™
The Claimants thus conclude that the Respondent failed to maintain even a minimally

adequate legal, regulatory and administrative structure to support the investment.

231. The Respondent dismisses these allegations on the ground that the Project was
technically and financially unworkable and that every single discussion led to a dead
end as substantial defects could not be remedied. According to the Respondent, the

Project implied risks which result from business decisions and for which Turkey cannot

‘2 T egal Opinion of Professors Mahmut Birsel and Arzu Aksag Yesilirmak, February 18, 2005, para. 27.

'°3 Gami Investments, Inc. v. The Government of the United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Award of
November 15, 2004; Occidental Exploration and Production Company y. The Republic of Ecuador,
LCIA Case No. UN 3467, Award of July 1, 2004; Pope and Talbot, Inc. v. The Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, April 10, 2001.

'4 T egal Opinion of Professors Mahmut Birsel and Arzu Aksag Yesilirmak, June 27, 2003, para. 53.

60

be blamed.’ An investor might end up disappointed, but BITs are not designed to

guard against disappointment. '°

232. In the Respondent’s view, fair and equitable treatment is a standard that depends

08

on the facts of each case,'’ has to be applied with flexibility!’ and, in any event,

requires a high standard of proof.'® Only acts showing a willful neglect of duty far

110

below international standards ~ and bad faith would qualify under this standard.

233. On the basis of its understanding of the facts as explained above, the Respondent
asserts that since no common agreement was embodied in the June 19, 1998 Ministerial
Approval, there was no prior decision that could have been later revoked by MENR.
That approval was, it is further maintained, an internal document that created no rights

for a private party.

234. In the Respondent’s view, the situation is thus clearly distinguishable from all
the cases cited by the Claimants as reasonable expectations had originated in formal
decisions or permits on which the investors had relied. The Respondent asserts that
here there was a willful misunderstanding by the Claimants, just as there was bad faith
in concealing essential facts or issues. But even if there had been an approved
agreement, the Respondent argues further, there would still be no violation of the fair

and equitable treatment in light of the Genin award.!'!

235. For the same reason, the Respondent states that there could have been no breach
of the Treasury Guarantee or the supplementary agreements as there was no agreement
on the terms of such contracts. An unfinished negotiation cannot be converted into a
Treaty breach, contrary to the Claimants argumentation. The Respondent add that the
Contract did not either guarantee that any such agreements would be successfully

concluded, but only that there was a right to negotiate those agreements.

'°5 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Award of November
13, 2000, para. 64.
'°6 Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/97/2), Award of November 1, 1999, para. 83.

"7 Mondev International, Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case ARB/99/2), Award of October
11, 2002, para. 118.
'8 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Award of April
30, 2004, para. 99.
' §.D. Mayers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of November 13, 2000, para.

263.

"0 Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/2), Award of June 25, 2001, para. 367.

"Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/2), Award of June 25, 2001, paras. 370-71.

61

236. The Respondent argues that the Claimants only had a right to apply for a private
law contract under Law 4501, and that the Law offered no guarantee that such private
contract would be automatically granted. It further argues that arbitrariness and
discrimination are thus unfounded allegations, which could not lead to the frustration of
any legitimate expectation. For the Respondent, there can be no legitimate expectation
that the proposed revisions of the Contract would be accepted no matter the cost to the

Government.

237. The Respondent concludes that it acted in an equitable, transparent, and
reasonable manner, in good faith and full compliance with the domestic law, and that
there is thus no breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard under the Treaty.
The Respondent further concludes that absent evidence to the contrary, negotiations
must be presumed to be done in good faith,'!? and in light of both the UNIDROIT
Principles of International Commercial Contracts (Article 2.1.15) and the Wintershall

case,'' there is no obligation to reach an agreement or liability for failure to do so.

2. The Tribunal’s Findings

238. The standard of fair and equitable treatment has acquired prominence in
investment arbitration as a consequence of the fact that other standards traditionally
provided by international law might not in the circumstances of each case be entirely
appropriate. This is particularly the case when the facts of the dispute do not clearly
support the claim for direct expropriation, but when there are notwithstanding events
that need to be assessed under a different standard to provide redress in the event that

the rights of the investor have been breached.

239. Because the role of fair and equitable treatment changes from case to case, it is
sometimes not as precise as would be desirable. Yet, it clearly does allow for justice to
be done in the absence of the more traditional breaches of international law standards.
This role has resulted in the concept of fair and equitable treatment acquiring a standing
on its own, separate and distinct from that of other standards, albeit many times closely
related to them, and thus ensuring that the protection granted to the investment is fully

safeguarded.

"2 Mobil Oil Iran, Inc. v. Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and National Iranian Oil Company,
Award No. 311-74-3 of July 14, 1987, para. 160.
'3 Wintershall, A.G. et al v. Government of Qatar, 28 1.L.M. 795, 814-15 (1989).

62

240. Recent awards have applied this standard to the assessment of rights affected by

* arbitrary modification of the regulatory framework!!> or

inconsistent State action,!!
endless normative changes to the detriment of the investor’s business and the need to
secure a predictable and stable legal environment.''® This includes most significantly
the issue of legitimate expectations which, as the Tribunal in Tecmed concluded,
requires a treatment that does not “detract from the basic expectations on the basis of

which the foreign investor decided to make the investment.”!!”

241. Although the Claimants, as noted above, provide a long list of legitimate
expectations that in their view have not been met, the Tribunal is not persuaded that all
such complaints relate to legitimate expectations. Legitimate expectations by definition
require a promise of the administration on which the Claimants rely to assert a right that

needs to be observed.''*

242. In fact, the Claimants invoke issues on which the Tribunal has found that no
promise or commitment had been made by the Respondent. This is particularly the case
of the lack of evidence about the alleged agreement of the commercial terms of the
Project. Had these terms been missing, no Energy Sales Agreement or Fund
Agreement, and ultimately no Treasury Guarantee could have been issued. As no such
agreements were reached, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent is right in arguing that

they could not be later revoked.

243. Neither does the Tribunal find merit in the Claimants’ argument that the
investment was actively requested by the Turkish Government. True enough, the whole
BOT policy was built on the premise that foreign investments would be needed,
encouraged and welcome,''? but this was a matter of general policy that did not entail a

promise made specifically to the Claimants about the success of their proposed project.

244. The evidence in fact points to the contrary conclusion. A witness for the

Claimants testified that two high-ranking corporate executives made two short trips to

"4 MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Award
of May 25, 2004, para. 164).

"8 Técnicas Medioambientales. Tecmed, S.A. v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of May 29, 2003, para. 154.

"6 Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN
3467, Award of July 1, 2004, para. 183.

"Técnicas Medioambientales. Tecmed, S.A. v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of May 29, 2003, para. 154.

"8 See J, Decision No. 349, World Bank Administrative Tribunal, 2006.

"° Opening Statement of Ms. Carolyn Lamm, April 3, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 1, at 80-81.

63

Turkey, because they “wanted to meet with senior government officials, make sure
they’re aware of the Project, make sure that they viewed this as a beneficial
development that they were happy to host in their country.”'?° It thus appears that it

was rather the Claimants who approached the Turkish Government.

245. In the present case, the Claimants contend, moreover, that the breach of fair and
equitable treatment goes as far as to have reached the level of bad faith and have
entailed the deliberate attempt by the Respondent to destroy the investment without
paying compensation. The Tribunal, however, has found no evidence of bad faith or
ultimately of a kind of conspiracy to take away legitimately acquired rights that could
result in the deliberate termination of the Project. To that extent, the role of fair and
equitable treatment in this case does not bring the standard near to expropriation or

other forms of taking.

246. The Tribunal is persuaded nonetheless that the fair and equitable treatment
standard has been breached, and that this breach is serious enough as to attract liability.
Short of bad faith, there is in the present case first an evident negligence on the part of
the administration in the handling of the negotiations with the Claimants. The fact that
key points of disagreement went unanswered and were not disclosed in a timely
manner, that silence was kept when there was evidence of such persisting and
aggravating disagreement, that important communications were never looked at, and
that there was a systematic attitude not to address the need to put an end to negotiations
that were leading nowhere, are all manifestations of serious administrative negligence
and inconsistency. The Claimants were indeed entitled to expect that the negotiations

would be handled competently and professionally, as they were on occasion.

247. Secondly, there is a breach of the obligation to accord fair and equitable standard
of treatment in light of abuse of authority, evidenced in particular, but not exclusively,
by the discussion of the Claimants’ application under Law 4501. As noted above,
MENR’s demands for a renegotiation went far beyond the purpose of the Law and
attempted to reopen aspects of the Contract that were not at issue in this context or even

within MENR’s authority.

248. Inconsistent administrative acts are also evident in this case in respect of some

matters. On occasion the administration would ignore rights granted by law as a matter

2° Testimony of Mr. Robert Dougherty, April 6, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 4, at 815-16; Written
Statement of Mr. Robert Dougherty, December 9, 2005, para. 9.

64

of policy or practice. This was particularly the case of the foreign branch corporate
structure, recognized under the law, the Implementation Contract, the Letter of
Undertaking and the Danistay, but was nevertheless ignored by MENR from February
1998 onward when it demanded the establishment of a Turkish corporation. A witness
for the Claimants testified that since 1996 “the various groups determining energy

policy in Turkey have not worked harmoniously.”'?!

249. Similar was the situation in respect of the Constitutional Court decision
upholding the rights acquired under a contract, which was simply ignored by MENR in
its dealings with the Claimants. Such inconsistent acts might be unlawful under Turkish
law, but in light of the provisions of the Treaty they are also in breach of the standard of

fair and equitable treatment.

250. Thirdly, the Tribunal also finds that the fair and equitable treatment obligation
was seriously breached by what has been described above as the “roller-coaster” effect
of the continuing legislative changes. This is particularly the case of the requirements
relating, in law or practice, to the continuous change in the conditions governing the
corporate status of the Project, and the constant alternation between private law status
and administrative concessions that went back and forth. This was also the case, to a

more limited extent, of the changes in tax legislation.

251. Even if some of these changes were introduced to facilitate investments and the
conclusion of projects, and to that extent cannot be open to criticism under this
standard, the administration again failed to address the consequences of such changes in
the negotiations and to accommodate the factors in the equation under discussion, with

particular reference to the commercial terms of the Project.

252. Various examples of the breach of fair and equitable treatment obligation are to
be found in the record of this case. Among such breaches, the most prominent are
indeed those that have been discussed earlier in connection with the administration’s
negligence in the handling of the negotiations with the Claimants: an abuse of authority
by MENR, in particular with respect to the latter’s demands for renegotiation in
connection with the Claimants' application under Law 4501, and the numerous changes

in the legislation and inconsistencies in the administration’s practice, in particular with

1 Third Written Statement of Mr. Ahmet Eltekin, February 18, 2005, para. 18; Reply Statement of Mr.
Ahmet Eltekin, December 9, 2005, para. 8.

65

respect to the corporate status of the Project Company and the legal status of the

concession.

253. The aggregate of the situations explained raise the question of the need to ensure
a stable and predictable business environment for investors to operate in, as required not
only by the Treaty but also by the Turkish Constitution as noted above. This is what the
United States Technical Memorandum on the BIT had very much in mind when it
referred to fair and equitable treatment as a standard “that can be invoked in arbitration
to protect investments against possible vagaries of the host-Party’s national laws and

their administration.”

254. The handling of the case shows the exact opposite. Stability cannot exist in a
situation where the law kept changing continuously and endlessly, as did its
interpretation and implementation. While in complex negotiations, such as those
involved in this case, many changes will occur beyond the control of the government, as
was particularly the case with the increased costs, the issue is that the longer term
outlook must not be altered in such a way that will end up being no outlook at all. In
this case, it was not only the law that kept changing but notably the attitudes and

policies of the administration.

255. While noting that no investor “may reasonably expect that the circumstances
prevailing at the time the investment is made remain totally unchanged,” the Tribunal in
Saluka held that the investor can still expect that the conduct of the host State
subsequent to the investment will be fair and equitable as the investor’s decision to
invest is based on “an assessment of the state of the law and the totality of the business

environment at the time of the investment.”!”*

256. Even if all the above conduct were to comply with good faith, which the
Tribunal has no reason not to believe, there still would be an evident breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard under the Treaty, and under Turkish law. To the extent

that this caused damage, compensation will of necessity be awarded.

'2 Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of
March 17, 2006, paras. 301, 305.

66

B. Was there a Breach of the Obligation to Provide Full Protection and Security?

257. The Claimants have also alleged a breach of the obligation to provide full
protection and security as a separate heading of liability. This obligation is indeed
embodied in Article II (3) of the Treaty. The Claimants have advanced two arguments
in this respect. The first is that, following CME, full protection and security includes
the adverse effects of the amendments of the law or administrative actions on the
investment. The second argument is that, following OEPC, the breach of fair and
equitable treatment automatically entails the absence of full protection and security.

The Respondent opposes both arguments.

258. The Tribunal is mindful of the fact that this particular standard has developed in
the context of the physical safety of persons and installations, and only exceptionally
will it be related to the broader ambit noted in CME. To the extent that there is such an
exceptional situation, the connection with fair and equitable treatment becomes a very

close one.

259. The Tribunal does not find that in the present case there has been any question of
physical safety and security, nor has any been alleged. Neither does the Tribunal find
that there is an exceptional situation that could qualify under this standard as a separate
heading of liability. The anomalies that have been found are all included under the
standard of fair and equitable treatment discussed above. This heading of liability is

accordingly dismissed.

C. Was there Arbitrariness or Discrimination?

260. The Treaty also provides in Article II (3) for protection against arbitrary and
discriminatory measures that impair the management, operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of the investment. This, the Claimants
argue, occurred in the present case, particularly in respect of the repudiation of the
Ministerial Approval and of the rights under the Contract, the refusal to reinstate such
rights following the decision of the Constitutional Court, as well as in connection with

the demands related to the application under Law 4501.

261. Again in this different context, the Tribunal finds that, to the extent supported by

the facts, the anomalies that took place in connection with the conduct just referred to

67

are included in the breach of fair and equitable treatment and that there is no ground for

a separate heading on liability on account of arbitrariness.

262. As far as discrimination is concerned, the Tribunal notes that all the measures
adopted, rightly or wrongly, related to the whole array of BOT projects under
consideration, as the Claimants themselves have repeatedly argued. Thus, it is quite
evident that Konya Ilgin was not singled out in a discriminatory manner. The
Claimants’ argument about foreign investments having been discriminated against is
equally not supported by the facts. The changes in macroeconomic policy that would
have occurred concerned the economy as a whole. The question of foreign investment
being particularly intense in the energy sector is a separate matter unrelated to the claim

on discrimination. This heading of liability is accordingly also dismissed.

D. Was there a Breach of Obligations Entered into with Regard to the Investment?

263. The Claimants also argue that the Respondent has breached the obligation under
Article II (3) of the Treaty to “observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments,” including therein not just the undertakings under the Contract
but also a host of other commitments originating in the legislative, administrative and
regulatory undertakings concerning the investment. Prominent among such alleged
breaches is the failure to permit the Claimants to benefit from the laws enacted
specifically to improve the financing of the Project, the failure to observe the regulatory
undertakings under Article 8 of the Contract, and the failure to exercise the regulatory

and administrative authority in good faith and in a reasonable manner.

264. As noted above, the Respondent asserts that under Article 8 of the Contract it

had discretion to approve the revised tariff. The discretion contrasted with the more

123

limited language of Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract,” with the sole

requirement of reasonable grounds, which the Respondent argues was amply satisfied in

124

light of the public interest. Judge Schwebel also concluded in this respect that

'°3 Affidavit of Judge Harun Getintemel, September 9, 2006, para. 11.

'4 Legal Opinion of Professor Zehreddin Aslan, September 14, 2005, para. 22; Legal Opinion of
Professor Ender Ethem Atay, September 15, 2005, para. 22; Second Legal Opinion of Professor Ergun
Ozsunay, September 13, 2005, para. 12.

68

MENR “rejected Claimants’ various tariff proposals for what it saw as reasonable

grounds and that it did not do so roughly, abruptly, arbitrarily or capriciously.”!”°

265. The Respondent further asserts that at all times it proceeded to negotiate in good
faith and, as discussed above, there could be no liability attached to the failure to
conclude an agreement if it was deemed to be too onerous for Turkey and if less

. : . 126
expensive alternatives were available.

266. The Tribunal concluded in its Decision on Jurisdiction that the existence of the
Contract, its validity and binding effects were beyond doubt. The issue that was then
left pending for the merits stage was whether the parties had reached agreement on any
amendment to some important commercial terms of the Project. As noted above, the
Claimants maintain that the parties were under an obligation to complete the
negotiations and finalize the Project, while the Respondent asserts that the discretion
envisaged in Article 8 was broad enough so as to allow for the disagreements that
followed. The Tribunal has found above that important as the Feasibility Study and the
Implementation Contract were, they were not self-contained as some of the essential
commercial terms were still open to discussion, a conclusion that Article 8 of the

Contract clearly corroborates.

267. Although negotiations on the commercial terms were pursued for a long time
there is no decisive evidence about an agreement having been unequivocally reached.
In view of the fact that the Contract provided for such negotiations to be carried
forward, it follows that liability cannot be attached to the fact that agreement was not

reached.

268. While a legal expert for the Claimants expressed the view that MENR’s legal
options were limited either to approve or disapprove on reasonable grounds, '”” this was
hardly realistic to expect in a project as complex as this. In fact the Claimants were

greatly interested in exhausting the possibilities of reaching a negotiated agreement.

269. It follows from the above that the Tribunal cannot conclude that there was a
breach of the Contract obligations, except to the extent that the sixty-day time line for a
rejection of the revised tariff was never complied with. Such a time limit was in any

event not essential as both parties pursued negotiations for many more months and it

"5 Opening Statement of Judge Stephen Schwebel, April 4, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 2, at 332-35.
26 Affidavit of Mr. Cumhur Ersiimer, September 14, 2005, para. 11.
"27 | egal Opinion of Professor Sait Giiran, December 9, 2005, para. 21.

69

could hardly be expected that it could be met in the context of a negotiation as complex

as this.

270. The Tribunal has also found that while both parties were required under the
Contract to pursue the negotiations on the additional agreements needed to complete the
Project, such as the Treasury Guarantee, the Energy Sales Agreement and the Fund
Agreement, such agreements were dependent upon the finalization of the commercial
terms of the Contract, a key event that never occurred. It follows that, in spite of the
fact that the Contract envisaged these agreements as a part of the overall commitments
undertaken by the parties, compliance with such objectives could not be achieved
irrespectively of or separately from the commercial terms.

271. A number of recent awards have extensively discussed the meaning of the

“umbrella clause”!**

and there is no point for this Tribunal to go over this discussion
again. In the context of the present dispute, it suffices to note that there are different
views about whether a contract breach can be transformed into a treaty breach or should
be handled differently as an ordinary commercial breach of contract.'”? As the Tribunal
has not found a specific breach of obligations under the Contract, the issue does not
arise in this case. Questions concerning the interference arising from the exercise of
sovereign powers of the State have been discussed above in connection with the breach
of fair and equitable treatment and are, in the light of the facts of this case, independent

from contract rights.

E. Was the Investment Expropriated through Measures Tantamount to Expropriation?

272. Although the Claimants have not argued the existence of direct expropriation in
this dispute, they have requested a finding of liability on account of the breach of
Article III (1) of the Treaty in that various measures adopted are tantamount to

expropriation and have resulted in indirect expropriation. Regulatory or creeping

28 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/13), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003; SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6), Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004; Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A.
v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13), Decision on Jurisdiction of
November 19, 2004; Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11), Award of October
12, 2005.

°° Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Award
on Jurisdiction of August 6, 2004, paras. 78, 81.

70

expropriation, the Claimants recall, has been long accepted in the literature of

international law and the decisions of international courts and tribunals.

273. Such measures can include, the Claimants assert, covert or incidental
interference with the property resulting in the deprivation of economic benefits,'*° the

' For

taking of contract rights and the imposition of unreasonable regulatory regimes.'*
the Claimants, the aggregate of measures taken in this case resulted in the termination of

the Project and the complete destruction of the investment made.

274. The Respondent opposes such allegations on the ground that, as held by the
tribunal in Feldman, “not every business problem experienced by a foreign investor is

99132

an indirect or creeping expropriation” ~~ nor does the protection under the Treaty cover

commercial risks. '*7

275. In the Respondent’s view, the disputed actions were not expropriatory in nature
as no rights under the Contract were taken and no vested rights arose from the
Implementation Contract, which was only initialed and never signed, from the June 19,
1998 Ministerial Approval, which contained no contractual commitment, or from Law

No. 4501, which gave no automatic rights to the conversion of contracts.

276. The Respondent further asserts that neither was there a deprivation of substantial
rights, and the Claimants were free, and are still free, to pursue the proposed Project
under the terms originally agreed in the Feasibility Study. However, the Claimants

chose to abandon the Project even before the actual alleged date of expropriation.

277. Inany event, the Respondent argues that, as held in OEPC, the deprivation must
affect a significant part of the investment, which was also the reason that led the
Tribunal in Noble Ventures to conclude that no viable company or valuable assets were
concerned in the actions taken in that case.'** Given that the Respondent asserts that

the Project had no economic viability, no value could have been affected by its actions.

0 Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of
August 6, 2004, para. 103.

3! Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. Mexico (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16,
2002, at par 103; CME Czech Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award,
September 13, 2001, para. 603.

' Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. Mexico (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16,
2002, para. 112.

'3 Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/6), Award of April 12, 2002, para. 153.

'4 Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11), Award of October 12, 2005, para.
216.

71

278. The Tribunal has no doubt that indirect expropriation can take many forms. Yet,
as the tribunal in Pope & Talbot found, there must be some form of deprivation of the
investor in the control of the investment, the management of day-to day-operations of
the company, interfering in the administration, impeding the distribution of dividends,
interfering in the appointment of officials and managers, or depriving the company of

its property or control in total or in part.'*

279. The Tribunal is not persuaded that any such extreme forms of interference took
place in this case. Many things were wrongly handled, but none could be considered to
amount to regulatory expropriation. The rights that were affected one way or the other,
including the Claimants’ legitimate expectation, have indeed resulted in a finding of
breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment, yet none of the measures adopted
envisaged the taking of property, which is still the essence of expropriation, even
indirect expropriation. Although measures tantamount to expropriation may well make

136

the question of ownership irrelevant, ~” it does require a strong interference with clearly

defined contract rights that in this case were in the end incomplete.

280. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that the Respondent has not breached
Article III (1) of the Treaty. This conclusion does not mean that there was no value of
property or rights affected, but this is a separate question that the Tribunal will address

next in the assessment of damages.

IV. Damages and Compensation

A. Claims

1. The Claim for Compensation of Damages

281. In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent’s violations of the BIT were so severe as
to deprive them of the value of their entire investment in the Project, thus resulting in
the complete loss of the benefit of such investment and of the value of the contract
rights. The Claimants accordingly request, in light of the Chorzéw Factory case, the

full reparation for the injuries caused so as to “as far as possible, wipe out all the

5 Pope and Talbot, Inc. v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on the Merits of Phase 2,
April 10, 2001, para. 100.

6 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Award of April
30, 2004, para. 143.

72

consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all

probability, have existed if that act had not been committed.” '*”

282. The above claim for compensation, in the Claimants’ submission, should cover
all financially assessable damage, including loss of profits arising from either contract
arrangements or from a well-established history of dealings, just as the International
Law Commission concluded in its comments on Article 36 of the Articles on State

Responsibility.

283. Based on the expert reports prepared by Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, the Claimants
have put forth three approaches to the assessment of damages: the fair market value, the
lost profit valuation, and the investments actually made and out of pocket expenses
incurred by the Project sponsors.'** The Tribunal will examine each of these heads of

claim.

2. Fair Market Value

284. As to the fair market value, the Claimants conclude in their last post-hearing
submission that, on the assumption that there has been expropriation, the value of the
investment at the time of expropriation was US$114.951 million. The expert and the
Claimants put the expropriation date to be March 3, 2001, the date on which the
Electricity Market Law was enacted. Applying interest at the rate of 10.6% per annum,
compounded annually, this amount came at the end of 2006, the probable date of the
award, to US$171.986 million. The interest rate retained by the Claimants is the
Project’s cost of equity and is thus necessary to return the Claimants to the economic

condition they would have been in “but for” the Respondent’s actions.

3. Loss of Profits

285. As to the second approach, if the measure of losing the entire economic benefit
that contractual performance would have brought is taken as the basis for compensation,

the Claimants estimate their lost profits to be US$223.742 million. Together with

‘7 Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland), Judgment of 13 December, 1928,
P.C.LJ. at 47.

'8 Expert Report of Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, February 18, 2005, para. 7; Testimony of Dr. Michael
Rosenzweig, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 6, at 1262-65.

73

interest at the rate just noted, lost profits would amount to US$334.756 million at the

end of 2006.

286. All such estimates are without prejudice to certain tax questions concerning the
award and the compensation. In the expert’s calculation, the net present value of the
losses as of the end of 2006 would be US$301.677 million, which including the

avoidance of certain tax effects would amount to US$494.552 million.

287. The Claimants assert in justification of this approach that they are entitled to the
economic equivalent of the contract performance that they were denied, that is the

amount of profits that they would have obtained under the Concession Contract.

288. The Claimants argue that such a measure of profits is certain and non-
speculative because there was an agreed minimum of electricity to be sold year by year
to TEAS under a “take-or-pay” contract, at a defined tariff rate and with guaranteed
payments by the Treasury. Moreover, in the Claimants’ view, certainty about profits
arises from the fact that all Project costs were thoroughly analysed and agreed to, the
Project sponsors were highly experienced with a long history of successful projects and

the Project was technically and financially practicable.

289. As a consequence of the reliability of the Project, which the Claimants’ experts
Norwest Corporation describe as “exceptionally high quality,” “well-developed” and
“fully bankable,” the Claimants argue that there was a reasonably certain projected
profit stream, much more certain than in other projects considered in other arbitration
proceedings where some uncertainty in damage assessment was held not to be an
obstacle to the award of damages and lost profits."°° The Claimants add that such an

approach has been upheld by the award of an ICC tribunal in SBD v. Turkey.'*°

4. Amount of Investment

290. In the alternative, the Claimants submit, a third approach, arguing that other
criteria support their claim for damages. In the Claimants’ view, at “the barest

minimum,” they should be allowed to recoup the amounts invested on behalf of the

‘8° With reference to Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID
Case No. ARB/84/3), Award of May 20, 1992; Sapphire International Petroleum Co. v. National Iranian
Oil Co. (Sapphire), Award of March 15, 1993, and Karaha Bodas Co. LLC v. Perusahan Pertambangan
Minyak Dans gas Bumi Negara (Pertamina).

‘0 Claimants’ Reply, para. 347, n. 740, with reference to SBD Sakarya Bolu Elelrik Dagitim Anonim
Sirketi v. The Republic of Turkey, (ICC Case No. 125751MS), Award of March 20, 2004.

74

Project Company by its sponsors PSEG Global, North American Coal and Guris. All
such amounts expended are, in their submission, reasonable and proper and were all
envisaged by the Feasibility Study and the project’s authorizing documents. These
expenditures include in particular the updated mine costs, the amounts invested by the
Project sponsors and out of pocket expenses. Such expenses refer to matters such as the
costs of preparing the power plant project and the mine studies, contract negotiations
and financing, environmental costs, permits and license fees, and legal and consulting

fees.

291. These expenses were estimated by the Claimants’ expert on the basis of the
“opportunity costs” the Claimants incurred by investing in the Project, that is the “time
value of money.” In the last post hearing submission, the expenses were estimated to
add up to US$27,941,740.30 by the end of 2006, including prejudgement interest based
on the cost of equity. An amount of US$45,806,131.64 has also been estimated as that
resulting from a tax gross up. Alternatively, the Claimants have also calculated
prejudgement interest in accordance with the Turkish Bond Yield, which brings these

figures to US$29,050,241.68 and US$47,623,347.01, respectively.

292. The Claimants finally argue that, contrary to what the Respondent asserts, the
contractual rights had a market value even prior to the financial close, as evidenced by
the value of the Letter of Guarantee, the Feasibility Study, the Revised Mine Plan and
other significant intellectual property and work product worth millions of dollars. The
Claimants note that the Contract itself recognized an economic value of between US$8
million and US$12 million in connection with the guarantee, just as the applicable BOT
regulations’! placed a value of up to 1.5% of the project cost for the completed

Feasibility Studies and finalized project documentation. '”

5. The Respondent's Opposition to the Claim for Damages

293. The Respondent’s views start out from the premise that “Claimants did not
excavate a mine and never extracted a single shovel of coal or limestone at Konya Ilgin.
Claimants did not lay a brick to build a power plant and never delivered a single

kilowatt hour of electricity to the Turkish power grid. Claimants did not even start

‘4! BOT Regulation No. 85/9799.
'® Claimants’ Post-hearing Brief, para. 196; Fourth Legal Opinion of Professors Mahmut Birsel and Arzu
Aksag Yesilirmak, December 9, 2005, CLA 108 to Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 77-78.

75

work on those projects.” The Respondent accordingly considers that all the activities

undertaken were related to a “pre-investment” phase. '“?

294. On these bases, the Respondent argues that the Project had no economic value
either in terms of the market for global independent power projects or in terms of an
economic project valuation; the amounts allegedly taken were certainly invested
elsewhere at competitive rates of return; the expenses allegedly made were “at risk,” as
in every power project, and the Claimants should have expected to incur a loss if
financial close was not reached; and not even out of pocket expenditures should be
recovered because in abandoning the Project the sponsors avoided losses that exceeded

the value of the alleged investment. '“*

295. The Respondent is in agreement with the principle on reparation laid down in the
Chorzow Factory case which the Claimants have invoked, but notes that in this case the
status quo ante that should be restored would leave the Claimants with a project that
was “infeasible and not financeable,” that is a project without any value that could have
been taken by the Respondent’s acts and, moreover, there was no certainty that the

Project would ever have come into existence.

296. The Respondent further argues that the fair market value of any such project is
zero as there is no market for projects that are still in development.'*° The Respondent
also maintains that the market does not assign a value to a project’s future earnings at
least until it has materialized in a full set of contracts and that arbitral awards have

refused to accept claims for speculative, uncertain or contingent damages. '*°

297. For the same reason, the Respondent maintains that arbitration tribunals will not
consider future earnings as a basis for damages when the affected entity is not a “going
concern” with a history of actual operations.'*” This is certainly not the case of Konya
Ilgin as the revised Concession Contract was not agreed to and none of the other

necessary agreements had been concluded either.

'3 Expert Report of Mr. Rutherford Poats, September 9, 2003, para. 7.

'44 Expert Report of Mr. René Stulz, September 19, 2005, paras. 99-105.

'45 Expert Report of Ms. Dianne Rudo, September 19, 2005, paras. 33-40.

‘© Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN
3467, Award of July 1, 2004; Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of August 6, 2004; Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/4), Decision on Jurisdiction of May, 25, 1994.

'7 Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3), Award of 21,
1990; Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of
August 6, 2004; Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No. ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003.

76

298. Neither does the Respondent accept that the contractual arrangements provide a
basis to award compensation, particularly in view of the fact that the claim for
compensation on this count does not rely on the Contract but on cash flow tables that
were a part of the February 13, 1998 Claimants’ proposal for a renegotiation that was
never agreed upon. The Respondent in particular opposes the Claimants’ argument that
the Sapphire and the Pertamina decisions would lend support to the role of contractual
arrangements in determining projected income streams subject to compensation. In
those cases there were complete contracts that actually described and governed the

projects in question, which is far from the case here.

299. In the opinion of an expert for the Respondent, even if the Project had proceeded
to construction in 2002, and to operation in 2004, it still would have failed economically

by 2005 given the increases in world oil prices, mining costs and other key factors. '“*

300. Aside from the fact that the Respondent opposes the valuation methods
suggested by the Claimants, in the understanding that both are mere variations of loss of
profits calculations, there are numerous disagreements about the specific factors taken
into account to this effect by Dr. Rosenzweig, the Claimants’ expert, with particular
reference to the discount rate used in those calculations and the method for its

application.'”

In Dr. Stulz’s estimates, the appropriate corrections result in a fair
market value put at negative US$33 million and a loss of profits at negative US$40

million.

301. The Respondent also opposes the claim for development and out of pocket
expenses because of the “at risk” nature of such expenses noted above, and also
questions a number of specific expenditures which in the Respondent’s view are
unrelated to the Project, including expenditures made by NACC and Guris, entities that
are not Claimants in this case. The Respondent estimates in its last post hearing
submission that if the appropriate corrections are made to this effect, and the risk-free
Treasury bill rate is applied as the relevant interest rate, such expenses would amount in

2006 to only US$8.754 million.

'48 Expert Report of Mr. Robert Sansom, March 17, 2006, paras. 10-15.
' Testimony of Mr. René Stulz, April 10, 2006, Hearing transcripts Vol. 8, at 2125-31.

77

B. The Tribunal’s Findings

302. In its jurisdictional decision, the Tribunal found that an investment had been
made in the form of a Concession Contract, and distinguished this situation from that
considered in Mihaly, where the parties never signed a contract and expressly

° So too,

disclaimed any obligations arising from the preparatory work undertaken.'*
this case was distinguished from Zhinvaly, where the parties expressly acknowledged
that the Claimants did not have an investment. Moreover, the Tribunal is mindful that
in Mihaly the decision did in fact consider that it might well be the case in other
investments that the moneys spent or expenses incurred in their preparation can be

swept within the umbrella of such investment. '*!

303. At the jurisdictional stage, the Tribunal also decided that a different question,
pertaining to the merits, is “whether all or some of the activities undertaken qualify as a
part of the investment or are to be regarded as merely preparatory. The same holds true
of whether the assets of the Project Company constitute an investment.”'? This is the

first issue the Tribunal must now decide on the merits.

304. As noted, the Respondent is of the view that because there was no mining
undertaken and the plant never even started to be built, there is nothing to compensate
for. It is an accepted fact of the case that, except for a groundbreaking ceremony, there
was no mining undertaken or construction started, not even in terms of the necessary
preparations to that effect. This, however, is not a reason sufficient in itself to rule out
the existence of damages subject to compensation. An investment can take many forms
before actually reaching the construction stage, including most notably the cost of
negotiations and other preparatory work leading to the materialization of the Project,
even in connection with pre-investment expenditures, particularly when, like in this

case, there is a valid and binding Contract duly executed between the parties.

‘80 PSEG Global, Inc., The North American Coal Corporation, and Konya Ilgin Electrik ve Ticaret
Limited Sirketi v. The Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Decision on Jurisdiction of June
4, 2004, para. 81.

'S! Mihaly International Corporation v. Sri Lanka, (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/2), Award of March 15,
2002, para. 50.

' PSEG Global, Inc., The North American Coal Corporation, and Konya Ilgin Electrik ve Ticaret
Limited Sirketi v. The Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Decision on Jurisdiction of June
4, 2004, para. 104.

78

1. Fair Market Value

305. The Tribunal will accordingly consider first whether the claim to a fair market
value of the Project is justified in light of the nature of the investment made. It must be
noted in this respect that the BIT, like most treaties of its kind, provides for the fair
market value as the measure for compensation only in connection with expropriation.
Since the Tribunal has found above that there is no expropriation in this case, either
direct or indirect, the fair market value does not appear to be justified as a measure for

compensation in these circumstances.

306. From a financial point of view, the Tribunal is persuaded by the view of Dr.
Carlos Lapuerta, the Respondent’s expert, who in answering a question from the
Tribunal, first explained that there might be a market for projects that have not reached
financial close or started construction or operation, as long as there is a willing buyer
and a willing seller prepared to buy and sell for one dollar. However, he noted that this
is normally a very limited market, based on private contacts and not on public offers,

that never comes anywhere near the amount claimed in this case. '*?

307. From a legal point of view, the Tribunal is mindful that a number of cases
accepted the measure of compensation based on the fair market value as appropriate for
treaty breaches not amounting to expropriation and relating to the breach of fair and
equitable treatment and other standards of protection under the treaty in question, as

evidenced by both NAFTA'™ and ICSID'® cases.

308. Yet, in all these cases the breach that was compensated had resulted in damage
to investments that were at the production stage, not merely in planning or under
negotiation. While the Tribunal has found that there is in this case a breach of fair and
equitable treatment, this breach relates not to damages to productive assets but to the
failure to conduct negotiations in a proper way and other forms of interference by the

Respondent Government. The appropriate remedies thus do not relate to a

'S3 Testimony of Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, April 9, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 7, at 1719-72.

‘4 S'D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of November 13, 2000; Pope
and Talbot, Inc. v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, April 10,
2001.

'S5 Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. Mexico (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16,
2002; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/1), Award
of April 20, 2005; Azurix Corporation v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award
of July 14, 2006, para. 424.

79

compensation for the market value of those assets but to a different objective. This, as

will be discussed below, also entails an economic value but of a different nature.

309. The Tribunal accordingly finds that the fair market value shall not be retained as
the measure for compensation in this case and hence it will also not discuss the many
technical aspects raised by the parties in connection with the factors that were taken into

account for assigning a value to the claim and the appropriate method for its calculation.

2. Loss of Profits

310. The second heading of claim for compensation is based on the lost profits
approach put forth by the Claimants. The Tribunal is mindful that, as the award in
Aucoven noted, ICSID tribunals are “reluctant to award lost profits for a beginning
industry and unperformed work.”'*° This measure is normally reserved for the

compensation of investments that have been substantially made and have a record of

157 158

profits, °’ and refused when such profits offer no certainty.

311. The Respondent convincingly invoked in support of its objections to this
approach the awards in AAPL'® and Metalclad,'® which required a record of profits
and a performance record, just as the awards in Wena,'*' Tecmed'® and Phelps
Dodge'® refused to consider profits that were too speculative or uncertain. The

Respondent also convincingly noted that in cases where lost profits have been awarded,

1,164

such as Aminoil this measure has been based on a long history of operations.

312. The Claimants also noted that line of decisions, but distinguish the situation

where there have been contractual arrangements “that establish the expectation of profit

'86 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award, September 23, 2003, para. 360.

'S7 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award, September 23, 2003, para. 361.

'8 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award, September 23, 2003, para. 365.

'° Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3), Award of 21,
1990.

' Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of
August 6, 2004.

‘Sl "Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Jurisdiction of
May, 25, 1994, paras. 122-24.

‘© Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of May 29, 2003.

‘8 Phelps Dodge Corporation v. Iran, 10 lran-US C.T.R. 121, 132-33 (1986).

‘4 Respondent’s Counter-memorial, para. 309, n. 564, with reference to Kuwait v. Aminoil, 21 LL.M.
976, 989-94 (1982).

80

at a certain level and over a given number of years,” which results in the concern
regarding speculation being removed. The Tribunal would have no difficulty with this
proposition, because in fact a self-contained and fully detailed contract can well
determine a basis for the calculation of future profits. However, the Tribunal must also
note that in many long-term contracts it is most difficult if not impossible to calculate
such future profits with certainty, particularly if the contract is subject to adjustment

mechanisms and other possible variations with time.'®

313. Even assuming that none of those difficulties existed, in this case the exercise
becomes moot because the parties never finalized the essential commercial terms of the
Contract, and as a result neither could the additional agreements concerning the sale of
electricity, the Fund payments and the Treasury guarantee be finalized. Relying on cash
flow tables that were a part of proposals that did not materialize does not offer a solid

basis for calculating future profits either.'°

The future profits would then be wholly
speculative and uncertain. By definition, the concept of /ucrum cesans requires in the
first place that there is a lucrum that comes to an end as a consequence of certain
breaches of contract or other forms of liability. Here such an element is not only

entirely absent but impossible to estimate for the future.

314. The Tribunal is also troubled by the economic foundations offered by the
Claimants for the lost profit approach. Dr. Rosenzweig’s justification for this claim is
based on the “cost of equity to the providers of the equity because that’s the value to
them ... the minimum return that the equity providers are willing to accept... .”'®”
The Respondent notes that this approach turns on the subjective assessment of the
investor’s own minimum acceptable return on equity, without any objective or market-
based assessment of the project and its risks, an approach which results in a claim twice

the amount of the claim for fair market value put forth in this case.

315. The Tribunal will accordingly also not retain the lost profits heading of claim as
the measure of compensation because it cannot be justified from a legal or economic

point of view in the circumstances of the case.

‘5 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.

ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003.

‘6 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003, para. 354.

‘67 Testimony of Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, April 8, 2006, Hearing transcripts, Vol. 6, at 1335-37.

81

3. Compensation of Investment Expenses

316. The third approach to compensation that the Claimants have put forth concerns
the investments made and out of pocket expenses referred to above. While these
amounts have been described at various points as pre-investment, pre-closing, pre or
post-expropriation and other, they all correspond to the period of preparation and

negotiation of the Project’s technical and legal aspects.

317. The Tribunal found above that the Respondent was in breach of some Treaty
provisions imposing upon it obligations in connection with the protection of the
investment. The question remains whether all or only some of the investments made

qualify under that protection so as to justify compensation for the damage caused.

318. Dr. Rosenzweig’s expert report has grouped these investments into five principal
categories: legal; mine and fuel supply; other technical studies; environmental; and
Project preparation, which in turn refers to items such as financing, permits, corporate
structure, preparations for implementation and drafting and negotiation of commercial
terms. The Tribunal notes that such categories correspond to the history of the
negotiation of the Project outlined above and the many issues that arose along the way,

and thus offer a reasonable framework to examine the specific amounts claimed.

319. All such categories were also envisaged in the Feasibility Study and the
Contract, as explained above. It should be noted in particular that Article 6 of the
Contract includes in the total investment cost of the Project “all the expenses made by
the Company regarding the facilities in accordance with the feasibility report, until the
commercial operation date.” It is not unusual either for awards to allow for the costs of

negotiation of a project.'®

320. The Tribunal also notes that the specific amounts claimed have been subject to a
detailed audit by the Claimants’ expert, who has also introduced the necessary
corrections justified by its own revisions or by some of the comments made by the

Respondent’s experts. To this end, the Tribunal is mindful that in Aucoven the award

'8 Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003, para. 263.

82

did not find any reason to disregard financial statements produced by the Claimants and

took into account the corrections made.'®

321. Subject to the Respondent’s objections that will be examined below, the
Tribunal considers that the approach followed by Dr. Rosenzweig offers a solid basis on
which to proceed. The amount of expenses estimated by Dr. Rosenzweig was set at

US$11,467,668, before escalation by interests and tax gross up.'”

Prejudgement
interest based on the cost of equity brings this amount to US$27,941,740.30 by the end
of 2006. With the tax gross up that will be discussed the amount claimed further
escalates to US$45,806,131.64. However, the basic amount claimed that the
Respondent considered to make its objections was US$11.722 million. For the sake of

avoiding confusion, the Tribunal will take this last amount as the claimed figure.

322. The Respondent’s first objection concerns the fact that the Claimants have
included in their estimates expenses incurred by NACC and Guris, entities that are not
parties to these proceedings. In the Respondent’s view, the Claimants’ contention that
the payments were made on behalf of the Project company does not change the fact that
such payments were not made by either the Project company or PSEG, and thus are not

actual expenditures subject to compensation.

323. The Claimants have in fact argued that the amounts invested by all the sponsors
of the Project represent the minimum value that could be assigned to the rights owned
directly by the Project company and indirectly by PSEG, and that, moreover, this view

is consistent with the Memorandum of Understanding among the sponsors.

324. The Tribunal found in its Decision on Jurisdiction that indeed NACC had no
standing in these proceedings as it had not signed the Contract and was acting basically
as the technical operator for the investor; whether there were legal arrangements in
place between the sponsors as to actual or potential equity holdings in the Project
company did not change the situation. Guris was at an even greater disadvantage to this
effect, because its participation as a sponsor was less evident and its field of expertise is

construction, which was one of the activities that never came to be.
325. The Tribunal will not undo with one hand what it did with the other. This would

be the result if compensation is awarded in respect of investments or expenses incurred

'® Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003, paras. 248, 258.
' Written Statement of Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, September 18, 2005, Annex 17.

83

by entities over which there is no jurisdiction, even if this was done on behalf of one of
the Claimants. As the Tribunal also noted in the Decision on Jurisdiction, these entities
might have a claim against PSEG in the light of intra-corporate arrangements, but this is

not something for which Turkey is liable, directly or indirectly.

326. The expenses incurred by NACC and Guris, as calculated by Mr. Carlos
Lapuerta, the Respondent’s expert, amount to US$2.317 million. The development

expenses claimed will be accordingly reduced by this amount.

327. The second objection made by the Respondent’s expert, Mr. Carlos Lapuerta,
concerns the fact that the claim includes expenses for work performed prior to February
1995, that is before the Feasibility Study was submitted to MENR, as well as expenses

incurred after the date of alleged expropriation, that is after March 2001.

328. The Claimants have explained that although some of the expenses were incurred
prior to the submission of the Feasibility Study, they were actually paid after that
submission. This, however, appears to be inconsistent with the expert’s methodology of
recording expenses at the time made and not at the time paid, and is also inconsistent
with his own description of these being “pre-investment expenses.”!”! The Tribunal
considers the objection tenable and will accordingly reduce the development expenses,

as calculated by the Respondent’s expert, by an amount of US$94,126.

329. As the Tribunal has found that there is no expropriation involved in this case, the
actual date of the alleged expropriation is immaterial for the purposes of establishing
expenses made. As long as these were within the accepted categories and reasonably
related to the negotiations and advancement of the Project completion, compensation is
not limited to that date. The Tribunal accordingly dismisses the objection made on this

count for US$254,810.

330. A third objection concerns the payments of VAT in the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands for US$62,039, which the Respondent believes are unrelated to the Project
and which could be offset by the Project sponsors. In the Claimants’ view, these were
legitimate expenses incurred in the development of the Project and could not be
diminished by theoretical offsets which could have related to other business of the

Project sponsors in those jurisdictions. The Tribunal is persuaded by the Claimants’

'” Written Statement of Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, September 18, 2005, para. 46.

84

views in this respect and finds no reason to believe that VAT could have been

improperly claimed. The objection is accordingly dismissed.

331. The Respondent raises a fourth objection concerning the absence of adequate
evidentiary support for salaries of PSEG employees, requesting a reduction of
US$820,651. While detailed evidentiary support has not been submitted for every
single penny spent on the Project, the Tribunal does not find any reason to doubt that
the audit by Dr. Rosenzweig and his associates could have added unjustified entries in
respect of salaries. It is only natural that such lengthy expenses, involving in the
Respondent’s expert argument around 1,085 different entries, will be grouped into more

succinct categories and periods. The objection is accordingly dismissed.

332. A fifth objection concerns what the Respondent believes are excessive overhead
expenses. Dr. Rosenzweig used a 99% ratio of overhead to salaries as this was PSEG’s
company wide average for the period. The Respondent’s expert believes that a
comparison with other U.S. firms would suggest a 57% ratio, which is closer to the 60%
ratio used for NACC. In addition, there would appear to be problems of double
counting and other expenses irrelevant to the Project, as well as doubts about some
items that could have been included also in other expenses claimed. In the light of these
objections, the Respondent’s expert proposes a reduction of US$407,199; if overhead is

eliminated altogether the reduction would be in the sum of US$799,294.

333. While it is true that a 99% ratio appears high and that some specific items are
unclear, the Tribunal accepts Dr. Rosenzweig’s figures in this matter, which are based
on the contemporaneous accounts of the Project’s sponsors. In addition, the Tribunal
does not find that an overall overhead expense of US$799,294 is excessive for a Project

of this kind and its many complexities. The objection is accordingly dismissed.

334. The sixth objection made by the Respondent concerns transcription errors for
US$60,923, double counting of some travel expenses for US$8,622, and inappropriate
expenses, in particular the participation in the American-Turkish Council (US$21,730)
and legal fees relating to the investigation of Guris for possible corrupt practices

(US$67,234). Of 1900 invoices submitted, the objections concern 11.

335. The Claimants’ expert reviewed the objected invoices and has established that in
some cases corrections were justified. The claimed amount has accordingly been

reduced by a total of US$16,430.66, which is also reflected in the final amount claimed

85

in the last post hearing submission. The Tribunal is satisfied that these corrections have
been made in accordance with appropriate accounting practices and also finds that the

explanations to this effect have been satisfactory. !”

336. The Tribunal finds, however, that the objections made to expenses relating to the
American-Turkish Council and legal expenses concerning Guris’ investigation are
justified. The first is a kind of general forum for policy discussions that, while of
interest to the Project, cannot be considered a cost related directly to the Project
development. The second objection relates to legal fees also unrelated to the
development of the Project and which concern a foreign entity not a party to these
proceedings. The amounts claimed will accordingly be reduced by US$21,730 and

US$67,234 on account of these two expenses.

337. Reducing the basic claimed amount of US$11.722 million by the objections that
the Tribunal has accepted above (US$2.317 million for NACC and Guris expenses;
US$94,126 for pre-investment expenses; US$21,730 for participation in the American
Turkish Council; and US$67,234 for Guris’ investigation), and further reducing it by
the corrections that the Claimants’ expert made to some items in the amount of
US$144,000 (as per submission of March 20, 2006) and US$16,430.66 as noted above,
the compensation is set at US$9,061,479.34.

338. The Claimants escalated the amount claimed by two factors. The first is the
interest rate that will be discussed below. The second is a tax gross up resulting from
the applicable Turkish taxes to the compensation awarded to the Project Company

(39%). This tax gross up is not claimed if the compensation is awarded to PSEG.

339. The Claimants assert in this connection that this tax gross up is the only way to
ensure that an award makes the company whole. The Respondent objected to this claim
because the Project sponsors wrote-off the development expenses and thus deducted
them against the corporate income, thus reducing their tax bill and receiving substantial

tax benefits. '7*

340. As the Tribunal has excluded the claims relating to expenses by NACC and
Guris, PSEG Global is the only investor remaining in the Project Company. While the

Project Company might have assets in its own name, compensation for these values has

 

'? Claimants’ Response to Respondent’s new evidence, July 11, 2006, Annex 3.

"3 Expert Tax Report of Mr. Faruk Sabuncu, March 15, 2006.

86

been computed in the development expenses discussed above. Moreover, the Tribunal
notes that the Project Company is wholly owned by PSEG Global. The Tribunal
accordingly finds no reason to award compensation to the Project Company and will do
so only to PSEG Global. The question of the tax gross up is thus no longer relevant in

this context.

4. Interest

341. The parties have also extensively discussed the question of interest. The
Claimants’ expert, Dr. Rosenzweig, has used the date of alleged expropriation, March 3,
2001, to calculate prejudgement interest relating to expenses made before and after this
date. For the period prior to March 2001, the estimated interest rate is 12% based on the
opportunity cost to the Project Company at that particular point in time and the length of
time since the investment was made until the date of expropriation. This opportunity
cost is in turn based on the “historic” cost of equity. After March 2001, the estimated
interest is 10.6% based on a “forward looking” cost of equity. Post-award interest is
also calculated at 10.6%. Alternatively, the Claimants accept the applicable Turkish
sovereign rate as reflected in the Turkish Bond yield, which as noted results in an

increased amount of the compensation claimed.

342. As noted above, the expenses, including prejudgement interest based on the cost
of equity, were estimated by the Claimants to add up to US$27,941,740.30 by the end of
2006. Alternatively, the calculated prejudgement interest in accordance with the

Turkish Bond Yield, brings this figure to US$29,050,241.68.

343. The Respondent’s expert, Mr. Lapuerta, considers this approach unjustified from
a methodological point of view. In his view there is no reason to apply a different
prejudgement interest rate before and after the alleged expropriation. As noted above,
the Respondent also objects to the fact that in Dr. Rosensweig’s approach the cost of
equity is subjectively established by each investor. Moreover, the Respondent also

objects to the computation of expenses before they were actually paid.

344. Another expert for the Respondent, Dr. Stulz, explained that in his view the
appropriate interest rate is that of the United States Treasury Bill as it would only be

justified to exceed this rate when there is a risk involved, which is not the case of the

87

compensation resulting from an award.!™ In the Respondent's estimates, total damages
after reductions and corrections, including interest at the United States Treasury Bill

rates, amount to only US$8.754 million.'”°

345. The Tribunal will examine first the question of the prejudgement interest. The
Tribunal is not persuaded by the Claimants’ argument that the cost of equity offers an
appropriate basis to this effect. As noted above, the cost of equity is based on
subjective determinations by the investors. For this reason it does not offer a useful
basis for calculating interest that aims at the protection of the value of funds spent rather
than the value of expropriated assets, which was in the first place the assumption behind

the Claimants’ choice.

346. Even less so is the Tribunal persuaded by the alternative reliance on the Turkish
Bond yield as the funds not invested in the Project would certainly not be placed in the
Turkish financial market at that time. The sovereign risk is not the appropriate

measurement for an alternative placement of funds.

347. Neither is the Tribunal persuaded by the Respondent’s choice of the US
Treasury Bill as the reference point. It would not offer a realistic alternative for the
Claimants’ investment of funds that were not placed in Turkey, independent of the
question as to whether or not the compensation provided in an award involves some

measure of risk.

348. In the opinion of the Tribunal, taking into account all the circumstances of the
present case, the most appropriate benchmark which will compensate adequately an
international company such as PSEG Global is the 6 month average LIBOR plus 2 per
cent per year for each year during which amounts are owing. The interest shall start
running on the date specified below until payment of the Award. Interest shall be

compounded semi-annually.

349. The Tribunal turns now to the discussion of dies a quo. Had there been in this
case a finding of expropriation, the determination of the starting point for the
application of interest could have been certain. As noted by the Tribunal in Azurix,

however, where there is indirect expropriation or a breach of fair and equitable

'4 Expert Report of Mr. René Stulz, September 19, 2005, para. 114; Rejoinder Expert Report of Mr. René
Stultz, March 16, 2006, para. 125.
"5 Review of Development Expenses of Mr. Carlos Lapuerta, May 26, 2006, para. 57.

88

treatment this determination is more difficult and less certain, except perhaps if the acts

in question result in a clear deprivation of the investment.'”°

350. In recent cases, the date of termination of a concession agreement has been used
as the starting point because it offers a date which is certain.'”” In this case, however,
none of those elements is available. The breach of fair and equitable treatment is not of
such nature as to be comparable to expropriation or deprivation, and neither was there a
specific date of termination of the Contract. It follows that there is no reason to make a
distinction based on the date of the alleged expropriation for expenditures made before

or after that date.

351. The Tribunal has considered the list of expenses submitted by the Claimants and
the comments of the Respondent’s experts. Some deductions have been upheld by the
Tribunal, as explained above. The yearly apportionment of the expenses which the
Tribunal has found the Claimants are entitled to recover from the Respondent is a task
which neither the Tribunal nor the parties need to undertake. Some practical solution is
needed. The Tribunal notes that the expenses are spread over a period of approximately
7 years, (i.e., from early 1995 until the request for arbitration in early 2002). The
Tribunal holds that interest shall run on the total amount awarded, from August 1, 1998,
as a mean due date, until payment of the Award. There is accordingly no need for a

separate or different determination of the post Award interest.
5. Costs

352. Finally, the Tribunal turns to costs. Although the Claimants did not prevail on
the major portions of their monetary claims, they prevailed on jurisdiction and on
liability in respect of certain breaches of the Treaty. To obtain justice, they had no
option but to bring this arbitration forward and to incur the related costs. For this
reason, the Tribunal considers it fair that the parties contribute to the cost in the
proportion of 65% for the Respondent and 35% for the Claimants. Without entering

into details of the claimed costs, the Tribunal accepts the costs claimed by the parties in

"%6 4zurix Corporation v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Award of July 14, 2006,
para. 417, with reference to Malek v. Iran, award 534-193-3, para. 114 (1992) (citing Int’! Technical
Prods. Corp. v. Iran, Award No. 190-302-3, at 49, 9 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 206, 240-241 (1985)).

"7 Azurix Corporation v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Award of July 14, 2006,
para. 418; Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case
No. ARB/00/5), Award of September 23, 2003, paras. 369-75.

89

their post hearing submissions, which are in the total amount of US$20,851,636.62,

including legal costs and fees.

353. The Respondent shall accordingly pay 65% of the costs of the arbitration
proceeding and of the legal costs and fees (US$13,553,563.80), of which it has already
advanced US$8,950,832.10. The Claimants shall pay 35% of the costs of the arbitration
proceeding and of the legal costs and fees (US$7,298,072.81), having paid
US$11,900,804.52. Therefore, the Respondent shall pay to the Claimants
US$4,602,731.70 in respect of such costs.

354. The Tribunal is pleased to extend its appreciation to counsel for both parties for
having performed their professional duties with distinction, greatly helping the Tribunal

to fully understand the complex issues discussed and to reach this award.

AWARD

1. The Respondent breached its obligation to accord the investor the fair

and equitable treatment guaranteed in Article II (3) of the Treaty.

2. The Respondent shall pay PSEG Global compensation in the amount of
US$9,061,479.34.

3. The Respondent shall pay PSEG Global interest at the 6 month average
LIBOR rate plus 2 per cent per year for each year during which amounts

are owing. Interest shall be compounded semi-annually.

4. Interest on the above amount awarded shall be paid from August 1, 1998,
as the mean due date for the period during which expenses were made,

until payment of the Award.

5. The total costs of the arbitration, including legal costs and fees, is set at

US$20,851,636.62.

6. The Respondent shall pay 65% of the costs of the arbitration and legal
costs and fees (US$13,553,563.80), of which it has already advanced
US$8,950,832.10. The Claimants shall pay 35% of the costs of the
arbitration and legal costs and fees (US$7,298,072.81), having paid
US$11,900,804.52. Therefore, the Respondent shall pay to PSEG
Global US$4,602,731.70 in respect of such costs.

90

7. All other claims are hereby dismissed.

[ signed ]
Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal

January 17, 2007

[ signed ] [signed ]

L. Yves Fortier Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
Arbitrator Arbitrator

January 17, 2007 January 16, 2007

91

ANNEX

(DECISION ON JURISDICTION)

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
PSEG Global Inc., The North American Coal Corporation, and Konya Ilgin
Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi
(CLAIMANTS)
and
Republic of Turkey

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants:

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm,
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny and
Mr. Lee A. Steven

White & Case LLP

Mr. Mesut Cakmak and
Ms. Tugba Bayman
Cakmak Ortak Avukat Biirosu

Representing the Respondent:
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Messrs Daniel M. Price,
Stanimir A. Alexandrov,
Samuel B. Boxerman and
P. David Richardson
Sidley Austin Brown & Wood LLP

Mr. Serdar Paksoy
Paksoy & Co

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURE 4

A. REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION. .ssesssscssssseseesssneesesssneeseensnneeeeeeee 4

B. CONSTITUTION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL AND COMMENCEMENT OF

 

 

PROCEEDING 5
C. WRITTEN AND ORAL PROCEEDINGS .......cscseseseesesssceseseseeeseeeseseseeeeeseseseeeaeeeensnenenees 5
II. CONSIDERATIONS. 8
A. THE FACTS OF THE DISPUTE. 8

 

The early start-up of the Project, the Feasibility Study and the Implementation

 

 

 

 

 

Contract. 8
The Revised Mine Plan and the corporate Structure. ...c.cccccsecsscsiessevesseteeeeeeeees 9
The Ce ion Contract. Il
The aftermath of the execution of the CONEACEL .o.ssccececcsecceseeveeetes estes eeteseeteseeteeenees 13
The parties’ ex} ion of the disput 15
The Clair ’ views. 15
The Respondent's views. 17
III. RESPONDENT’S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS... ceceeeeseseneneteseeeeeees 18

A. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING THE EXISTENCE OF AN INVESTMENT....... 20

 

 

Respondent’s a 20
The Claimants’ argument. 23
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the existence of the investMeNt. .......c0c 24

B. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING THE QUESTION THAT THE DISPUTE DOES,

NOT ARISE DIRECTLY OUT OF AN INVESTMENT. .......:sscseseeeseeesseesseeeseeeseeesseesseeeeeesseeeseees 30

 

 

The Respondent's ar: 30
The Claimants’ argument. 32
The Tribunal’s findings on the dispute arising directly out of the investment. ........ 33

C. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION CONCERNING RESPONDENT’S NOTIFICATION UNDER

 

ARTICLE 25 (4) OF THE CONVENTION. ......0.++
Respondent’s a 35
The Claimants’ approach. 37
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of consent qualified by notification under the

Convention. 38

D. OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION ON THE BASIS OF THE CLAIMANTS NOT HAVING

 

RESORTED TO PREVIOUSLY AGREED DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES.

The Ri dent’s ar: 41

‘ip

 

The Clair ’ view. 42
The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the previously agreed dispute settlement

procedure. 43

 

E. OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION ON THE BASIS OF LACK OF STANDING. ..........+5

 

Respondent’s objection. 47

The Clair ’ view. 48

 

The Tribunal’s findings on the question of standing.

IV. DECISION. 53

I Procedure

A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

1. On March 22, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a request for arbitration against the
Republic of Turkey (“Turkey” or the “Respondent”) from PSEG Global Inc. (PSEG), a
company incorporated under the laws of New Jersey in the United States of America
(USA); the North American Coal Corporation (“North American Coal”), a company
incorporated under the laws of the state of Delaware in the USA; and Konya Ilgin
Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi (the “Project Company”), described in the
request for arbitration as a special purpose limited liability company incorporated under
the laws of Turkey and wholly owned through several subsidiaries by PSEG (together

referred to as the “Claimants”).

2. The request invoked the ICSID arbitration provisions in the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments (the “Treaty”), which was

signed on December 3, 1985 and entered into force on May 18, 1990.

3. The Centre, on March 25, 2002, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“Institution
Rules”) acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day transmitted a copy to

the Republic of Turkey and to the Embassy of Turkey in Washington, D.C.

4, On April 12, 2002, the Centre requested further information from the Claimants,
with regard to (i) the investment of each requesting party, for purposes of the ICSID
Convention and the Treaty; (ii) the dispute of each requesting party, including further
information as to the date on which the dispute arose; (iii) each claimed violation of the
Treaty in respect of each requesting party; and (iv) the efforts on the part of each
requesting party to settle the dispute through consultations and negotiations in good faith.

The Claimants responded by a letter of April 18, 2002.

5. The request, as supplemented by the Claimants’ letter of April 18, 2002, was
registered by the Centre on May 2, 2002, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID

-5-

Convention, and on the same day the Secretary General, in accordance with Institution
Rule 7, notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an
Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

B. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and Commencement of Proceeding

6. Following the registration of the request for arbitration by the Centre and the
invitation to the parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal, the Claimants
reiterated the proposal in their request for arbitration that the Tribunal be composed of
three arbitrators, one appointed by each party and the third, who shall be the President of
the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties. Pursuant to Rule 2(2) of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), the Centre
communicated this proposal to the Republic of Turkey by letter of May 9, 2002 and by
letter of May 24, 2002, the Republic of Turkey notified the Centre of its acceptance of

the proposal.

7. The Claimants, by a letter of June 6, 2002, appointed Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C.,
Q.C., a national of Canada, as arbitrator and by letter of June 25, 2002, the Respondent
appointed Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as arbitrator. By
agreement, the parties in a joint letter of October 22, 2002 appointed Professor Francisco

Orrego Vicufia, a national of Chile, as the presiding arbitrator.

8. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre by a letter of
October 25, 2002, informed the parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, consisting of
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., and Professor
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, and that the proceeding was deemed to have commenced on
that day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

Cc. Written and Oral Proceedings

9. After consulting with the parties and the Centre, the Tribunal scheduled a first
session for January 8, 2003, and the parties, by a joint letter of December 23, 2002,
communicated to the Tribunal their agreement on procedural matters identified in the
provisional agenda for the first session, which had been sent to them by the Tribunal’s
Secretary. In that letter, the parties notified the Tribunal that the Respondent intended to
raise objections to jurisdiction, which the Tribunal would be required to rule on before

proceeding to the merits of the case in accordance with Article 41 of the ICSID

-6-
Arbitration Rules. They also notified the Tribunal of their agreed schedule for the
submissions and hearing on jurisdiction. Further, the parties in the same letter informed
the Tribunal that in the event that the Tribunal were to reach the merits of the dispute, the
Respondent intended to submit a counterclaim and the Claimants reserved their rights to
raise objections as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over any such counterclaim, which

objection would be heard at the same time as the merits of the claims and counterclaims.

10. The first session of the Tribunal was held as scheduled on January 8, 2003, at the
seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The parties reiterated their agreement on the
points communicated to the Tribunal in their joint letter of December 23, 2002, and the
remainder of the procedural issues on the agenda for the session were discussed and
agreed. All the conclusions were reflected in the written minutes of the session, signed
by the President and Secretary of the Tribunal and provided to the parties, as well as all

Members of the Tribunal.

11. In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Respondent on April 3, 2003, filed its
Memorial on Jurisdiction, and on June 27, 2003, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial

on Jurisdiction.

12. On July 11, 2003, the Respondent requested the Tribunal, in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 26, to extend by 45 days the time for the Respondent to file its
Reply on Jurisdiction. The Respondent cited as the reasons for this request, the volume
of the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (121 pages) and the number of
exhibits thereto (300); and the fact that “a substantial portion of the materials in [the]
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial ... including 13 of the witness statements and expert
opinions, [were] in English only” and needed to be translated into Turkish. The
Claimants in a letter of July 15, 2003 objected to the Respondent’s request, suggesting
instead that if an extension of time was of critical importance, it should be for no more
than 30 days to minimize the delay to the originally agreed schedule, and that, in such an

event, a similar extension should also be allowed the Claimants for their Rejoinder.

13. Following a further letter of July 15, 2003 from the Respondent, the Tribunal by
its Secretary’s letter of July 17, 2003, communicated to the parties its decision to extend
the deadline for the filing of the Reply on Jurisdiction by 30 days and to allow a similar

extension to the Claimants for the submission of the Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. The

-7-
Tribunal also decided to reschedule the hearing on jurisdiction, originally set for
November 3 to 6, 2003, to take place no earlier than the second half of January 2004 on

dates to be agreed by the Tribunal in consultation with the parties and the Secretariat.

14. In compliance with the new schedule, the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction was
duly filed on September 10, 2003, and the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction was duly
filed on November 24, 2003.

15. Also, in accordance with a new schedule, agreed after several exchanges of
correspondence between the Tribunal and the parties, and in consultation with the Centre,
the hearing on jurisdiction was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., from
February 22 to 25, 2004. The parties were represented by their respective counsel who
made presentations to the Tribunal and examined witnesses and experts from their side
and the opposing side. Seven witnesses and experts testified on behalf of the Claimants

and six testified on behalf of the Respondent. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal: Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, President, Mr. L. Yves
Fortier, CC, QC and Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler.

ICSID Secretariat: Mr. Ucheora O. Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal.

Attending on behalf of the Claimant: Carolyn B. Lamm, Abby Cohen Smutny, Lee A.
Steven, Lee M. Caplan, Noyan K. Goksu, Petr Polasek, Katherine F. Price, Matthew N.
Drossos, Erica M. Preiss, and Darryl S. Lew of White & Case LLP; Mesut Cakmak and
Tugba Bayman of Cakmak Ortak Avukat Biirosu; Matthew J. McGrath and Halil E.
Sunar PSEG Global, Inc.; Clark A. Moseley of North America Coal Corporation; Sarah
P. Voll and Carlos A. Pabon-Agudelo of National Economic Research Associates; as
well as William VanHerwarde, Michael B. Rosenzweig, Metin Gunday, Sait Guran, and
Ata Sakmar.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent: Selahattin Cimen, Sevim Argun, and Oguzhan
Ertugrul, Representatives; Daniel M. Price, Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Stephen M.
Schwebel, Samuel Boxerman, P. David Richardson, Marinn F. Carlson, Lesley Foxhall,
Jennifer Haworth McCandless, Banu Demiralp, Serdar Paksoy, Duygu Limnili, Elvan
Aziz, and John P. Wintrol, Counsel; Selda Bilgig, Osman Emed, Ahmet Oktay Kavas,
Carlos Lapuerta, Ergun Ozsunay, Rutherford B. Poats, Robert Sansom, and Mumtaz
Soysal.

16. Following the hearing, the Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means

of communication, including a meeting for deliberations in London on May 4, 2004.

17. The Tribunal considers it unnecessary to describe the numerous procedural issues

that it was called upon to resolve, or to recount the parties’ many submissions, requests

-8-
and applications relating to these issues. Suffice it to say that throughout the written
phase of this jurisdictional phase of the arbitration, the Tribunal was required to consider
and determine a myriad of questions relating to the disclosure of documents and the

availability of one witness.

II. Considerations.

A. The facts of the dispute.

The early start-up of the Project, the Feasibility Study and the Implementation Contract.

18. In the past two decades Turkey has undertaken an important expansion of its
energy sector with a view to ensuring the overall development of its economy. In 1984,
Parliament enacted Law No. 3096 authorizing private companies to build and operate
generation facilities and to sell the generated electricity to TEAS, the Turkish state-
owned electric entity. Under this Law a “Build-Operate-Transfer” (“BOT”) model was
established, allowing private investors to undertake the generation project with the
requirement of transferring to the Government the ownership of the site and plant at the
end of the authorization period. This legal framework was perfected in 1994 with the
enactment of Law No. 3996, which in essence provided for the BOT contracts and

agreements to operate subject to private law.

19. Foreign investment was expected to be a key feature in this energy expansion
program. In April 1994, PSEG requested the Ministry of Energy to undertake the
negotiation of a contract with a view to developing a lignite-fired electric power plant in
the Turkish Province of Konya. The development of an adjacent lignite mine that would
supply the plant’s fuel was also envisaged in the proposal. After some initial
negotiations and revisions, the Ministry in November 1995 approved the Feasibility

Study of the project prepared by PSEG.

20. The Feasibility Study considered a plant with a generating capacity of 425 MW
gross and 375 MW net. The average annual price per kilowatt-hour was US$0.0498
cents,’ the operational period 38 years, the annual availability factor 85.08% and the total

investment US$804. 8 millions. The net capacity, the price and the availability factor are

All references to currencies made in this Decision are to dollars of the United States of America.

-9-
the key commercial terms and are set out in a “tariff” which establishes the terms and

conditions for the provision of and payment for power on a yearly basis.

21. In March 1996, the Turkish Constitutional Court ruled that BOT power projects
could not be subject to private law and had to follow the traditional model of concession
contracts subject to the approval of the Turkish Council of State (the “Danistay”). Upon
approval of the project by the State Planning Organization, the parties in August 1996
initialed an Implementation Contract” based on the same factors as the Feasibility Study.
This contract was then submitted to the Danistay for review and approval in the form of a

Concession Contract.’

22. A few weeks before the Implementation Contract was initialed, PSEG advised the
Ministry that an additional site exploration had to be conducted before preparing the final
Mine Plan, a step that could have an influence in the operation plan and coal production
costs. Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract allowed the Claimants to conduct
additional studies concerning the mine site and, if necessary, to prepare a Revised Mine
Plan; it also allowed for the submission of a revised energy tariff reflecting such cost

increases.

23. The Implementation Contract also provided for a Long Term Energy Sales
Agreement to be entered into by the Claimants and TEAS and for a Fund Agreement with
the Electrical Energy Fund, as well as for the project to benefit from a Treasury guarantee
under Article 11 of Law 3996.‘ Discussions on the Energy and Fund agreements made
progress but ultimately were not finalized. The Treasury guarantee experienced other
problems as will be mentioned below.

The Revised Mine Plan and the corporate structure.

24. The Revised Mine Plan was submitted by the Claimants in December 1997,
incorporating conditions for the mine that were different from those originally envisaged.
As a result, it was estimated by the Claimants that a capital investment of US$361.6
million would have to be made in addition to the US$804.8 million investment envisaged
in the Feasibility Study, thus totaling US$1.166 billion. Furthermore, the Revised Mine
Plan called for an additional US$557 million that would be needed for the mine during

? Hereinafter the “Implementation Contract”.
3 Hereinafter the “Concession Contract” or the “Contract”.

-10-
the life of the Project and an additional US$20 million yearly operating and maintenance
costs. It was also proposed that these increased costs could be met by increasing the
generating capacity of the plant to 500 MW gross and 433.5 MW net with an average
availability of 87%, the price per kilowatt hour remaining unchanged. Additional energy
would have to be bought by TEAS under this proposal. The overall cost of the project

would increase by approximately US$1 billion.

25. The negotiations between the parties that followed in 1998 were of an
increasingly complex nature. Part of it was related to the implications of the Revised

Mine Plan and part to the proposed corporate structure.

26. At first, a Turkish joint stock company was envisaged as the corporate vehicle,
but as a result of amendments of the Turkish law and tax issues PSEG later proposed that
it be changed to a Turkish branch Office of the foreign investor. The Ministry favored
the first choice although there would be adverse tax implications for the project. In this
context, the Ministry apparently requested the Claimant to prepare alternative proposals
that would take into account variations in the plant capacity and other factors that could
affect the tariff structure, including the question of the corporate structure.
Consequently, the Project Company was first established as a Turkish branch Office of a
Dutch corporation created to handle the investment and later incorporated as a limited

liability company.

27. The North American Coal Company (NACC) began assisting with the mining
aspects of the project in 1996 and in 1998 entered into a Memorandum of Understanding

with PSEG so as to become an equity investor.

28. In so far as the settlement of disputes was concerned, the Implementation
Contract had provided for ICSID arbitration. The relevant clause was, however, deleted
from the Concession Contract in the review process before the Danistay and as a result

the Contract did not contain any specific provision on dispute settlement.

29. Three proposals were submitted by the Claimant to take account of the changed
costs in February 1998. These proposals ranged from 433 MW gross/375 MW net to 500
MW gross/433.5 MW net; from an average availability factor of 85% to 87%; and all had

 

4 Hereinafter the “Treasury guarantee”.

-ll-

in common an increase in price from the original US$0.0498 cents to: US$0.0571

cents/Kwh, US$0.0523 cents/Kwh and US$0.0634 cents/Kwh, respectively.

30. The parties have different views about what was agreed in this respect. The
Respondent is of the view that the proposals were rejected because they would increase
the cost to the Turkish Government and consumer, but that it was prepared to
accommodate the 500/433.5 MW alternative provided the price remained unchanged and
that a limited liability company was established. The Respondent also submits that this
was agreed at a meeting held on February 13, 1998. The Claimants have a different
view, believing that no agreement was reached at this time and that the Ministry would

continue to examine the various proposals and to consider the Revised Mine Plan.

31. The discussions continued at another meeting held on February 19, 1998, where it
was agreed that a draft amended Contract would be submitted to the Danistay, including
the changes agreed. Exactly what changes and amendments would be submitted remained
unclear in the light of the continuing discussions about the Revised Mine Plan and the
plant capacity and other associated elements. The Revised Mine Plan was later approved
by the Turkish Coal Enterprise in May 1998.

The Concession Contract.

32. The fact is, however, that the Danistay approved the Implementation
Contract in the form of a Concession Contract on March 30, 1998. The economics of the
project as envisaged in the Feasibility Study were not changed as no agreed amendment
had been submitted. It follows that a plant capacity of 425 MW gross/375 MW net, on a
38-year term, an annual average availability factor of 85.08% and an average price of

US$0.0498 cents/Kwh, were approved.

33. One of the amendments introduced by the Danistay concerned the revised
tariff and its approval. Article 5.1 of the Implementation Contract had provided for the
possibility of submitting a new tariff to the Ministry covering the increased fuel
production costs. This resulted in the amended Article 8, paragraph 3, of the Contract,

which provides:

“Tf necessary, the Company will prepare a revised mine plan based on
such additional research and exploration conducted in the mine site prior

to the construction start date. If such revised mine plan increases the

-12-
Company’s estimated fuel production cost, the Company shall submit to
the Ministry a revised tariff reflecting such cost increase, which the
Ministry shall approve or disapprove in no later than sixty days after the
submission by the Company. In the event the Ministry withholds its
approval for the revised tariff on the basis of reasonable grounds and if the
Company abandons the project prior to the construction start date, the

Company and the Ministry shall have no claims against the other”.

34. Additional meetings were allegedly held in May 1998, although the Respondent
has explained that it has no official records of any such meetings and the officials
allegedly participating do not recall attending such meetings. In the Claimants’ version,
at a meeting held on May 18, 1998 the Ministry orally accepted a proposal for a 500 MW
gross/465 MW net plant capacity and an 87% availability factor so as to include the
increased costs and the added tax burden resulting from the limited liability company
corporate structure. Furthermore, a letter from the Claimant followed on the same date
confirming the alleged understandings. The Respondent, however, does not believe that
any such agreement was reached and that the letter remained unanswered as it was
beyond the scope of the agreement allegedly reached in February. In any event, the
Respondent argues, the Claimant itself believed that the May terms were only a proposal,

as reflected in a letter of June 3, 1999.

35. Other crucial steps in the process of negotiation took place in June 1998, but
again the views of the parties on such events are different. Following the approval of the
Revised Mine Plan by the Turkish Coal Enterprise, the Ministry approved on June 19,
1998 the commercial terms of the project. The Respondent believes these are the terms
agreed to in February 1998, that is, a plant capacity of 500 MW gross/433.5 MW net, the
availability factor and the tariff remaining unchanged. The Claimant, for its part, submits
that as a result of the May meetings and another meeting held on June 16, 1998, the
Ministry through its approval of June 19, 1998 accepted the 500 MW/gross and 465 MW
net plant capacity as the means to cover the increased costs, although admittedly no
reference was made to the net factor. The Respondent further argues that the 465 MW
net capacity was not feasible and that in any event the Ministry alone could not approve
new commercial terms. It also does not agree with the Claimants that a meeting was held

in this context.

-13-
36. After further exchanges of correspondence between the Claimant and the Ministry
concerning the Danistay approval of the Contract and the Claimant’s reservations in
respect of arbitration and other issues, PSEG executed the Concession Contract as issued
by the Danistay on December 10, 1998. A ground breaking ceremony took place on
December 17, 1998. In February 1999 the Claimant issued a performance bond for
US$8.848 millions and on March 8, 1999 the Ministry signed the Concession Contract.

37. Whether the Contract included a final agreement on key commercial terms and
what those terms were has also been a matter of controversy. The Respondent is of the
view that the Contract did not include a final agreement on essential commercial terms as
the original cost estimates turned to be inaccurate and no amendments were submitted to
the Danistay. A reference to 425 MW was made in the Ministry’s transmittal letter of the
executed Contract and later a reference to 500 MW gross/465 MW net was included in a
draft Protocol that the parties discussed in connection with the amendments that could be

submitted to the Danistay.

38. Each party argues that this Protocol was drafted by the other. In Respondent’s
view the reference to 465 MW net is a mistake that originated in the draft being prepared
by the Claimant; conversely, the Claimant argues that this was drafted by the Respondent
and therefore constitutes further evidence of the revised commercial terms having been
agreed to and that in any event the alleged mistake, even if such, was never corrected.
New meetings were held and correspondence exchanged in March and April 1999
concerning the terms of the Protocol and again the parties dispute whether the 465 MW
figure was accepted or even discussed at this other stage.

The aftermath of the execution of the Contract.

39. Various meetings that followed the execution of the Contract and the discussion
of the draft amendment Protocol showed that the parties were entrenched in their views
of the facts. The Ministry considered in particular that the final figures had been agreed
to in February 1998 and that any increase in the net capacity above 433.5 MW would
inevitably result in an unacceptable increase of the envisaged tariff of US$0.0498 cents.
In addition, the Ministry’s engineers believed that the increased tariff would not only
cover the costs but would also result in a higher profit for the Company. The Claimants

insisted that only by increasing the net capacity to 465 MW, as agreed in May 1998,

-14-
could the tariff be kept at that level and at the same time offset the additional costs

imposed by a limited liability company structure.

40. Additional proposals were made by the Claimants in June 1999 but none of them
were acceptable to the Ministry if it resulted in a higher cost to the Government and,
eventually, to the consumer. The alternative of a 545 MW gross/465 MW net was also
considered at this stage. On February 10, 2000, the Claimants made what they
considered their final offer: a 500 MW gross/433.5 MW net plant capacity with a higher
availability factor for the first twelve years of the project, but this was not acceptable to

the Ministry.

Al. Several important steps were taken as from mid-1999 in respect of the corporate
organization of the project and the governing legal framework. A Permission Certificate
authorizing the Project Company to invest and do business in Turkey was issued on July
5, 1999. The Company was incorporated as Konya Ilgin Ltd. on August 19, 1999. Also
in August 1999 the Turkish Constitution was amended to enable Parliament to authorize
certain public services to be provided under private law contracts and to permit the
Republic of Turkey to consent to international arbitration. Following the enactment of
Law No. 4493 in December 1999, BOT contracts could be concluded as private law

contracts.

42. Also with the enactment of Law No. 4501 on January 22, 2000, parties to existing
concession contracts could convert these instruments to private law contracts or could
agree to submit disputes to international or domestic arbitration. The Claimants applied
to the Ministry within the deadline given to convert the Concession Contract to a private
law contract or, alternatively, to amend the Contract agreeing to submission of disputes

to international arbitration.

43. This application led to a new round of disagreements between the parties as to the
commercial terms of the Contract. According to the Claimants, the Ministry demanded
six changes in the Contract before forwarding the application to the Council of Ministers.
In the view of the Claimants the Ministry was seeking to obtain financial concessions

which it did not have authority to demand under the law.

-15-
44, On December 22, 2000, the Claimants indicated that they would demand
reimbursement of the expenses made and payment for its losses. It appears that no further
negotiations took place thereafter. The performance bond expired on February 23, 2001

and was not extended.

45. An additional amendment of the legal framework took place in March 2001 with
the enactment of Law No. 4628 on the Electricity Market. The Claimants believe that
Article 8 (1) of this Law, by eliminating the possibility of obtaining a Treasury guarantee,
effectively terminated the Concession Contract as this was one of its essential
components. The Respondent believes that the law had no impact on the project as the

Claimant had ended the negotiations before its adoption.

46. A decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court of February 13, 2002 invalidated
the provision of Law No. 4628 eliminating the rights of a company to the Treasury
guarantee, because this was a right created by the concession contract and hence had to
be protected under the contract, the rule of law and the Turkish Constitution. The
Claimants believe that their right to this guarantee has thus been revived, but no

governmental action was taken in this respect.

47. As noted, the Claimants introduced a request for arbitration before ICSID on
March 22, 2002, thus beginning this proceeding.

The parties’ explanation of the dispute.

48. The parties also offer different explanations about the reasons for their
disagreements and, ultimately, for submitting their dispute to arbitration. A number of the
issues raised are connected more to the merits than to jurisdiction in this case, but it is
necessary to keep them in sight in order to better understand the nature and extent of the
jurisdictional objections made by the Respondent and the views of the Claimants thereon.
The Claimants’ views.

49. The Claimants have argued that the Respondent took action and engaged in
deliberate inaction to destroy the Claimants’ investment in the Republic of Turkey. After
having authorized the investment and concluded a valid and binding Concession
Contract, it is argued, the Respondent took steps to deprive the Claimants of the Treasury
guarantee, the long-term power purchase agreement and the Fund Agreement that were

essential to the success and feasibility of the project. In this context, the Claimants argue

-16-
that various contractual undertakings were breached, in particular the revision of the
tariff structure so as to accommodate increased costs. It is also claimed that other rights

provided to investors by law were denied.

50. Given the fact that the project was organized along the lines of a BOT model, the
actions and inactions were particularly detrimental to its feasibility. The Claimants
explain that the significant level of investment required involves both equity and loan
resources, including international debt financing, which is dependent on a tariff structure
that is able to generate sufficient income to repay lenders, meet the operational expenses
and offer sufficient returns on equity. Although regulations in force at the time provided
that a BOT project’s rate of return should be capped at 16%, most of the alternatives
discussed with the Ministry ended up in lower figures that led, in the Claimants’ view, to

an inadequate and unreasonable rate of return.

51. In the Claimants’ understanding these difficulties stemmed from the changing
priorities of the Turkish Government and particularly from the pressure to reform the
country’s economy in the light of the negotiations for access to the European Community
and World Bank policies. It is alleged that these policies were contrary to the BOT model
as it was thought that the profitability of the project would be artificially ensured through
government guarantees and other mechanisms, including a subsidized tariff structure
resulting in uncompetitive generation costs. The Government was required to impose
limits on the new projects included in the public investment program and to limit the

issuance of new guarantees.

52. The end result was that the Government abandoned the large-scale BOT projects,
with the exception of 29 small projects that did not include the Claimants’ project.
Treasury guarantees were effectively eliminated under the Electricity Market Law, noted
above, and power purchase agreements could not exceed one year. These measures led to
the effective termination of the project. Notwithstanding the fact that the Constitutional
Court ruled that such restrictive provisions of the Electricity Market Law were
unconstitutional, as explained above, no government action ensued to remedy the
situation. Moreover, it is argued by the Claimants that both the Energy Sales Agreement
and the Fund Agreement had been substantially completed with the technical bodies

involved but the Ministry never extended the necessary authorization.

-17-

53. The Claimants also explain that all the major components of the project had been
completed prior to financial closing. These components included the preparation of an
Environmental Impact Assessment, the selection of the engineering, procurement and
construction contractor, the conduct of hydrological studies, a mining license and
operation permit for the mine, loan applications and appointment of financial agents,
zoning changes and preparatory steps for the necessary expropriations.

The Respondent's views.

54. The Respondent rejects all of the above explanations and believes that the dispute
arises from the project never having moved off the drawing board or the negotiating
table. Since the Claimants had dramatically underestimated the costs of the project in the
Feasibility Study, it is argued, there simply was no agreement on the commercial terms. It
follows in the Respondent’s view that all the activities undertaken were merely

preparatory to the investment and did not involve any legal expectation or right.

55. Before any Concession Contract was approved by the Danistay, the Claimants
knew that the original commercial terms were unfeasible as they had changed
dramatically in the light of the Revised Mine Plan. The Respondent believes that the
Claimants have constantly sought to pass on to the Turkish Government and consumer
the higher costs involved by selling more electricity, resulting in a burden to the public of
US$2 billion. The Ministry repeatedly advised the Claimants that the original commercial
framework was not feasible as neither were many additional proposals that differed
substantially from the original. In particular it is asserted that the Ministry never agreed

to and the Danistay never approved a 500 MW gross/465 MW net plant capacity.

56. Even after the Danistay approved the Concession Contract, both parties clearly
understood that new commercial terms would have to be agreed to and submitted for the
approval of this body. This was the reason for the many negotiations that took place and
the draft amendment Protocol that was discussed after the approval of the Concession

Contract.

57. In addition, the Respondent is of the view that the Claimants never completed the
steps required to make an investment in Turkey. The initial framework setting was not
followed up and as a result the Claimants did not obtain the necessary authorizations

from the Treasury to proceed with the investment, did not obtain approval from the

-18-
Turkish Coal Enterprises to mine certain needed reserves, never concluded the Energy
Sales Agreement or the Plant Performance Report and never obtained a host of other
permits nor took other steps required, including loan agreements, insurance, plant
permission, construction license and others. The activities undertaken by the Claimants
are all pre-investment steps and in a number of cases do not even fall in this category.

The ground-breaking ceremony was merely symbolic.

58. As to the question of the Treasury guarantee, the Respondent explains that there
was no obligation in this connection as the issuance of such guarantees is a discretionary
power of the Treasury and there was no obligation to this effect under the Concession
Contract. Neither did the restrictions introduced by the Electricity Market Law have any
consequence for the project as the commercial terms had failed much earlier and the
project had in fact been abandoned. In any event, it is argued, as the Constitutional Court
held these restrictions unconstitutional, the Claimants could have pursued an agreement

and applied for the guarantee at any time, but this was not done.

59. The Respondent also explains that the Ministry worked diligently at all times and
that its responses to the various proposals were reasonable in the light of the need to
protect the public interest. So was the requirement to organize the project company as a
Turkish capital company as PSEG had obtained a windfall by changing the structure to a
branch office of a foreign company. At all times the Ministry instructed the various
public services involved to cooperate in the obtaining of permits, agreements and
elements required for the beginning of the project, but the Claimants were remiss in their

own action to this effect while they waited for more favorable legislation to be enacted.

60. The Respondent opposes in particular any connection with World Bank policies,
as these were discussed much later than the date when disagreements emerged as a result
of the increased costs of the Revised Mine Plan. Neither did the Ministry interfere with
the Claimants’ rights to obtain the benefits of a private law regime under Law No. 4501
as it only asked for the introduction of standard conditions required to improve all
projects.
III. Respondent’s jurisdictional objections.

61. Based upon its views of the facts and the meaning of the dispute, the Respondent

has made the following objections to jurisdiction:

-19-

a

There is no jurisdiction in this case because there is no investment or an

investment dispute under the ICSID Convention or the Treaty.

b) Even if there was an investment, the Government of Turkey has not consented

to jurisdiction.

c

The obligation under the Treaty to resort to any previously agreed dispute

settlement procedure has not been met.

d

oS

The North American Coal Corporation (NACC) and the Project Company do

not have standing in this case.

62. The parties have raised as a preliminary point an aspect that the Tribunal wishes

to dispose of at the very outset.

63. The Claimants have argued that the Tribunal needs only to be satisfied that if the
facts alleged by Claimants are ultimately proven true, they would be capable of
constituting a violation of the Treaty. The Claimants have invoked in support of this
proposition the prima facie test applied in UPS v. Canada* and the assumption relied
upon in Methanex v. United States® that, for purposes of jurisdiction, the Claimants’
factual contentions are deemed correct. In the Respondent’s view, however, when the
jurisdictional challenge involves disputed questions of fact, as in this case, the Tribunal
has the duty to consider the facts alleged by both parties and make its own findings of

fact for deciding the jurisdictional aspects.

64. The Tribunal is aware that the prima facie test has been applied in a number of
cases, including ICSID cases such as Maffezini’ and CMS®*, and that as a general
approach to jurisdictional decisions it is a reasonable one. However, this is a test that is
always case-specific. If, as in the present case, the parties have views which are so

different about the facts and the meaning of the dispute, it would not be appropriate for

SUnited Parcel Service of America v. Government of Canada, available at
http://www. state.gov/s/l/c3749.htm

® Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, available at http://www. state.gov/s/I/c5818.htm

7 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision on Request for
Provisional Measures of October 28, 1999 and Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000,
16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 212 (2001); Award of the Tribunal of November 13, 2000; 16 JCSID Rev.—FILJ
248 (2001). Rectification of the Award of January 31, 2001; 16 JCSID Rev.—FILJ 279 (2001).

* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, 42 ILM 788 (2003).

-20-

the Tribunal to rely only on the assumption that the facts as presented by the Claimants

are correct.

65. The Tribunal necessarily has to examine the facts in a broader perspective,
including the views expressed by the Respondent, so as to reach a jurisdictional
determination, keeping of course separate the need to prove the facts as a matter
pertaining to the merits. This is what the Tribunal will do.

A. Jurisdictional Objection concerning the existence of an investment.

Respondent's arguments.

66. The Respondent argues first that the Treaty protection extends only to the
investments defined therein and as neither the proposed project nor the Concession
Contract are an investment the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. Article I (1) (c) of the BIT

defines “investment” as follows:

“Investment”? means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals or companies of the
other Party, including assets, equity, debt, claims and service and investment

contracts; and includes

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as mortgages, liens

and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests in

the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value and

associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual and industrial property rights, including rights with respect to
copyrights, patents, trademark, trade names, industrial designs, trade

secrets and know-how, and goodwill;

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits

pursuant to law; and

-21-
(vi) reinvestment of returns, and of principal and interest payments arising

under loan agreements.”

67. As noted above, the Respondent believes that the project never moved beyond the
drawing board and the lengthy negotiations undertaken did not mature into an
investment. As the parties never agreed to the essential commercial terms of the project,
such as gross and net plant capacity, availability factor and purchase price, there was
simply no “meeting of the minds”.’ Even if there had been an agreement, the Respondent
adds for the sake of argument, no amendments or revisions were submitted to the
Danistay for approval, an essential step under Turkish law, nor were a number of other

key agreements concluded, notably the Energy Sales Agreement.

68. The Respondent further argues that the situation in this case is analogous to that
in Mihaly v. Sri Lanka,'° where a number of preliminary expenditures and steps
undertaken by the Claimant were ruled not to be an investment as no binding and
effective concession contract was concluded by the parties. It alleges that there is no
investment in this case either; there are only some expenditures on a project that never

materialized.

69. The Respondent argues next that, while it is not disputed that the Concession
Contract was approved by the Danistay and executed by the parties, this Contract does
not constitute an investment because it did not contain the essential agreed commercial
terms. In the best of circumstances there was a framework for an agreement to negotiate
further. The parties knew this before the Contract was submitted to the Danistay and this
explains why the Contract contains provisions for a revised mine plan and a revised
tariff. However, it is explained, the Danistay provided the Ministry with broad discretion
to withhold its approval of the revised tariff and did not fix the commercial terms to be

negotiated.

70. In the Respondent’s view nothing prevented the Claimants from implementing the
Contract in the terms that it contained reflecting the early agreement of the Feasibility

Study, but, before submission to the Danistay, the Claimants advised that the Contract

° Legal Opinion of Professor Dr. Ergun Ozsunay. September 10, 2003, at 14.
'© Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/2), Award of March 15, 2002, 17 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 142 (2002).

-22-
was not feasible in those terms and that it had to be renegotiated. The amendments

requested by the Claimants were ultimately not acceptable to the Respondent.

71. The end result is that the Contract, the Respondent asserts, is not a valid and
binding agreement to which both parties have expressed their consent to be bound. The
original terms were repudiated by the Claimants and there are no new terms agreed to. In
addition, under Turkish law a contract is null and void if its subject matter is impossible
to carry out, this being the case here from a technological and economic point of view
unless entirely new terms were introduced. Neither was the Contract financially feasible
without the financial incentives that the Claimants never obtained nor sought. Such
situation of uncertainty made it impossible for any tribunal to fill the gaps concerning the

essential commercial terms, which are thus clearly unenforceable.

72. Also the Respondent opposes in this context the characterization that the
Claimants have made of the Branch Office and Konya Ilgin Ltd, the Project Company, as
an investment within the meaning of the Treaty or that any of the claimed assets of this
Company qualify as investments. First, because in the Respondent’s argument the Branch
Office established in January 1998 is not an investment under any definition and, in any
event, this would not be an investment out of which the dispute arises. The dispute in this
case concerns the proposed project and not the activities of a branch Office which did not
even sign the Concession Contract submitted to the Danistay. The fact that a limited
liability Company was incorporated in August 1999, long after the relevant events
invoked by the Claimants in support of their argument, does not in Respondent’s view

alter the situation as this is still not an investment.

72. Relying on the criteria set out in Mihaly'! and Zhinvali (R1907),'? the
Respondent argues in particular that the Feasibility Study, the Revised Mine Plan, the
Transfer of Mining Rights Agreement and other permits and licenses claimed to be part
of the assets of the Project Company are mere development activities undertaken in

preparation of an investment that never came about.

Mi .

Mihaly cit.
" Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/1), Award of January 24,
2003, unpublished but introduced in the arbitration record.

-23-

The Claimants’ argument.

74. In making their argument the Claimants rely on the accepted fact that the ICSID
Convention deliberately omitted the definition of investment and left this definition to the
parties’? Broad definitions were embodied in numerous treaties and agreements and a
broad interpretation has also been upheld by ICSID tribunals, particularly Fedax'* and
CSOB.'> The Treaty concerned in this case is no exception as the Parties thereto have
agreed to a broad definition of investment. The Claimants assert that the Concession
Contract clearly constitutes an investment which is listed in Article I (1)(c) to include

service and investment contracts, claim to performance and intangible property.

75. The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts are invoked by
the Claimants in support of their view that it is not always necessary to reach an
agreement on all the essential terms of a contract as long as the parties have the intention
of forming a contract'® and the obligation to proceed to negotiate the pending terms in
good faith. It is further invoked that civil law systems also allow the parties to leave
open many terms of the contract to be determined later in good faith and that, particularly
in long-term concession contracts, it is often the case that adjustment clauses will allow
for change to basic terms in order to remain within the economic parameters of the
contract. It is also stated that the validity of adjustment clauses and their enforceability

have been upheld by arbitral tribunals. '7

76. The Claimants also argue that the Contract is unequivocally a valid and binding
legal agreement between the parties, as reflected in a precise legal language and the use
of all the solemnities of a contract, all of it far from a mere statement of intention. In the
Claimants’ view there is no possible analogy with Mihaly, where no contract was signed
and all preliminary documents of intention expressly contained disclaimers that no

binding rights were being created. Moreover, the Concession Contract in the present case

'3 Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, June 27, 2003, at 2-5.

'§ Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction of July 11, 1997, 37 ILM 1378 (1998); Award of March 9, 1998, 37 ILM 1391 (1998).

'S Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction (May 24, 1999), available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/csob_decision.pdf; Decision of the Tribunal on the Further and
Partial Objection to Jurisdiction of December 1, 2000, 15 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 530 (2000).

' UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, 1994, Article 2.14.

"7 Aminoil Award, 21 ILM 976, (1982).

-24-
expresses its binding legal character and was executed by the parties, authorizing the

completion of further contracts but not depending itself on these other contracts.

77. Expert opinions introduced by the Claimants also examine in detail the validity of
contracts under Turkish law,'* concluding in this respect that once a concession contract
is approved by the Danistay and executed by the parties it constitutes a legally binding
and valid instrument. It is also concluded that in this particular case the Contract
includes more comprehensive terms than most contracts approved by the Danistay, even
the essential commercial terms the Respondent argues to be missing. Adjustment clauses,
such as Article 8 of the Contract, constitute an integral part of the agreement and are also
binding under Turkish law. In any event, as explained in connection with the facts, the
Claimants believe that an agreement on the new essential commercial terms was reached

with the Ministry.

78. In the Claimants’ argument the Project Company is in itself an investment that
was duly incorporated under Turkish law and granted the necessary Permission
Certificate to operate and do business in that country. In particular, it is further affirmed,
all of its assets are investment in the meaning of the Treaty, including the Feasibility
Study and the Revised Mine Plan as well as intangible property and industrial property
rights, the Transfer of Mining Rights Agreement as both intangible property and licenses
and permits, and the Environmental Impact Assessment Report and other permits and
licenses. Even if it were correct to observe that the project does not constitute an
investment, all the agreements, legal rights, licenses, authorizations, assets and property
of the investor do qualify as investments under the Treaty.

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the existence of the investment.

79. The Tribunal must first note that the facts alleged by the parties are not always
consistent with the very views in support of which they are invoked. A number of
contradictions can be noted in this respect. This is not surprising in a highly complex
operation and negotiation that on many occasions were handled by technical staff not

familiar with the legal language.

'8 Rejoinder Opinion of Prof. Dr. Metin Giinday, November 24, 2003, par. 13; Legal Opinion of Prof. Dr.
Sait Giiran, November 24, 2003, par. 6.

-25-
80. The essential point that the Tribunal must establish, however, is a legal one. Does
the Concession Contract exist? The answer to this question is not difficult as the parties
do not dispute the fact that the Concession Contract does exist, was duly signed,
submitted to the Danistay and approved by this body and later executed with all the legal
formalities and requirements. It is not disputed either that both parties unequivocally
believed that the Contract had become effective on the date of the signing by the

Ministry. The Contract is couched in proper legal language.

81. | Numerous documents in the record evidence this understanding of the parties.
Letters from the Ministry of March 11, 1999, April 9, 1999 and July 20, 1999, for
example, refer to the Contract having become effective. This in itself is a substantive
difference with the facts in Mihaly where, as explained above, the parties never signed a
concession contract and expressly disclaimed any legal obligations arising from the
preparatory work undertaken. The same is true of Zhinvaly where the parties expressly

acknowledged that the Claimant did not have an investment.

82. The question that the Tribunal must answer next is a more difficult one. Is the
Contract valid? Herein lies the fundamental dispute between the parties. The answer is
related to the question of whether the Contract omitted essential terms and conditions that

make it a nullity or a different kind of instrument.

83. The Tribunal must first note in this respect that the Contract did not ignore the
essential commercial terms of the transaction as the terms originally agreed to in the
Feasibility Study were incorporated in the Contract. Technical formulas to define the
tariff structure and the price were thus included in Annex 2 of the Contract. To this
extent there is not a blank or a vacuum in the Contract. Theoretically, on the basis of the
Contract as signed and executed, the Claimants could still undertake the project on the
commercial terms therein specified, which the Respondent has admitted was a possibility.
The Claimants could also seek either to amend those terms, under both Articles 8 and 32

of the Contract or to ultimately abandon the project.

84. The parties to the Contract knew before its submission to the Danistay in draft

form that costs would increase as a result of the Revised Mine Plan.'? This Revision

'° Witness Statement of Halil L. Sunar, June 27, 2003, par. 59.

-26-
entailed significant changes to the earlier economic estimates and to the work envisaged
in the mine site. Letters pointing to the need for accommodation and tariff restructuring
were abundant. This is precisely why the Implementation Contract included a
rebalancing mechanism in Article 5.1, which later led to Article 8 of the Concession
Contract. This is also why the Claimants repeatedly made reservations of their rights
under the Implementation Contract and stated that amendments included in the draft

submitted to the Danistay did not constitute a waiver of such rights.

85. The fact that economically the project might be difficult to execute or even
become unfeasible does not render the Contract invalid. Neither does the fact that the
project could become impossible to perform. As Professor Giiran stated in his Legal
Opinion, “...economic hardship does not constitute a valid excuse to escape a party’s
contractual obligations, whether under the doctrine of impossibility of performance or
any other principle of Turkish law”.”° Professor Giinday offered a similar opinion. He
said that “...economic hardship is not recognized as impossibility as that concept is

o> 21

understood by Turkish law”.

86. Moreover, the repudiation that the Claimants have allegedly made of the original
terms stems from its economic and financial feasibility. It does not alter the legal validity
of the Contract, particularly since both parties foresaw that there would be a need for an
economic adjustment as a result of the Revised Mine Plan and other issues intervening in
the negotiation. The need for an economic adjustment informs Article 8 of the Contract.
Article 8 of the Contract allows the Claimants to seek an economic rebalancing of the

Contract terms in case of significant change in that balance.

87. An additional consideration arises because the Contract contains a mechanism for
renegotiating the commercial terms and the tariff as a result of the Revised Mine Plan.
Again, this does not affect the validity of the Contract; it only means that the terms

therein defined can be reopened in the light of certain events.

88. This is not an unusual feature in contracts dealing with highly complex
concessions of services of long duration or other types of long-term transactions. Faced

with the possibility of renegotiation of certain contract terms, the parties’ intent is

°° | egal Opinion of Prof. Dr. Sait Giiran, November 24, 2003, par. 23.
2! Rejoinder Opinion of Prof. Dr. Metin Giinday, November 24, 2003, par. 26.

-27-
dispositive of the question whether the Contract nevertheless came into existence. In the
present case, both the language of the Contract as well as the circumstances, as they are
reviewed below, demonstrate an intent by the Parties to be bound in spite of the fact that

certain terms still needed to be agreed upon at a later date.

89. The Tribunal also notes that several experts on Turkish administrative law have
opined that the Concession Contract is binding on the Turkish State and meets all the

conditions to become effective under Turkish administrative law.

90. The conclusions reached by the Tribunal on the existence and the validity of the
Contract would suffice to affirm jurisdiction on this point. The issue whether the parties
undertook the required negotiations on the amendment and rebalancing of the
commercial terms of the Contract in good faith and its eventual legal consequences

pertains to the merits.

91. The Tribunal cannot ignore, however, the related question whether the
commercial terms were actually agreed as this question is also of the essence of the
dispute between the parties. The documentary evidence offered by the parties in support
of their respective arguments is not generally conclusive on this matter. Whether the
terms were agreed to in February 1998, as the Respondent believes, or in May and June
1998, as the Claimants believe, and what those terms were, is not sufficiently
documented. In fact, there are indications pointing both ways and again many

contradictions. The same is true of the statements of fact witnesses.

92. The Respondent argues in particular that the Claimants in a letter of June 3,
1999,” characterized as a proposal what they now argue was an agreement referred to in
an earlier letter of May 18, 1998,”> thus acknowledging that an agreement was never
reached. While grammatically that may be so, the Tribunal cannot draw from this fact a
legal conclusion since it is perfectly possible that the Claimants were referring to the
proposal on the basis of which the alleged agreement of May 18, 1998 was reached. The
ongoing submission of cash flow tables and tariff alternatives up to the year 2000
suggests, however, that no firm agreement was in place but that it was being explored and

negotiated.

® Sunar to Ministry, June 3, 1999.
?3 Sunar to Ministry, May 18, 1998.

-28-
93. The Respondent has also invoked minutes of the Claimants concerning, for
example, meetings held on May 14, July 19, September 21 and October 13, 1999,
suggesting that a number of issues were not considered sufficiently clarified, agreed to or
settled. The Respondent also argued that the Claimants stated clearly that the project
could not move forward without an agreement on the tariff, as reflected in minutes of

meetings held on December 16, 1999, January 27, March 3 and April 10, 2000.

94. The Claimants have also bolstered their arguments with documentary evidence.
The letters sent by the Claimants to the Ministry on May 18 and June 23, 1998 make
specific reference to agreements on amendments discussed at meetings, as does the draft
Protocol that was prepared but not actually sent to the Danistay. Furthermore, various
notes of meetings appear to corroborate the Claimants’ view that an agreement was in
fact reached. On this question, Claimants refer to notes of meetings held on May 15 and
18 and June 16, 1998, filed late in the proceedings. The Claimants also refer to
documents allegedly evidencing that the Respondent’s view that a different agreement
was reached is not tenable. Some documents do indeed point to the specific figures of

500 MW gross/465 MGW net or to the 500 MW alone.”*

95. Considering the conclusion on jurisdiction which the Tribunal reached on the
basis of the intent of the Parties, there is no need at this stage for the Tribunal to elaborate
on the fact that some of these documents were indeed filed very late in the proceedings.

This may be a matter to be considered during the second phase of the arbitration.

96. There are, however, other documents which the Tribunal believes are particularly
important in establishing the intent of the parties to conclude and be bound by the
Contract. The most fundamental of these is evidently the Contract itself. There are many
provisions in the Contract which evidence the intent of the parties to be bound. The main
one is Article 8 which specifically allows for a rebalancing of the Contract where a
Revised Mine Plan introduces substantial changes in the economics of the Contract, such
as in the present case. The wording of Article 8 is very clear. The pertinent terms of this
Article, reproduced above, are clearly indicative of the central role played by the

economic rebalancing which is envisaged.

4 Ministry to TEAS, 30 June 1998; Letter by Technical staff to Ministry, 19 June, 1998.

-29-
97. While much has been discussed about whether the 60-day period the Ministry had
to approve or disapprove the Article 8 amendments on reasonable grounds entails a
mandatory action, or the opposite conclusion that if no action is taken it simply means the
rejection of the amendments under Turkish law, this does not alter the fact that the
Claimants could avail themselves of this mechanism and indeed did so in order to seek to
rebalance the Contract. The long negotiations between the parties with respect to a new
tariff so indicates and the very terms of the draft Protocol discussed by the parties also
show that commercial elements were being debated pursuant to the mechanism set out in

Article 8 of the Contract.

98. In turn, this mechanism is related to Article 15 of the Contract which refers to a
number of agreements or protocols to be concluded by the Company. The fact that this
was seen as an obligation is clearly expressed by the use of the term “shall”. This very
obligation also assumes that the Respondent’s institutions will concur in these

agreements which will supplement the Contract.

99. Article 35 of the Contract is also significant in this context. This Article provides
that the Contract shall be effective on the date of execution upon review by the Danistay,
all of which happened in fact. It provides next for the Company to complete other related
steps concerning, in particular, financing, executing the Contracts envisaged in Article
15, obtaining required authorizations and permits and obtaining the final approval of
projects by the Ministry. Paragraph 2 of Article 35 begins with the expression
“However”. This word does not condition the effectiveness of the Contract under
paragraph 1 because termination only arises in case of “default” of the Company.

Otherwise the Contract remains in force and is effective.

100. The Danistay Decision of 11 March 1998 approving the Contract refers to the
fulfillment of a number of additional transactions by the Company as “an obligation
arising from the contract”, thus indicating that the obligations would be in effect as soon
as the Contract was approved and executed. Clearly, these obligations were to be fulfilled

once the Contract had become effective.

101. Although, as noted, the witness statements are contradictory, it is well established
that there were meetings held by the Company officials with the Ministry’s

representatives in charge of negotiations, in particular Mr. Basli. The correspondence that

-30-
followed these meetings indicates clearly that discussions were progressing on the
commercial terms, including the plant capacity. Although witnesses for the Respondent
have stated that they were not aware of any such meetings, that no official records were
prepared and that, at the most, these should be considered simply as visits, the fact is that

a certain number of meetings were held.

102. The Tribunal need not find during this phase of the arbitration whether or not the
parties reached agreement on any amendment to some of the commercial terms of the
Contract. However, in weighing the totality of the evidence submitted by the parties, the
Tribunal does find that amendments to the Contract terms were pursued. This finding

further confirms the existence, validity and binding nature of the Contract.

103. In reaching its conclusion on this matter the Tribunal is also persuaded by the
argument that if the parties did not intend to bind themselves by means of a Contract,
why would they then have signed, submitted for approval and executed a Contract?
Letters of intention or other instruments would have sufficed to provide a general
framework to continue negotiations until an agreement was reached or not without any
legal consequence for either party, as the events in Mihaly show. The view of the
Respondent that the Contract was signed as a mere courtesy or sign of good will is not

tenable, nor is the view that this is nothing but a framework devoid of legal significance.

104. A contract is a contract. The Concession Contract exists, is valid and is legally
binding. This conclusion is sufficient to establish that the Tribunal has jurisdiction on the
basis of an investment having been made in the form of a Concession Contract. A
different question, again pertaining to the merits, is whether all or some of the activities
undertaken qualify as a part of the investment or are to be regarded as merely
preparatory. The same holds true of whether the assets of the Project Company constitute

an investment.

105. The objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on this count is therefore dismissed.

B. Jurisdictional objection concerning the question that the dispute does not arise
directly out of an investment.

The Respondent's argument.
106. Intertwined with the arguments on the jurisdictional objection concerning the

existence of an investment, the Respondent has also raised the question that if there is no

-31-
investment, there cannot be an investment dispute under the Treaty and the ICSID
Convention. But even if there is an investment, the argument follows, the dispute does

not arise directly from such investment in terms of Article 25 (1) of the Convention.
Article VI (1) of the Treaty defines an investment dispute as

“a dispute involving (a) the interpretation or application of an investment
agreement between a Party and a national or company of the other Party;
(b) the interpretation or application of any investment authorization
granted by a Party’s foreign investment authority to such national or
company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this

Treaty with respect to an investment.”

107. |The Respondent believes that none of these three situations arise in the present
case. There is no investment agreement or authorization in this case, avers the
Respondent, and there are no Treaty rights associated with an investment. If the
activities undertaken do not qualify as investments under the Treaty the dispute cannot be
said to arise directly out of an investment as required under Article 25 (1) of the
Convention, particularly since the Convention left the definition of investment to the

parties.

108. The CSOB decision invoked by the Claimants in connection with the definition of
an investment is, according to the Respondent, to be distinguished from this case. The
dispute and the investment in the CSOB case were held to be sufficiently connected since
the specific transaction involved was an integral part of an overall operation qualifying as
an investment, but in this case the proposed project does not qualify as an investment nor

does the Contract.

109. The Respondent submits further that there can be no investment authorization
because at the time the project was under discussion there were three foreign investment
permissions required under Turkish law, the Claimants having obtained only one. These
permissions were the “permission certificate” (or pink certificate) that the Claimants did
obtain both for the branch office and later for the limited liability company; the
“investment permission certificate” (or green certificate) and the “investment permission

and incentive certificate” (or blue certificate - usually encompassing also the green

-32-

certificate), which the Claimants failed to apply for. It follows, in the Respondent’s view,
that there is no proper investment authorization under Turkish law and Article VI (1) of
the Treaty.

The Claimants’ argument.

110. The Claimants are of the view that the dispute in this case involves in essence the
interpretation or application of the Concession Contract and also the interpretation or
application of the investment authorization granted, just as Treaty rights associated to the
investment are also involved. As the dispute falls within the terms of Article VI of the
Treaty, the jurisdictional requirement of Article 25 (1) of the Convention has been met as

the dispute arises directly from the investment.

111. In this connection, the Claimants rely in particular on the decision in CSOB and
its precedents to the extent that an investment is frequently a complex operation the

elements of which ought not to be examined in isolation but cumulatively,” and the

Holiday Inns approach emphasizing “the general unity of an investment operation”.*°
Lanco is also invoked to the extent that a concession contract was characterized as such
as an investment,”” as also is SGS v. Pakistan in recognizing intangible property as an

investment.”*

112. The Claimants also argue that since the Concession Contract is a valid and
binding instrument it is properly characterized as an investment agreement and can also
be characterized as an investment authorization from the State to pursue the project
defined. The Claimants also assert that even the authorization granted to conduct the
Feasibility Study was a foreign investment authorization by the Turkish Government.
The Claimants further submit that the discussion about obtaining a green and a blue
certificate is not relevant. The blue certificate refers to non-mandatory economic
incentives for which the investor may or may not apply, and the green certificate is not a

part of the requirements for foreign investment authorization in Turkey.

5 CSOB cit., par. 72.

?6 Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1), Yes, Lalive’s article, p. 84.

?7 Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6), Decision of the Tribunal
of December 8, 1998 (English text), 40 ILM 457 (2001).

8 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/13), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003; 18 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 301 (2003).

-33-

113. The Claimants conclude that the dispute arises directly from the investment made
and that both the Treaty and the Convention requirements are met.

The Tribunal’s findings on the dispute arising directly out of the investment.

114. The Tribunal has held above that the Concession Contract is valid and binding.
By its very nature and specific terms the Contract embodies an investment agreement
under which the investor is authorized to undertake the power generation activities
therein specified. The Contract refers repeatedly to the investment, its amount, financing,
period of implementation and a host of other investment connected questions. Article 4 of

the Contract provides in particular for a detailed investment schedule.

115. The foreign investor is a party to the Contract in its own right. The investor was
specifically encouraged to undertake the project and assurances were apparently given at
the time of signing of the Contract that any pending problems would be accommodated.
The investment operation as a whole was related to the activities to follow the delivery of
the site as is evident from both Articles 4 and 35 of the Contract, which refer to such step

among many others to be undertaken by the Company.

116. The Tribunal also concludes that, in addition, the proper authorization has been
granted by the foreign investment authority to the company, first in the form of a branch
office and later as a limited liability company. The Turkish law governing foreign
investments does not require a string of authorizations” nor does the Foreign Capital
Framework Decree of 1995.*° More specifically, the Communiqué explaining this last
decree only requires one authorization issued in the form of a permit by the Foreign

Investment General Directorate, Undersecretary of the Treasury.*!

117. The terms of the authorizations given in this case are also self-contained, in that a
permit is granted for the Company to “conduct its activities by having equal rights and
responsibilities with local institutions acting in the same field...”.*? The field of activity
permitted is broad as it allows the Company to “...plan, construct and operate energy

power plants, to exploit mining reservoirs, to trade electric energy and conduct all types

?° Law Concerning the Encouragement of Foreign Capital, No. 6224 Jan 18, 1954.

* Decree No. 95/6990, June 7, 1995.

5! Communiqué No. 95/2, August 24, 1995.

* Permission Certificate No. 6014, 5 July 1999, replacing certificate No. 4492 of 5 May 1997.

-34-
of electricity, mining and other activities in accordance with the current related

legislation”.

118. It is quite common that countries, host to an investment, will require a number of
other authorizations to permit the investment to operate a number of specific activities,
but in so far as the authorization to invest is concerned only one decision by the pertinent
government service suffices. This authorization has been duly given by the Foreign

Investment General Directorate, as noted.

119. The so called green and blue certificates may be necessary to undertake given
activities or acquire certain rights, but these elements are not an essential part of the
investment authorization. The Tribunal notes that the information required by both the
green and blue certificates is in essence the same, this probably being the reason why in
practice both are combined. Moreover, as the Claimants have argued, the blue certificate
relates to a non-mandatory incentive the investor may or may not apply for. The very
Communiqué noted above requires the activity to be undertaken to be listed in “permits
and/or incentive certificates granted by the General Directorate of Foreign

Investment...”; the incentive is evidently not compulsory.

120. There is yet another aspect that convinces the Tribunal that an authorization was
duly given by the Respondent. The Concession Contract could not have been approved
by the Danistay if the foreign investment had not been authorized. Neither could it have
been submitted to this body by the Ministry or even signed. Moreover, the very Contract
provides in connection with the transfer of authorization in Article 27 that shareholders
shall be free to transfer, assign, pledge or sell the Company shares in whole or in part
subject to the Ministry’s approval and in cases required by the legislation, “the permit to
be issued by the Undersecretariat of Treasury, Foreign Investment General Directorate”.
If other authorizations would have been required in connection with the original
investment, there is every reason to conclude that they would have been required for

subsequent activities.

121. The dispute that has been described above, in the view of both parties, involves
questions of interpretation or application of both the investment agreement and the
investment authorization. This is also the case in respect of the Respondent’s argument

that there is no investment, agreement or authorization as these very claims involve the

-35-
interpretation of the Contract and the authorization. The dispute therefore arises
unequivocally directly out of the investment subject, of course, to the same proviso made
above that the issue of what constitutes precisely an investment as opposed to mere

preparatory activities pertains to the merits.

122. There is yet another element in Article VI (1) concerning a dispute involving an
alleged breach of any right conferred or created by the Treaty with respect to an
investment. The Claimants have argued in the Request for Arbitration that, in addition to
having failed to fulfill its obligations under the Contract and the authorizations given, the
Respondent has also violated the Treaty. In particular, Claimants submit that there haven
been breaches of Article II of the Treaty, concerning treatment of the investment, and

Article III, concerning expropriation.

123. Although it is not possible at this jurisdictional stage to decide whether breaches
have been committed, the history and terms of the dispute described are indicative that
the investment is in principle subject to protection under the Treaty and that the

Claimants are entitled to have their complaint examined.

124. The Tribunal accordingly finds that it has jurisdiction under this heading as the
dispute concerned arises directly out of an investment in terms of the interpretation and
application of the Contract and the investment authorization, as well as in terms of Treaty
rights connected to this investment that could have been compromised.

C. Jurisdictional Objection Concerning Respondent’s Notification under Article 25
(4) of the Convention.

Respondent's arguments.

125. Article 25 (4) of the Convention allows any Contracting State to “...notify the
Centre of the class or classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting
to the jurisdiction of the Centre...”. On the basis of this provision, the Republic of
Turkey notified the Secretary-General of ICSID on February 23, 1989 that “only the
disputes arising directly out of investment activities which have obtained necessary
permission, in conformity with the relevant legislation of the Republic of Turkey on
foreign capital, and that have effectively started shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the

Centre”.

-36-
126. The Respondent argues in this connection that the notification made qualifies the
consent to arbitration contained in the Treaty, admittedly not as a reservation to the
Convention but with the effect of informing the limits and scope of its subsequent
consent to arbitration under the Treaty. As in the Respondent’s view the project never
“effectively started”, the consent to arbitration is absent. Effective start is generally
identified by the Respondent with the beginning of construction of either the mine or the
power plant. As discussed above, the Respondent has also argued that the Claimants

lacked the necessary investment permits.

127. In support of its objection, the Respondent first notes that unilateral declarations
of States can have legal effects in spite of not technically being reservations. Internal
documents of the Turkish Government describe the notification as a “condition” to

becoming signatory to the Convention.

128. CSOB and Fedax are relied upon in support of the Respondent’s understanding of
the effects of a notification under Article 25 (4) of the Convention. The first case refers to
the declarations made under this Article as limiting the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction,
while the second, in the Respondent’s view, puts investors on notice as to the disputes
envisaged and that in the context of that case it was recognized that such notification
would have qualified the State’s consent under the pertinent treaty. The Respondent
further alleges that Aguas del Aconquija accepted a similar exclusion effect of

notifications.

129. The Respondent also argues in this context that the terms of the notification are
more specific than those of the Treaty and, therefore, in the event of a conflict the more

specific terms would prevail.

130. As to the timing of the various instruments concerned, the Respondent argues that
although the Treaty was signed on December 3, 1985 and the notification made on March
3, 1989 upon ratification of the Convention, the entry into force of the Treaty only took
place on May 18, 1990. It follows in the Respondent’s arguments that the notification
preceded the consent and that the terms of the notification are presumed to be
incorporated into the meeting of the minds when the consent is later given. As the United

States was fully aware of the notification made by Turkey and did not object to it before

-37-

making the Treaty effective, the Respondent believes that the United States accepted
those qualifications to Turkey’s consent as notified.

The Claimants’ approach.

131. The Claimants have argued in respect of this objection that notifications under
Article 25 (4) of the Convention do not have a binding legal effect. That very Article
explicitly provides that “Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by
paragraph (1)”. In the light of the drafting history of the Article, the World Bank
Executive Director’s Report on the Convention and scholarly writings,** the Claimants
conclude that this notification only serves information purposes in terms of letting
prospective investors or their respective governments know that the terms of the
notification will be relied upon or called up at the time of expressing the consent to
arbitration. As the Convention does not deal with the question of consent neither can it
deal with a qualification or condition to consent, a matter to be taken up in agreements or

treaties. Both parties agree that the notification is not a reservation to the Convention.

132. The Claimants are also of the view that the consent expressed in the Treaty is far
more specific than the general qualifications contained in the notification and that, as the
Treaty entered into force after the notification, both the United States and Turkey could
have qualified their consent as expressed in the Treaty, just as they did in a Protocol to
the Treaty in respect of other matters, but kept silent in connection with the terms of the

notification.

133. In any event, the Claimants are of the view that the investment activities had all
effectively started and that there is no reasonable basis to equate this requirement with
the start of construction. A long list of activities that had effectively started is referred to
by the Claimants, who further submit that if activities did not go beyond a certain stage it

was because the Respondent prevented the project from proceeding further.

134. The Claimants also submit a different interpretation of ICSID cases in this
respect, particularly of Fedax which clearly stated that Article 25 (4) allows Contracting
States “to put investors on notice” as to the disputes they would or would not consider

consenting to.

*3 Christoph H. Schreuer: The ICSID Convention. A Commentary, 2001, at 342.

-38-

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of consent qualified by notification under the
Convention.

135. The Tribunal has examined the important question raised by the Respondent in
respect of the legal extent of notifications under Article 25 (4) of the Convention, with
particular attention to the most thorough and learned discussion of the subject by Judge

Schwebel in his presentation on the matter at the hearing held in this case.**

136. It must first be noted that Article 25 (4) in itself does not assign any particular
legal effect to notifications as it refers to the disputes that the Contracting State “would or
would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre”. This is quite natural as
the whole issue of consent was left to instruments other than the Convention, for example
investment agreements and bilateral investment treaties. This is also the reason why that
very Article clearly separates notification from consent by providing that “Such

notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1)”.

137. The Claimants have invoked the travaux préparatoires of this provision, noting in
particular that Mr. Broches, the architect of the Convention, conceived the notification
system as one allowing Contracting Parties to “make declarations under the Convention
in which they could define in advance, if they so desired, the scope within which they
would be willing to consider, always subject to the specific consent on their part in any
specific case, making use of the Center”.** The Report on the Convention by the Bank’s
Executive Directors also clarified that notifications would “serve for purposes of

information only” and not constitute reservations to the Convention.*° Scholarly opinions

have also supported this interpretation.*”

138. Most pertinently, following a question from the Tribunal, Judge Schwebel
emphasized that notifications must necessarily have a purpose as otherwise they would
be a meaningless exercise. There is no doubt that this is true. In fact, at the time the
Convention was negotiated it was envisaged that the Contracting States would normally
express their consent in investment agreements concluded with the private investors,

which were later supplemented by the massive network of bilateral investment treaties in

* Hearing, February 22, 2004, at 37-57.

*5 ICSID, History of the Convention, Vol. IL, at 567.

*° Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention, 1 ICSID Reports 29.

>? Legal Opinion of Professor W. Michael Reisman, June 27, 2003, at 25; Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Dr.
Rudolf Dolzer, June 27, 2003, par. 39; Schreuer, at 342.

-39-
force today. Notifications were a useful means to inform beforehand the kind of disputes
to which consent for arbitration might or might not be expected by the prospective

investor or its State of nationality. To this extent the notification has a specific purpose.

139. In this connection the Tribunal does not share the Respondent’s interpretation of
the CSOB and Fedax cases. Although the language in CSOB appears to support the
interpretation that notifications can limit the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction, that
Tribunal concluded that by not making such a declaration the Contracting Party has
“submitted itself broadly to the full scope of the subject matter jurisdiction governed by
the Convention”.** Yet it remains that the “subject matter” jurisdiction is determined by
the consent of the Contracting State expressed in a separate instrument and by the
definition of investment included in that expression of consent. True, it is governed by
the Convention but it is not defined by it. It follows that notifications under Article 25 (4)

do not have a life of their own and are wholly dependent on the consent mechanism.

140. Similarly, Fedax was also explicit in referring to notifications as putting
“investors on notice”, but it does not follow that the Tribunal accepted a qualification of
consent by means of a notification under Article 25 (4). Evidently, in case of doubt, the
notification will help the interpretation of the parties’ consent but it does not have an

autonomous legal operation.

141. | The discussion above still does not answer the key question concerning the legal
nature or effect of notifications. Both parties have agreed that notifications are not
reservations. This is also the view of the Tribunal. An autonomous legal effect of

notifications has been ruled out for the reasons explained above.

142. The view that unilateral acts of States have legal effects under international law is
accurate as evidenced by the decisions of the Permanent Court of International Justice in
the Eastern Greenland case* and of the International Court of Justice in the Nuclear
Tests case.*° There is no doubt that notifications qualify as unilateral acts under
international law*', although in the present case it is not an autonomous act as it depends
on the Convention. However, in the cases mentioned above the essence of the legal
** CSOB cit., par. 65.

* Permanent Court of International Justice, Eastern Greenland case, 1933, PCU, Ser. A/B, No. 53, at 52.
4° International Court of Justice, Nuclear Tests case, ICJ Reports 1974, at 253.

-40-
effects admitted has been that the unilateral acts in question create obligations for the

State concerned on which other States can rely.

143. In the instant case, the notification does not create an obligation for the
Contracting State, but rather it is associated with the claim to a right. In fact, States
making notifications will always wish to remain free to either follow or not follow the
terms of the notification when expressing their consent. No State would believe that by
making a notification it has become bound by its terms as in that case there would be no
difference between notification and consent, thus contradicting specific provisions of the
Convention. In this context, the Contracting State is in fact claiming a right to later
exclude certain disputes from consent, if it so wishes, and it is always free not to adhere

to the terms of its notification.

144. It has become increasingly common for treaties to exclude reservations and allow
for declarations instead. These declarations do not alter the legal rights and obligations
under the treaty nor do they amend any of its provisions. They are simply an instrument
that allows States to express questions of policy to which they are not bound and that do
not create rights for the other parties. It is a matter of information, normally resorted to
for domestic needs. This is also the legal nature of the declarations made by States in the
form of notifications under Article 25 (4) of the Convention. Interestingly Mr. Broches,

quoted above, referred to these notifications as “declarations”.

145. It follows that to be effective the contents of a notification will always have to be
embodied in the consent that the Contracting Party will later give in its agreements or
treaties. If, as in this case, consent was given in the Treaty before the notification, that
treaty could have been supplemented by means of a Protocol to include the limitations of
the notification into the State’s consent. Otherwise the consent given in the Treaty stands

unqualified by the notification.

146. Although the practice of the Contracting Parties in this connection under Article
25 (4) of the ICSID Convention is not easy to establish in view of the fact that few
notifications have been made, it must be noted, for example, that the terms of the

notification made by the People’s Republic of China are reproduced in various bilateral

 

*' Patrick Daillier et Alain Pellet: Droit International Public, 2002, 359-366.

-41-
investment treaties entered into with other countries.” It follows that the legal effects of

those terms arise from the treaties and not from the notification as such.

147. The Tribunal accordingly holds that the objection to jurisdiction on this count is
also dismissed.

D. Objection to Jurisdiction on the basis of the Claimants not having resorted to

reviously agreed dispute settlement procedures.

The Respondent's argument.

148. The Respondent has invoked in the alternative the lack of jurisdiction of this
Tribunal in view of the fact that under the Treaty the parties are required to exhaust any
previously agreed upon dispute settlement procedures before they may resort to
international arbitration. The Respondent refers to the question as one requiring the

parties to resort to those procedures but not necessarily to exhaust them.

149. In this connection, the Respondent relies on Article VI (2) and its relationship
with Article VI (3) (a) of the Treaty. The first clause provides that if the dispute cannot
be solved by consultations and negotiations, “the dispute shall be submitted for
settlement in accordance with any previously agreed, applicable dispute settlement
procedures”. The second clause provides that after one year a party may resort to ICSID
arbitration if “the dispute has not, for any reason, been submitted by the national or
company for resolution in accordance with any applicable dispute settlement procedure

previously agreed to by the parties to the dispute”.

150. The Respondent is of the view that the Claimant has the obligation to resort to the
agreed procedure before arbitration since Article VI (2) so mandates by using the verb
“shall”. If this was not so, the second clause would result in the cancellation of the first.
It follows that only if the Claimant had a compelling reason, not just “any reason”, for
not submitting the dispute to the previously agreed procedure could it resort to the ICSID

arbitration.

® See, for example, the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the
People’s Republic of China, 11 July 1988, Article XII, 2, b; Agreement between the Government of
Lithuania and the Government of the People’s Republic of China, 8 November 1993, Article 8, 2, b;
Agreement between the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Republic of Korea, 30
September 1992, Article 9. 10, The text of the notification of the People’s Republic of China is found in
www. Worldbank.org/icsid/pubs/icsid-8-d.htm

-42-
151. The Respondent further believes that the parties in this case have agreed to a
dispute settlement procedure. Although the draft Contract submitted to the Danistay had
an ICSID arbitration clause, this clause was expressly deleted by that body on the
understanding that the Danistay had exclusive jurisdiction over disputes concerning
Concession Contracts under Turkish law. This was in particular the result of the
Constitutional Court’s decision that concession contracts were administrative contracts.
As the Claimants failed to submit the dispute to the Danistay and did not offer any reason

for it, they are precluded under the Treaty from resorting to ICSID arbitration.

152. It is further argued by the Respondent that if Turkey had envisaged giving an
option to the Claimants it would have included in the Treaty the typical “fork-in-the-
road” clause that it has used in many other treaties. Neither could any most favored
nation clause argument affect this conclusion as the requirement of Article VI (2)
embodies a fundamental policy consideration not subject to the operation of the clause, as
established by the Tribunal in Maffezini, a case also relied on by the Claimants. In any
event, it is asserted, the Treaty in this case contains a more restricted most favored nation
clause than the one in the treaty concerned in Maffezini and does not allow for the

application of the clause to dispute settlement mechanisms.

153. The Respondent also argues for distinguishing this case from that of Lanco,
invoked by the Claimants, because in that case the Claimants had a typical choice of
procedures that is absent in the present case.

The Claimants’ view.

154. The Claimants argue that Article VI of the Treaty does not require that a dispute
be referred first to a previously agreed, applicable dispute settlement procedure as a
condition for submitting the dispute to ICSID. In the light of Article VI (3)(a)(i), the
investor may choose to submit the dispute to ICSID if it has not otherwise been submitted
for resolution in accordance with a previously agreed procedure. This means in
Claimants’ view that the investor may submit the dispute to the previously agreed
mechanism if it so wishes, but that it would by so doing lose its right to resort to ICSID.

This would be the equivalent of a “fork-in-the-road” provision.

155. The most favored nation clause is also invoked by the Claimants in support of

their view and they argue that a number of bilateral investment treaties to which Turkey

-43-
is a party do not include a mechanism for resorting to a previously agreed mechanism and
investors are free to choose. In the light of Maffezini the Claimants argue they are entitled

to benefit from a more favorable treatment included in those treaties.

156. The Claimants are also of the view that, in any event, there was no previously
agreed procedure in this case because they never accepted that the Contract was subject
to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Danistay and an express reservation was made to
safeguard their right to resort to ICSID when that body deleted the ICSID clause from the
draft Contract. Moreover, the ICSID clause was not replaced by another clause with the
result that the Contract does not contain a dispute settlement mechanism. As in Lanco,
there was no choice freely available to the investor and therefore there can be no

agreement to submit disputes to domestic jurisdiction.

157. It is further argued that not even under Turkish law does the Danistay have
exclusive jurisdiction, among other reasons because international law is part of the
domestic legal order and prevails over municipal law. Therefore, the rights of the

investors under treaties have to be observed, including the right to resort to ICSID.

158. Even if there had been an agreement to submit disputes to the Danistay, this
would not have prevented ICSID arbitration since, as in Aguas del Aconquija,” the
Vivendi annulment,“ Salini v. Morocco,’ SGS v. Pakistan*®® and other recent cases,
contract based disputes are different from treaty based disputes and arise out of separate
causes of action. Treaty based disputes can always be submitted to international

arbitration from this point of view.

The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the previously agreed dispute settlement procedure.

159. Following the detailed examination of the issues discussed above, the Tribunal
concludes that there is no incompatibility between the provisions of Article VI (2) and
Article VI (3) (a) and that they respond to a step by step search for a dispute resolution

mechanism. First, consultations and negotiations are envisaged as an initial step. If this

4 Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Award of
November 21, 2000, 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 641 (2001)

** Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Application for Annulment of July 3, 2002, 41 ILM 1135 (2002).
45 Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4),
Decision of July 23, 2001, [French original] 129 Journal du droit international 196 (2002); English
translation in 42 ILM 609 (2003).
4° SGS v. Pakistan cit.

-44-
fails, third party non-binding procedures can be attempted if agreed between the parties.
If these procedures fail, then the dispute shall be submitted to the previously agreed

mechanism.

160. If no submission had been made pursuant to the previously agreed mechanism,
then, after one year, the investor can apply to ICSID. This sequence of dispute settlement
procedures is quite typical of dispute settlement arrangements under international law,
beginning with political alternatives, followed by third party non-binding intervention
and ultimately by binding procedures, which can include a method agreed to or lead to

binding international arbitration.

161. The fact that Article VI (2) provides that the dispute “shall” be submitted to the
previously agreed mechanism does not entail an obligation on the part of the investor.
The investor may well choose to live with the dispute and never attempt a settlement.
This is always a choice of the claimant party. If the investor chooses to resort to the
previously agreed mechanism, the dispute must then be submitted to that procedure. It is
obligatory and the other party has no further option. It is in this context that the “shall”

becomes mandatory for the other party.

162. This is the reason why Article VI (3) (a) expressly provides that the ICSID
alternative will not be available if the “national or company” has submitted the dispute to
the previously agreed procedure, thereby clearly indicating that the choice belongs to the
investor. Any other interpretation would mean that the principal feature of the Treaty,
which is to make ICSID arbitration available to the investor, would be nullified and

impaired by Article VI (2).

163. In the light of this finding, based on the interpretation of the Treaty, the Tribunal
does not consider it necessary to discuss the issue in terms of the operation of the most
favored nation clause. If the right to resort to ICSID arbitration in the terms discussed is

embodied in the Treaty itself, there is no need to look for it under other treaties.

164. The Tribunal is not convinced either that in the light of the facts of the case there
was a procedure previously agreed to. This is not because of the rather elliptic Lanco
argument that a party cannot select a jurisdiction which by law is not subject to

agreement or waiver, such as an administrative court, but because of an entirely different

-45-
reason. The decision of the Danistay to delete the ICSID clause contained in the draft
Contract certainly does not have the effect of precluding ICSID jurisdiction provided by
consent in treaties. Otherwise treaties would be subject to unilateral derogation by one
party. The Respondent has argued in this connection that the Danistay has exclusive
jurisdiction over contract disputes as a consequence of the Constitutional Court ruling of
1996 not allowing private law contracts for BOT power projects and requiring instead
concession contracts approved by the Danistay. This view, however, cannot be imposed

upon the investor who seeks to rely on an arbitration established by treaty.

165. The Claimants’ argument to the effect that the Danistay’s deletion of the ICSID
arbitration clause did not really mean that the clause was rejected is not tenable. As

expressed in paragraph 10 of the Danistay’s approval decision of March 11, 1998

“the Council of State has jurisdiction on disputes between parties arising
from concession contracts. Therefore, Article 28 regarding arbitration and
pre-arbitration, which is a private law tool, has been removed from the

text”.

166. The submission of the Respondent that such deletion was accepted by the
Claimants on signing the Contract and that, in any event, the Danistay also has
jurisdiction to hear treaty-based claims does not convince the Tribunal. On the contrary,
this discussion evidences that there was no agreement on an exclusive dispute settlement

mechanism.

167. But even assuming for the sake of argument that the Danistay jurisdiction could
be exclusive under Turkish legislation, there are two additional considerations to be had.
The first is that the Turkish legislature came later to the conclusion that concession
agreements could be submitted to international arbitration and that investors could
request their conversion to private law contracts, as noted above. This new approach
entailed recognition that international arbitration was not to be regarded as incompatible

with Turkish legislation. Claimants believe this to be the case since the very outset.

168. The second consideration is the place of treaties under Article 90 of the Turkish

Constitution. The last paragraph of this Article provides that “International agreements

duly put into effect carry the force of law...”. In the Turkish Constitutional system this

-46-
means that at the very least treaties rank equally with the law. A number of opinions are
of the view that treaties even prevail over the law. In this context, whatever jurisdiction
the Danistay might have had or still has in respect of administrative acts and concession
contracts yields to treaty provisions which, in the instant case is the investment protection

Treaty and associated arbitration.

169. The discussion about a forum selection clause is also associated to the question of
contract-based and treaty-based rights that have haunted many ICSID tribunals, which if
applicable to the present case would mean that some disputes are capable of being
submitted to Danistay or Turkish jurisdiction and some other kind of disputes could be

submitted to international arbitration.

170. The difference between contract-based claims and treaty-based claims has been
discussed by various international arbitral tribunals as evidenced by the decisions in
Lauder,” Genin,"® Aguas del Aconquija,° CMS and Azurix*' and by those of the
Annulment Committees in Vivendi and Wena. The Tribunal held in CMS, referring to
this series of decisions, that “as contractual claims are different from treaty claims, even
if there had been or there currently was a recourse to the local courts for breach of

contract, this would not have prevented submission of the treaty claim to arbitration”.**

171. | Where to draw the line, however, is not easy in practice as has been evidenced by
the discussion of these various cases. The Vivendi Annulment Committee explained that
“[iJn a case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal is

a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in

the contract”.°” However, to the extent that the basis for the claim is a treaty violation,

the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant and

47 Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Final Award (Sept. 3, 2001).

48 Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of the Tribunal (June
25, 2001); Decision on Claimants! Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification (April 4, 2002),
available at: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/conclude.htm

* Aguas cit.

°° CMS cit.

*! Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of
December 8, 2003, International Law in Brief available at: http://www.asil.org/ilib/azurix.pdf.

* Vivendi annulment cit.

*3 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Application for Annulment
rendered on February 5, 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002).

* CMS cit., par. 80; Azurix cit., par. 89.

*5Vivendi Annulment cit., par. 98.

-47-
the respondent state “cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty standard”.*°
To the extent that there are valid concurrent alternatives, the choice will then depend on

the nature of the dispute submitted.

172. In the recent case of SGS v. Pakistan, the Tribunal concluded in this respect that it
did not have jurisdiction over contract claims “which do not also constitute or amount to

breaches of the substantive standards of the BIT”.*”

173. In the instant case, however, it is not evident that there was such an alternative or
an agreed forum selection clause. The existence of a previously agreed procedure is
questionable and disputed. In any event, the dispute that has arisen in this case rather
qualifies as a treaty-based dispute as it is related both to the issue of interpretation and
implementation of the Contract as an investment agreement and to the allegation that the
Government, through various measures, impeded and ultimately destroyed the
investment. The nature of the dispute is therefore not that of a typical contractual

dispute.

174. The Tribunal accordingly affirms its jurisdiction and the objection based on the

lack of resort to a previously agreed dispute settlement mechanism is dismissed.

E. Objection to jurisdiction on the basis of lack of standing.

Respondent's objection.

175. The Respondent also objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in respect of the
North American Coal Corporation (NACC) and the Project Company on the ground that
these entities lack standing. It is argued that NACC has no investment in Turkey nor any
rights under the Danistay approved Contract, which was not even signed by NACC.
Moreover, the Respondent believes that NACC owns no equity in the Project Company
and owns none of the assets that have been claimed as investments. The only link it has
to the case is a Memorandum of Understanding signed on August 1, 1998 between
NACC and PSEG, conferring the option to acquire ownership interest in the Project

Company by means of a Shareholders Agreement to be negotiated later.

*6 Vivendi Annulment cit., par. 101.
57 SGS v. Pakistan cit., par. 162.

-48-
176. In Respondent’s view, the Memorandum in question is not valid because it is a
preliminary agreement which is not binding until the parties’ intention to be bound
materializes, a situation that never happened. The instrument was conceived as the
expression of a desire to “explore an arrangement”, the terms of which were never
formalized or even agreed to. However broad the definition of “investment” might be, it
does not include mere options and, therefore, this Memorandum does not qualify either as
an investment under the Treaty or in any other way. Even if some expenses were made
by NACC in connection with the Revised Mine Plan, these are not an investment subject

to recovery.

177. In respect of the Project Company, the Respondent argues that it is not a company
of the United States as required by the Treaty. Under Article VI (6) a company
incorporated in Turkey must have existed before the events giving rise to the dispute for
it to be considered a national of the United States. In this case, the Project Company was
incorporated in August 1999, two years after the disputed events. Moreover, the
Respondent believes that the Project Company cannot simply be considered the successor
to the earlier Branch Office opened in January 1998, as this was not a company of the
United States; it was merely a component of a foreign company not recognized in Turkey
as a separate legal entity and, unlike other treaties concluded by the United States, not
included in the Treaty governing this case.

The Claimants’ view.

178. The Claimants’ view is that NACC owns a 25% interest in the Project Company
and 25% of all its assets, including the Contract. Under the Treaty definition of
investment it is not necessary to own shares of stock as “other interests” are also
included. In its view, the Memorandum is valid and binding and currently in force,
providing a clear intention of the parties and establishing all the essential terms of the
transaction, a situation that the legal opinion of Mr. David Rivkin explains is sufficient
under the law of New York to uphold the validity of such an agreement.” If there was

an intent not to be bound, this would have to be expressed clearly, as in Mihaly.

179. The Claimants also argue that the NACC investments in the Project are clearly

covered by the Treaty and even if it were correct to characterize them as an option, this is

** Expert Opinion of David W. Rivkin, June 27, 2003.

-49-
also covered by the Treaty definition as encompassing a present interest to acquire that

property in the terms of the option.

180. As to the Project Company, Claimants argue that it was established following
long negotiations with the Ministry as to the terms of the project and the corporate
structure required and that, in any event, the vast majority of the events giving rise to the
dispute occurred after the date of incorporation, such as the question of the Treasury
guarantee and the application under Law No. 4501. But even in respect of events that
took place before 1999 Claimants are of the view that, as held in Mondev,® events or
conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation may be relevant in determining

whether the Respondent has subsequently committed a breach of an obligation.

181. In the Claimants view, the branch office of a foreign investor controlled by PSEG
is governed by the Treaty because under its Article I (1) (a) any kind of juridical entity
qualifies as a company, including any business association or other organization. The
branch office under Turkish law is distinct from the head office and a Permission
Certificate was issued specifically to such branch for the purpose of the investment.

The Tribunal’s findings on the question of standing.

182. The standing of PSEG to bring this arbitration is not disputed. The objection
made concerns only the standing as Claimants of NACC and the Project Company. The
Tribunal will now examine each of these objections, beginning with that relating to the

Project Company.

183. It must first be noted that the establishment of a branch office of a foreign
investor in Turkey is done in accordance with Turkish legislation. The foreign company
of which the branch office was an integral part was owned and controlled by PSEG. This
fact alone would provide a clear link between this branch and the investment. However,
other facts also strengthen this link. The branch was known to the Turkish Government
as the conduit for the proposed investment and its establishment for this purpose was
discussed at various times. More importantly, the fact that the first Permission
Certificate was issued to this branch is in itself evidence that it was regarded by the

Turkish Government as the entity authorized to operate and do business in that country in

*° Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of
October 11, 2002, 42 ILM 85 (2003).

-50-
the specific context of the mining and power project envisaged. The Tribunal notes that
the legal status of the Project Company is persuasively explained in the Opinions of

Professors Reisman and Dolzer.

184. It was later that the question of a new corporate structure arose in the light of tax
policies and other interests. This discussion resulted in long negotiations, including the
impact of the change on the tariff, and ultimately led to the incorporation of Konya Ilgin
Ltd. There can be no doubt that whatever rights or interests the branch office had were
transferred to the new company as its successor in law and business. The objectives of
the Project Company as stated in the act of incorporation are unequivocally linked to the

investment.

185. Because of this continuity, the fact that the Company as such only came into
existence later is immaterial. Any right or dispute concerning the branch office was also
the concern of the successor as both entities were the legal vehicles of the investment
made. Even if the Tribunal were to accept a line separating events in time in connection
with the date of incorporation, there are still events after that date which involve a

dispute between the parties.

186. On many occasions the critical date for the purpose of jurisdiction is whether the
dispute arose before or after the entry into force of the relevant treaty. This is the
situation specifically considered in Mondev, where events or conduct prior to that date
were considered only for the purpose of establishing breaches subsequent to the entry
into force of the treaty. Similarly, in Maffezini the Tribunal held that events before the
critical date might be factors leading to the legal dispute after that date. The critical date
in this case is not the incorporation date of the Project Company but again that of the
entry into force of the Treaty. Every dispute affecting the investment arose in this case

after the Treaty had entered into force.

187. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is therefore not affected either because of the

change of corporate structure or because of the date of the events leading to the dispute.

188. The situation in respect of NACC is different. This company began participating

in the Project in the summer of 1996 to assist in developing the mining aspects of the

6960 Trade Registry Gazette, No. 4861, 27 August 1999.

-51-

power project and later, in 1998, allegedly joined PSEG as an equity investor by means
of the Memorandum discussed above. NACC at all times participated as an auxiliary to
PSEG and even though it intervened actively in the preparation of the mining plans, the
counterpart of the Turkish Government was at all times PSEG. This explains why NACC
is not a signatory to the Contract. Exhibit A to the Memorandum clearly outlines NACC
functions as mainly those of a service provider to the Project Company under a

Management Services Agreement.

189. Whether the Memorandum is valid and in force is immaterial for the purpose of
the Tribunal’s decision. The Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s argument that the
definition of investment does not include an option is persuasive as a general approach.
Broad as many definitions of investment are in treaties of this kind, there is a limit to
what they can reasonably encompass as an investment. Options such as this particular
one can not, in the view of the Tribunal, be interpreted as an “investment”. The Tribunal
acknowledges that different circumstances from those which obtain in the present case

may lead to a different conclusion.

190. Professor Dolzer’s Rejoinder Opinion to the effect that the Treaty definition of
investment refers to any right, even one that can be exercised at any time in the future, is
not persuasive.°' The Tribunal is not persuaded either by the explanation that a
Shareholders’ Agreement was not pursued by the parties to the Memorandum because it

would not have been a prudent business decision and a waste of time.

191. In the opinion of the Tribunal NACC was at best only a technical operator for the
investor in respect of the mining operations of the project and, later, an equity holder
with a standing no different from any other equity holder. In fact at some point another
entity had the same status as NACC since a similar Memorandum was signed between
PSEG and Guris, a Turkish corporation. Given the corporate structure of the project, only
PSEG as the investor and the Project Company as the conduit for this investment can be
considered legally linked to the Turkish Government for the purpose of the Contract and
the operation of the Treaty, including the consent given to arbitration. Other equity
holders do not have an interest separate from these entities and consequently cannot

claim on their own.

©! Additional Expert Opinion, Professor Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer, November 24, 2003, at 11.

-52-
192. The case may be different when minority shareholders are accorded a right to
claim independently from the project company because, for example, of questions of

In those cases the interest of the

nationality or other reason as in CMS® or Enron.°
investor would be nugatory if they were not allowed to claim in their own right. The
operation of the respective treaties would then be paralyzed. This is not the case here.
Any interest, which the investor may eventually have, may accrue, in part, to NACC, if
the latter still has an ongoing equity participation in the investor company. But this is a
matter which concerns only intra-corporate arrangements that are separate and distinct
from any Treaty connection between NACC and the Respondent. As such, while it may

possibly result in a claim by NACC against PSEG, it does not give rise to a Treaty claim
by NACC against the Respondent.

193. As held in Enron, the corporate linkages can be recognized for the purpose of the
jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal to the extent that the consent to arbitration is
considered to extend to a given entity, but not beyond. NACC is beyond the reach of the

consent to arbitration as far as the Respondent is concerned.

194. The Tribunal accordingly finds that it lacks jurisdiction in respect of claims by

NACC in this case.

@ .
CMS cit.

© Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3),

Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, International Law in Brief, available at:

http://www.asil.org/ilib/Enron.pdf

-53-

IV. Decision.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal decides that:

1. The dispute submitted by PSEG and Konya Ilgin Ltd. is within the jurisdiction of

the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

2. The dispute submitted by NACC is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre and

the competence of the Tribunal.

3. The costs of the jurisdictional phase of the arbitration are reserved.

So decided.

Date: June 4, 2004

[ signed ]
Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal

[ signed ] [ signed ]
L. Yves Fortier Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
Arbitrator Arbitrator

