International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplun
CLAIMANTS

v.
Plurinational State of Bolivia
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2

 

DECISION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C., Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Natali Sequeira

Date: 26 February 2010

ve

A.
B.

A.

c.
D.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS DECISION 3

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

 

ORIGIN OF THE DISPUTE AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY ...
FACTS UNDERLYING THE REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES ...
1. NMM’s corporate audit

2. The criminal pri

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 17
CLAIMANTS’ POSITION 17
1. Rights that require preservation 18
a. Right to the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute
b. Right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings...
c. The right to the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings under Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention.
2. quit ‘for provisi 22
a. Urgency 22
b. Necessity 23
RESPONDENT'S POSITION 23
1. Rights for which protection is sought...
a. With respect to the right to the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute ..
b. With respect to the right to the integrity of the arbitral proceedings .
c. With respect to the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings.......
2. quit ‘for provisi 28
a. Urgency 29
b. Necessity 29
DISCUSSION 31
APPLICABLE STANDARD: 31
1. Legal frameworl 31
2. Prima facie jurisdiction 31
3. quit ‘for provisi 32
EXISTENCE OF RIGHTS REQUIRING PRESERVATION ...
1. Rights that may be protected by provisional measure 33
2. Right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings in accordance with Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention
3. The right to the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute.....
4. Right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings ...
URGENCY 41
NECESSITY 42
DECISION 46

 

|. SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS DECISION

1. The present decision deals with a Request for Provisional Measures (“Claimants’
RPM”) filed by Claimants Quiborax S.A. (“Quiborax”), Allan Fosk and Non Metallic
Minerals S.A. (“NMM”) on 14 September 2009, by which Claimants request that the
Arbitral Tribunal:

(1) Order Bolivia and/or Bolivia’s agencies or entities to refrain from engaging in
any conduct that aggravates the dispute between the parties and/or alters the
status quo, including any conduct, resolution or decision related to criminal
proceedings in Bolivia against persons directly or indirectly related to the
present arbitration;

(2) Order Bolivia and/or Bolivia’s agencies or entities to discontinue immediately
and/or to cause to be discontinued all proceedings in Bolivia, including criminal
proceedings and any course of action relating in any way to this arbitration and
which jeopardize the procedural integrity of these proceedings;

(3) Order Bolivia and/or Bolivia’s agencies or entities to discontinue immediately
and/or to cause to be discontinued all proceedings in Bolivia, including criminal
proceedings and any course of action relating in any way to this arbitration and
which threaten the exclusivity of the ICSID arbitration."

2. In their Reply on Provisional Measures (“Claimants’ Reply”), Claimants supplemented
this request with a fourth request for relief:
(4) Order Bolivia and/or Bolivia's agencies or entities to deliver to Claimants the

corporate administration of NMM sequestered in the course of the criminal
proceedings.”

3. The Plurinational State of Bolivia (“Bolivia” or “Respondent’) has objected to Claimants’

Request for Provisional Measures and has requested the Tribunal to:

1

Reject Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures;

8

Refrain from adopting the measures that have been requested; and

Ss

Order Claimants to pay the expenses that Bolivia has had to incur because of
their groundless and reckless request.°

' Claimants’ RPM, p. 22.
? Claimants’ Reply, ] 126.
3 Respondent's Rejoinder, {| 81.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Origin of the Dispute and Procedural History

The dispute between the Parties originates from the revocation by Presidential Decreto
Supremo 27.589 of 23 June 2004 (“D.S. 27.589”), of eleven mining concessions
allegedly held by Claimants in Bolivia (the “Bolivian Concessions”). The concessions
were held by investment vehicle and co-Claimant NMM. Co-Claimants Quiborax and
Allan Fosk, both Chilean nationals, claim to have a 51% majority interest in NMM and a
100% interest in the Bolivian Concessions.

Claimants allege that the revocation of the Bolivian Concessions was a confiscatory
measure. Claimants state that D.S. 27.589 revoked the Bolivian Concessions for
alleged violations of Bolivian law, on the basis of Law 2.564 of 9 December 2003 (“Law
2.564”), which Claimants allege was tailor-made to authorize the Executive to annul
Claimants’ concessions retroactively. Claimants also claim that D.S. 27.589 applied
Law 2.564 incorrectly, because the Executive’s authority to annul had expired on 9
February 2004, and thus D.S. 27.589 is unlawful under domestic Bolivian law.

Claimants allege that D.S. 27.589 violates Claimants’ rights as foreign investors in
Bolivia under the Acuerdo entre la Republica de Bolivia y la Republica de Chile para la
Promocién y Proteccién Reciproca de Inversiones (the “BIT”). On 22 July 2004,
Claimants requested friendly consultations in accordance with Art. X of the BIT. This
request did not lead to a resolution of the dispute, and on 4 October 2005, Claimants
filed a Request for Arbitration before ICSID, which was registered on 6 February 2006.

In their Request for Arbitration, Claimants asked the Tribunal to declare that Bolivia
breached: (i) Art. VI of the BIT by depriving Claimants of their investment in Bolivia; (ii)
Art. IV of the BIT by not providing Claimants fair and equitable treatment; and (iii) Art.
Ill of the BIT by not protecting Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and submitting
Claimants to unreasonable and discriminatory measures. Claimants requested
compensation of all damages suffered as a consequence of these violations, plus
interest, as well as all costs of arbitration and all other costs incurred as a consequence
of Bolivia's allegedly unlawful acts.

The dispute continued to escalate after Claimants’ request for friendly consultations.
Bolivia set up an inter-ministerial task force to evaluate the merits of Claimants’ claims.
In an internal memorandum dated 8 December 2004 (the “2004 Memo’), the task force

concluded that D.S. 27.589 suffered serious legal defects and that the case was about
4

to become an international predicament for Bolivia.* The task force outlined different
scenarios to aid Bolivia’s defense strategy, recommending as the “best alternative” to
try to demonstrate the existence of flaws in the processing of the concessions.°

9. On 28 October 2004, the Bolivian Mining Superintendency annulled the already
revoked concessions.° At the same time, Claimants allege that Bolivia submitted NMM
to multiple tax investigations. By November 2007, Claimants state that NMM had been
ordered to pay approximately US$ 1,200,000 in alleged taxes and fines.

10. During this period, the Parties engaged in prolonged negotiations. Following
constitution of the Tribunal on 19 December 2007, on the day of the first Procedural
Session on 20 March 2008, the Parties communicated to the Tribunal that they had
reached an oral settlement agreement. Upon request from the Parties, the
proceedings were suspended.

11. Nine months later, Bolivia initiated criminal actions against several persons related
directly or indirectly to the present arbitration, including co-Claimant Allan Fosk.
Claiming that Bolivia had repudiated the oral agreement, on 14 January 2009
Claimants requested the Tribunal to resume the arbitration.

12. By Procedural Order No. 1 of 5 March 2009, the Tribunal set the calendar for the
Parties’ presentations. After certain changes requested or agreed by the Parties, by
letter of 17 September 2009 the Tribunal amended the procedural schedule as follows:

1. On or before 14 2009, the Claimants shall file their M inl
2. At its option, the Respondent shall file either:

2.1 Objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal by no later than 15 January
2010; or

2.2 A Counter-memorial on the merits by no later than 15 January 2010.
Proceedings following paragraph 2.1 above:

3. On or before 16 April 2010, the Claimants shall file their Counter-memorial
on jurisdiction.

4. On or before 18 June 2010, the Respondent shall file its Reply on
jurisdiction.

5. On or before 20 August 2010, the Claimants shall file their Rejoinder on
jurisdiction.

* See 2004 Memo (Annex CPM-5), p. 11.
* Id., pp. 10-11.
® See Writs of Annulment (Annex CPM-6).

6. On 23 September 2010, the Tribunal will hold a hearing on jurisdiction in
Paris, at a location to be later specified. On a date to be later determined but
at least two weeks before the hearing on jurisdiction, the Tribunal will hold a
pre-hearing telephone conference to address any outstanding issues relating
to the forthcoming hearing.

7. Thereafter, the Tribunal will issue a decision or award on jurisdiction and, if
applicable, a procedural order on the continuance of the proceedings on the
merits, it being specified that, in this latter case, the Respondent will be
required to submit its Counter-memorial on the merits no later than four
months from the date of the said procedural order.

Proceedings following paragraph 2.2 above:

8. On or before 15 March 2010, the Claimants shall file their Reply on the
merits.

9. On or before 17 May 2010, the Respondent shall file its Rejoinder on the
merits.

10. On 22 to 26 June 2010 (the exact number of days being determined during
the pre-hearing telephone conference), the Tribunal will hold a hearing on
the merits and, if applicable on jurisdiction, in Paris, at a location to be later
specified. On a date to be later determined but at least two weeks before
said hearing, the Tribunal will hold a pre-hearing telephone conference to
address any outstanding issues relating to the forthcoming hearing.
On 14 September 2009, Claimants submitted their Memorial, simultaneously with a

Request for Provisional Measures.

By letter of 22 September 2009, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit its
observations on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures by 13 October 2009. On
23 September 2009, Respondent requested an extension to submit its observations.
The Tribunal invited Claimants to comment on this request by 5 October 2009.

On 2 October 2009, Claimants filed a request for a “temporary restraining order.” On
that same date, the Tribunal invited Respondent to provide its observations by 5
October 2009.

On 5 October 2009, after receiving Respondent's observations, the Tribunal denied
Claimants’ request for a “temporary restraining order” and, based on the circumstances
surrounding Claimants’ latest request, denied Respondent’s request for an extension to
submit its observations on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures. The Tribunal
invited the Parties to submit brief rebuttals on 21 October 2009 and 29 October 2009,
respectively.

On 14 October 2009, Respondent filed its Objection to Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures (“Respondent's Objection”). On 21 October 2009, Claimants
filed their Reply, and on 29 October 2009 Respondent filed its Rejoinder.

18.

20.

On 24 November 2009, the Tribunal and the Parties participated in a telephone
conference where the Parties supplemented their written submissions. The following
persons participated in the telephone conference:

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President of the Tribunal
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Hon. Marc Lalonde, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat

Ms. Natali Sequeira, Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing Claimants
Mr. Allan Fosk, Claimant
Mr. Andrés Jana, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Hinzpeter Jana
Mr. Jorge Bofill, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Hinzpeter Jana
Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Hinzpeter Jana
Ms. Dyala Jiménez F., Bofill Mir & Alvarez Hinzpeter Jana

Mr. Sebastian Yanine, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Hinzpeter Jana

Representing Respondent

Ms. Maria Cecilia Rocabado Tubert, Minister of Legal Defense of the
State

Mr. Javier Antonio Viscarra, Vice-Minister of Legal Defense of the State
Mr. Alfredo Mamani, Director for Jurisdictional and Arbitral Defense

Mr. Paul Reichler, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr. Ronald E.M. Goodman, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr. Alberto Wray, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr. Diego Cadena, Foley Hoag LLP

At the telephone conference, the Tribunal heard the Parties’ oral arguments. A
transcript was made and distributed to the Parties.

By letter of 5 January 2010, Foley Hoag LLP informed the Tribunal that it no longer
represented Respondent.

ai.

22.

23.

24.

On 15 January 2010, Respondent requested a 30-day extension to submit its
Objections to jurisdiction or its Counter-memorial on the merits, which the Tribunal
granted. Respondent requested another 60-day extension to submit either of these
pleadings on 12 February 2010. This time the Tribunal granted an extension only until
24 March 2010. At the date of issuance of this Decision, the procedural calendar
described in paragraph 12 above had been extended approximately 2 months.

B. Facts Underlying the Request for Provisional Measures

The facts described below are based on the Parties' submissions but reflect the
Tribunal's review of the record. As a result, they are presented in the manner that the
Tribunal considers most intelligible. The findings of fact are made on the basis of the
record as it presently stands; nothing herein shall preempt any later finding of fact or
conclusion of law.

1. NMM'’s corporate audit

On 18 January 2005, six months after Claimants’ request for friendly consultations and
one month following the issuance of the 2004 Memo, the Superintendencia de
Empresas ordered a corporate audit of NUM. The audit was carried out by employees
of the Superintendencia, Ms. Lorena Fernandez and Mr. Yury Espinoza. According to
the testimony of Lorena Fernandez, this audit was directed to establish whether NMM’s
shareholders were Chilean nationals.’ The audit appears to have been ordered at the
request of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.®

During the course of the audit, Ms. Fernandez and Mr. Espinoza reviewed copies of the
shareholders’ registry and other corporate documents, including copies of minutes of
board and shareholders' meetings. The company had stated that the original corporate
documents were not available because they were in Chile, and the Superintendencia
allowed the company to provide copies. The report that ensued from the audit
(‘Informe 001/2005” of 11 February 2005) noted that, according to NMM's
shareholders' registry, NMM’s shareholders were Quiborax, with 13,636 shares, David
Moscoso, with 13,103 shares, and Allan Fosk, with one share.° With respect to
investment by Chilean nationals, the report concluded that the Chilean company

” See Minutes of Informative Declaration before the Prosecutor as Means of Defense of Ms. Maria Monica Lorena
Fernandez Salinas, Case No. 9394/08, 14 January 2009 (“Declaration of Lorena Fernandez", Annex CPM-37).

® See Declaration of Lorena Fernandez (Annex CPM-37) and correspondence between the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and the Superintendencia de Empresas regarding NMM's corporate inspection (Annex CPM-48).

* Informe 001/2005 (Annex CPM-14), p. 3.

25.

26.

27.

Quiborax had acquired 26,680 shares in NMM from Compajia Minera Rio Grande Sur
S.A. (“RIGSSA”) on 17 August 2001 (part of which were later transferred to David
Moscoso), and thus this investment was protected by the BIT."° The report also
concluded that the corporate documentation showed signs of improper handling and
care.'' Finally, the report contained certain recommendations with respect to Bolivia’s
defense strategy in the ICSID arbitration triggered by the revocation of NMM’s mining
concessions (that is, the present arbitration). These recommendations included: (i)
analyzing the potential unconstitutionality of Law 1854, which would render the granting
of the mining concessions null and void; (ii) establishing whether Quiborax had paid for
the acquisition of its shares in NMM from RIGSSA, and thus made an effective
investment in Bolivia, and (iii) taking the necessary steps to declare the annulment of
the public deed whereby RIGSSA — original owner of the Bolivian Concessions — had
contributed those Concessions to NMM, thus rendering Quiborax’s purchase of
RIGSSA’s shares in NMM invalid as well.’?

Informe 001/2005 does not appear to have been questioned by the Superintendencia
de Empresas at the time of its issuance. Nonetheless, on 10 October 2008, the
Minister of the State’s Legal Defense requested the Superintendente to once again
review the file on NMM and certify if there were any irregularities that could give rise to
the annulment of NMM’s corporate acts or the annulment of the company’s
incorporation."

On 17 October 2008, the Superintendente de Empresas confirmed the findings of
Informe 001/2005 and denied the existence of any irregularities that could give rise to
the annulment of the company’s acts, certifying, among other things, the shareholder
composition of NMM, consisting of Quiborax, David Moscoso and Allan Fosk.'*

2. The criminal proceedings

Despite the certification issued by the Superintendencia de Empresas on 17 October
2008, Bolivian authorities continued to review Claimants’ corporate documentation

" Id., pp. 6-7.

"8 See Letter from Héctor E. Arce, Ministry of State’s Legal Defense to Rolando Morales, Superintendencia de
Empresas, 10 October 2008 (Annex CPM-49).

"4 See Letter from Rolando Morales, Superintendencia de Empresas, to Héctor E. Arce, Ministry of State’s Legal
Defense, and the attached certification dated 17 October 2008. (Annex CPM-49).

9

28.

29.

registered in Bolivia's Commercial Register, and noted the existence of certain
irregularities in NMM’s corporate documentation."

Specifically, the Bolivian government discovered the existence of the minutes of a
shareholders’ meeting of NMM dated 11 September 2001,"° which had not been
provided during the audit, and which contained a different list of shareholders from that
included in the minutes of a meeting allegedly held 2 days later, on 13 September
2001.7. Both minutes had almost identical content, but while the minutes of 11
September 2001 stated that the shareholders of NMM were Fernando Rojas, Gilka
Salas, Dolly Paredes and RIGSSA, the minutes of 13 September 2001 stated that the
shareholders of NMM were Allan Fosk, Empresa Quimica Industrial del Borax S.A.
(currently Quiborax) and David Moscoso Ruiz.

According to Bolivia, the existence of these two contradictory documents, seen jointly
with other corporate documents of NMM, suggests that the minutes of 13 September
2001 may have been forged."® Based on this suspicion, on 8 December 2008, the
Superintendente de Empresas presented a criminal complaint against the following
persons:"®

(i) | Co-Claimant Allan Fosk;
(ii) | David Moscoso, Claimants’ Bolivian business partner;

(iii) Fernando Rojas and Maria del Carmen Ballivian, former legal counsel of
Claimants;

(iv) Daniel Gottschalk, attorney at Guevara & Gutiérrez, current legal counsel of
Claimants;

(v) Dolly Teresa Paredes de Linares and Gilka Salas Orozco, employees of Estudio
Rojas;

(vi) Maria Monica Lorena Fernandez Salinas and Yury Alegorio Espinoza Zalles,
the two (now former) employees of the Superintendencia de Empresas who
authored Informe 001/2005; and

'8 Respondent's Objection, {ff 21-29.

‘6 Minutes of NMM's Shareholders Meeting dated 11 September 2001 (Annex 8 to Respondent's Objection).
"” Minutes of NMM's Shareholders Meeting dated 13 September 2001 (Annex 7 to Respondent's Objection).
"8 Respondent's Objection, { 29.

"8 See for all accusations, Criminal Complaint of 8 December 2008, Case N° 9394/08 (“Querella Criminal’, Annex
CPM-09). Maria del Carmen Ballivian was added to the list of persons under investigation on 14 April 2009. See
Correction of Extension of Criminal Complaint, 14 April 2009 (“Querella Modification,” Annex CPM-10).

10

(vii) Tatiana Giovanna Teran de Velasco and Ernesto Ossio Aramayo, two Notaries
Public whose services NMM had used.

30. The accusation underlying the criminal prosecutions (which have been identified as
Case N° 9394/08) is that some of the persons listed above forged the minutes of 13
September 2001 (replacing what Bolivia deems to be the real minutes, those of 11
September 2001), while others improperly used such forged document. Specifically,
Bolivia accuses the persons listed above of the following crimes:”°

(i) Allan Fosk, David Moscoso, Fernando Rojas, and Dolly Paredes are accused of
four different crimes: (i) falsedad ideoldgica (forgery) in accordance with Art.
199 of the Bolivian Penal Code (“BPC”); (ii) uso de instrumento falsificado (use
of forged document); Art. 203 BPC; (iii) estafa (fraud), Art. 335 BPC; and (iv)
destruccién de cosas propias para defraudar (destruction of personal property
to defraud), Art 339 BPC;

(ii) Maria del Carmen Ballivian is accused of falsedad ideoldgica and uso de
instrumento falsificado;

(iii) Daniel Gottschalk was accused of uso de instrumento falsificado only;
(iv) Isaac Frenkel of destruccién de cosas propias para defraudar,

(v) Lorena Fernandez, Yury Espinoza, Ernesto Ossio, and Tatiana Teran are all
accused of incumplimiento de deberes (dereliction of duties), Art. 154 BPC;

(vi) Gilka Salas is mentioned among the persons accused but has not been
accused of any crime in particular.

31. Bolivia's reasons to suspect this forgery are, among others:”'

(i) | The minutes of 11 September 2001 were inserted into a public deed and used
several times in the following years to grant powers of attorney for the company,
which suggests that the minutes of 11 September 2001 are the real minutes,
while the minutes of 13 September 2001 were created ex post facto.”

(ii) The minutes of 11 September 2001 indicate that one of the shareholders was
RIGSSA, which according to the Shareholders’ Registry had transferred its
shares to Quiborax on 17 August 2001. Bolivia also claims that this transfer
was in breach of NMM’s corporate bylaws, as they provided for a right of first
refusal to the remaining shareholders that Bolivia claims was not respected.”

> See Querella Criminal (Annex CPM-9) and Querella Modification (Annex CPM-10).

a Respondent's Objection, f[{] 22-29. See Public Instrument No. 523/2001, September 20, 2001 (Exhibit 9 to
Respondent's Objection) Public Instrument 291/2002, July 1, 2002 (Exhibit 10 to Respondent's Objection); NMM's
Shareholders Registry dated January 27, 2009 (Exhibit 11 to Respondent's Objection); NMM's Bylaws (Exhibit 12
to Respondent's Objection).

2 See, e.g., Annexes 9 and 10 of Respondent's Objection.

°3 There is contradictory evidence on this point — Claimants attach the minutes of a shareholders meeting held 17
August 2001 that authorizes the transfer in the presence of all shareholders. See Minutes of NMM's shareholders
meeting dated 17 August 2001 (Annex CPM-40).

11

(iii) According to Bolivia, Dolly Paredes’s signature in the minutes of 13 September
2001 does not match her signature in other documents.”*

(iv) Bolivia also asserts that co-Claimant Allan Fosk was not in Bolivia on 13
September 2001.”

32. Bolivia finds support for this allegation of forgery in other inconsistencies found in
NMM's corporate documentation that shed doubts on the validity of Quiborax’s
acquisition of shares, namely:

(i) Quiborax allegedly acquired its shares from RIGSSA on 17 August 2001.”° This
acquisition was reflected in the minutes of NMM’s shareholders’ meeting of 17
August 2001.2” However, the minutes of such meeting were formalized in the
presence of a notary only on 26 November 2004, more than three years after
the meeting was supposedly held.”

(ii) In addition, RIGSSA had only recently acquired the shares it allegedly
transferred, and Bolivia contends that such acquisition was not legally complete
when RIGSSA transferred those shares to Quiborax. Bolivia’s argument in this
respect can be summarized as follows, although it must be noted that Bolivia’s
statement of the facts contains certain errors, in particular with respect to dates:

(a) NMM’s shareholders approved RIGSSA’s entry as a new shareholder
and NMM's capital increase by means of RIGSSA’s contribution in kind
of seven mining concessions on 3 August 2001.” This capital increase
was formalized by public deed dated 10 August 2001. Bolivia alleges
that NMM requested the Commercial Registry to record this capital
increase on 21 August 2001, when allegedly RIGSSA was no longer a
shareholder in NMM."

(b) Bolivia also alleges that, pursuant to Bolivian law, NMM’s capital
increase had to be authorized by the Commercial Registry. This
authorization, which according to Bolivia was a prerequisite for the
issuance of NMM's shares, was only granted on 28 August 2001.% In
other words, the alleged transfer of shares from RIGSSA to Quiborax on
17 August 2001 could not have happened because the shares could not
have been issued prior to 28 August 2001.

24 See Querella Criminal (Annex CPM-9), p. 6.

?5 Respondent's Rejoinder, 5.

?8 See NMM'’s Shareholders’ Registry (Exhibit 11 to Respondent's Objection).

27 See Minutes of NMM's shareholders meeting dated 17 August 2001 (Annex CPM-40).
28 See Exhibit 14 to Respondent's Objection and Exhibit 2 to Respondent's Rejoinder.

?9 Bolivia states that RIGSSA contributed its mining concessions on 17 August 2001, but the record shows that
such contribution was approved on 3 August 2001. (Respondent's Objection to the RPM, {| 25).

* Bolivia alleges that the public deed is dated 16 August 2001 and thus was issued only one day prior to
RIGSSA's transfer to Quiborax (See Respondent's Observations to the RPM {| 25). However, the public deed
attached as Annex 16 to Respondent's Objection is dated 10 August 2001.

* See Respondent's Objection, {| 25. Respondent cites to Annex 16 of its Objection, but this document does not
support this allegation.

*2 See Exhibit 18 to Respondent's Objection.

12

33.

34.

35.

36.

(iii) Bolivia also alleges that, under Bolivian Law, the title that contains transfers of
mining concessions must be recorded in the Real Property Register in order to
become effective, which Bolivia claims was not done.

(iv) Bolivia claims that NMM’s Financial Statements filed with the National Revenue
Service of Bolivia continued to reflect RIGSSA’s shareholder stake in NMM, with
an interest of 99.75% of the stock package.* Similarly, RIGSSA’s Financial
Statements at 30 September 2003 show that its shareholder stake in NMM at
that date amounted to Bs 2,793,000.**

Claimants maintain that what Bolivia claims is forgery is merely the result of a clerical
error. Claimants argue that the minutes of 11 September 2001 were incorrectly
prepared by one of NMM’s lawyers using old models that listed previous shareholders,
and when the error was discovered, a new shareholders' meeting was held on 13
September with the correct shareholders. Claimants also insist that the minutes of 11
September were used by mistake to grant powers of attorney for the company.°°

In this regard, Claimants maintain that in 2004, Claimants’ legal counsel at the time of
their investment, Maria del Carmen Ballivian of Estudio Rojas, informed Claimants of
an error she had detected in the issuance of powers of attorney upon revision of
NMM's corporate administration. According to Ms. Ballivian, the powers of attorney
incorporated the 11 September 2001 draft minutes of a shareholders’ meeting instead
of the definitive 13 September 2001 minutes which are part of the company’s book of
shareholders’ meetings.*®

Claimants allege that, based on this information, on 21 January 2005 the Board of
Directors of NMM acknowledged the mistake and ratified all acts performed by virtue of
the powers of attorney that incorporated the 11 September 2001 draft minutes to avoid
any challenge of these acts.°” Later that same day, the Board of Directors revoked the
powers of attorneys and issued new ones.*®

In the months following the initiation of the criminal proceedings, Bolivia took several
measures related to the criminal investigations, including:

8 Respondent's Objection, | 24. Respondent does not attach NMM's Financial Statements nor indicates their

date.

* See Exhibit 15 to Respondent's Objection. Bolivia mistakenly states that the shareholder stake was Bs
2,770,000 (Respondent's Objection, J] 24).

* Claimants’ Reply, if] 60-63.

°8 Claimants’ Reply, | 61. This affirmation is supported by Ms. Ballivian’s voluntary testimony. See Minutes of
Informative Declaration of Ms. Maria del Carmen Ballivian Ascarrunz dated 5 February 2009. (Annex CPM-36).

$7 Claimants’ Reply, {| 62. See also Minutes of NMM's Board Meeting dated 21 January 2005. (Annex CPM-59).

id.

13

37.

38.

39.

40.

(i) The sequestration of corporate records;*° and

(ii) The interrogation of persons related to Claimants/NMM’s business, including
Claimants’ former and present legal counsel in Bolivia.*°

On 16 March 2009, formal charges were presented against David Moscoso, Fernando
Rojas, Dolly Paredes, Lorena Fernandez, and Yury Espinoza.*'

The proceedings regarding David Moscoso, Claimants’ Bolivian business partner,
moved swiftly. At a hearing on preventive measures held on 4 June 2009 before Judge
Margot Pérez, Moscoso was ordered to report to the court on a weekly basis, not to
leave the country and to present two witnesses as sureties. The Superintendencia was
not satisfied with this decision and appealed. As a result of this appeal, a bail of
US$300,000 was set on David Moscoco’s personal liberty, to be deposited within

seventy-two hours.*?

On 7 August 2009, on notice that bail would be set, David Moscoso wrote to Allan Fosk
informing him that, as of the date of the notice he would have 72 hours to pay such bail
or risked going to prison. Mr. Moscoso asked Allan Fosk for the bail money in
compliance with the “gentlemen’s agreements” reached with him and Fosk’s father that
they would cover all expenses related to the arbitration, and announced that if the
money was not forthcoming, he would have to look for ways to preserve his freedom.
Mr. Moscoso stated that “[o]ne way could be to ask for summary judgment in my
condition as director of the company and be punished with a sanction that would allow
me not going to prison...”, and added that, if Allan Fosk did not provide him with the
bail money, he would immediately start negotiations for the summary judgment.“

On 11 August 2009, the Fiscal (Prosecutor) presented a request for a summary
judgment against David Moscoso sentencing him to two years of imprisonment, stating
that this was done at David Moscoso’s request.*

°° See Deed of Sequestration, 29 January 2009 (Annex CPM-17).

“0 Jorge Luis Inchauste, current legal counsel of Claimants in Bolivia, was interrogated about documents related
to the arbitration and his relationship with Claimants (See Annex CPM-18). Fernando Rojas, former legal counsel
and one of the accused persons within the criminal proceedings, was also interrogated (See Annex CPM-35).

*" See Formal Indictment, 16 March 2009 (Annex CPM-11).

* See Resolution No. 179/2009 of the Third Criminal Chamber, 8 August 2009 (Annex CPM-57).

43 See E-mail from David Moscoso to Allan Fosk, 7 August 2009 (Annex CPM-58). (Original in Spanish).
** See Resolution No. 01/2009, 11 August 2009, Request for Abbreviated Proceeding (Annex CPM-19).

14

41. The hearing on David Moscoso’s summary proceeding took place on 14 August 2009.
The decision rendered as a result of that hearing indicated that Mr. Moscoso had
confessed his participation in the forgery of the minutes NMM’s shareholders' meeting
of 13 September 2001.*° The decision noted that such forgery had caused a harm to
the Bolivian State by allowing Quiborax to initiate an arbitration against Boliva and that
the existence of harm was a an essential requirement for the crimes alleged, but that
Mr. Moscoso had not known of the harm that his actions could cause.“® As a result of
Mr. Moscoso’s confession, he was sentenced to two years of imprisonment, receiving
immediate judicial pardon based on his previous clean record.*” Following his judicial
pardon, Mr. Moscoso expressly waived his right to appeal.®

42. On that same day, David Moscoso signed an affidavit, given expressly “within the
request for Arbitration” initiated by Quiborax and others against Bolivia, where he
“freely and spontaneously” confessed to his participation in the crimes of falsedad
ideolégica and uso de instrumento falsificado. “ In that affidavit, he stated that he first
learned of the existence of the minutes of 13 September 2001 at NMM's board meeting
held on 21 January 2005. Although he does not expressly say that the minutes were
forged, Mr. Moscoso acknowledges that they were used to replace the minutes of 11
September 2001 in order to revoke previous powers of attorney and grant new ones,
including powers of attorney related to the ICSID arbitration initiated by Quiborax “with
the purpose of having the claim before ICSID prevail against the Bolivian State.”*' This
affidavit contradicts Mr. Moscoso’s previous declaration before the criminal courts,
rendered on 30 January 2009."

43. While the proceedings against David Moscoso were under way, the Minister of the
State’s Legal Defense and the Minister of Institutional Transparency and Defense

45 The decision does not cite explicitly to the confession, but rather states that “regarding the existence of the act
and the participation of the accused in the same, the Prosecutor has proved clearly with all the literal proof that he
has presented to this judicial chamber that the accused has participated in the fabrication [faccidn] of these
minutes that are accused as false...” and that “the accused... has acknowledged his guilt on the illegal acts that
the prosecutor accuses him of...” See Resolution No. 313/2009 dated 14 August 2009, pp. 3-4. (Original in
Spanish) (Annex CPM-20).

48 See Resolution No. 313/2009 dated 14 August 2009, pp. 2-3 (Annex CPM-20).

*° See Affidavit of David Moscoso, 14 August 2009 (Annex CPM-21). (Original in Spanish).

Id.

®" Id, (Original in Spanish).

®2 See Informative Declaration before the Prosecutor as Means of Defense of Mr. David Moscoso Ruiz, Case No.
9394/08, 30 January 2009 (Annex CPM-22).

15

44.

45.

against Corruption presented criminal charges of prevaricato (malfeasance in office)
against Judge Margot Pérez for failing in her functions by, among others, refusing to
grant Bolivia’s initial request for Mr. Moscoso’s preventive detention.® The Minister of
the State’s Legal Defense justified his standing to file this criminal complaint on the
basis of his legal responsibilities to “promote, defend and protect the interests of the
plurinational state in jurisdictional proceedings and arbitrations in investment
disputes.” Both Ministers accused Judge Pérez of not “taking into consideration the
importance of this case that concerns the protection of the goods and interests of the
State that are subject of an international arbitration’; “without valuing the procedural
risks that continue to exist, and that affect the arbitration that the State of Bolivia
confronts before an international tribunal” and by delaying the proceedings “which
negatively affects the interests of the Bolivian state, since this causes harm and delay
in the international arbitration.”®

On 21 September 2009, the criminal court summoned Fernando Rojas and Dolly
Paredes to a hearing on preventive measures.*° Claimants feared that their personal
liberty and the possible fabrication of evidence were at stake, as they allege had
happened in the case of David Moscoso. On 2 October 2009, Claimants filed a
request for a “temporary restraining order” to prevent the continuation of criminal
proceedings related to this arbitration.*” The Tribunal rejected this request, holding that
the request did not meet the urgency requirement, and that at that stage it lacked
sufficient information to assess whether the requirement of necessity was met or to
determine whether any of Claimant's rights required preservation.®

The hearing on preventive measures that was supposed to take place on 6 October
2009 did not take place. Dolly Paredes submitted a challenge against Judge Margot
Pérez for alleged lack of impartiality as a consequence of the criminal proceedings
initiated against her by the Minister of the State’s Legal Defense.°*° Judge Pérez
accepted the challenge, declaring that her acts “are being controlled within the

3 See Complaint for crimes committed by competent authority, 10 June 2009 (Annex CPM-23), p. 8.
® Id, p. 8 (Original in Spanish).

®5 Id., pp. 3, 5-6. (Original in Spanish).

°° See Annex CRO-1.

®7 Claimants’ Request for a Temporary Restraining Order, 2 October 2009.

* See ICSID letter dated 5 October 2009.

°° See Challenge filed by Dolly T. Paredes, 5 October 2009 (Annex CPM-54).

16

46.

47.

48.

proceedings for prevaricato, since any decision of this judge may result in further

criminal charges as they have done before...”°°

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
A. Claimants’ Position

Claimants contend that the criminal proceedings are motivated by and aimed at the
present arbitration, that they have no self-standing merit, and are instrumental to
Bolivia’s defense strategy to avoid arbitration on the merits. Specifically, Claimants
allege that “[t]he criminal proceedings are merely instrumental to Bolivia’s goals in the
arbitration, which are to (i) deny the condition of Claimants as foreign investors under
the BIT; (ii) obtain, manipulate and fabricate evidence that supports Bolivia's defense
strategy, and (iii) ultimately, force Claimants to give up their claims in the arbitration.”*"
Claimants also argue that this is a unique case, because Bolivia is prosecuting
Claimants and persons related to them for a crime that consists in presenting a claim in
an international arbitration.© Claimants support this allegation by asserting that Bolivia
has claimed within the criminal proceedings that the harm which is a constituent
element of the crimes attributed to the accused persons consists of Bolivia’s exposure
to this international arbitration.

Finally, Claimants submit that, just as investors must pass certain tests in order to fall
under the protection of the ICSID Convention, States too must abide by certain basic
notions of behavior and act in accordance with ICSID rules and guiding principles.
Claimants argue that “States cannot be allowed to avail themselves of their intrinsically
superior powers under their own domestic legal systems in order to obstruct [an]
investor's legitimate access to ICSID arbitration’, and that coercing Claimants and
persons related to their investment in Bolivia by criminal prosecution is an
unacceptable means of boycotting the ICSID system that must not be permitted.™

© See Resolution No. 389/2009, Decision on challenge, 7 October 2009 (Annex CPM-55). (Original in Spanish).
®' Claimants’ RPM, 7 18.

© Transcript, p. 30, lines 15-20.

® Transcript, p. 17, lines 2-6; p. 76, lines 18-22; p. 77, lines 1-12.

® Claimants’ RPM, 7 64.

17

49.

50.

51.

52.

1. Rights that require preservation

Claimants submit that, in accordance with Art. 47 of the ICSID Convention, provisional
measures can only be requested to preserve the rights of either party. Claimants
allege that the criminal proceedings initiated by Bolivia impair the following rights that
need preservation: (1) the right to preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation
of the dispute; (2) the right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings;
and (3) the right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings in accordance with Art. 26 of
the ICSID Convention. ©

Claimants reject Bolivia’s argument that the Tribunal may only order provisional
measures if Bolivia’s actions impair the rights “in dispute’. Claimants argue that
identity between the object of the coercive measures and the rights in dispute is not
required, and that in any event Bolivia’s actions do affect the rights “in dispute”,
because Claimants are not only requesting compensation for the unlawful expropriation
but also moral damages for the acts of harassment perpetrated by Bolivia against
Claimants, in particular by way of criminal proceedings.

a. Right to the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation
of the dispute
Claimants submit that the right to preservation of the status quo and the non-
aggravation of the dispute is a self-standing right under international law.®” Claimants
rely on Burlington v. Ecuador,® Electricity Company of Sofia v. Bulgaria,’ and Amco
Asia v. Indonesia,”° among others.

Claimants allege that the criminal proceedings have aggravated, and continue to
aggravate, the dispute between the Parties. Claimants assert that Bolivia is doing
everything in its power to obstruct the ICSID proceedings, and is using the criminal
proceedings and other forms of harassment to ultimately force the Claimants to give up
their claims.

® Claimants’ RPM, 1 34.

® Claimants’ Reply, {ff 78-79.

®7 Claimants’ RPM, If 36-37.

6 Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, (“Burlington v.
Ecuador’), Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009 {| 60.

6 Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), Judgment of 5 December 1939, PClJ series
A/B No. 79, p. 199.

7 Amco Asia Corporation v. Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1 (“Amco Asia v. Indonesia’), Decision on
Request for Provisional Measures of 9 December 1983, p. 412.

18

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Claimants note as an example that the court issued an order of restraint prohibiting
David Moscoso from contacting the other accused, including his former legal counsel
Fernando Rojas. Claimants allege that “the direct pressure placed on David Moscoso
by the government of Bolivia has made him turn against his own business partners, as
well as virtually eradicated him as a source of information and a buttress for the cause
of Claimants in the arbitration.””'

Claimants allege that Bolivia’s course of action has changed the status quo of the
dispute, as Claimants have become defendants in Bolivia, and has created serious
obstacles for Claimants’ presentation of their claim. Claimants contend that at the time
they submitted their Request for Arbitration, the Parties were equal in arms as to their
possibility to present their case, but since December 2008 Claimants’ position has
been weakened as the persons involved in the criminal proceedings have been forced
out from the ICSID proceedings as potential witnesses or sources of information.”

Claimants argue that the criminal proceedings are aimed at avoiding discussion on the
merits of the dispute and put intolerable pressure on Claimants to drop their claim. As
support for this allegation, they cite declarations in the Bolivian press by Bolivian
authorities, including Oscar Camara, former Vice-Minister of the State’s Legal Defense
and Executive Director of the Autoridad de Fiscalizacién y Control Social de Empresas
(the agency that has since replaced the Superintendencia de Empresas), claiming the
existence of an agreement between the Parties without any payment of compensation
by Bolivia to Claimants, allegedly due to Claimants acceptance of the criminal
accusations against them.”

b. Right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings

Claimants assert that the criminal proceedings impair their right to the procedural
integrity of the arbitration proceedings, in particular with respect to their access to
evidence and the integrity of the evidence produced.

In particular, Claimants allege that Bolivia is impairing Claimants’ access to evidence
by sequestering corporate documents and intimidating potential witnesses (including

7! Claimants’ RPM, 138.
”2 Claimants’ RPM {] 39, Claimants’ Reply on PM, 88-90.

73 Claimants’ Reply, {If 91, 33. See Press Article, “Quiborax withdrew arbitration because the Government found
alleged fraud” [“Quiborax levanté arbitraje porque el Gobierno hallé presunto fraude”], La Razén - Bolivia, 10
September 2009 (Annex CPM-65).

19

58.

59.

60.

61.

Claimants’ former and current legal counsel) who now fear to testify." Claimants note
that the persons involved in the criminal proceedings have been defined by Bolivia as

””> but that, fearing for

“indispensable witnesses to reach the historic truth of the facts’

their situation in Bolivia, they are not prepared to participate in this arbitration.” As a

result, Claimants claim they have been left without indispensable witnesses for their
77

case.

Claimants specifically point to the fact that David Moscoso is now legally impeded to
act as a witness for Claimants, as he has made a confession within the criminal
proceedings and any testimony to the contrary in the ICSID proceedings would allow
Bolivia to prosecute him for false testimony or false self-incrimination (autocalumnia).”®

Claimants allege that by forcing confessions such as that of David Moscoso, Bolivia is
manipulating and fabricating ex post facto evidence to be used in the ICSID
proceedings (in particular with respect to the Claimants’ standing as investors under
the BIT).”° Claimants contend that “[i]f the criminal proceedings are allowed to
continue, there is every reason to fear that other potential witnesses will find
themselves forced to make false statements to save themselves from imprisonment or
otherwise face Bolivia’s persecution.”

Claimants also claim that, by questioning Informe 001/2005 and harassing its authors,
Bolivia has destroyed information that supports Claimants’ status under the BIT.
Claimants maintain that “[t]he intricate maneuvers deployed by Bolivia to diminish the
value of the report are only within the means of a sovereign State with investigative and
coercive powers and not permissible in international arbitration.”*'

Claimants reject Bolivia’s contention that no harm is done because the Tribunal is free
to weigh the evidence as it deems appropriate, arguing that this faculty will be
contaminated by Bolivia because the persons involved in the criminal proceedings will
no longer be able to render candid testimony.®

* Claimants’ RPM fff] 40, 42; Claimants’ Reply on PM, if] 98-102.
78 Formal Indictment, p. 10 (Annex CPM-11). (Original in Spanish).
76 Claimants’ Reply, 99.

77 Ig

78 Claimants’ Reply, § 97.
”° Claimants’ RPM, {| 41; Claimants’ Reply, 1] 101-102.
®° Claimants’ RPM, | 42.

8 Id.

® Claimants’ Reply, 1 95.

20

c. The right to the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings under Art. 26
of the ICSID Convention
62. Claimants contend that the criminal proceedings are aimed at destroying Claimants’
status as foreign investors under the Bolivia-Chile BIT and are thus parallel
proceedings on jurisdiction prohibited by the exclusivity of ICSID jurisdiction under Art.
26 of the ICSID Convention, which provides in relevant part:

Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion
of any other remedy.

63. Claimants submit that “Bolivia is raising and discussing in an alternate forum issues
that are aimed at attacking the jurisdiction of the Centre”, and that it “has construed the
mere existence of being subject to the present arbitration as the object of its domestic
criminal prosecution.” Claimants argue that, as a consequence, the criminal
proceedings initiated by Bolivia constitute what Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention calls
“other remedy’. Claimants rely on City Oriente v. Ecuador, where the Tribunal
ordered the Ecuadorian General Prosecutor to refrain from pursuing the criminal
investigation of three of City Oriente’s executives on charges closely related to the
subject of the arbitration.®°

64. Citing Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Claimants submit that parallel proceedings are
prohibited under Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention, if they “relate to the subject matter of
the case before the tribunal and not to separate, unrelated issues or extraneous
matters.”®° Relying on CSOB v. Slovak Republic, Claimants also argue that it is not
necessary for the criminal proceedings to deal with the same subject matter as the

ICSID proceeding to constitute such “other remedy”, and that it is sufficient that the

proceedings refer to matters under consideration by the Tribunal.®”

®3 Claimants’ RPM, 7/50.
® Claimants’ RPM, 151.

8s City Oriente Ltd. v. Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador, |\CSID Case No. ARB/O6/21 (“City
Oriente v. Ecuador’), Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007, {| 50.

®§ Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18 (“Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine”), Order No. 3 of 18
January 2005, § 11.

® Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/4 (“CSOB v. Slovak
Republic’), Procedural Order No. 4 of 11 January 1999, preamble.

21

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

2. Requirements for provisional measures

Claimants state that provisional measures must be urgent and necessary for the rights
invoked to be protected, and that both requirements are fulfilled in the present case.*®

a. Urgency
Citing Burlington v. Ecuador and Prof. Schreuer, Claimants submit that “the criterion of
urgency is satisfied when [...] ‘a question cannot await the outcome of the award on the
merits””.©°

According to Claimants, what is essential is that the harm is likely to be produced
before the date of the award.® For that reason, the urgency requirement must be
assessed in the context of the case, as stated by the tribunal in Biwater Gauff v.

Tanzania:

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the degree of “urgency” which is required

depends on the circumstances, including the requested provisional

measures, and may be satisfied where a party can prove that there is a

need to obtain the requested measure at a certain point in the procedure

before the issuance of an award. [...] The Arbitral Tribunal also considers

that the level of urgency required depends on the type of measure which

is requested.°'
Claimants argue that the requirement of urgency is met in this case.° Specifically,
Claimants contend that because the provisional measures are intended to protect
against the aggravation of the dispute and to safeguard the jurisdictional powers of the

Tribunal and the integrity of the arbitration, they are urgent by definition.

Claimants argue that the urgency of the provisional measures is evidenced by the
conviction of David Moscoso,” and that it has become evident that the passage of time
in the present case only makes the threat of irreparable harm to Claimants’ rights more

imminent.

®8 Claimants’ RPM, 7/35.

69 Burlington v. Ecuador, Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009, $73; Christoph H. Schreuer. The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary (2001), p. 751, § 14.

°° Claimants’ Reply, {| 115.

*' Biwater Gauft (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, |CSID Case No. ARB/05/22 (“Biwater Gauff v,
Tanzania’), Procedural Order No. 1 of 31 March 2006, {| 76.

© Claimants RPM 4] 52-55.

°3 Claimants rely on Burlington v. Ecuador, Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009, § 74 and City Oriente v.
Ecuador, Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007, 69.

* Claimants’ RPM, 7] 54.

®5 Claimants’ Reply, | 119.

22

70.

71.

72.

73.

b. Necessity

Claimants submit that “[t]he necessity requirement requires the Tribunal to consider the
proportionality of the requested provisional measures to the harm Claimants have
already suffered and will continue to suffer in consequence of the actions of Bolivia.”*°
According to Claimants, the appropriate standard to assess the necessity of Claimants’
request for provisional measures is that established in Art. 17A of the UNCITRAL
Model Law, which requires the party requesting an interim measure to satisfy the
tribunal that:

Harm not adequately repaired by an award of damages is likely to result if

the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the

harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is

directed if the measure is granted.
Following this standard, Claimants argue that the provisional measures requested are
necessary because the harm caused would not be adequately repaired by an award on
damages. Specifically, Claimants allege that “[t]he harm to Claimants caused by the
criminal proceedings, consisting of restrictions on the personal liberty of co-Claimant
Allan Fosk and the other persons accused, as well as the corruption of evidence
relevant to the present arbitration, is not the kind of harm that can be adequately
repaired by an award of damages”, and that “[iJt can only be avoided by immediate
termination of the criminal proceedings in Bolivia.”*” In contrast, Claimants assert that
Bolivia suffers no harm if the criminal proceedings are stayed. °°

B. Respondent’s Position

Respondent notes at the outset that provisional measures are exceptional in nature
and should not be granted lightly. Respondent cites Occidental Petroleum Corporation
v. Ecuador, where the Tribunal held:

It is not contested that provisional measures are extraordinary measures
that cannot be recommended lightly. In other words, the circumstances
under which provisional measures are required under Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention are those in which the measures are necessary to
preserve a party's rights and where the need is urgent in order to avoid
irreparable harm. The jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice
dealing with provisional measures is well-established: a provisional

 

°6 Claimants’ RPM, 453.
*” Claimants’ RPM, | 62.
°8 Claimants’ RPM, 7 63.

23

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

measure is necessary where the actions of a party ‘are capable of
causing or of threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked’ [...]°°
In Respondent's view, Claimants’ request for provisional measures must fail because it
meets none of these requirements.

1. Rights for which protection is sought

As a preliminary matter, Respondent contends that provisional measures may not be
granted in this case because the criminal proceedings do not affect any of Claimants’
rights in the dispute.'°° Specifically, Respondent claims that “[a] criminal proceeding
initiated with full factual and legal justification, exclusively to establish the existence of
crimes that affect legal rights protected by Bolivian Law, does not constitute a threat to
the arbitral proceeding, its development and its results.”

Respondent also asserts that Claimants have not established “the existence of even a
single objective element from which it could be determined that the rights that are
significant to this dispute, including the procedural rights that they invoke, may have
been affected or could be affected in an imminent and irreparable manner by the
legitimate exercise of the powers that Bolivia can engage in as a sovereign state in
order to demand compliance with its legislation and to apply current criminal laws in
observation of the principle of due process.”'

In addition, Respondent states that the dispute in this arbitration proceeding would be
limited to establishing whether the Claimants have the right to the monetary
compensation that they are demanding as a result of the revocation of the mining
concessions they claim to have held.'® In contrast, the criminal proceedings deal with
the prosecution of crimes, specifically the alteration and falsification of documents, the
use of a falsified instrument and dereliction of duty by public officers."°*

Respondent relies on precedent from the International Court of Justice, in particular the
Case Concerning Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of Congo v.

°° Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of
Ecuador, |CSID Case No. ARB/06/11 (“Occidental v. Ecuador’), Decision on Provisional Measures of 17 August
2007, 459.

100

Respondent's Objection, If] 5-7.

‘°' Respondent's Objection, 1 6.

102 jg,
Respondent's Objection, {| 7.

103

104 Respondent's Objection, J] 8, 30.

24

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

France), according to which the power of the Court to indicate provisional measures to
maintain the respective rights of the parties is to be exercised only if there is an urgent
need to prevent irreparable prejudice to the rights that are the subject of the dispute
before the Court has had an opportunity to render its decision.’

Respondent objects to each of Claimants’ specific grounds for requesting provisional
measures, as described below.

a. With respect to the right to the preservation of the status quo and
non-aggravation of the dispute

As noted above, Respondent contends that there is no aggravation of the dispute or
need to preserve the status quo, because the criminal proceedings do not affect the
rights in dispute. Respondent argues that the fact that the criminal proceedings cause
inconveniences and suffering to Claimants does not prove that they interfere with the
rights in dispute.‘
In this regard, Respondent submits that there is no self-standing right to the
preservation of the status quo or the non-aggravation of the dispute. Such right exists
only when there is an imminent threat that a right in dispute will suffer irreparable
harm.'°”

Even if such self-standing right existed, as held by the tribunal in Burlington v. Ecuador,
Respondent argues that the sole existence of this right does not necessarily mandate
the adoption of provisional measures. Claimants would have to demonstrate that: (a)
the initiation of the criminal proceeding alters the status quo of the dispute as it was
submitted to the Tribunal; (b) the existence of the criminal proceeding produces a
threat of irreparable harm that may affect the disputed rights; and (c) if the requested

measures are not adopted, harm would be imminent.'®

Respondent argues that Claimants’ reliance on Burlington v. Ecuador is misguided
because the circumstances of that case were totally different from those of the present
arbitration. In Burlington, Ecuador's actions giving rise to the provisional measures
related to the same monetary obligations being examined by the arbitral tribunal, there

15 Case Concerning Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v. France), Order of June
17, 2003, ICJ Reports 2003, § 22.

16 Respondent's Objection, 45.

107

Respondent's Objection, ff] 11; 46-48.

18 Respondent's Objection, 51.

25

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

was an ongoing business relationship between the parties that the tribunal deemed
worth protecting, and the contract governing that relationship gave rise to an obligation
of specific performance that also merited protection. None of those elements is
present here.

In any event, Respondent claims that there is no change to the status quo, because
claimant Allan Fosk has not been formally accused and his procedural status has not
changed since December 2008. Respondent also notes that none of the persons
involved in the criminal proceedings has been called as a witness by Claimants, so
their procedural status is not relevant to this arbitration.’

In addition, Respondent claims that there has been no aggravation of the dispute
because Claimants have not identified any measure by Bolivia that could exercise a
prejudicial effect on the execution of the decision or aggravate or extend the dispute.'"°

Relying on Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay),''' Respondent also
argues that even when the conduct of one of the parties allegedly aggravates or
prolongs the dispute, provisional measures may only be ordered if there is evidence of
some irreparable harm to the rights of the other party. As this is not the case here,
provisional measures may not be granted.

b. With respect to the right to the integrity of the arbitral
proceedings
Respondent contends that there is no threat to the integrity of the proceedings,
particularly with respect to the production of evidence.

Respondent notes that Claimants have already presented substantial evidence,
including corporate documentation, both in their Request for Provisional Measures and
in their Memorial on the merits. Thus, provisional measures directed to protect
Claimants’ right to present evidence would serve no purpose."

If Claimants refer to the evidence that may be presented by Bolivia, Respondent claims
that there is no urgency or necessity to support the granting of provisional measures
because any evidence that Bolivia presents will be examined, criticized and verified by

18 Respondent's Objection, ff] 54-61.
"© Respondent's Objection, TJ 64-69.
™ Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay, (Argentina v. Uruguay), Order of January 23, 2007, ICJ Reports 2007, 4 50.
"2 Respondent's Objection, ff 12, 72.

26

90.

91.

92.

93.

113 ig.

Claimants and freely evaluated by the Tribunal.''? Indeed, Respondent argues that
any provisional measure intended to prevent such evidence from being presented
would be equivalent to ruling on and rejecting such evidence without having examined
it, which would affect Bolivia’s right to defense.'"*

In this regard, Respondent states that provisional measures directed to prevent the
“contamination” of evidence are appropriate only where such evidence is likely to
disappear, be destroyed or become unavailable. In these cases, provisional measures
are appropriate because they protect the Tribunal’s ability to examine evidence in the
future. Respondent argues that what Claimants seek is the opposite, that is, the
issuance of provisional measures that would prevent particular evidence from ever
being submitted to the Tribunal.'"®

Respondent rejects Claimants’ accusation that the criminal proceedings were artificially
instituted by Bolivia to destroy or distort the evidentiary value of certain documents
relevant to proving their condition as investors. This would imply falsely accusing
Bolivia of a crime. Respondent asserts that the Bolivian State is governed by the
principle of separation of powers and that the Executive branch does not interfere in
the administration of justice. Respondent contends that the factual circumstances that
motivated the criminal proceedings fully justify such proceedings.''®

c. With respect to the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings

Respondent maintains that the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings may only be
threatened by a parallel proceeding, i.e., one that deals with the same matter.
Respondent relies on Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine’ and City Oriente v. Ecuador'"®,
where the rights subject to the parallel proceedings were the same rights submitted to
the consideration of the tribunal in the ICSID proceedings. ''®

Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that the criminal proceedings are directed to
denying Claimants’ condition as investors protected by the BIT or deciding on the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. To the contrary, Respondent argues that the purpose of the

‘4 Respondent's Objection, {] 72.

115

Respondent's Objection, ff] 70, 73.

"© Respondent's Objection, J 12

"” Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Order No. 1, July 1, 2003, 43.

"8 City Oriente v. Ecuador, Decision on Provisional Measures of 19 November 2007, 9 49- 54.
"8 Respondent's Objection, ff 74-76.

27

94.

95.

96.

criminal proceedings is to establish whether the individuals prosecuted committed
certain crimes and, if so, to sanction such criminal conduct. Thus, the criminal
proceedings do not interfere with the sphere of jurisdiction and competence of the
Tribunal. ‘7°

As a result, Respondent contends that the criminal proceedings are not parallel to the
ICSID proceedings. While the criminal proceedings seek to sanction crimes that may
have been committed, the ICSID arbitration is directed to determining whether the
Claimants have the right to the relief they invoke and the compensation they are
claiming. Respondent argues that “[t]he circumstance that the documents whose
falsification is being investigated are related to the Claimants' status as shareholders in
a Bolivian company does not transform the criminal proceeding into a proceeding that
is parallel to the ICSID arbitration, because the results of the criminal proceeding will
be the application, or not, of penalties for falsification pursuant to Bolivian law,
regardless of the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal regarding the relevance of the claims
under the BIT with Chile.”*"

In addition, Respondent claims that the proceedings are legitimate per se, and not
motivated by the ICSID arbitration. Indeed, Respondent argues that by requesting
provisional measures Claimants seek to prevent Bolivia from exercising its sovereign
right to prosecute crimes within its own territory.' Respondent asserts that the
existence of documentation with indications of forgery offers sufficient grounds to merit
the initiation of criminal proceedings. In addition, Respondent claims that public
Officials are required by law to report the commission of a crime.’ The fact that
Bolivia paid more attention to NMM’s corporate structure after Claimants filed their
Request for Arbitration and thereby discovered irregularities does not mean that the
criminal proceedings are a reaction to the ICSID arbitration.’

2. Requirements for provisional measures

Respondent submits that provisional measures may be granted only in situations in
which there exists an urgent need to safeguard rights that are in imminent danger of

"20 Respondent's Objection, ff 76-77.

121

Respondent's Rejoinder, {] 22.

"22 Respondent's Rejoinder, { 6.

128 Respondent's Rejoinder, | 6. Respondent's Rejoinder is accompanied by the Expert Report of Dr. Mary
Elizabeth Carrasco Condarco, which describes the principles of Bolivian criminal procedure.
14 Respondent's Rejoinder, {| 28.

28

97.

98.

99.

100.

irreparable harm, in such a way that the party could find the party’s rights irreparably
affected before a decision is made on the merits."*° Respondent relies on Occidental
v. Ecuador,"*® Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine’’’ and the Aegean Sea Continental Shelf
Case (Greece v. Turkey).'*

In this case, Respondent claims that the provisional measures requested are neither
urgent nor necessary, because there is no imminent threat of an irreparable harm.

a. Urgency

With respect to the urgency requirement, Respondent states that the threat of
irreparable harm must be present and imminent. If the threat is not present or the harm
is not imminent, there is no need to decide anything before the award or decision is
issued. The urgency must be assessed at the time of the request, and should not be a

"28 Respondent relies on the Case Concerning Certain
130

speculation on the future.
Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of Congo v. France).

According to Respondent, Claimants’ allegations that they will not be able to access
key documents or witnesses to present their case on jurisdiction (particularly their fear
that key witnesses will be deprived of their liberty) are mere speculations conditional on
future events, and thus are incompatible with the notion of urgency.‘

b. Necessity

Respondent denies that the measures are necessary to prevent irreparable harm to
Claimants’ rights. As a preliminary matter, Respondent claims that the requirement of
necessity is premised on the existence of a right that requires protection from an
irreparable harm. As explained above, Respondent denies that such a right exists in
this case.

"5 Respondent's Objection, {| 40.

"8 Occidental v. Ecuador, Decision on provisional measures of 17 August 2007, {1 61

"” Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Order No. 3, January 18, 2005, 78.

128 Aegean Sea Continental Shelf Case (Greece v. Turkey), Order of September 11, 1976, ICJ Reports 3, 4 25,
33.

"8 Respondent's Rejoinder, {| 38.

"8° Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v. France, 2003), Order of June 17, 2003, ICU
Reports 2003, § 35.

*8' Respondent's Rejoinder, {f] 34-37, 41, 44.

29

101.

102.

103.

104.

192

In any event, as outlined in the preceding section, Respondent denies that there is any
threat of harm to any of the rights invoked by Claimants. Thus, the requirement of
necessity is not met.

Notwithstanding the above and to support its claims that no provisional measures are
necessary, Respondent has committed to:

(a) Provide certified copies of the corporate documentation sequestered by the
Bolivian authorities; and

(b) Collaborate so the persons involved in the criminal proceedings can be called as
witnesses in the arbitration.

With respect to documents, Respondent stated in its Rejoinder that “as a clear sign that
it has no intention of putting obstacles in the way of the Claimants’ probative task,
Bolivia has agreed to obtain from the Prosecutor's Office certified copies of any
documents identified by the Claimants, if they should have any difficulty in doing so.”"**
During the telephone conference that took place on 24 November 2009, Respondent
stated that more than a commitment, this was an expression of Claimants’ unrestricted
right to access to documents under Bolivian law.'*? This said, after being specifically
asked by the President of the Tribunal, Respondent confirmed the commitment
undertaken in the Rejoinder with respect to access to documents. '**

With respect to access to witnesses, Respondent stated in its Rejoinder that the
persons involved in the criminal proceedings “could be witnesses if they wanted. In
fact, since Respondent would certainly be interested in questioning them to see if it
would finally be possible to clarify the famous issue of the ‘formal errors’, it would
cooperate as necessary so that they could offer their testimony to the Tribunal.”"® This
commitment was confirmed by Respondent during the telephone conference. '%°

Respondent's Rejoinder, {] 33.

"83 Transcript, p. 81, lines 16-22; p. 82, lines 1-11.
‘4 Transcript, p. 86, lines 10-22; p. 87, lines 1-14; p. 92, lines 12-22.

1935

Respondent's Rejoinder, {J 35.

"8 Transcript, p. 89, lines 13-16; p. 90, lines 2-22; p. 91, line 1, 18-22.

30

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

DISCUSSION
A. Applicable Standards

1. Legal framework

The relevant rules are found in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, which are generally considered to grant wide discretion to the
Arbitral Tribunal on the issue of provisional measures.

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures
which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (effective as of January 1, 2003) provides in
relevant parts:

(1) At any time during the proceeding a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be
recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights
to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is
requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request
made pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own
initiative or recommend measures other than those specified in a
request. It may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or modify
or revoke its recommendations, after giving each party an
opportunity of presenting its observations.

2. Prima facie jurisdiction
It is undisputed by the Parties that the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to order
provisional measures prior to ruling on its jurisdiction. The Tribunal will not exercise
such power, however, unless there is a prima facie basis for jurisdiction.

The Tribunal is satisfied that it has prima facie jurisdiction for the purposes of rendering
this decision. The Request for Provisional Measures was filed by Claimants in this
arbitration. Claimants claim to be Chilean nationals, and Chile is a signatory to the

31

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

ICSID Convention. At the date when Claimants’ Request for Arbitration was filed, as
well as at the date when the Request for Arbitration was registered by the ICSID
Secretariat, Bolivia was still a signatory to the ICSID Convention. Thus, the Tribunal
has prima facie jurisdiction ratione personae.

Claimants claim that the disputes brought before this Tribunal arise from breaches by
Bolivia of its obligations with respect to Claimants’ investments in Bolivia under the
Chile-Bolivia BIT. To this date, Bolivia has not contested this allegation. Thus, the
Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction ratione materiae.

Further, Claimants allege that the dispute arose in June 2004, long after the entry into
force of the BIT in 1999. Bolivia has not contested this allegation. The Tribunal
therefore also has prima facie jurisdiction ratione temporis.

Finally, by ratifying the Chile-Bolivia BIT, Bolivia consented in writing to the jurisdiction
of the Centre over disputes such as those brought by Claimants. Claimants consented
in writing to the jurisdiction of the Centre by filing their Request for Arbitration.
Consequently, the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction ratione voluntatis, on the basis
of the Parties' consent.

3. Requirements for provisional measures

There is no disagreement between the Parties, and rightly so, that provisional
measures can only be granted under the relevant rules and standards, if rights to be
protected do exist (Section B below), and the measures are urgent (Section C below)
and necessary (Section D below), this last requirement implying an assessment of the
risk of harm to be avoided by the measures. By contrast, the Parties disagree on the
type and existence of the rights to be protected. The Parties further disagree on
whether the measures are urgent and/or necessary. The Tribunal will now review the
different requirements for provisional measures set out and the Parties’ divergent
positions in this respect.

B. Existence of Rights Requiring Preservation

Claimants allege that the following three rights need preservation by way of provisional
measures: (i) the right to preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the
dispute; (ii) the right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings, and (iii)
the right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings in accordance with Art. 26 of the ICSID
Convention.

32

115. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal will deal first with Bolivia’s contention that the
rights that may be protected by provisional measures may only be the rights “in
dispute”, and specifically whether under the circumstances of this case the rights
invoked by Claimants may be preserved by provisional measures (Section 1 below).
The Tribunal will then review the right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings (Section
2 below); then the right to preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the
dispute (Section 3 below); and finally the right to the procedural integrity of the
arbitration proceedings (Section 4 below).

1. Rights that may be protected by provisional measures

116. Bolivia contends that provisional measures may not be granted in this case because
the criminal proceedings do not affect any of Claimants’ rights “in dispute”, understood
as the rights that are the subject matter of the ICSID arbitration. In contrast, Claimants
argue that identity between the object of the coercive measures from which protection
is sought and the rights in dispute is not required.

117. The Tribunal agrees with Claimants’ position. In the Tribunal's view, the rights to be
preserved by provisional measures are not limited to those which form the subject
matter of the dispute, but may extend to procedural rights, including the general right to

the preservation of the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute. As stated

by the Tribunal in Burlington v. Ecuador, these latter rights are self-standing rights.'*”

The Tribunal in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania reached a similar conclusion.'*®

118. In the Tribunal’s view, the applicable criterion is that the right to be preserved bears a
relation with the dispute. This was the standard adopted by the tribunal in Plama v.
Bulgaria:

The rights to be preserved must relate to the requesting party's ability to
have its claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered
and decided by the arbitral tribunal and for any arbitral decision which
grants to the Claimant the relief it seeks to be effective and able to be
carried out. Thus the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are
circumscribed by the requesting party's claims and requests for relief.
They may be general rights, such as the rights to due process or the right
not to have the dispute aggravated, but those general rights must be

*8” Burlington v. Ecuador, § 60.
"88 See Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 1, 31 March 2006, 171 (‘The type of rights capable of
protection by means of provisional measures are not only substantive rights but also procedural rights”).

33

related to the specific disputes in arbitration, which, in turn, are defined by
the Claimant's claims and requests for relief to date.'*°
119. It is evident from the record that the criminal proceedings are related to, and may even
be motivated by, the ICSID arbitration. Most of the documents in the criminal
proceedings refer expressly to the ICSID arbitration. To cite one example, when David
Moscoso made his alleged confession, such confession specifically stated to be issued
“within the Request for Arbitration initiated by [Quiborax].”"*°
120. Although the subject matter of the criminal proceedings is the prosecution of crimes of
forgery, use of forged documents, fraud, destruction of personal property to defraud
and dereliction of duties, the factual accusation underlying these proceedings is that
the minutes of 13 September 2001 of NMM were forged to support Claimants’
contention that they were shareholders of NMM at the time the dispute brought before
this Tribunal arose, thus allowing them to gain access to ICSID arbitration under the
Chile-Bolivia BIT.“ This access to ICSID arbitration is expressly deemed to constitute
the harm caused to Bolivia that is required as one of the constituent elements of the
crimes prosecuted.'“? Thus, the criminal proceedings are related to this arbitration
because both the conduct alleged and the harm allegedly caused relate closely to
Claimants’ standing as investors in the ICSID proceeding.

121. In addition, although the Tribunal has every respect for Bolivia’s sovereign right to
prosecute crimes committed within its territory, the evidence in the record suggests that
the criminal proceedings were initiated as a result of a corporate audit that targeted
Claimants because they had initiated this arbitration. Indeed, the Querella Criminal
expressly states that the alleged irregularities in Claimants’ corporate documentation
were detected in consideration of (“en atencién a”) the Request for Arbitration filed by
Claimants against Bolivia.* Lorena Fernandez, one of the authors of Informe

"89 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24 (“Plama v. Bulgaria”), Order, 6
September 2005, § 40.

"40 Affidavit of David Moscoso (Annex CPM-21). (Original in Spanish).

See, e.g. Request for Abbreviated Proceeding (Annex CPM-19), p. 5 (“For the above reasons [and] the
existing evidence Mr. David Moscoso recognizes freely and spontaneously the falsity introduced in the minutes of
13 September of 2001, whose only objective was to make the Chilean company QUIBORAX a participant in the
incorporation of the company N.M.M. and to use this to benefit from the Bolivia-Chile bilateral treaty and in this
way sue the Bolivian State and cause a harm to it.”) (Original in Spanish).

"2 See Querella Criminal (Annex CPM-9) pp. 1209-1210; Formal Indictment (Annex CPM-11), pp. 4-5; Request
for Abbreviated Proceeding (Annex CPM-19), p. 5; Resolution No. 313/2009 (Annex CPM-20), p. 3; Complaint for
crimes committed by competent authority (Annex CPM-23), p. 2.

8 See Querella Criminal (Annex CPM-9), p. 1209 (“In consideration of the request for arbitration filed by the
company Quimica e Industrial del Borax Ltda., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Mr. Allan Isaac Fosk Kaplun,
against the Bolivian State, a series of irregularities had been detected because certain documentation appeared

34

001/2005, testified that the corporate audit was made at the request of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in the context of an arbitration proceeding and was aimed at
establishing whether the shareholders in NMM were Chilean nationals.'“ Indeed, the
very content of Informe 001/2005 suggests that the underlying motivation for the audit
was to serve Bolivia in the defense of this arbitration claim, as it contained specific
recommendations for such defense. ‘“°

122. The Tribunal cannot fail to note that these actions were taken after an inter-ministerial
committee specifically recommended in the 2004 Memo that Bolivia should try to find
flaws in Claimants’ mining concessions as a defense strategy for the ICSID
arbitration.'*® Seen jointly with the 2004 Memo, the corporate audit and the criminal
proceedings appear to be part of a defense strategy adopted by Bolivia with respect to
the ICSID arbitration.

123. Whether such defense strategy amounts to harassment, as Claimants allege, is not
clear to the Tribunal. Bolivia has the sovereign power to prosecute conduct that may
constitute a crime on its own territory, if it has sufficient elements justifying prosecution.
Bolivia also has the power to investigate whether Claimants have made their
investments in Bolivia in accordance with Bolivian law and to present evidence in that
respect. But such powers must be exercised in good faith and respecting Claimants’
rights, including their prima facie right to pursue this arbitration.

124. What is clear to the Tribunal is that there is a direct relationship between the criminal
proceedings and this ICSID arbitration that may merit the preservation of Claimants’
rights in the ICSID proceeding. The Tribunal will now examine specifically whether any
or all of the three rights invoked by the Claimant merit such protection in the specific
circumstances of the case.

 

to have been fabricated in order to mislead the Superintendencia de Empresas, during audits carried out to such
company due to the incomplete documentation that was presented to the auditing entity, so that it would certify
that the company Non Metallic Minerals had foreign capital so that it could benefit from the Bilateral Investment
Treaty signed with the Republic of Chile and thus not [have to] go before Bolivian courts.”). (Original in Spanish)

"4 See Declaration of Lorena Fernandez (Annex CPM-37), pp. 2, 4.
"45 See Informe 001/2005 (Annex CPM-14), pp. 6-7.
"48 See 2004 Memo (Annex CPM-5).

35

125.

126.

127.

128.

2. Right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings in accordance with Art.
26 of the ICSID Convention
Claimants argue that provisional measures are necessary to preserve the exclusivity of
the ICSID proceedings under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, which provides in
relevant part:

Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless

otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion

of any other remedy.
Claimants argue that the criminal proceedings are aimed at destroying their status as
foreign investors under the Bolivia-Chile BIT and thus constitute “other remedy” for
purposes of Art. 26 of the ICSID Convention. Bolivia rejects this argument by pointing
out that the subject matter of the ICSID proceeding (determining whether Bolivia has
breached its obligations under the BIT and Claimants are entitled to the relief sought) is
distinct from the subject matter of the criminal proceedings (prosecuting and punishing
crimes in accordance with Bolivian law).

The Tribunal has no doubt that the right to exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings is
susceptible of protection by way of provisional measures. In the words of the Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine tribunal:

Among the rights that may be protected by provisional measures is the

right guaranteed by Article 26 to have the ICSID arbitration be the

exclusive remedy for the dispute to the exclusion of any other remedy,

whether domestic or international, judicial or administrative.'*”
The question that arises is whether the continuation of the criminal proceedings
referred to in this decision threatens the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings. The
Tribunal considers that it does not. Although it finds that the criminal proceedings are
related to the ICSID arbitration, that does not per se threaten the exclusivity of the
arbitration proceedings under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. Pursuant to Article
25 of the ICSID Convention, the Centre has jurisdiction to resolve investment disputes.
Thus, the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings applies only to investment disputes, i.e.
here to the determination of whether Respondent has breached its international
obligations under the BIT and whether Claimants are entitled to the relief they seek.

"47 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Order No. 3 of 18 January 2005, {/7, citation omitted.

36

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

Consequently, the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings does not extend to criminal
proceedings. Criminal proceedings deal with criminal liability and not with investment
disputes, and fall by definition outside the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the
competence of this Tribunal. Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT contain any
rule enjoining a State from exercising criminal jurisdiction, nor do they exempt
suspected criminals from prosecution by virtue of their being investors.

Thus, the Tribunal finds that the criminal proceedings initiated by Respondent do not
threaten the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings. Even if the criminal proceedings
result in evidence that is later used by Respondent in this arbitration, that would not
undermine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to resolve Claimants’ claims, if such jurisdiction is
established at the appropriate procedural instance.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that the practice of ICSID tribunals has been to
consider that other proceedings are parallel for purposes of Art. 26 of the ICSID
Convention when such proceedings deal with the same subject matter as the ICSID
dispute. This was the criterion adopted by the tribunal in Perenco v. Ecuador'®, for
instance.

3. The right to the preservation of the status quo and the non-
aggravation of the dispute

Claimants allege that the criminal proceedings are aggravating the dispute because
they put intolerable pressure on them to abandon their claim and are thus aimed at
avoiding the resolution of the dispute. Claimants also allege that the criminal
proceedings have changed the status quo of the dispute, as they have become
defendants in Bolivia, and have created serious obstacles for Claimants’ presentation
of their claim. Respondent opposes that there is no self-standing right to the
preservation of the status quo or the non-aggravation of the dispute and that, in any
event, there is no aggravation of the dispute or need to preserve the status quo,
because the criminal proceedings do not affect the rights in dispute.

As noted above, the Tribunal considers that although the criminal proceedings do not
deal with the same subject matter as the ICSID proceeding, they are sufficiently related
to merit the protection of Claimants’ rights to the non-aggravation of the dispute and the
preservation of the status quo, which the Tribunal considers to be self-standing rights.

"48 Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6) (“Perenco v. Ecuador’), Decision on Provisional Measures, 8 May 2009, {| 61.

37

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

The existence of the right to the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation
of the dispute is well-established at least since the case of the Electricity Company of
Sofia and Bulgaria." In the same vein, the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID
Convention referred to the need “to preserve the status quo between the parties
pending [the] final decision on the merits” and the commentary to the 1968 edition of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules explained that Article 47 of the Convention “is based on the
principle that once a dispute is submitted to arbitration the parties should not take steps
that might aggravate or extend their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award.”'®

In ICSID jurisprudence, this principle was first affirmed in Holiday Inns v. Morocco'®'
and then reiterated in Amco v. Indonesia. |n the latter case, the tribunal acknowledged
“the good and fair practical rule, according to which both Parties to a legal dispute
should refrain, in their own interest, to do anything that could aggravate or exacerbate

the same, thus rendering its solution possibly more difficult”.

The principle was re-affirmed in Plama v. Bulgaria’®

54

(although with a somewhat more

55

limited approach), Occidental v. Ecuador'®*, City Oriente v. Ecuador'®*, and Burlington

v. Ecuador."®

Having established the existence of these rights, the question that arises is whether the
criminal proceedings are in fact aggravating the ICSID dispute or have changed the
status quo.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that the criminal proceedings exacerbate the
climate of hostility in which the dispute is unfolding. However, it also notes that
Claimants have no more activities or presence in Bolivia. Their mining concessions
have been revoked, so there is no ongoing investment to protect. Co-Claimant Allan
Fosk — the only Claimant implicated in the criminal proceedings — has not been formally

“49 Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Belgium v. Bulgaria), Judgment of 5 December 1939, PClJ series
AJB, No 79, p.199. See also the LaGrand case (Germany v. United States), Judgment of 27 June 2001, 4 103,
ICJ Reports 2001, p. 466.

18° 4 ICSID Reports, p. 99.

151

Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1), Order of 2 July 1972, not

public but commented in Pierre Lalive, "The First ‘World Bank™ Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) — Some
Legal Problems", BYIL, 1980.

182 Amco Asia v. Indonesia, Decision on request for provisional measures of 9 December 1983, ICSID Reports,
1993, p. 412.

*83 Plama v. Bulgaria, Order of 6 September 2005, § 40.

*4 Occidental v. Ecuador, Decision on provisional measures of 17 August 2007, 1 96.

"8 City Oriente v. Ecuador, Decision on provisional measures of 19 November 2007, 55.

*88 Burlington v. Ecuador, Procedural Order No, 1 of 29 June 2009, {1 61-68.

38

139.

140.

141.

accused and does not live in Bolivia. Thus, the Tribunal cannot agree with Claimants
that the criminal proceedings place “intolerable pressure” on Claimants to drop their
claims. Likewise, the Tribunal cannot concur with Claimants’ argument that the
criminal proceedings have changed the status quo of the dispute because they have
turned them into defendants in Bolivia. If there are legitimate grounds for the criminal
proceedings, Claimants must bear the burden of their conduct in Bolivia.

4. Right to the procedural integrity of the arbitration proceedings

Claimants assert that the criminal proceedings impair their right to the procedural
integrity of the arbitration proceedings, in particular with respect to their access to
evidence and the integrity of the evidence. Specifically, Claimants claim that through
the criminal proceedings Respondent has obstructed their access to indispensable
evidence by sequestering their corporate records and alienating potential witnesses;
that Respondent has fabricated ex post facto evidence by forcing false confessions out
of a potential witness and thus making him unavailable to testify, and seeks to do the
same with other potential witnesses; and that Respondent attempts to destroy the
probative value of certain documents, such as Informe 001/2005.

Respondent denies that the criminal proceedings pose a threat to the procedural
integrity of the arbitration proceedings, in particular with respect to the production of
evidence. If Claimants’ allegation refers to the evidence to be presented by Claimants,
Respondent submits that Claimants have already presented substantial evidence, and
that Respondent is in no way restricting its access to documentary evidence or
potential witnesses. To the contrary, Respondent submits that granting provisional
measures would deprive it of the possibility to present its own case, because the
criminal proceedings may result in evidence that could be submitted to this Tribunal.
Respondent also rejects Claimants’ accusation that the criminal proceedings were
artificially instituted by Bolivia to destroy or distort the evidentiary value of certain
documents relevant to proving their condition as investors.

The Tribunal has no doubt that it has the power to grant provisional measures to
preserve the procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings, in particular the access to
and integrity of the evidence. Such measures were granted in Biwater Gauff v.

157

Tanzania'*” and Agip v. Congo'®* with respect to documentary evidence.

‘87 Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Jf 84- 98.

39

142. The Tribunal considers that the criminal proceedings may indeed be impairing
Claimants’ right to present their case, in particular with respect to their access to
documentary evidence and witnesses. Claimants have been deprived of their
corporate records and, although it appears from the record that Claimants have had
access to copies of certain documents, it is unclear whether they are still missing
relevant documentation that might assist them in presenting their case on jurisdiction or
the merits.

143. The Tribunal is also troubled by the effect that the criminal proceedings may have on
potential witnesses. The record shows that Respondent has pressed formal charges
against several persons involved in Claimants’ operation in Bolivia, including its
business partner, former counsel, the authors of Informe 001/2005, and the judge who
refused to order the preventive detention of Mr. Moscoso. It is true that Claimants have
already produced evidence with their Memorial and that these persons have not been
named as witnesses. However, Claimants have not answered any possible objections
to jurisdiction yet nor submitted their Reply to Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the
merits, if any. If such objections are raised, then the record as its stands seems to
indicate that these persons may indeed be privy to relevant facts and be asked to give
evidence.

144. Respondent denies that it has exercised any undue pressure on these persons that
could prevent them from acting as witnesses in this arbitration. However, at least one
of them — David Moscoso ~ is as a result of the criminal proceedings legally prevented
from testifying for Claimants in the ICSID proceedings because he cannot testify
against his own confession.

145. In addition, the way in which the criminal proceedings against David Moscoso
developed suggests that Respondent indeed may be exercising undue pressure
against potential witnesses. The record shows that David Moscoso had first denied
participation in the crimes charged and confessed only after bail of US$300,000 was
set on his personal liberty. Such bail had first been denied by the competent judge,
and was only set after that judge was charged with malfeasance in office for having
neglected to consider the importance of the case for the State of Bolivia. The Tribunal
also finds it troubling that although the Bolivian authorities first insisted on Mr.

 

188 Agip SpA v. People's Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/1, Decision, 18 January 1979, reported in
the Award of 30 November 1979, 1 ICSID Reports, p. 310.

40

146.

147.

148.

149.

Moscoso’s preventive detention, once he had confessed he was immediately
pardoned, which seems to suggest that the restriction on his personal liberty was
meant as an intimidation measure and not because the nature or circumstances of the
crime required Mr. Moscoso’s detention.

Even if no undue pressure is exercised on potential witnesses, the very nature of these
criminal proceedings is bound to reduce their willingness to cooperate in the ICSID
proceeding. Given that the existence of this ICSID arbitration has been characterized
within the criminal proceedings as a harm to Bolivia, it is unlikely that the persons
charged will feel free to participate as witnesses in this arbitration.

The Tribunal is not persuaded by Respondent’s argument that if provisional measures
are granted this would affect Respondent's ability to present its case in this ICSID
arbitration. Somewhat paradoxically, Respondent itself has argued that the criminal
proceedings are not directed to determine the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In any event,
whether Claimants made an investment in Bolivia that is covered by the Chile-Bolivia
BIT will not be proved or disproved by criminal proceedings, but by evidence related to
ownership and to the manner in which the investment was made, among others. Even
if the criminal proceedings could potentially result in evidence of facts related to this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Tribunal would not be bound by it.

Thus, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have shown the existence of a threat to the
procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings, in particular with respect to their right to
access to evidence through potential witnesses. In the words of the Plama tribunal, the
Tribunal finds that, under the particular circumstances of this case, the rights invoked
by Claimants and analyzed in this Section relate to Claimants’ “ability to have [their]
claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered and decided by the

arbitral tribunal”.'°°

C. Urgency

The Parties agree that there is urgency when there is a need to safeguard rights that
are in imminent danger of irreparable harm before a decision is made on the merits.
They disagree, however, on whether the present facts meet the urgency requirement.

*89 Plama v. Bulgaria, Order, 6 September 2005, § 40.

41

150. The Arbitral Tribunal agrees with Claimants that the criterion of urgency is satisfied
when “a question cannot await the outcome of the award on the merits”'®. This is in
line with the practice of the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”)'®". The same definition
has also been given in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania:

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, the degree of ‘urgency’ which is required
depends on the circumstances, including the requested provisional
measures, and may be satisfied where a party can prove that there is a
need to obtain the requested measures at a certain point in the procedure
before the issuance of an award."

151.

Claimants argue that the requirement of urgency is met in this case. Specifically,
Claimants contend that because the measures are intended to protect against the
aggravation of the dispute and to safeguard the jurisdictional powers of the Tribunal
and the integrity of the arbitration, they are urgent by definition.

152. By contrast, Respondent argues that there is no imminent threat to any of Claimants’
rights because the alleged harm to such rights is mere speculation.

153. The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that if measures are intended to protect the
procedural integrity of the arbitration, in particular with respect to access to or integrity
of the evidence, they are urgent by definition. Indeed, the question of whether a Party
has the opportunity to present its case or rely on the integrity of specific evidence is
essential to (and therefore cannot await) the rendering of an award on the merits.

D. Necessity

154. The Tribunal has found that the criminal proceedings threaten the procedural integrity
of the ICSID proceeding, and that provisional measures are urgent. The Tribunal will
now examine if provisional measures such as those requested by Claimants are
necessary.

160 Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 751, ¥ 14.
‘6 In the words of the ICJ, “[w]hereas the power of the Court to indicate provisional measures will be exercised
only if there is urgency in the sense that there is a real risk that action prejudicial to the rights of either party might
be taken before the Court has given its final decision (see, for example, Passage through the Great Belt (Finland
v. Denmark), Provisional Measures, Order of 29 July 1991, ICU Reports 1991, p. 17, § 23; Certain Criminal
Proceedings in France (Republic of the Congo v. France), Provisional Measures, Order of 17 June 2003, ICJ
Reports 2003, p. 107, § 22; Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Preliminary Objections, Order
of 23 January 2007, p. 11, 4 32), and whereas the Court thus has to consider whether in the current proceedings
such urgency exists", Case C i ication of the Co on the of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Order of 15 October 2008, § 129.

182 Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 1 of 31 March 2006, { 76.
42

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

The Parties agree that provisional measures must be necessary, in other words, that
they must be required to avoid harm or prejudice being inflicted upon the applicant.
However, they disagree on the qualification of the harm, whether serious or irreparable,
and also whether the criminal proceedings present a harm to Claimants’ rights that
requires avoidance by granting provisional measures.

The Tribunal considers that an irreparable harm is a harm that cannot be repaired by
an award of damages. Such a standard has been adopted by several ICSID tribunals
and embodied in Art. 17A of the UNCITRAL Model Law.'® That provision requires the
party requesting an interim measure to satisfy the tribunal that:

Harm not adequately repaired by an award of damages is likely to result if

the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the

harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is

directed if the measure is granted.
Following this standard, Claimants submit that the provisional measures requested are
necessary because the harm caused would not be adequately repaired by an award of
damages. The Tribunal agrees with Claimants in this respect: any harm caused to the
integrity of the ICSID proceedings, particularly with respect to a party's access to
evidence or the integrity of the evidence produced could not be remedied by an award
of damages.

However, Claimants have accurately pointed out that the necessity requirement
requires the Tribunal to consider the proportionality of the requested provisional
measures. The Tribunal must thus balance the harm caused to Claimants by the
criminal proceedings and the harm that would be caused to Respondent if the
proceedings were stayed or terminated.

Respondent claims that its sovereignty would be harmed if the Tribunal orders the
provisional measures sought by Claimants, as this would unduly interfere with its right
to prosecute crimes committed on its territory. Respondent also argues that the
criminal proceedings may provide evidence that it could present in the ICSID
proceedings, and that granting the measures requested by Claimants would prevent
such evidence from ever reaching the Tribunal and would thus affect its right to present
its case.

183 See City Oriente v. Ecuador, Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures, 13 May 2008, § 72, n. 21;
Sergei Paushok v. Republic of Mongolia, Order on Interim Measures of 2 September 2008 { 68-69; Burlington v.
Ecuador, Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2009, J 81-82.

43

160.

161.

162.

163.

In addition, Respondent has committed to collaborate with Claimants’ access to
documentary evidence and witnesses. Specifically, it has committed to:
(a) “obtain from the Prosecutor's Office certified copies of any documents identified

ond

by the Claimants, if they should have any difficulty in doing so”;

(b) “cooperate as necessary so that [the persons charged in the criminal
proceedings] could offer their testimony to the Tribunal”."®

In Claimants’ view, these commitments are not sufficient. Claimants insist that they

require the entire set of original documents sequestered by Bolivia, and that they have

serious difficulties accessing documents from the criminal proceedings, so

Respondent's assurance that the criminal documents are available to them is an empty

promise.'®

With respect to witnesses, Claimants contend that Respondent's assurances are
insufficient because it is not in Respondent's power to grant them access to the
witnesses. Claimants assert that the persons involved in the criminal proceedings
cannot or are not willing to appear as witnesses in this arbitration, either because they
are legally impeded from rendering testimony contrary to their prior testimony in the
criminal proceedings (as is the case of David Moscoso), or because they fear that their
participation in the arbitration will worsen their status in the criminal proceedings.
Thus, Claimants argue that the only way to make these persons available would be to
stop the criminal proceedings so that these persons can testify freely and without
fear.'°”

The Tribunal takes due notice of Respondent's commitments set out in paragraph 160
above. Nonetheless, the Tribunal agrees with Claimants that in the particular
circumstances of this case the commitment with respect to witnesses is insufficient.
Regardless of whether the criminal proceedings have a legitimate basis or not (an
issue which the Tribunal is not in a position to determine), the direct relationship
between the criminal proceedings and this ICSID arbitration is preventing Claimants
from accessing witnesses that could be essential to their case. No assurance of
cooperation from Respondent can guarantee that persons who are being prosecuted
for having allegedly caused harm to Respondent by permitting Claimants to present

164 Respondent's Rejoinder {] 33; see also Transcript, p. 81, lines 16-22; p. 82, lines 1-11.
165 Respondent's Rejoinder {] 35; see also Transcript, p. 86, lines 10-22; p, 87, lines 1-14; p. 92, lines 12-22.

166

Transcript, p. 86-88.

‘8’ Transcript, p. 93-95.

44

164.

165.

this arbitration will be willing to participate as witnesses in this very same arbitration.
Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that Claimants’ access to witnesses
may improve if the criminal proceedings are stayed until this arbitration is finalized or
this decision is reconsidered.

The Tribunal has given serious consideration to Respondent’s argument that an order
granting the provisional measures requested by Claimants would affect its sovereignty.
In this respect, the Tribunal insists that it does not question the sovereign right of a
State to conduct criminal cases. As mentioned in paragraph 129 above, the
international protection granted to investors does not exempt suspected criminals from
prosecution by virtue of their being investors. However, the situation encountered in
this case is exceptional. The Tribunal has been convinced that there is a very close
link between the initiation of this arbitration and the launching of the criminal cases in
Bolivia. It has become clear to the Tribunal that one of the Claimants is being
subjected to criminal proceedings precisely because he presented himself as an
investor with a claim against Bolivia under the ICSID/BIT mechanism. Likewise, the
Tribunal has been convinced that the other persons named in the criminal proceedings
are being prosecuted because of their connection with this arbitration (be it as
Claimants’ business partners or counsel, or as authors of a report ordered by a state
agency). Although Bolivia may have reasons to suspect that the persons being
prosecuted could have engaged in criminal conduct, the facts presented to the Tribunal
suggest that the underlying motivation to initiate the criminal proceedings was their
connection to this arbitration, which has been expressly deemed to constitute the harm
caused to Bolivia that is required as one of the constituent elements of the crimes
prosecuted.

In addition, the Tribunal is of the opinion that a mere stay of the criminal proceedings
would not affect Respondent's sovereignty nor require conduct in violation of national
law. Respondent's expert in criminal procedure, Dr. Mary Elizabeth Carrasco
Condarco, notes that the prosecutor may request the competent judge to refrain from
prosecuting a criminal action in certain cases, such as when the event is of little social
relevance or judicial pardon is foreseeable.’ The fact that David Moscoso was

188 Dr. Carrasco Condarco states: “The exercise of the public criminal action may not be suspended, interrupted,
nor ceased, except in the cases expressly provided by law. The prosecutor's office shall have the obligation to
exercise the public criminal action in all the cases where it applies, however, it may request the Judge that
exercises jurisdictional control to dispense with criminal persecution of one or more of the events prosecuted, with
respect to one or more participants, only in the following cases: 1.- When it is an event of little social relevance
due to its minimal effect on the legally protected interest, 2.- When the prosecuted person has suffered as a

45

Vv.

immediately pardoned, allegedly on the basis of a clean record, suggests that others in
a similar situation may be pardoned as well, and that Respondent does not consider
them a threat to society. In any event, the harm that such a stay would cause to Bolivia
is proportionately less than the harm caused to Claimants if the criminal proceedings
were to continue their course. Once this arbitration is finalized, Respondent will be free
to continue the criminal proceedings, subject to the Tribunal terminating or amending
this Decision prior to the completion of this arbitration.

DECISION

On this basis, the Arbitral Tribunal makes the following decision:

Respondent shall take all appropriate measures to suspend the criminal proceedings
identified as Case N° 9394/08, initiated against Allan Fosk, David Moscoso, Fernando
Rojas, Maria del Carmen Ballivian, Daniel Gottschalk, Dolly Teresa Paredes de
Linares, Gilka Salas Orozco, Maria Monica Lorena Fernandez Salinas, Yury Alegorio
Espinoza Zalles, Tatiana Giovanna Teran de Velasco and Ernesto Ossio Aramayo, and
any other criminal proceedings directly related to the present arbitration, until this
arbitration is completed or until reconsideration of this decision, whether at the request
of a Party or of the Tribunal’s own motion.

Respondent shall also refrain from initiating any other criminal proceedings directly
related to the present arbitration, or engaging in any other course of action which may
jeopardize the procedural integrity of this arbitration.

Claimants’ other requests for provisional measures are denied.

Costs are reserved for a later decision or award.

 

consequence of the event a physical or moral damage more serious than the sentence to be imposed; 3.- When
the sentence that is expected for the crime which prosecution is dispensed with lacks importance in consideration
of a sentence that has already been imposed for another crime, 4.- When judicial pardon is foreseeable and 5.-
When the expected sentence lacks importance considering those of other crimes, or that which would be imposed
in a proceeding taking place abroad and the requested extradition may be granted (article 21 of the [Code of
Criminal Procedure]).” Expert Report of Mary Elizabeth Carrasco Condarco, p. 3. (Original in Spanish).

46

— mass
Maw (a epic

“Bri fle Stem

Hon. Marc Lalonde Prof. Brigitte Stern

Date: 01.02.2010 Date: 01.02. 2010

n-Kohler, President

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufm

Date: 01.02.2010

