International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

Quiborax S.A.
and
Non Metallic Minerals S.A.

Claimants

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2

 

AWARD

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C., Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Natali Sequeira

Assistant to the Tribunal
Leonor Diaz-Cérdova

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 16 September 2015

=

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 8
A. THE PARTIES 8

1. The Claimant: 8

2. The Ri dent 8
THE FACTS. 10
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 20
A. INITIAL PHASE 20
B. JURISDICTIONAL PHASE 21
C. MERITS PHASE 25

 

OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS..

  

A. OVERVIEW OF THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION...

 

B. OVERVIEW OF THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION

 

 

 

PRELIMINARY MATTERS 35
A. THE TRIBUNAL'S TASK 35
B. LAW APPLICABLE TO THE MERIT! 36

 

C. WITNESS STATEMENT OF MR. OSVALDO ASTUDILLO..........

  

THE CLAIMS FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT

  

A. THE EXPROPRIATION CLAIM
1. Overview of the Parties’ positions ....
2. The Respondent's argument that the Claimants’ investments were illegal...

 

 

 

 

 

a. The Respondent's position 39
b. The Claimants’ position 43
c. Analysis 46

 

 

 

Bolivia's argument that the Claimants’ investments are not protected by the BIT ....
ii. Bolivia's argument that the Claimants’ concessions were null and void ab initio and thus

cannot be subject to iatic 50
3. The Respondent's argument that the Claimants’ claims are premature
a. The Respondent's position
b. The Claimants’ position 58

c. Analysis
4. Was there an unlawful expropriation of the Claimants’ investments?...........

 

 

a. The Claimants’ position 59

Decree 27,589 expropriated the Claimants’ investments.

 

 

|. The expropriation was unlawful
(a) The Revocation Decree was not issued in accordance with the law and did not serve the
public interest

 

(b) The Revocation Decree discriminated against the Claimants
(c) The Revocation Decree did not offer compensation

 

Vil.

B. FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT; IMPAIRMENT OF INVESTMENT
1. The Claimants’ position

3. Analysis

b. The Respondent's position 67

 

 

Bolivia's were not an i 67
ii. The requi for an unlawful iation are not met. 70

 

c. Analysi: 71
i. Was there a direct expropriation of the Claimants’ investments? .....
(a) Does the deprivation find a justification under the police powers doctrine? ....
(b) Did the Revocation Decree deprive NMM of its investment? ...
(c) Was the deprivation permanent? ..
Was there an indirect expropriation of Quiborax’s investment?

. Was the expropriation unlawful under the BIT?
(a) Did the expropriatory measure serve the public or national interest? Was it in accordance
with the law?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) Was the expropriatory measure discriminatory? ...
Was the expropriatory measure without compensation? ...
v. C i 89

z

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. The scope of the FET standard

b. The Claimants’ and legiti i were by the F 92

c. The revocation and ex post annulment of the mining concessions were unreasonable and
arbitrary measures 93

d. The revocation and ex post annulment of the concessions were also discriminatory ...

e. The Respondent cannot rely upon its own unlawful conduct to the detriment of the Claimants... 94

f. Post-expropriation acts of harassment

2. TheR dent's position
a. Bolivia did not treat the Claimants’ investment unfairly and inequitably by revoking and declaring

 

the annulment of the mining concessions ..
Bolivia has not impaired the Claimants’ investment with unjustified, arbitrary or discriminatory
measures by revoking and declaring the annulment of the mining concessions...
Bolivia did not violate its obligations under the BIT through subsequent acts ...

S

 

e

 

a. Revocation of the

 

b. Annulment of the concessions ...

 

c. Post-expropriation acts of harassment...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

REPARATION 104
A. COMPENSATORY DAMAGES 104
1. Overview of the Parties’ positions .... 104

2. Standard of compensation. 105

a. The Claimants’ position 105

b. The Respondent's position 107

c. Analysis 109

3. Valuation method 114

a. The Claimants’ position 111

b. The Respondent's position 113

c. Analysis 115

 

4. Valuation of ulexite reserves and resources 117
a. The Claimants’ position 117

 

b. The Respondent's position
i. Valuation under the sunk costs method....
ji, Valuation under the DCF method ...

c. Analysis

Valuation date.
Effects of Decree 27,590
|. Cash flows: reserves and

 

 

(a) Mining and financial standard:
(b) The Aquater-Enichem report.
(c) Behre Dolbear’s estimate of reserves and resources...
(d) The Tribunal’s of reserves and

. Cash flows: production profile and life of the concessions...
(a) Production profile
(b) Life of the

 

 

iv,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

v. Cash flows: ulexite products, prices and costs ..
(a) Products to be sold
(b) Price
(c) Cost
vi. Cash flows: other variable:
vii. Discount rate
(a) Risk free rate of return.
(b) Equity risk premium.
(c) Country risk premium
(d) Micro-cap size premium
(e) Cost of debt
(f) | Conclusions on the discount rate ..
Quantificati
5. The claim for the loss of lithium resources -- 167
a. The Claimants’ position 167
b. The Respondent's position 167
c. Analysi: 168
6. Interest 169
a. The Claimants’ position 169
b. The Respondent's position 169
c. Analysis 170
B. DECLARATORY JUDGMENT AND MORAL DAMAGES.... 174
1. Overview. 174
2. Request for a declaratory jud 174
a. The Claimants’ position 175

b. The Respondent's position
c. Analysis

 

Objections to ji
ii. Objections to
iii. Does the Tribunal have the power to grant the relief requested? .....

 

 

4

. 186
. 186

 

iv. Has the Respondent's conduct breached its international obligations?.
(a) Has the Respondent's conduct breached its substantive obligations under the BIT’

(b) Has the Respondent breached its obligations under the ICSID Convention? . 189

(1) Did the Respondent breach Article 47 of the ICSID Convention?.. .-- 190

(2) Did the Respondent breach Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and Article 14 of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Administrative and Financial Regulations? ... a 193

(c) Has the Respondent breached its duty to arbitrate in good faith?... wae 194

3. Moral d 199

a. Objections to jurisdiction 199

b. Merits 200

i. The Claimants' position 200

ii. The Ri 's position 202

iii. Analysis 204

Vill. COSTS 206
IX. DECISION 207

 

BIT or Treaty

CCSS

CDJ
Claimants

COSS

Counter-Mem.

Exh. CD-

Exh. CL-
Exh. CPM-
Exh, R-

Exh. RL-
ICJ
ICSID

ILC Articles

MT

NMM

PClJ
PO
Quiborax

RCSS

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Bilateral Investment Treaty; specifically “Agreement between the
Republic of Bolivia and the Republic of Chile on the Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,” signed on 22 September
1994 and in force since 21 July 1999

Claimants’ Closing Statement Slides for the hearing on merits of 28-30
October 2013

Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment of 27 May 2011
Quiborax S.A. ("Quiborax") and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. ("NMM")

Claimants’ Opening Statement Slides for the hearing on merits of 28-30
October 2013

Respondent's Counter-Memorial of 10 May 2013
Claimants’ Exhibits

Claimants’ Legal Exhibits

Claimants’ Exhibits — Provisional Measures

Respondent's Exhibits

Respondent's Legal Exhibits

International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for

Internationally Wrongful Acts with comments, November 2001,
Supplement No. 10 (A/56/10), chap. IV.E.1

Claimants’ Memorial of 14 September 2009
Metric tonnes

Non-Metallic Minerals S.A.

Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration of 4 October 2005
Permanent Court of International Justice
Procedural Order

Quiborax S.A.

Respondent's Closing Statements Slides for the hearing on merits of 28-30
October 2013

RDJ

Rejoinder
Reply
Respondent

Rio Grande or
RIGSSA

ROSS

Tr. [page:line]

n.

Respondent's Reply to Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment of 10
June 2011

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits of 11 October 2013
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits of 13 August 2013
Plurinational State of Bolivia ("Bolivia")

Compajiia Minera Rio Grande Sur S.A.

Respondent's Opening Statement Slides for the hearing on merits of 28-30
October 2013

Transcript of the hearing on merits of 28-30 October 2013
Footnote

Page

Paragraph

Section

I INTRODUCTION

A. The Parties

1. The Claimants

1. The Claimants are Quiborax S.A. ("Quiborax"), a Chilean mining company, and Non-
Metallic Minerals S.A. ("NMM"), a Bolivian mining company (collectively, the
Claimants").

2. Quiborax, a corporation created under the laws of Chile, is a mining company

dedicated in particular to the extraction of ulexite, a non metallic mineral, and to the
manufacture of products derived from this mineral, including boric acid. It operates in
the northern part of Chile, near the border with Bolivia, and it is mostly owned by
members of the Fosk family. NMM, a corporation created under the laws of Bolivia, is
a mining company that operated in the Rio Grande delta in Bolivia. Quiborax owns
50.995% of NMM.

3. The Claimants are represented in this arbitration by Mr. Andrés Jana, Ms. Johanna
Klein Kranenberg and Mr. Rodrigo Gil of Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana, whose contact
details are as follows:

Mr. Andrés Jana Linerzky
Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg
Mr. Rodrigo Gil

Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Av. Andrés Bello 2711, Piso 8
Torre Costanera — Las Condes
7550611 Santiago

Chile

Email: QUIBORAX-CIADI@bmaj.cl
2. The Respondent
4. The Respondent is the Plurinational State of Bolivia ("Bolivia" or the "Respondent").

5. By letter dated 3 April 2007, the Respondent designated Mr. Paul S. Reichler and
the law firm Foley Hoag LLP as external counsel in these proceedings. By letter of 5
January 2010, Foley Hoag LLP announced that as of that date it would no longer

serve as counsel for the Respondent. By letter dated 18 March 2010, the
Respondent informed the Tribunal that it appointed Prof. Pierre Mayer, Dr. Eduardo
Silva Romero and Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa of the law firm Dechert (Paris)
LLP, as external counsel in this case. On 7 December 2012, the Respondent
updated the contact information of the government officials acting in this case and
confirmed that Dechert (Paris) continued to act as external counsel. On 29 March
2013, Dechert updated the contact information of the government officials and
Dechert’s counsel (in Paris and Washington DC) representing the Respondent. On
12 September 2013, Dechert informed the Tribunal that in view that its contract
expired on 30 June 2013, it would no longer serve as counsel for the Respondent.
Dechert attached a letter of the same date from the then Attorney General, Mr. Hugo
Raul Montero Lara, authorizing Dechert’s communication. By letter of September
30, 2013, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it appointed Mr. Diego Brian
Gosis of the law firm Gomm & Smith, P.A. (Miami) as its external counsel. By email
of 23 October 2013, the Centre informed both parties that at the request of the
Respondent, the email addresses of Bolivia’s external counsel had been updated.
Until 21 March 2014, the Respondent was represented in this arbitration by Mr.
Hugo Ratil Montero Lara, Attorney General of Bolivia, Ms. Elizabeth Arismendi,
Deputy Defense Attorney of Bolivia, Mr. Edgar Pozo, General Director of Investment
Litigation and Arbitration Defense and Mr. Leonardo Anaya (Attorney General's
office), and by Mr. Diego Gosis of Gomm & Smith P.A.

On 21 March 2014, Bolivia submitted a letter to ICSID informing that Dr. Héctor Arce
Zaconeta and Dr. Pablo Menacho Diederich had been appointed Attorney General
and Deputy Attorney of Defense and Legal Representation of the State,
respectively. By emails of 3 and 4 June 2014, the Respondent updated the contact
information of the government officials and its external counsel. On 13 March 2015
and 30 May 2015, counsel for the Respondent updated its contact information. On
8 June 2015 the Respondent submitted an email updating the contact information of
the government officials acting in this case (further clarified on 16 June 2015). On 7
September 2015, the Respondent informed that as of that date all communications
concerning these proceeding should be only notified to the following persons:

Dr. Hector Arce Zaconeta, Attorney General of Bolivia (Procurador
General del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia)

Dr. Pablo Menacho Diederich, Deputy Attorney for the Defense and Legal
Representation of the State (Sub-Procurador de Defensa y
Representacion Legal del Estado)

Dr. Franz Zubieta Mariscal, General Director of Arbitral and Jurisdictional
Defense (Director General de Defensa Arbitral y Jurisdiccional)

Dra. Angélica Rocha Ponce, General Director for Negotiation and
Conciliation (Directora General de Negociacion y Conciliacion)

Procuraduria General del Estado
Calle Martin Cardenas,
No. 109 entre Calles Noel Kenf y Calle 1

El Alto, La Paz
Bolivia
Emails: harce@procuraduria.gob.bo

pmenacho@procuraduria.gob.bo
fzubieta@procuraduria.gob.bo
arocha@procuraduria.gob.bo

THE FACTS'

The Salar de Uyuni (also referred to as the "Gran Salar de Uyuni") is the largest dry
salt lake in the world. It is located in the Bolivian region of Potosi and is a fiscal
reserve since 1965 (Decreto Supremo, "D.S." or "Decree" 7,150).? According to the
Mining Code issued on the same year, mining operations in a fiscal reserve area
could only be authorized through a special legal provision.

In 1985, Law 719 created the Complejo Industrial de los Recursos Evaporiticos del
Salar de Uyuni ("CIRESU"),* the only entity authorized to manage the operations of
the mineral resources of the Salar de Uyuni's basin. On 3 April 1992, CIRESU
entered into a mining concession lease agreement with Sociedad Colectiva Minera
Rio Grande ("SOCOMIRG"). An addendum was signed in 1997.5

' See also Decision on Jurisdiction of 27 September 2012 ("Decision on Jurisdiction"), {{ 6-18.

2 Exh. R-232. In 1986, Decree 21,260 declared the Salar de Uyuni's basin a fiscal reserve as well and

established 13 coordinates for its delimitation (Exh. R-235).
3 Article 20 (Exh. R-233).

4 Exh. R-234.

5 Mentioned in Decree 27,548 (Exh. CD-41).

In 1993, Italian companies Aquater S.p.a. and EniChem S.p.a., commissioned by the
Bolivian government and sponsored by Italy, carried out a study of the mineral
reserves of a part of the fiscal reserve of the Salar de Uyuni.® The results of this study
were presented in a report to the Ministry of Mining in May 1993, under the title
Informe Final de Explotacién de Minerales Metdlicos y no Metalicos en el Sudoeste
de Bolivia.”

In 1998, Bolivia enacted Law 1.854 (also known as Ley Valda), which reduced the
fiscal reserve area of the Salar de Uyuni. Its sole article reads as follows:

The fiscal reserve of the Gran Salar de Uyuniis hereby declared, comprised
within the perimeter that corresponds to the salt crust.®

The Servicio Nacional de Geologia y Mineria ("SERGEOMIN") determined the
perimeter corresponding to the salt crust under a system of coordinates in 2002.9

As a result of the Ley Valda, 43 new mining concessions were requested between
1998 and 2004 in an area that had previously been a fiscal reserve. Seven of these
concessions"? were granted to the Bolivian company Compafiia Minera Rio Grande
Sur S.A. ("RIGSSA"), owned by Bolivian businessmen (and former officials of the
Ministry of Mining) Messrs. David Moscoso and Alvaro Ugalde.

The granting of these concessions caused discomfort to the local communities and in
2001 and 2003 Potosi representatives presented bills to Congress to reverse the Ley
Valda and revert the mining concessions to the Bolivian State.""

In 1999, Messrs. David Moscoso and Alvaro Ugalde approached Mr. Carlos Shuffer
at Quiborax to inform him of a business project involving mining concessions in the
Rio Grande area.'® As a consequence of negotiations between Quiborax and
RIGSSA, both companies entered into an Exclusive Supply Contract for fifteen years

® The sampled surface was 21.6 km.

7 Exh. R-236. This report will be discussed in detail in Section VIl below, when addressing the
Claimants’ claim for reparation and in particular the estimates of proven and probable reserves of the
concessions.

8 Exh. CD-7, Tribunal's translation. The original states: “Se declara la reserva fiscal del Gran Salar de
Uyuni, comprendida en el perimetro que corresponde a la costra salina.”

° Decree 26,574 (Exh. R-239).

10 Dofia Juanita, Borateras de Cuevitas, Tete, Basilea, Inglaterra, Don David and Sur.
" Exhs. CD-28 and CD-38.

12 Shuffer WS, {§ 16, 18; Fosk WS, § 31.

13 Exh.
"4 Exh.
‘5 Exh.
16 Exh.
17 Exh.
18 Exh.

on 12 January 2001.'° This contract gave Quiborax the right of first refusal regarding
the concessions, should RIGSSA decide to sell them.

On 12 March 2001, Mr. Alvaro Ugalde, his brother Gonzalo Ugalde and Quiborax
executed a stock purchase agreement regarding shares in RIGSSA."* The shares
were, however, never transferred and, instead, Quiborax decided to create a new
Bolivian company (Non-Metallic Minerals S.A., “NMM”) that would act as its

investment vehicle.

In June 2001, Quiborax contacted Mr. Fernando Rojas, a partner in the law firm C., R.
& F. Rojas Abogados, who was retained as Quiborax's legal counsel in Bolivia shortly
afterwards. A month later, NMM was constituted by Mr. Fernando Rojas and two of
his employees, Ms. Dolly Paredes and Ms. Gilka Salas. *®

On 3 August 2001, RIGSSA contributed seven mining concessions to NMM, with a
resulting capital increase equivalent to 26,680 shares.'® RIGSSA thus became the
majority shareholder of NUM.

Later that month, RIGSSA transferred all of its newly acquired shares in NMM to
Quiborax, 13,103 of which were transferred in turn by Quiborax to Mr. David Moscoso
on 4 September 2001. On that same day, Quiborax transferred to Mr. David Moscoso
an additional 267 shares, which were immediately sold back to Quiborax for US$
9,985. On 10 September 2001, Mr. Fernando Rojas and Ms. Dolly Paredes
transferred their shares in NMM (58 and one, respectively) to Quiborax, while Ms.
Gilka Salas transferred her sole share to Mr. Allan Fosk. As a consequence, the
definitive shareholder configuration of NMM was set.'” Three days later, the NMM
Board of Directors was elected, with Mr. David Moscoso as Chairman, Mr. Allan Fosk
as Vice Chairman and Mr. Isaac Frenkel as Secretary.'® The corporate structure of
Quiborax's investment vehicle in Bolivia was therefore concluded by 13 September
2001, and did not change until the events giving rise to this dispute.’ The

CD-16.
CD-17.
CD-23.
CD-25
CD-24.
CD-26.

‘9 The Tribunal came to this conclusion during the jurisdictional phase. See Decision on Jurisdiction, J

192.

12

shareholders of NMM are Quiborax (50.995%), Mr. David Moscoso (49%) and Mr.
Allan Fosk (0.005%).

19. NMM obtained four additional mining concessions, two on 18 April 2002,”° and two
additional ones on 20 July 2003," ultimately owning a total of eleven.”

20. On 9 December 2003, President Mesa issued Law 2.564, which abrogated the Ley
Valda and Decree 26,574 (by which the perimeter established in the Ley Valda was
determined) and redefined the perimeter of the fiscal reserve of the Salar de Uyuni.”°

21. In addition, Article 3 of Law 2,564 enabled the Executive power to annul the mining
concessions granted under the Ley Valda, as follows:

The Executive Power is authorized, after the evaluation of audits, technical,
legal, economic and financial, tax, social and labor legislation and
environmental and ecological preservation, to declare null the
concessionaires' mining rights that are liable to sanctions provided by the
Laws and regulations in force, within a deadline of 60 days calculated from
the enactment of this Law, with the consequent recovery of such
concessions and non-metallic resources originally belonging to the State.°*

22. The Parties dispute the political context in which these events unfolded. According to
the Claimants, "Law 2,564 was adopted in the midst of intense social and political
events that shook Bolivia during the years 2003 and 2004. The political instability in
the country had been triggered by the Government's public energy policies and, in
particular, the possibility to export Bolivian gas through Chilean pipelines." The
Claimants assert that the discussions regarding the construction of a pipeline to
transport Bolivian gas over Chilean territory to a Chilean port was a highly
controversial topic: "the possibility that Chile might benefit from the Bolivian gas
reserves gave rise to heated protests" under the slogan "gas por mar," which referred

20 Pococho and La Negra (Exhs. CD-32 and CD-31).

21 Cancha | and Cancha II (Exhs. CD-36 and CD-37).

22 Exhs. R-244 to R-254.

23 Exh. CD-39.

24 Exh. CD-39, Tribunal's translation. The original Spanish text reads as follows:
Facultase al Poder Ejecutivo, luego de la evaluacién de auditorias, técnica,
juridico legal, econdmico financiera, regalitario — tributaria, legislacion
sociolaboral y preservacién ecolégica y medioambiental, a declarar la
nulidad de los derechos concesionarios mineros que, sean pasibles a
sanciones establecidas por las Leyes y disposiciones vigentes, en un plazo
perentorio de 60 dias a computar a partir de la promulgacion de la presente
Ley, con la consiguiente recuperacién de tales concesiones y recursos no
metalicos a propiedad originaria del Estado.

25 Reply, § 123.

23.

24.

25.

to the historical controversy between the two countries since Bolivia's landlocked
situation following the Pacific War (Guerra del Pacifico) in the late nineteenth
century.2° As a consequence of the strong protests, on 18 October 2003, Bolivian
President Sanchez de Losada was forced to resign and leave the country. Vice-
President Carlos Mesa stepped into power and submitted the construction of the
pipeline to a popular vote in July 2004.2”

The Respondent contests the Claimants’ version of the facts, alleging that it is fraught
with chronological errors. According to Bolivia, both the protests deriving from the
"gas por mar’ movement and the referendum took place in July 2004, long after the
abolition of the Ley Valda, which had given rise to protests since the end of the 90s.

Following the promulgation of Law 2,564, Decree 27,326 specified the modalities of
the audits mentioned in that law and ordered the corresponding national ministries
and Potosi department to execute the audits.?9

From February 2004 onwards, several audits of various mining concessions in the
Salar de Uyuni took place, including the following:

a. In February 2004, SERGEOMIN and the Corporacién Minera de Bolivia
("COMIBOL") submitted their technical audit on a number of the concessions in
the Rio Grande delta, owned by companies Copla and NMM and mining
cooperative Socomin. Their conclusions included the following:

They do not have a Geological mining study and therefore [neither a]

quantification of reserves that allows to plan an exploitation method in large
volumes.

There is no rational and systematic administration from a technical,
economic and social standpoint by the operating companies.

The exploitation method applied continues to be manual with a slight
tendency towards semi-mechanization.

The mining companies and cooperatives that are in the process of exploiting
ulexite such as: Copla S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and the Mining
Cooperative "Socomin" must work in a rational and systematic fashion in all
their exploitation activities.°°

26 Reply, § 124.

27 Reply, FG 124-125.

28 Counter-Mem., 47, footnote 46.
29 Exh. CD-40.

30 Exh. R-261, Tribunal's translation.

b. In March 2004, the Environmental Directorate of the Ministry of Sustainable
Development finalized its environmental audit after an on site inspection of
companies NMM, Copla, Tecno Quimica and Socomin. While the document
submitted by the Respondent seems to be incomplete, the conclusions are
available and read as follows:

The referred companies at the time of the inspection are operating in the Rio
Grande Canton Nor Lipez Province of the Department of Potosi without the
approved environmental documentation as stipulated by Environmental Law
No. 1333 and its Regulations.

The operations of [NMM and other companies] at the time of inspection are
operating, regardless of the Prefectural Resolution of the Department of
Potosi that determines the suspension of operations.*"

c. In April 2004, the Prefecture of the Department of Potosi completed its legal
audit on the concessions granted under the Ley Valda. Again, the document
submitted by the Respondent appears incomplete, but the last pages provide the
following:

In the case before us, Moscoso Ruiz or the Mining Company Rio Grande
Sur S.A. have not complied with the mining obligation to pay the licenses,
within the time limit of art. 133 and the extension of art. 134 of the Mining
Code, losing its "mining priority," in other words, due to the imperative
mandate of the cited articles, the applicant had a time limit to cancel the
mining patents and consolidate its concession within 45 days from 15
November 1999 and ending on 30 December of the same year, without
having complied with its mining obligation to pay the corresponding patents
thereby causing the loss of its priority and the rejection of the application [...].

RECOMMENDATION.- Request the same Superintendent to issue a specific
resolution declaring the expiration due to the non-payment of the patents,
with the consequent loss of priority and the resulting reversion to the original
property of the State or alternatively request that the file is referred to the
Potosi Mining Superintendent due to loss of competence.

[...] [T]he proceedings should be terminated, with the cancellation of the filing
fees and the loss of priority of the following mining requests: [among others,
7 of NMM's concessions: Dofia Juanita, La Negra, Don David, Cancha I,
Cancha II, Tete and Pococho].

LJ
DECIDES:
FIRST.- The proceedings are terminated, with the cancellation of the filing

fees and the loss of the priority of the mining request. For breach of Art. 134
of law 1777 in accordance with Administrative Resolution N° 18/03 [...].

 

SECOND.- To ensure that the mining regulations are no longer tampered
with, nullifying the mining administrative process, the Tupiza and Tarija
Regional Mining Superintendent, having lost its competence, is to send the

31 Exh. R-267, Tribunal's translation.

26. On 9

environmental license for the concession "Borateras de Cuevitas."*° The granting of
this environmental license triggered strong protests from civic organizations (in
particular, the Comité Civico Potosinista, "Comcipo") in Potosi and La Paz, as
reflected by several press articles.* This "war to death"®> included hunger strikes and
the blockade of roads and railways between Uyuni and the city of Oruro. As a
consequence of this popular reaction, the same Ministry first suspended all activities
in "Borateras de Cuevitas" on 17 June 2004%° and subsequently revoked NMM's

license

27. On 23

proceedings to the superintendent of the closest jurisdiction, in accordance
with Art. 118 of the Mining Code.

June 2004, the Ministry of Sustainable Development granted NMM's

on 22 June.°®”

June 2004, the President of Bolivia issued Decree 27,589 (the “Revocation

Decree”), revoking the Claimants' mining concessions in the following terms:

WHEREAS:

Mining Company Non Metallic Minerales (sic) S.A., which operates the
mining concessions object of the present Supreme Decree, has
systematically refused to provide information both to the National Tax
Service and to the National Customs, thus preventing the audits mandated
by Law No. 2,564 of 9 December 2003.

It has been shown that the exports of ulexite minerals declared by the Mining
Company Non Metallic Minerals S.A. do not match the cargo volumes
transported by the National Railways Company — ENFE, as shown in the
audit performed by SERGEOMIN and COMIBOL of February 2004 and the
Preliminary Report of the Revenue Service.

These facts evidence economic damage to the State, contravening, in
addition, provisions of the Tax Code currently in force, in compliance with
the provisions of the Law of the Public Reserve of the Gran Salar de Uyuni.

THE CABINET COUNCIL
DECREES:

SOLE ARTICLE.- I. The revocation of the constitutive resolutions and loss
of the mining concessions Cancha |, Dofia Juanita, Tete, Borateras de
Cuevitas, Basilea, Inglaterra, Don David, Sur, Pococho, La Negra, Cancha
Il, located at the Rio Grande Delta of the Gran Salar de Uyuni, Nor Lipez
Province of the Region of Potosi, is hereby ordered.

32 Exh. R-240, Tribunal's translation.

33 Exh. CD-42.
4 Exhs. CD-43,
35 Exh. CD-43.
36 Exh. CD-44
87 Exh. CD-173.

CD-45, CD-46, CD-47, CD-48, CD-49, CD-52, CD-54, CD-55 and CD-57.

28. On that same day, the President of Bolivia issued Decree 27,590 (the “Export Ban
Decree”), banning the export of non metallic minerals, such as unprocessed boron
and unprocessed or partly processed ulexite.*° It came into force 90 days after its
enactment (Article 7) and was revoked in October 2004 through Decree 27,799.“°

29. On 22

Il. Mining Company Non Metallic Minerales (sic) S.A., which operates the
abovementioned concessions, is granted a period of thirty days to physically
hand over the concessions to the Prefecture of the Potosi Region, without
prejudice to the criminal and civil actions that may be appropriate.

lll. All provisions contrary to the present Supreme Decree are abrogated
and derogated.**

July 2004, the Claimants requested initiation of friendly consultations under

Article X of the BIT.‘

38 Exh. CD-50, Tribunal's translation. The Spanish original states:

CONSIDERANDO:

Que la Empresa Minera Non Metallic Minerales S.A., que explota las
concesiones mineras materia del presente Decreto Supremo, se negd
sistematicamente a proporcionar informaci6n tanto al Servicio de Impuestos
Nacionales como a la Aduana Nacional, impidiendo de esta manera las
auditorias dispuestas por la Ley N° 2564 de 9 de diciembre de 2003.

Que se ha evidenciado que las exportaciones de minerales de ulexita
declaradas por la Empresa Minera Non Metallic Minerales S.A. no coinciden
con los voltimenes de carga transportados por la Empresa Nacional de
Ferrocarriles - ENFE, como lo demuestra la auditoria técnica realizada por
SERGEOMIN y COMIBOL de febrero de 2004 y el informe Preliminar de
Impuestos Internos.

Que estos hechos evidencian dafio econdmico al Estado, contraviniendo,
ademas, las normas del Cédigo Tributario en actual vigencia, en
cumplimiento a lo dispuesto en la Ley de Reserva Fiscal del Gran Salar de
Uyuni.

EN CONSEJO DE GABINETE

DECRETA:

ARTICULO UNICO.- I. Se dispone la revocatoria de la resolucién
constitutiva y pérdida de las concesiones mineras Cancha I, Dofia Juanita,
Tete, Borateras de Cuevitas, Basilea, Inglaterra, Don David, Sur, Pococho,
La Negra, Cancha II, ubicadas en el Delta del Rio Grande del Gran Salar de
Uyuni, Provincia Nor Lipez del Departamento de Potosi.

Il. Se otorga a la Empresa Minera Non Metallic Minerales S.A., que explota
las concesiones detalladas en el Paragrafo anterior, el plazo de treinta dias
para la entrega fisica de las mismas a la Prefectura del Departamento de
Potosi, sin perjuicio de las acciones penales y civiles que correspondan
seguirse.

Ill. Se abrogan y derogan todas las disposiciones contrarias al presente
Decreto Supremo.

39 Articles 1 and 2, Exh. CD-51.

40 Exh. CD-195.

41 Exh. CD-58.

30. On 23 July 2004, in compliance with the 30-day time limit fixed in the Revocation
Decree, NMM handed over its eleven mining concessions to the Prefect of the
Department of Potosi. The letter which accompanied the handover stated:

[...] [W]e hereby formally make physical handover of our concessions [...]
notwithstanding their physical handover [...] [Several thousand tons of
different types of ulexite] that have been previously extracted and are the
property of [NMM] are collected in those concessions, which we will remove
shortly together with other goods of our property that are found there. 47

31. | On 26 September 2004, a member of the Bolivian National Parliament submitted a
request of annulment for each of the eleven mining concessions to the Mining
Superintendence.*® Bolivia annulled the revoked concessions through writs of
annulment on 28 October 2004, pursuant to Articles 126 and 128 of the Mining Code,
on the grounds that there had been errors in the requests for concessions:

The Potosi-Chuquisaca Regional Mining Superintendent [...] ANNULS the
mining concession named "BASILEA," for breach of Articles 126 and 128 of
the Mining Code for lack of legal capacity of the principal and the agent.**

32. RIGSSA submitted an appeal regarding seven of the concessions, which was
rejected on the ground that it was submitted outside the time limit.“®

33. In December 2004, the Bolivian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship received a
memorandum from technical teams of his Ministry and of the Ministry of Economic
Development, the Ministry of Mining and the National Mining Technical Service,
Informe 025/2004, addressing NMM's case under the BIT ("2004 Inter-Ministerial
Memo"). The 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo is an internal document which was included
in the criminal file prepared by the Superintendencia de Empresas in December 2008.

42 Exh, CD-59, Tribunal’s translation. The Spanish original states:

[...] [P]or medio de la presente venimos formalmente a hacer entrega fisica
de nuestras concesiones [....] sin perjuicio de la entrega fisica [...] en ellas
se encuentran acopiadas [varios miles de toneladas de distintos tipos de
ulexita] todas de propiedad de [NMM] que se han extraido con anterioridad,
las que se procederan a retirar proximamente junto con otros bienes de
nuestra propiedad que alli se encuentran.

43 Exh. R-271.

44 Exh. R-276, Tribunal’s translation. The Spanish original states: “El suscrito Superintendente
Regional de Minas de Potosi-Chuquisaca en Suplencia legal de la Superintendencia Regional de
Minas de Tupiza Tarija, con las atribuciones otorgadas por los Arts. 117 y 118 de la ley 1777 del 17
de Marzo de 1997 (Cod. de Mineria) ANULA la concesi6n minera denominada “BASILEA,” por
incumplimiento de los Arts. 126 y 128 del Céd. de Mineria por impersoneria en el mandante y
mandatario.” Emphasis in original. The Tribunal notes that the wording is identical in all of the writs of
annulment.

45 Exh. R-277.

The scenarios envisaged by the memorandum and its main conclusions are the

following:

FIRST SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may try to reach an amicable
and mutually satisfactory agreement with the company. However it is clear
that the only settlement possible with the company would be an indemnity or
recovery of its concessions. For the Government, said option would involve
a significant political cost and the generation of new social and regional
conflicts in the Potosi Department.

SECOND SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may attempt to defend its
decisions. Unfortunately, the Mining Code makes no provisions for the
revocation of mining concessions. Therefore, this option has a great
weakness. Another alternative would be to try to prove irregularities in the
processing of the original mining concessions of Non Metallic Minerals S.A.,
so as to demonstrate that these are and always have been invalid. For the
time being, this has been considered the best alternative.

bel
[CONCLUSIONS]

1. By means of Supreme Decree N° 27,589, of 23 June 2004, the revocation
of the mining concessions granted in favor of the company Non Metallic
Minerals S.A. was ordered. This Supreme Decree was enacted due to the
social and political pressure exercised by the authorities of Potosi and, in
particular, of the locality of Uyuni. [This Supreme Decree] suffers from
serious legal problems.

LJ

[NMM] has submitted documentation that supports that [Quiborax],
incorporated under Chilean laws, has a direct participation higher than 50%
of [NMM's capital] and therefore, in accordance with [the Bolivia-Chile BIT],
has effective control of [NMM].

LJ

10. The Bolivian Government may try to reach an amicable and mutually
satisfactory agreement with the company. However, this option would imply
significant political costs and the creation of new conflicts in the Department
of Potosi. On the other hand, the Bolivian Government may try to defend its
decision to revoke the mining concessions or try to prove defects in the
granting of the original concessions of [NMM].4°

34. On 16 December 2005, Decree 27,589, (the Revocation Decree), was abrogated by
Decree No. 28,527, which reads as follows:
[The Revocation Decree] suffers from irreparable legal defects because the
Mining Code does not provide in any of its legal provisions the revocation of
mining concessions, but provides rather for the legal figures of caducidad or

annulment of mining concessions after an administrative proceeding under
the competence and jurisdiction of the Superintendence of Mines.47

46 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal's translation.
47 Exh. CD-74, Tribunal's translation.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

In December 2008, Bolivia initiated criminal proceedings against Messrs. Allan Fosk,
David Moscoso and others on the ground that these individuals allegedly fabricated
evidence for the purpose of allowing the Claimants to establish jurisdiction in this
arbitration.“®

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. Initial phase

On 4 October 2005, the Claimants filed a Notice of Arbitration with the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID") pursuant to Article 36 of the
ICSID Convention and to the Bolivia-Chile BIT.

Despite the commencement of the arbitration, the Parties continued to hold
settlement negotiations, without however reaching an agreement. Thus, it is only on
21 November 2006 that the Claimants appointed as arbitrator the Hon. Marc Lalonde,
a Canadian national. On 6 April 2007, the Respondent appointed as arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, a French national. On 18 December 2007, the Chairman of
the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a
Swiss national, as President of the Tribunal, in accordance with Article 38 of the
ICSID Convention. All three arbitrators accepted their appointments. Further, the
Centre designated Ms. Natali Sequeira as Secretary of the Tribunal. Consequently,
the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted and the proceedings commenced in late
December 2007.

On 20 March 2008, the Tribunal and the Parties held a first procedural session in
Paris. At the beginning of the first session, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they
had orally reached a preliminary settlement and that they expected to put it in writing
within the next fifteen days. Nevertheless, the Parties and the Tribunal decided to
conduct the first session as scheduled in case a final agreement were ultimately not
reached. Thus, the Parties and the Tribunal discussed and agreed on a number of
procedural issues. Thereafter, the arbitration proceedings were suspended pending
the conclusion of a settlement agreement between the Parties.

The Parties requested multiple time extensions to finalize the settlement agreement.
Eventually, on 13 January 2009, the Claimants requested that the arbitration be

48 Exh. CD-82. Criminal proceedings were brought against Messrs.Daniel Gottschalk, David Moscoso,
Allan Fosk, Fernando Rojas, Gilka Salas, Dolly Paredes, Monica Fernandez, Yuri Espinoza, Ernesto
Ossio and Tatiana Teran.

20

40.

A.

42.

resumed on the alleged ground that the Respondent's conduct was "inconsistent" with
settlement negotiations. As a result, on 17 February 2009, the Tribunal issued the
final minutes of the first session, attaching a draft timetable upon which the Parties
would be able to comment. On 5 March 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order
No. 1, including a final timetable of the proceedings. This timetable was amended on
various occasions upon the request of both Parties.

B. Jurisdictional phase

On 14 September 2009, the Claimants filed their Memorial, together with expert
reports of Behre Dolbear & Company (USA), Inc. and Navigant Consulting, Inc., as
well as witness statements from Messrs. Allan Fosk, Carlos Shuffer, Ricardo Ramos
and Osvaldo Astudillo. On the same date, the Claimants also submitted a request for
provisional measures, asking that the Respondent refrain from engaging in any
conduct that could aggravate the dispute and requesting that the Bolivian criminal
proceedings against Messrs. Allan Fosk, David Moscoso and others be discontinued.
On 2 October 2009, the Claimants requested a “temporary restraining order” with
immediate effect, asking that the Respondent discontinue the Bolivian criminal
proceedings pending the Tribunal’s decision on the request for provisional measures.
The Respondent opposed this request on 5 October 2009. The Tribunal denied the
Claimants' request for a "temporary restraining order" in a letter of the same date.

On 13 and 29 October 2009, Bolivia filed briefs opposing the Claimants’ request for
provisional measures. On 21 October 2009, the Claimants submitted a second brief in
support of their request for provisional measures. Following a conference call held on
24 November 2009, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Provisional Measures on 26
February 2010, according to which the Respondent was to take all appropriate
measures to suspend the Bolivian criminal proceedings against Messrs. Allan Fosk,
David Moscoso and others, and refrain from initiating new criminal proceedings which
could jeopardize the procedural integrity of this arbitration.

On 7 April 2010, Bolivia filed a proposal to disqualify the Tribunal, which suspended
the proceedings. On 19 April 2010, the Claimants submitted observations opposing
the Respondent's proposal. Each Party then presented an additional brief in support
of its position. On 6 July 2010, the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
World Bank, conveying his decision through the Secretary-General of ICSID,
dismissed the proposal for disqualification. The arbitration resumed shortly thereafter
and the procedural calendar was amended accordingly.

21

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

On 12 July 2010, Bolivia informed that it would file objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal by no later than 30 July 2010. At the same time, the Respondent requested
an order from the Tribunal directing the Claimants to produce the documents
identified in the Redfern schedule dated 28 May 2010. On 19 July 2010, the
Claimants presented objections to the Respondent's requests for document
production. On 26 July 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, partially
granting the Respondent's requests for document production, as specified in the
Redfern schedule attached to the order.

The Respondent filed Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal on 30 July 2010,
together with the expert report of Mr. Ivan Salame. The Claimants submitted their
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 29 October 2010, together with the expert report
of Mr. Carlos Rosenkratz and the report of Mr. Juan Pablo de Luca. The Respondent
submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction, together with the second expert report of Mr. Ivan
Salame, on 13 January 2011.

On 8 February 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, granting the
Respondent's request for document inspection, contained in the Reply on Jurisdiction
and a letter of 4 February 2011. The Tribunal ordered the Claimants to make the
original share certificates Nos. 1 to 11 of NMM available for inspection and provided
directions on the inspection in Procedural Order No. 4, dated 10 March 2011. In
accordance with the timetable set in Procedural Order No. 4, the Respondent
submitted its expert report on the document inspection on 8 April 2011 and the
Claimants did the same on 22 April 2011.

The Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on 1 April 2011, together with the
second expert report of Mr. Carlos Rosenkratz and the second report of Juan Pablo
de Luca.

Following the pre-hearing telephone conference held between the Tribunal and the
Parties on 12 April 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Orders Nos. 5, 6 and 7 with
directions for the hearing.

On 12 and 13 May 2011, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris. In
attendance at the hearing were the members of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Secretary
and the Assistant, Mr. Gustavo Laborde, and the following party representatives,
witnesses and experts:

22

49.

On behalf of the Claimants

Andrés Jana, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Jorge Bofill, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Johanna Klein Kranenberg, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana
Rodrigo Gil, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Ximena Fuentes, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana
Constanza Onetto, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana
Claimants’ witness

Allan Fosk

Claimants’ experts

Albert Lyter III

Carlos Rosencrantz

On behalf of the Respondent

Hugo Montero Lara, Attorney General of the State
Elizabeth Arismendi Chumacero, Deputy Attorney General

Danny Javier Lopez Soliz, General Director of the Jurisdictional and Arbitral
Defense of Investments (Attorney General’s Office)

Pierre Mayer, Dechert (Paris) LLP

Eduardo Silva Romero, Dechert (Paris) LLP

José Manuel Garcia Represa, Dechert (Paris) LLP
Ana Carolina SimGes e Silva, Dechert (Paris) LLP
Francisco Paredes-Balladares, Dechert (Paris) LLP
Anna Valdés Pascal, Dechert (Paris) LLP

Pacéme Ziegler, Dechert (Paris) LLP
Respondent's expert

Ivan Salame

Mr. Andrés Jana and Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg presented oral arguments on
behalf of the Claimants; Messrs. Hugo Montero Lara, Pierre Mayer, Eduardo Silva
Romero and José Manuel Garcia Represa, in turn, presented oral arguments on
behalf of the Respondent.

23

50. After the hearing, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8 confirming, as
discussed at the end of the hearing, that there would be no post-hearing briefs and
setting a calendar for the filing of submissions regarding the Claimants' request that
the Tribunal issue a declaration pursuant to Article 37 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility. The Claimants filed these submissions on 27 May 2011 and the
Respondent filed its reply on 10 June 2011.

51. — The Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction on 27 September 2012, which forms
an integral part of this Award. In its dispositive, the Tribunal declared and decided as

follows:
A. On jurisdiction:

1. Declares that it has jurisdiction over the claims of Quiborax and
NMM:

2. Declares that it has no jurisdiction over Allan Fosk's claims;
B. On admissibility:

1. Declares that the witness statement of Ricardo Ramos is
admissible;

2. Declares that Bolivia's objections to jurisdiction and the evidence
arising from the Bolivian criminal proceedings are admissible;

3. Declares that the claims of Quiborax and NMM are admissible;
4. On further procedural steps:

1. Will take the necessary steps for the continuation of the
proceedings toward the merits phase by way of a procedural order
to be issued after consultation with the Parties;

2. Defers consideration of the Claimants’ request for a declaratory
judgment pursuant to Article 37 of the Articles on State
Responsibility for subsequent adjudication;

3. Reserves the decision on costs for subsequent decision.

52. Of note, in its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal found that the Respondent's claim
that the Claimants or their employees or advisors had fabricated evidence in order to
establish jurisdiction in this arbitration was unfounded:

On the basis of the review of the entire record, the Tribunal finds that the
Claimants’ account of facts is consistent and well-documented. Whilst there
are some documentary discrepancies [...] these do not prove fraud nor
suffice to overcome the plentiful evidence in support of the Claimants’ case.

For these reasons, the Tribunal is persuaded that [...] [Quiborax] did not
engage in fraud or fabricate evidence to gain access to ICSID arbitration. *9

49 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 192.

24

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

C. Merits phase

On 9 November 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9 regarding the
merits phase and setting the corresponding calendar for written memorials. The
calendar was amended by letter of the Tribunal dated 21 March 2013 and again in a
letter of 5 April 2013, following the Parties' correspondence.

Accordingly, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on 10 May 2013, together
with the expert report of Econ One Research Inc.

The Claimants submitted their Reply on 13 August 2013, together with the second
expert reports of Behre Dolbear Company (USA), Inc. and Navigant Consulting, Inc.

On 4 October 2013, the Parties submitted a list of the witnesses and experts they
wished to examine at the hearing.

On 7 October 2013, the Parties and the Tribunal held a telephone conference to
discuss the preparation of the hearing. Subsequently, the Tribunal issued Procedural
Order No. 10, reflecting the agreements reached by the Parties with respect to the
conduct of the hearing and the Tribunal’s decision regarding those issues on which
the Parties did not reach an agreement.

Following the Tribunal's letter of 18 September 2013 granting the Respondent an
extension of the time limit to submit its Rejoinder, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder
on 11 October 2013, together with the second expert report of Econ One Research
Inc.

On 28, 29 and 30 October 2013, the Tribunal held a hearing on the merits in Paris. In
attendance at the hearing were the members of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Secretary
and the Assistant, Ms. Leonor Diaz-Cordova,®*° and the following party
representatives, witnesses and experts:

On behalf of the Claimants

Andrés Jana, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Johanna Klein Kranenberg, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana
Rodrigo Gil, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Daniela Arrese, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

50 Ms. Leonor Diaz-Cordova replaced Mr. Gustavo Laborde as assistant to the Tribunal with the
consent on the Parties prior to the hearing on the merits.

25

Maria Victoria Demarchi, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Diego Pérez, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Claudio Inostroza, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Jorge Luis Inchauste, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Claimants’ witnesses

Allan Fosk

Carlos Shuffer

Ricardo Ramos

Claimants’ experts

Bernard Guarnera, Behre Dolbear & Company (USA), Inc.
Brent Kaczmarek, Navigant Consulting, Inc.

On behalf of the Respondent

Hugo Montero Lara, Attorney General of the State
Elizabeth Arismendi Chumacero, Deputy Attorney General

Edgar Luis Pozo Goytia, General Director of the Jurisdictional and Arbitral
Defense of Investments

Leonardo Alejandro Anaya Leigue (Attorney General's Office)
Diego Brian Gosis, Gomm & Smith, P.A.

Quinn Smith, Gomm & Smith, P.A.

Clovis Trevifio, Gomm & Smith, P.A.

Bernardo Wayar Caballero, Wayar & von Borries Abogados, S.C.
Bernardo Wayar Ocampo, Wayar & von Borries Abogados, S.C.
Flavio Javier Loza Vargas, Wayar & von Borries Abogados, S.C.
Agustina Alvarez Olaizola, consultora de Gomm & Smith P.A.
Alfredo de Jestis O., consultor de Gomm & Smith P.A.
Respondent's experts

Daniel Flores, Econ One Research

Andrea Cardani, Econ One Research

Ivan Lopez, Econ One Research

26

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Mr. Andrés Jana and Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg presented oral arguments on
behalf of the Claimants; Mr. Hugo Montero Lara, Ms. Elisabeth Arismendi Chumacero
and Mr. Diego Brian Gosis, in turn, presented oral arguments on behalf of the
Respondent.

At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal and the Parties agreed that there would be no
post-hearing briefs.

On 5 November 2013, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(2), the Tribunal
invited the Parties to file statements of costs by 10 January 2014 and their comments
on the other Party’s statement by 24 January 2014. Following an extension requested
by the Respondent and granted by the Tribunal, the statements of costs were
circulated to the Tribunal on 3 February 2014. The Respondent's comments on the
Claimants' statement of costs were submitted on 10 February 2014. The Claimants’
comments on Bolivia's statement of cost were submitted on 13 February 2014.

On 21 March 2014, the Respondent submitted a letter to ICSID informing that Mr.
Héctor Arce and Mr. Pablo Menacho had been appointed Attorney General and
Deputy Defense Attorney of Bolivia, respectively.

On 23 May 2014, the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal to inform of recent
developments in the criminal proceedings against Allan Fosk, David Moscoso and
others in Bolivia. In particular, they informed of invitations sent by Bolivia to Mr. Allan
Fosk and to Claimants’ counsel for a “coordination meeting” scheduled for 22 May
2014 at the Bolivian Consulate in Chile, which they described as "an ambush to have
Mr. Allan Fosk and his legal counsel attend at a formal taking of evidence in the
criminal case."5"

Following the Tribunal's invitation, on 2 June 2014, the Respondent replied to the
Claimants’ letter, stating that its actions had complied with diplomatic standards,
international regulations and local legal proceedings. **

On 29 May 2015, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that Mr. Allan Fosk had been
indicted on 11 November 2014, and that the Bolivian prosecutor had requested that
he be declared in default and that an Interpol Red Notice be issued against him. The
Claimants also noted that the prosecutor had summoned Mr. Moscoso and

51 Claimants’ letter of 23 May 2014, p. 3.
52 Respondent's letter of 2 June 2014.

27

67.

68.

69.

70.

Claimants’ counsel in Bolivia to testify as witnesses in the criminal case, and informed
of measures taken against a Bolivian notary public in the context of the criminal
proceedings.*?

On 12 June 2015, the Respondent replied emphasizing Bolivian law prevented it from
suspending the criminal proceedings, and asserted that all procedural actions taken
in the context of these criminal proceedings complied with Bolivian law. The
Respondent also noted that, although Mr. Fosk could make use of procedural
guarantees in Bolivia to defend himself, he had chosen not to exercise them. The
Respondent added that, in any event, Mr. Fosk was no longer a party to these
proceedings.®4

On 17 August 2015, ICSID declared the proceedings closed.
OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The purpose of this Section is to provide an overview of the Parties' positions. The
Parties’ detailed positions with respect to each claim are described in Sections VI and
VII below.

A. Overview of the Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argue that Bolivia has violated its obligations under the BIT by the
revocation and ex post annulment of the Claimants’ mining concessions. They claim
that the Revocation Decree unlawfully deprived them of their investment in Bolivia
and characterize the revocation of their concessions as "unlawful, unreasonable,
arbitrary and discriminatory."®> The Claimants further contend that everything that
occurred after the revocation of their concessions (in particular, the initiation of the
criminal case in Bolivia) is part of Bolivia’s defense strategy in this arbitration.
According to the Claimants, the Respondent has tried to avoid a discussion on the
merits of its own actions by launching unsubstantiated accusations against the
Claimants and attempting to place the burden of proof upon the Claimants to
establish that they did not indulge in fraud, corruption or trivial errors. However, when
required to justify its own actions, the Respondent stands empty-handed. It has tried
to find support in the auditing reports that allegedly prove the irregularity of the
Claimants’ investment. The Claimants argue they do not. Moreover, the Claimants

53 Claimants’ letter of 29 May 2015.
54 Respondent's letter of 12 June 2015.
55 Reply, 4 552.

28

contend that "the Respondent's defense on the merits is limited to its re-litigation of
jurisdiction."°6

71. The Claimants contend that Bolivia has breached Articles III, |V and VI of the Bolivia-
Chile BIT as well as certain obligations under the ICSID Convention and international
law. They claim, in particular, that:

a. The revocation of the Claimants' mining concessions constitutes an unlawful
expropriation under Article VI of the BIT.

b. The revocation and ex post annulment of the Claimants’ mining concessions and
Bolivia's post-expropriation acts of harassment constitute unreasonable,
arbitrary and discriminatory measures that breach the fair and equitable
standard of Article IV of the BIT, as well as the prohibition to impair the free
administration, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and
liquidation of their investments with unreasonable or discriminatory measures,
contained in Article III of the BIT.

c. By refusing to suspend the criminal case, as directed in the Decision on
Provisional Measures, and through its conduct in this arbitration, Bolivia has
breached its treaty obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the
Claimants’ investments, as well as its procedural obligations under the ICSID
Convention and under general principles of international law.

72. The Claimants' specific arguments with respect to the alleged treaty breaches are
discussed in Sections VI (Claims for Violation of the BIT) and VII (Reparation) below.

73. In terms of reparation, the Claimants request "material and non-material" damages,*”
as well as a declaratory judgment, as explained in Section VII below. The Tribunal
understands that, for each breach of the BIT or of international law that they allege,
the Claimants request the following relief:

a. For the loss of their investments in Bolivia, whether such loss was caused by
Bolivia’s unlawful expropriation of those investments, by Bolivia’s unfair and
inequitable treatment or by its impairment of their investments through
unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the Claimants request compensatory
damages in an amount of US$ 146,848,827 as of 30 June 2013, plus compound

56 Reply, § 17.

57 Reply, 4555.

29

74.

75.

interest from that date. This claim for compensatory damages covers all of their
financially assessable damage arising from the loss of their investments in
Bolivia, regardless of the treaty breach that caused them.

For the consequences of Bolivia’s post-expropriation acts of harassment, which
the Claimants submit qualify as unfair and inequitable treatment by Bolivia, as
well as an impairment of their investments by unreasonable and discriminatory
measures,®® the Claimants request moral damages in an amount of US$
4 million. The Claimants also request a declaratory judgment in respect of these
breaches.

For Bolivia's failure to comply with the Decision on Provisional Measures and its
conduct in this arbitration, which the Claimants argue is in breach of Bolivia’s
obligation of fair and equitable treatment under the BIT, as well as its procedural
obligations under the ICSID Convention and under general principles of
international law, the Claimants request a declaratory judgment.

The Claimants also request the Tribunal to order Bolivia to pay all costs, fees and
expenses incurred by the Claimants during the arbitration, given the manner in which
the Respondent has conducted itself during the proceedings.

On the basis of the foregoing, in their Memorial the Claimants requested the following
relief:

[...] Claimants request the Tribunal to render an award in favor of Claimants:

(1) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article VI of the BIT
by expropriating Claimants' investment in Bolivia, in an unlawful manner
and not in accordance with the requirements of Article VI;

8

Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT
by failing to accord Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by unlawfully
expropriating Claimants’ investment in Bolivia;

S

Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article III of the BIT
by failing to protect Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and obstructing its
free administration, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, transfer,
sale and liquidation, by unreasonable and discriminatory measures
consisting of the unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment in
Bolivia;

s

Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under international law by
aggravating the dispute between the parties, by submitting Claimants to
acts of harassment intended to obstruct Claimants' rights under the BIT;

58 Although in their Reply the Claimants link this request to Bolivia’s expropriation of their concessions
(Reply, Section IX(6), that link is not made in their arguments.

30

(5) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT
by failing to accord Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by
submitting Claimants to acts of harassment intended to obstruct
Claimants’ rights under the BIT;

(6) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article III of the BIT
by submitting Claimants to unreasonable and discriminatory measures,
consisting of acts of harassment intended to obstruct Claimants’ rights
under the BIT;

(7) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Art. 26 of the ICSID
Convention by initiating parallel criminal proceedings in Bolivia;

(8) Ordering Bolivia to pay Claimants full compensation in an amount not
less than US$ 61,481,461 as of 1 August 2009 for damages suffered
due to the loss of their investment in Bolivia, plus compound interest at
the commercial rate on such amount from such date until the date of
actual payment;

Ss

Ordering Bolivia to pay compensation in an amount not less than US$
5,000,000 for moral damages suffered by Claimants due to the unlawful
acts of harassment by Bolivia, subsequent to the loss of Claimants’
investment in Bolivia;

(10) Ordering Bolivia to pay all costs, fees and expenses incurred by
Claimants as a result of Bolivia's violations of the BIT, including all cost,
fees and expenses of these arbitration proceedings. °°

76. In their Reply, the Claimants updated their relief (and in particular their claim for
monetary damages) as follows:

[...] [T]he Claimants request the Tribunal to render an award in favor of the
Claimants:

(1) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article VI of the BIT
by expropriating Claimants’ investment in Bolivia, in an unlawful manner
and not in accordance with the requirements of Article VI;

(2) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT
by failing to accord Claimants’ investment fair and equitable treatment
by unlawfully expropriating Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and by
measures subsequent to the expropriation of the Claimants’ investment;

(3) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article III of the BIT
by failing to protect Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and by impairing its
free administration, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, transfer,
sale and liquidation, by unreasonable and discriminatory measures
consisting of the unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment in
Bolivia and by measures subsequent to the expropriation of the
Claimants’ investment;

(4) Ordering Bolivia to pay the Claimants full compensation to an amount of
US$ 146,848,827 as of 30 June 2013 for damages suffered due to the
loss of their investment in Bolivia, plus compound interest at the
commercial rate on that amount from such date until the date of actual
payment;

59 Mem., pp. 98-99.

31

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

(6) Ordering Bolivia to pay compensation to an amount of US$ 4,000,000
for moral damages for Quiborax due to the unlawful expropriation and
acts of harassment by Bolivia, subsequent to the loss of Claimants’
investment in Bolivia;

(7) Declaring that the Respondent’s conduct in the present arbitration is in
breach of its international obligations under the ICSID Convention and
its duty to arbitrate fairly and in good faith;

(8) Ordering Bolivia to pay all costs, fees and expenses incurred by the
Claimants as a result of Bolivia's violations of the BIT, including all
costs, fees and expenses of these arbitration proceedings.

(9) Granting the Claimants any other relief the Tribunal considers
adequate.

B. Overview of the Respondent's Position

Bolivia rejects each of the Claimants' claims and contends that it has not violated its
obligations under the BIT and international law.

According to Bolivia, "the mining concessions are the result of an abuse perpetrated
by Mr. Alvaro Ugalde and Mr. David Moscoso who, having had access because of
their public functions to a geological study carried out in 1993 that showed a wealth of
minerals in a small area of the fiscal reserve, acquired concessions there and in all
the surrounding areas."*"

Subsequently, Messrs. Ugalde and Moscoso offered these concessions to the highest
bidder. Quiborax paid US$ 400,000 in 2001 for over 50% of the mining concessions
through NMM, of which Mr. Moscoso holds part of the remaining capital. From then
on, the Claimants have not invested any additional capital.

The audits carried out by Bolivian authorities in 2004 of all mining concessions in the
Gran Salar de Uyuni detected serious irregularities in the Claimants’ concessions.
This led to their revocation and annulment.

For the Respondent, since the Claimants have obtained their investment in violation
of Bolivian law, they are not entitled to the protection of the BIT and international law.
However, even if these protections were available, Bolivia submits that it has not
breached any of its international obligations by revoking and annulling the mining
concessions. In particular:

° Reply, p. 170. The Tribunal notes that there is no request No. 5 in the Claimant's request for relief.

61 Counter-Mem., § 7, Tribunal's translation.

32

82.

83.

84.

85.

a. The Respondent denies having expropriated the Claimants’ investments. If the
Tribunal were to find that there has been such an expropriation, it contends that
that this expropriation has been lawful.

b. The Respondent denies having breached the fair and equitable treatment
standard of the BIT.

The Respondent advances further arguments with respect to each of the Claimants’
claims, which will be addressed in the specific analysis in Section VI.

As discussed in Section VII below, the Respondent also challenges the Claimants’
case on quantum. Bolivia stresses that this claim bears no connection with reality.
Following the Claimants’ contention, an alleged investment of US$ 400,000 in 2001
would have produced a value of US$ 60 million only three years later, and over US$
140,000,000 in 2013. The additional claim for moral damages is punitive and
inadmissible under international law. In any event, the damage claimed is non-
existent.

In conclusion, the Tribunal should confirm that the Claimants "abuse these
proceedings to denigrate the State and attempt to unjustly enrich themselves." The
Tribunal should thus reject all the claims and order the Claimants to repair the harm
its accusations have done to the Bolivian State.

For the foregoing reasons, in its Counter-Memorial the Respondent requested the
following relief:

[...] Bolivia respectfully requests the Tribunal to:

Declare:

a. That the Treaty and international law do not protect the Claimant's
investment because it was not carried out in accordance with the laws
and regulations of Bolivia;

b. Alternatively, that Bolivia's conduct was justified and that it has
complied with each and every one of its obligations under the Treaty
and international law;

c. In the further alternative, if the Arbitral Tribunal found that Bolivia should
pay any compensation to the Claimants, order the payment of no more
than the Net Investment Realized by the Claimants, i.e. US$ 622,492;

d. Alternatively, if the Tribunal decides to compensate the Claimants
based on the DCF method, order the payment of no more than US$ 2.1
million; and

62 Counter-Mem., § 15, Tribunal's translation.

33

Order:

a. the Claimants to entirely reimburse Bolivia for the costs it has incurred
to defend its interests in the present arbitration, together with interest at
a reasonable commercial rate in the Tribunal's opinion from the moment
in which the State incurred in said costs until the date of actual
payment; and

b. any other compensation to the State that the Tribunal deems
appropriate.®

86. In its Rejoinder, the Respondent updated its prayers for relief as follows:
[...] [T]he Plurinational State of Bolivia formally requests the Tribunal to:

Reject all of the claims submitted by the Claimants under the Bolivia-Chile
Bilateral Treaty, because the alleged investments are not protected under
this Treaty since they were made or carried out in violation of the applicable
norms, laws and regulations and, alternatively, because they lack merits and
have not been proven;

Reject all of the claims submitted by the Claimants under customary
international law because these fall outside the competence of the Tribunal
and, alternatively, because they lack merit and have not been proven;

Reject all of the sums claimed as a consequence of the violations alleged by
the Claimants, because they lack merit and have not been proven; and

Order the Claimants to reimburse all costs and expenses incurred in
defending Bolivia's interests in this proceeding, and to provide compensation

®3 Counter-Mem., § 450-452, Tribunal's translation. The original Spanish text reads as follows:
[..-] Bolivia solicita respetuosamente al Tribunal Arbitral que:
Declare:

a. Que el Tratado y el derecho internacional no protegen la inversién de las
Demandantes por no haber sido realizada de conformidad con las leyes y
reglamentos de Bolivia;

b. Que, subsidiariamente, la conducta de Bolivia era justificada y ha cumplido
todas y cada una de sus obligaciones bajo el Tratado y el derecho
internacional;

c. Que, a titulo subsidiario también, en caso de que el Tribunal Arbitral
considere que Bolivia debe pagar alguna compensacién a las
Demandantes, ordene el pago de, como maximo, la Inversién Neta
Realizada por las Demandantes, esto es US$ 622.492;

d. Que, a titulo subsidiario, si el Tribunal Arbitral decidiera compensar a las
Demandantes con base en el método FFD, ordene el pago de, como
maximo, US$ 2,1 millones; y

Ordene:

a. ala Demandante reembolsarle integramente a Bolivia los costos en los que
ha incurrido en la defensa de sus intereses en el presente arbitraje, junto
con intereses a una tasa comercial razonable a juicio del Tribunal Arbitral
desde el momento en que el Estado incurrid en dichas costas hasta la
fecha de su pago efectivo; y

b. cualquier otra medida de satisfaccidn al Estado que el Tribunal Arbitral
estime oportuna.

34

87.

88.

89.

in the manner the Tribunal deems appropriate regarding the misconduct of
the Claimants harmful to the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

PRELIMINARY MATTERS
A. The Tribunal's task

The Tribunal’s task is to resolve the investment dispute brought before it.
Specifically, it must determine whether the Respondent breached the provisions of
the Bolivia-Chile BIT in its treatment of the Claimants’ investments, as alleged by the
Claimants.

During the hearing on the merits, Bolivia's Attorney General, Mr. Montero Lara,
addressed the Tribunal and explained that in 2006 Bolivia had started "a process of
change," a "veritable transformation" that "no longer allowed for companies from other
countries to define, control and command economic structures in Bolivia [...] So we
now say where investment goes, and why, how our natural resources are to be
used."65

The Tribunal wishes to reassure the Government of Bolivia that by no means does it
intend to interfere with the policies that Bolivia sets and implements as a sovereign
State. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the ICSID arbitration system
"should not be used as a sword of Damocles to hang over [host States’] heads but as
a means of ensuring everybody abides by their obligations."®* The Tribunal is well

4 Rejoinder, pp. 79-80, Tribunal's translation. The original Spanish text reads as follows:

[..-] [E]| Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia formalmente solicita al Tribunal que:

A. Rechace la totalidad de los reclamos presentados por las Demandantes bajo
el Tratado Bilateral Bolivia-Chile, por carecer las inversiones pretendidas de
proteccién bajo ese Tratado por haberse realizado o desarrollado en violacién
de las normas, leyes y reglamentos aplicables, y, en la alternativa, por carecer
de mérito, y no haber sido probados;

B. Rechace la totalidad de los reclamos presentados por las Demandantes bajo
el derecho internacional consuetudinario, por caer fuera de la competencia de
este Tribunal y, en la alternativa, por carecer de mérito y no haber sido
probados;

C. Rechace la totalidad de los montos reclamados como consecuencia de las
pretendidas violaciones alegadas por las Demandantes, por carecer de mérito y
no haber sido probados; y

D. Ordene a las Demandantes a reembolsar la totalidad de los costos y gastos
incurridos en la defensa de sus intereses en este proceso, y a prestar
satisfaccién del modo y con el tenor que el Tribunal entienda apropiado a las
inconductas de las Demandantes dafiosas para con el Estado Plurinacional de
Bolivia.

6 Tr., Day 1, 93:2-94:12.
6 Tr., Day 1, 98:17-19.

35

aware that it is tasked solely with deciding whether those commitments which Bolivia
in its sovereign power chose to undertake in the Bolivia-Chile BIT are respected in
accordance with the rule of law.

B. Law applicable to the merits

90. The claims before the Tribunal are brought on the basis of the Bolivia-Chile BIT,
which is the primary source of law for this Tribunal. With respect to matters not
covered by the BIT, the latter contains no choice of law. The Tribunal must thus resort
to Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, which reads as follows:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as
may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such an agreement, the
Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law
as may be applicable.

91. Except for the undisputed application of the BIT, the Parties have not agreed on the
rules of law that govern the merits of this dispute. Consequently, the Tribunal shall
apply Bolivian law and international law when appropriate. The Tribunal is of the view
that the second sentence of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention does not allocate
matters to either law. It is thus for the Tribunal to determine whether an issue is
subject to national or international law.®

92. When applying the law (whether national or international), the Tribunal is of the view
that it is not bound by the arguments and sources invoked by the Parties. The
principle jura novit curia — or better, iura novit arbiter — allows the Tribunal to form its
own opinion of the meaning of the law, provided that it does not surprise the Parties
with a legal theory that was not subject to debate and that the Parties could not
anticipate. °

®7 See, e.g., Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, |\CSID Case No. ARB/08/5 (“Burlington
v. Ecuador’), Decision on Liability of 14 December 2012, § 179.

88 See, e.g., Daimler Financial Services A.G. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/1,
Decision on Annulment of 7 January 2015, § 295 (“[...] an arbitral tribunal is not limited to referring to
or relying upon only the authorities cited by the parties. It can, sua sponte, rely on other publicly
available authorities, even if they have not been cited by the parties, provided that the issue has been
raised before the tribunal and the parties were provided an opportunity to address it”). See also
Fisheries Jurisdiction Case (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), Merits, Judgment of 25 July
1974, { 18 (‘{iJt being the duty of the Court itself to ascertain and apply the relevant law in the given
circumstances of the case, the burden of establishing or proving rules of international law cannot be
imposed upon any of the Parties, for the law lies within the judicial knowledge of the Court.”); Albert
Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL Case, Award of 23 April
2012, § 141; Metal-Tech Ltd. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award of 4
October 2013, § 287.

36

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

C. Witness statement of Mr. Osvaldo Astudillo

The Claimants informed the Tribunal in their letter of 21 August 2013 that Mr. Osvaldo
Astudillo, whose witness statement had been submitted together with the Claimants’
Memorial, had passed away in July 2011. The Claimants "respectfully request[ed] the
Tribunal to grant Mr. Osvaldo Astudillo’s witness statement of 10 August 2009 proper
probative value, based on that statement’s reliability and coherence with the other
evidence presented by the Claimants."

The Respondent, in its letter of 2 September 2013, "reserve[d] its right to submit its
argument on the inadmissibility of the testimony of Mr. Astudillo in its Rejoinder taking
into account, among other aspects, Bolivia's right to cross-examine the witnesses put
forward by its counter-party in accordance with Rule 34 of the Arbitration Rules"
(Tribunal's translation). The Respondent did not address this matter in its Rejoinder,
but explained at the hearing on the merits that "Bolivia opposed giving value of proof
to Mr Astudillo's written documents in light of the fact that he would not be able to
participate in the actual hearings."©°

The Tribunal notes that Section 18 of the Minutes of the First Session provides the
following:
It was agreed that if a witness called by one party is not made available for
examination at the oral hearing, his/her statement will remain on record and
the Tribunal will assess the probative value of that statement taking into
account the record and all relevant circumstances, including the fact that the

statement was not confirmed orally and that the witness was not cross-
examined.

This provision must be read together with Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules:
Evidence: General Principles

The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced

and of its probative value.
Taking these rules in consideration, the Tribunal shall attempt to rely on the
remainder of the evidence presented by the Parties to reach its decision. Should the
Tribunal need to rely on the evidence submitted by Mr. Astudillo when carrying out its
analysis, it will clearly state so.

% Tr., Day 1, 150:4-7.

37

Vi.

98.

99.

THE CLAIMS FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT

A.

The expropriation claim

1. Overview of the Parties’ positions

The Claimants argue that the revocation of its concessions through Decree 27589

(the Revocation Decree) constitutes an unlawful expropriation under Article VI of the

BIT. They claim that "the expropriation is both direct and indirect, as it affected the

concessions held by NMM and the shares of Quiborax [in NMM]."”° Specifically, they

submit that the expropriatory act is illegal and does not serve the public interest, and
discriminated against NMM on the basis of the Chilean nationality of Quiborax, its

majority shareholder. Further, the Claimants have received no compensation for this

expropriation.

For its part, the Respondent denies that either the Revocation Decree or the

subsequent writs of annulment of the concessions constitute an expropriation.

a.

First, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ investments (specifically,
their mining concessions) were illegal (and invalid) under Bolivian law from the
outset, and thus were not entitled to the protection of the BIT or international
law. The Respondent submits that the protection of the BIT is conditioned upon
the validity of the Claimants’ investments, not only as a matter of jurisdiction but
also as a matter of merits. Specifically, in the context of expropriation, as the
Claimants’ concessions were illegally acquired and were thus null and void ab
initio, they do not constitute rights that may be subject to expropriation.

Second, the Respondent contends that the revocation and subsequent
annulment of the Claimants’ concessions was a consequence of the Claimants’
defective acquisition and administration of the concessions and does not amount
to an expropriation. Bolivia's actions were a legitimate and proportionate
response to the illegality of the concessions, and thus cannot be characterized
as a violation of the BIT or international law. In the Respondent's view, there
can be no substantive violation of the BIT when the host State takes measures
in response to a situation of illegality of the investment.”

70 Mem., J 137.
71 Counter-Mem., § 131.

38

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

c. Third, the Respondent alleges that the claims have been presented prematurely
and as a result cannot constitute an expropriation.

If the Tribunal were to find that the measures do amount to an expropriation, the
Respondent argues that such expropriation is not unlawful either under the BIT or
under international law.

In response to the Respondent's allegations, the Claimants contend that their claims
are not premature and have been presented in accordance with Article X of the BIT.
As regards the legality requirement on which Bolivia relies, the Claimants argue that
the Respondent attempts to re-litigate issues that have already been resolved in the
jurisdictional phase. In any event, they contend that the legality requirement does not
apply regarding trivial breaches of domestic law.

The Tribunal will first address the Respondent's argument that the Claimants’
investments were illegal and are thus not protected by the BIT (Section 2). It will then
address the Respondent's argument that the Claimants’ claims are premature
(Section 3). The Tribunal will subsequently address whether the Respondent's
actions constituted an expropriation of the Claimants’ investments and, in the
affirmative, whether that expropriation was unlawful (Section 4).

2. The Respondent’s argument that the Claimants’ investments were
illegal

a. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that there were serious irregularities in the acquisition and
administration of the Claimants’ concessions, which are sufficient to deny the
Claimants’ investments the protection of the BIT and international law. These same
illegalities justify the revocation and annulment of the Claimants’ concessions.

The Respondent submits that the BIT and international law do not offer substantive
protection to investments that were not made in conformity with the internal law of the
host State. This rule is expressly set out in the BIT, in Articles 1(2), Il and III(2).
Specifically, pursuant to Article I(2) of the BIT, only investments made in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the host State qualify under the definition of
investment. In turn, Article Il of the BIT, which defines the scope of application of the
BIT, limits it to investments made in conformity with the host State’s law. Finally,
Article III(2) of the BIT provides that each Contracting Party shall protect the

39

investments made in its territory in accordance with its laws and regulations. The
effect of these provisions is to exclude from the substantive protection of the BIT
investments that have not been made in accordance with the host State’s laws.

105. Citing decisions of investment tribunals, the Respondent submits that the substantive
protections of a treaty do not apply to an illegal investment (World Duty Free v.
Kenya,” Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Bulgaria’’) and that, consequently, the measures
taken by a State in response to illegalities in an investor's investments cannot violate
the substantive protections of a treaty (Genin v. Estonia,’ Thunderbird v. Mexico’®).
The Respondent contends that, in this case, “the measures adopted by Bolivia were
proportional and legitimate responses to the illegalities that vitiated the Mining
Concessions from their origin and cannot, therefore, be characterized as violations of
the Treaty or international law.””°

106. The Respondent notes that, in its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal found that
“under the Bolivia-Chile BIT, the legality requirement is relevant to determine both the
Treaty's scope of application and the scope of Bolivia's consent to arbitration.”””
Other tribunals have confirmed that the legality of an investment is an element to be
considered by the tribunal when applying the relevant treaty’s substantive provisions
(i.e., at the time of a decision on the merits). Even if the legality requirement is not
expressly included in the relevant treaty, tribunals have found it to be an implicit
requirement deriving from the international law principle of good faith (Plama,”
Phoenix’’).

107. Thus, the validity of the investment under the law of the host State is an element that
determines the substantive protection of investment treaties and concerns all

72 World Duty Free Company Limited v. Republic of Kenya, |\CSID Case No. ARB/00/7 (“World Duty
Free v. Kenya”), Award of 4 October 2006.

73 Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24 (“Plama v. Bulgaria’), Award of
27 August 2008.

74 Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2
(“Genin v. Estonia’), Award of 25 June 2001.

75 International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. United Mexican States, UNCITRAL Case
(“Thunderbird v. Mexico”), Award of 26 January 2006.

76 Counter-Mem., § 131, Tribunal’s translation.
77 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 255.
78 Plama v. Bulgaria, Award of 27 August 2008.

73 Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O6/5 (“Phoenix Action v. Czech
Republic’), Award of 15 April 2009.

40

108.

109.

110.

111.

substantive obligations of the State under the treaty with respect to the investment.®°
This applies irrespective of whether the illegalities were known to the State when
taking certain measures in relation to the investment (Genin®’).

In addition to this general legality requirement, the Respondent contends that the
legality of the investment under the law of the host State is fundamental to
characterize a State measure as an "expropriation" (EnCana, Generation Ukraine,
Thunderbird™). Indeed, only property rights whose existence and validity are

recognized by the law of the host State may be subject to expropriation.

In the present case, the Claimants’ investments were illegal and invalid under Bolivian
law from the start. Therefore, they do not constitute properly acquired property rights
and cannot be subject to expropriation. The Tribunal should apply Bolivian law to
these matters and conclude that the revocation and annulment of the Claimants’
mining concessions is not an expropriation, and thus the State owes no
compensation.

With respect to the nature of the alleged illegality, the Respondent argues that the
Claimants’ mining concessions were vitiated by two types of illegality: an “original
illegality” and an “ongoing illegality.”. As summarized by the Respondent:
[T]he illegality incurred by the Claimants in this case has two dimensions:
original and ongoing. The illegality incurred in establishing the investment
(original illegality) is an obstacle to the implementation of the substantive
guarantees of the Treaty, while the illegality incurred by the Claimants in the
subsequent administration and operation of the alleged investment (ongoing
illegality) prevents the verification of the factual requirements of the alleged
violations, and justifies the challenged measures.®
With respect to the alleged original illegality, the Respondent contends that RIGSSA
and NMM, through Mr. David Moscoso, obtained the eleven mining concessions

irregularly under Bolivian law, for the following reasons:®°

80 The Respondent also notes that the Tribunal is authorized to apply Bolivian law in accordance with
the second sentence of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, which provides that “[i]n the absence of
[the parties’ agreement on the applicable law], the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State
party to the dispute (including its rules on conflict of laws) [...]” (Counter-Mem., § 130, Tribunal’s
translation).

81 Genin v. Estonia, Award of 25 June 2001.

82 EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador, LCIA, Award of 3 February 2006.

83 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award of 16 September 2003.
84 Thunderbird v. Mexico, Award of 26 January 2006.

85 Rejoinder, J 52, p. 19. Tribunal's translation.

86 Exhs. R-244 to R-254.

a

a. The applications submitted by RIGSSA for seven of the concessions did not
comply with the legal requirements regarding the legal status of the principal
(RIGSSA) and the agent (Mr. Moscoso). This constitutes a violation of the
procedure to obtain mining concessions established in Article 126 of the Mining
Code,®” as well as of the rules on capacity contained in Article 33 of the Code of
Commerce.®®

b. The four mining concessions obtained by NMM in 2002 were granted despite the
fact that the applicant did not present proper authority to act in this procedure. In
fact, the Tupiza and Tarija Regional Mining Superintendent, Ms. Pilar Vila
Cortés, who was responsible for granting the concessions to NMM, was
investigated and consequently removed from her post due to the serious
irregularities in the granting of those concessions.®°

c. The constitutive resolutions of some of those mining concessions were issued
beyond the time limit established by Article 134 of the Mining Code.

d. Neither RIGSSA nor NMM were registered with the Technical Mining Service
(Servicio Técnico de Minas, "SETMIN"), as required by Article 122 of the Mining
Code.

e. The Cancha | and Cancha II concession files were tampered with, because the
date of the resolutions that granted the concessions predates the payment of the
mining patents.*' Bolivia also argues that since the Cancha | and Cancha Il
resolutions granted the concessions to Mr. David Moscoso instead of NMM,
these administrative acts are invalid.

112. The Respondent also suggests that Mr. Moscoso and Mr. Ugalde abused their former
positions in the Ministry of Mining in order to push for the adoption of the Ley Valda,
with the ultimate purpose of obtaining the concessions.°

87 Exh. CD-6.

88 Exh. R-255.

89 Exh. R-259.

°° Exh. CD-6.

31 Rejoinder, 9 38-40.

8 Rejoinder, § 34.

93 Counter-Mem., 9§ 36-51, 123.

42

113. With respect to the alleged ongoing illegality, Bolivia asserts that the audits carried
out in accordance with Law 2,564 identified irregularities in the operation of some of
the Claimants’ concessions. Specifically, the Respondent asserts that the Claimants’
concessions breached domestic law in matters of tax, customs, industrial safety,
environment and labor.

114. Moreover, the Respondent argues that the Claimants operated the mining
concessions until 2004 without carrying out investments or prospects. According to
the Respondent, during the two and a half years when NMM operated at the Salar de
Uyuni, the Claimants made no investments to improve the production of ulexite and
limited themselves to running the production fronts that already existed. The
extraction, processing and transportation of the ulexite was artisanal, supported by
the local means and did not involve any investment in infrastructure. In addition,
Bolivia alleges that the Claimants did not carry out any of the investments mentioned
in their economic expert's first report. With respect to exploration, the Respondent
argues that the Claimants failed to carry out any reserve prospecting or study.
Instead, they based themselves exclusively on the Aquater-EniChem Report that Mr.
Moscoso handed to them.

b. The Claimants’ position

115. The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s illegality arguments attempt to
establish that the Claimants did not make an investment (or at least, an investment
protected by the BIT) and that such arguments were already dismissed in the
Decision on Jurisdiction. In any event, the Claimants reject the Respondent's
allegations of illegality.

116. With respect to the Respondent's arguments of original illegality, the Claimants deny
that the concessions were obtained through fraud, corruption or in breach of Bolivian
law. The Respondent’s accusations of fraud and corruption against Mr. Moscoso and
Mr. Ugalde are false. First, Mr. Moscoso and Mr. Ugalde left public office long before
setting up RIGGSA and obtaining an interest in the concessions. Second, the
Respondent has not provided evidence of any connection between Mr. Moscoso and
Mr. Ugalde and the adoption of the Ley Valda. Indeed, according to the Claimants,
“the facts seem to indicate that the Ley Valda was adopted to facilitate the operation

°4 Counter-Mem., § 84.
5 Navigant First ER, 1 124-127.

43

of the giant San Cristdbal silver mine, located in the southern tip of the former fiscal
reserve of the Salar de Uyuni.”%

117. The Claimants also deny that they committed breaches of Bolivian law in the
acquisition of the concessions that could render them null and void. Specifically:

a. Regarding the first seven concessions, the Claimants maintain that Mr. Moscoso
and RIGGSA complied with all relevant legal requirements when they requested
them before the Tupiza and Tarija Regional Mining Superintendent.” In
particular, they claim that Mr. Moscoso presented all the necessary powers of
attorney. Although they acknowledge that those powers of attorney were not
registered in the Registry of Commerce at the time, they argue that their
registration was not a requirement for the validity of the legal act, and in any
event the powers of attorney were subsequently filed and registered before the
Registry of Commerce. The Claimants also allege that Mr. Moscoso complied
with the obligation to submit information related to the petitioner in accordance
with Bolivian legal practice, and that the Superintendent of Mines was satisfied
with the information provided. The requirements of Administrative Resolution
18/04 did not apply, as this resolution was issued four years after the
concessions were granted. Finally, Article 33 of the Commercial Code creates
an obligation for judges, not for administrative authorities nor for the Claimants.

b. With regard to the four concessions acquired directly by NMM, the Claimants
argue that the power of attorney which Mr. Moscoso submitted for himself and
for Mr. Omar Leén was sufficient.°* As for the destitution of the Tupiza and Tarija
Regional Mining Superintendent in connection with the granting of these
concessions, they point out that any errors made by her are not attributable to
the Claimants and stress that the Respondent "accuses its own administrative
authorities of breaches of law and even fraud, in order to deny the legality of the
Claimants’ Concessions."®° In any event, the Claimants argue that they “can
also not be held accountable for possible errors in the administrative decisions
by the Superintendent of Mines of Tupiza, the Respondent’s own administrative
authority.”1°°

°6 Reply, 25.

97 Reply, 4 52-61.

%8 Reply, 4 62; Exhs. R-251, R-252, R-253 and R-254.
99 Reply, § 66.

100 Reply, § 73.

44

118.

119.

120.

c. Regarding the delay in the issuance of the constitutive resolutions of some of the
concessions beyond the legal time limit, the Claimants allege that the delays
were caused by the Director of the Technical Mining Service (SETMIN). In any
case, Article 134 of the Mining Code imposes a 15-day time limit on the
Superintendent of Mines, not on the applicants for a concession. Moreover, they
argue that delays in the procedure and issuance of petitions for new
concessions are very common and are not sanctioned with the nullity of the
administrative act."

d. Finally, the Claimants argue that the Respondent tries to mislead the Tribunal by
asserting that neither RIGSSA nor NMM were registered before the SETMIN, in
breach of Article 122 of the Mining Code. The Claimants explain that, pursuant
to Article 122 of the Mining Code, the SETMIN must keep a register of mining
concessions, mining acts and contracts, but does not register mining companies.
Therefore, NMM and RIGSSA could not have been registered with the Mining
Registry. 1°

The Claimants note in addition that the Revocation Decree revoked the concessions
for reasons unrelated to the formal breaches which are now alleged. According to the
Claimants, “these alleged ‘irregularities’ were first invoked in the ex post writs of
annulment, as part of Bolivia's defense strategy.”"°

The Claimants also note that the Respondent did not refer to these alleged formal
irregularities in its Objections to Jurisdiction. Bolivia “now attempts to use them to a
double purpose: to deny the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to justify the ex post
annulment of the Concessions. Both are moot points: the Tribunal has already
confirmed its jurisdiction and the Concessions were revoked before they were
annulled. Indeed, the Concessions could not have been ‘revoked’ if they were ‘null
and void’ from the very beginning.”'*

In any event, the Claimants contend that, as the Tribunal found in its Decision on
Jurisdiction, the BIT’s legality requirement does not extend to trivial breaches of
domestic law. In particular, the Claimants argue that these alleged irregularities

101 Reply, J 67-69, citing Article 36.1II of the Law of Administrative Procedure.
102 Reply, 65.
103 Reply, 50.
104 Reply, 7 51.

45

121.

122.

123.

124.

“could not possibly be indicative of a carefully planned attempt by the Claimants to
circumvent the requirements of Bolivian law.”1°

As for the claims of ongoing illegality, the Claimants contend that "the alleged
breaches of mining, commercial or administrative law are either non-existent or utterly
trivial.""°° Regarding the alleged environmental breaches, the Claimants maintain that
NMM complied "at all times with all environmental regulations"'”” and criticizes
Bolivia's use of a circular argument, "[b]Jecause the Respondent tried to persuade us
and the Tribunal that the alleged non-existence of environmental licences would
justify the expropriatory act when the environmental licence was illegally revoked by
the same government the very same day of the expropriation.""°

Finally, the Claimants reject Bolivia's assertion that they operated the mining
concessions until 2004 without carrying out investments or prospects, as follows:

The Tribunal declared itself “satisfied that Quiborax’s and NMM’s original

and subsequent contributions meet the contribution requirement for the

“investment” test of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.” The Tribunal’s

Decision on Jurisdiction leaves no room for doubt that the Claimants made

an investment in Bolivia. There is also no room for the Respondent to, once

again, argue to the contrary in its presentations on the merits.'°°
In sum, the Claimants submit that the Respondent's claims of illegality do not pass
the threshold set by the Tribunal in its Decision on Jurisdiction,"*® nor do any of the
cases cited by the Respondent interpret the legality requirement more broadly than
the Decision on Jurisdiction. The trivial breaches of domestic law alleged by the
Respondent should not therefore leave the Claimants without treaty protection nor
justify an otherwise unlawful confiscation of their rights.

c. Analysis

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ investments were affected by two types
of illegality: an illegality in connection with the establishment of the investment (i.e.,
an original illegality) and an illegality in its subsequent administration and operation

105 Reply, § 73.

106 Reply, § 220, footnote omitted.
107 Tr., Day 3, 18:1-2.

108 Tr., Day 3, 22:2-7.

109 Reply, 4 80.

110 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 237.

46

125.

126.

127.

(i.e., an ongoing illegality). The Tribunal understands that the Respondent’s argument
has three prongs:

a. First, the Claimants did not make and operate an investment in accordance with
Bolivian law and, hence, cannot benefit from the substantive protections of the
BIT.

b. Second, the acquisition of the Claimants’ mining concessions was illegal and
therefore the concessions were null and void ab initio. As a result, the
Claimants had no right to those concessions that could be subject to
expropriation.

c. Third, the revocation and subsequent annulment of the Claimants’ concessions
were justified by the Claimants’ breaches of Bolivian law in the establishment
and operation of these concessions. Such measures are therefore punitive
measures applied in the legitimate exercise of the State’s police powers, rather
than expropriations.

The Tribunal will now address the first two arguments. It will address the third
argument in the context of its analysis of whether there has been an expropriation
(Section VI.A.4 below).

i. Bolivia’s argument that the Claimants’ investments are
not protected by the BIT

The first prong of Bolivia’s argument of illegality is that the Claimants’ investments
were not made nor operated in accordance with Bolivian law and that, as a result,
they cannot benefit from the substantive protections of the BIT.

In the Tribunal’s view, an investment may benefit from the substantive protections of
the BIT if it qualifies as an investment under the BIT and under the ICSID Convention,
if the investment meets the legality requirement of the BIT, and is not denied the
benefits of the BIT as a result of a specific provisions in the BIT (by virtue of a “denial
of benefits” clause). In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal found that
Quiborax’s and NMM’s investments qualified as investments both under the BIT‘
and under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.'"? Bolivia did not invoke at that

‘1 Decision on Jurisdiction, J§ 210-211.
‘2 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 237.

47

128.

129.

130.

131.

stage (nor does it do so now) the denial of benefits clauses contained in Articles |.1.c
and II of the Protocol to the Bolivia-Chile BIT.

With respect to the legality requirement, in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal
found that it had both subject-matter and temporal limitations, as follows:

The subject-matter scope of the legality requirement is limited to (i) non-

trivial violations of the host State's legal order [...], (ii) violations of the host

State's foreign investment regime [...], and (iii) fraud — for instance, to secure

the investment [...] or profits [...]. Additionally, under this BIT, the temporal

scope of the legality requirement is limited to the establishment of the

investment; it does not extend to the subsequent performance. Indeed, the

Treaty refers to the legality requirement in the past tense by using the words

investments "made" in accordance with the laws and regulations of the host

State and, in Spanish, "haya efectuado" [...].''°
To the extent that the Respondent's allegations refer to the operation or performance
of the investment (Bolivia’s allegations of “ongoing illegality”), they are not relevant to
the availability of the BIT’s substantive protections. Instead, they are matters for the
merits which the Tribunal will address when determining whether the Respondent
breached its BIT obligations.''* By contrast, to the extent that the Respondent's
allegations of illegality refer to the establishment of the investment (Bolivia’s
allegations of “original illegality”) they fall under the temporal scope of the BIT’s
legality requirement. However, these allegations seek to reopen an issue that was
resolved during the jurisdictional phase

That the Tribunal’s inquiry at that juncture was directed to establishing jurisdiction
does not detract from the fact that the Tribunal ascertained that the Claimants’
investments were made in accordance with Bolivian law. This conclusion also applies
to the application of the substantive protections of the BIT. Only the allegation of an
illegality that was unknown to Bolivia during the jurisdictional phase may justify
reopening the matter at the merit stage.

Bolivia now argues that the Claimants’ mining concessions were originally obtained
by Mr. David Moscoso and Mr. Alvaro Ugalde through an abuse of their position as
former officers of the Ministry of Mining. Specifically, Bolivia argues that the
Claimants’ concessions “were the result of an irregular process that unduly benefitted
public officers that knew, due to their functions, the nature and precise location of the

13 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 266. Footnotes omitted.

114 See, e.g., Urbaser S.A. and Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao Biskaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur Partzuergoa v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Decision on Jurisdiction of 19 December 2012, 4
260. See also Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 30 April 2010, 4 176.

48

132.

133.

Salar [de Uyuni]'s mineral wealth, Alvaro Ugalde and David Moscoso, who had been
in office in the Ministry of Mining (Vice-minister and Legal Director, respectively).”""®
Indeed, Bolivia claims that the Ley Valda was adopted in dubious circumstances and
suggests that Mr. Moscoso may have played a part in its adoption:

The personal interest of senator Valda in redefining the extension of the
Fiscal Reserve of the Gran Salar de Uyuni is unclear. We understand that
senator Valda’s sister was (or had been), Mr. David Moscoso’s personal
secretary, therefore he could have promoted the bill. 1

Bolivia did not advance these arguments during the jurisdictional phase, although it
had all the necessary elements to do so. As such, the objection could be rejected
outright. Nevertheless, due to the gravity of the accusation, the Tribunal has
considered the Respondent's allegation and has analyzed the evidence adduced to
support it.

Having done so, the Tribunal finds that the evidence to which Bolivia refers in support
of its contention'’” is inconclusive. Specifically:

a. Bolivia cites former senator Martin Quirés Alcala’s “Commentary on the Mining
Code of 1997” to claim that “criminal hands” were behind the adoption of the Ley
Valda. The document, however, simply mentions that part of the media argued
that there had been a “criminal hand” behind the “adulteration” of Quiros’s bill,
which contained a different proposal from that finally adopted in the Ley
Valda.'® There is no mention of either Mr. Moscoso or Mr. Ugalde, nor any
other indication of who this “criminal hand,” if any, might be.

b. The Claimants have persuasively rebutted the existence of a connection
between Mr. Moscoso and Senator Valda: Senator Valda’s sister worked as a
secretary at a gold mine company where Mr. Moscoso was a legal director
between July 1994 and January 2001. However, they worked at offices located
in different cities, she was never Mr. Moscoso’s secretary, and it is not
established that they worked at the company at the same time.'"9

c. It seems undisputed that Messrs. Moscoso and Ugalde left public office long
before obtaining an interest in the concessions (1985 and 1979, respectively).

118 Counter-Mem., § 123, Tribunal's translation.

116 Counter-Mem., § 45, Tribunal's translation, footnote omitted.
7 Exhs. R-227, CD-10, CD-28, CD-38, R-243, R-22 and R-240.
118 Exh. R-227, p. 272.

19 Reply, 37.

49

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

According to Articles 18 and 19 of the Mining Code, '”° the restrictions on public
officials to obtain an interest in mining concessions are limited to the first three
months after leaving public office.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal cannot but dismiss the Respondent’s
argument that the Claimants’ investments should be denied the substantive protection
of the BIT because they were not made or operated in accordance with the law.

ii. Bolivia’s argument that the Claimants’ concessions
were null and void ab initio and thus cannot be subject
to expropriation

The second facet of the Respondent's illegality argument is that, because the
Claimants’ concessions were obtained irregularly, they are null and void ab initio. As
a result, the Claimants did not hold a right that could be subject to expropriation. The
Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that, in order for a right to be expropriated, it
must first exist under the relevant domestic law (in this case, Bolivian law).

Here, the Tribunal stresses that it already held that the Claimants’ investments were
validly made under Bolivian law in the Decision on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal cannot
but note that the Respondent did not make these allegations during the jurisdictional
phase, when the legality of the Claimants investments was being discussed.

Be this as it may, the Tribunal cannot follow the Respondent’s argument as a matter
of merits. The alleged illegalities that the Respondent now brings to the Tribunal’s
attention were first raised in the writs of annulment of the concessions. Indeed, on 28
October 2004, the concessions were annulled for failure to comply with Articles 126
and 128 of the Mining Code, on the grounds of “impersoneria en el mandante y
mandatario” (i.e., lack of legal capacity or sufficient representation of the principal and
agent).'27. This annulment took place four months after the revocation of the
concessions on different grounds. As the Claimants point out, had the concessions
been improperly granted they would have been annulled or declared null and void in
the first place, not revoked.

As discussed in Section VI.A.4 below, the annulment of the concessions on these
formal grounds appears to have been a form of “damage control” by the Respondent
in order to make the cancellation of the concessions definitive after the legality of the

120 Exh. CD-6.
121 Exh. R-276; see § 31 supra.

50

139.

140.

Revocation Decree was questioned. Indeed, in the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo,
members of the Bolivian Government were considering precisely this defense

strategy in connection with the Claimants’ BIT case:

SECOND SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may attempt to defend its

decisions. Unfortunately, the Mining Code makes no provisions for the

revocation of mining concessions. Therefore, this option has a great

weakness. Another alternative would be to try to prove irregularities in the

processing of the original mining concessions of Non Metallic Minerals S.A.,

so as to demonstrate that these are and always have been invalid. For the

time being, this has been considered the best alternative. '22
This strongly suggests that the annulment of the concessions on the formal grounds
cited above was an ex post attempt to improve Bolivia's defense in this arbitration, not
a bona fide exercise of Bolivia’s police powers. It also suggests that the alleged
irregularities were either fabricated or trivial breaches that would not normally justify
the annulment of a concession. Although the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo postdates
the writs of annulment, it confirms the course of action adopted by the Government by

stating that “[flor the time being, this has been considered the best alternative.”'2°

In any event, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have established that the flaws
alleged by Bolivia are either non-existent or are not subject to the sanction of
annulment of the concessions. They did so with respect to the first seven
concessions obtained by RIGSSA as follows:

a. The Claimants have shown that the petitions for each concession all contain the
powers of attorney from RIGSSA to Mr. Moscoso. '4

b. The Claimants acknowledge that these powers of attorney were not registered in
the Registry of Commerce. However, although Article 29(5) of the Commercial
Code imposes the obligation to register “any acts that grant, modify, substitute or
revoke the general or special authority to administer goods or businesses of the
merchant,” failure to do so is not sanctioned by the nullity of the power of
attorney. Instead, Article 34 of the Commercial Code provides that failure to
register acts and documents subject to registration is a fine imposed by the

122 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal's translation.
123 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal's translation.
124 Exhs. R-244 to R-250.

125 Tribunal’s translation. The original Spanish text provides: “Art. 29.- (ACTOS Y CONTRATOS
SUJETOS A INSCRIPCION). Deben inscribirse en el Registro de Comercio: [...] 5) todo acto en virtud
del cual se confiera, modifique, sustituya o revoque la facultad de administracion general o especial
de bienes 0 negocios del comerciante.” Exh. R-255.

51

Registry."° Further, Article 31 provides that acts or documents subject to
registration are effective vis-a-vis third parties only from the moment of their
registration. '?”

The Claimants claim that Mr. Moscoso presented the powers of attorney, duly
registered, to the Superintendent of Mines in January 2002.'78 The Tribunal
notes that Exh. R-256, upon which the Claimants rely for this assertion, appears
to be a request to add certain powers of attorney to the original concession files.
However, the powers of attorney themselves are not attached, nor is a copy of
their registration in the Commercial Registry, so the Tribunal cannot confirm the
veracity of this statement. That said, as the failure to register is not sanctioned
by the nullity of the power of attorney, the Tribunal does not find this fact
determinative.

The Tribunal finds that the Claimants otherwise complied with the general
practice at the Superintendence of Mines with respect to Article 126 of the
Mining Code, which requires the applicant to submit general information
regarding the law of the applicant (“datos [...] generales de ley del peticionario”).
The Respondent has not shown that this expression required specific
documents, and the Superintendent of Mines could have requested further
documents if it had considered that the documents submitted were insufficient.
In addition, Administrative Resolution 18/04, which requires the submission of a
company’s certificate of incorporation, was passed in November 2004. In any
event, that Administrative Resolution grants the applicant the opportunity to
correct the omission within 15 days before archiving the petition. 12°

126 The original Spanish text of Article 34 of the Bolivian Commercial Code provides: “Art. 34.-
(SANCION). La persona que ejerza habitualmente el comercio sin estar matriculada en el Registro de
Comercio, sera sancionada con multa que impondra este Registro, sin perjuicio de las demas
sanciones legales. Igual sancion se aplicara cuando se omita la inscripcién de los actos y documentos
sujetos a registro” (Exh. R-255).

127 Article 31 of the Bolivian Commercial Code provides: “Art. 31.- (EFECTOS DE LA MATRICULA E
INSCRIPCION). La matricula puede solicitarse al empezar el giro o dentro del mes que le siga, si el
reglamento no fija un término para ello. Empero, los actos y documentos sujetos a inscripcién no
surten efectos contra terceros sino a partir de la fecha de su inscripcion. Ninguna inscripcién puede
hacerse alterando el orden de su presentaci6n” (Exh. R-255).

128 Reply, 4 54.

129 Exh. R-257.

52

e. Finally, although Article 33 of the Commercial Code provides that judges must
require merchants to show their registration before the Registry of Commerce,
this is an obligation imposed upon judges, not on the Claimants. °°

141. Similarly, the record does not substantiate the defects alleged with regard to the four
concessions acquired directly by NMM:

a. The Claimants have shown that Mr. Moscoso did submit a power of attorney for
himself to act on behalf of NMM, which was granted by NMM'’s general
manager, Mr. Omar Leon.'*' Although the power of attorney for Mr. Omar Leén
is not attached, the notary before whom such power of attorney 631/2001 (Exh.
R-251) was granted certified that Mr. Leén duly represented NMM on the basis
of “General Management Power of Attorney” (“Poder Especial de
Administraci6n”) No. 531/2001 issued on 2 October 2001 and granted at that
same notary.'*? Given the notary public’s role as certifying officer (“ministro de
fe’), the Tribunal finds that this suffices to establish Mr. Leén’s authority to
represent NMM.

b. With respect to the destitution of the Tupiza and Tarija Regional Mining
Superintendent, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that any errors made by
her are not attributable to the Claimants.

142. Further, the Tribunal finds that the delay in the issuance of the constitutive resolutions
of the concessions "Tete," "Pococho" and "La Negra" beyond the time limit set in
Article 134 of the Mining Code cannot have the effect of rendering the concessions
null and void for the following reasons:

130 Article 33 of the Commercial Code provides: “Los jueces ante quienes ocurren los comerciantes
deben exigir a éstos que acrediten previamente su matricula del Registro de Comercio” (Exh. R-255).

131 See Power of attorney 631/2001 of 19 November 2011, included in Exhs. R-251 (pp. 35-36), R-252
(pp. 34-35), R-253 (pp. 11-12) and R-254 (pp. 12-13).

132 Power of attorney 631/2001 states that ““OMAR ANDRES LEON PEREZ [...] en su condicion de
APODERADO ESPECIAL ESPECIAL [sic] de [NMM] [...] y debidamente facultado para este acto en
mérito a los incisos f) y h) del poder General de Administracién N° 531/2001 de fecha 2 de Octubre de
2001 [...] confiere PODER ESPECIAL Y SUFICIENTE, cual por derecho se requiere en favor del
sefior DAVID MOSCOSO RUIZ [...] para que en nombre y representacion de [NMM] para su legal
representacion actue con plena capacidad y poder para solicitar concesiones mineras conforme al
Codigo de Mineria vigente, a nombre de la sociedad mandante, ubicadas en la jurisdiccién de la
provincia Nor Lipez del departamento de Potosi [...].”

53

a. The Law on General Administrative Procedure invoked by the Respondent dates
from 23 April 2002 and entered into force twelve months later in 2003, '%° while
the relevant concessions were granted in the years 2000 and 2002. "+

b. Assuming arguendo that the provisions of this act were applicable to the
situation at hand, the failure of the Superintendent of Mines to meet the time limit
imposed in Article 134 of the Mining Code does not appear to trigger the nullity
of the concession. While that provision states that if the Superintendent does
not comply with the 15 day time limit to grant the concessions following the
preparation of the definitive concession plan by the SETMIN, the Superintendent
ceases to be competent,'*° the granting of the concessions is not automatically
null and void. Pursuant to Article 35 of the Law on General Administrative
Procedure, administrative acts issued by an incompetent administrative authority
are only automatically null and void (“nulos de pleno derecho”) if that
incompetence relates to subject matter or territory.%° Here, however, the defect
stems from failure to meet a deadline, so the appropriate sanction is that
provided in Article 36(III): “Performance of administrative acts outside of the
established time limits shall be voidable when the nature of the term or deadline
so imposes it.”'8? Given that the time limit is imposed to accelerate the
procedure to the benefit of the applicants, the Tribunal does not believe that the
nature of the time limit vitiates the grant of the concession.

c. Even if the failure by the Superintendent to meet the time limit established in
Article 134 of the Mining Code had arguably made the concessions voidable,

133 Exh. R-258, Second Final Provision, p. 17.
134 Exhs. R-244, R-251 and R-252.

135 Article 134 of the Mining Code (Exh. CD-6) provides: “Once the requirement indicated in the
preceding article has been complied with [the preparation of the definitive plan of the concession by
the Technical Mining Service] and within a maximum period of fifteen calendar days from said
compliance, subject to loss of competence, the Mining Superintendent [...] will grant the mining
concessions through an express constitutive resolution [...].”[...],” Tribunal's translation. The original
Spanish text reads as follows: “Cumplido el requisito sefalado en el articulo precedente y en el plazo
maximo de quince dias calendario desde dicho cumplimiento, bajo sancién de pérdida de
competencia, el Superintendente de Minas [...] otorgara la concesién minera mediante resolucion
constitutiva expresa [...].”

136 The original Spanish text of Article 35(1) of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (Exh. R-
258) provides: “Son nulos de pleno derecho los actos administrativos en los casos siguientes: a) Los
que hubiesen sido dictados por autoridad administrativa sin competencia por razon de la materia o del
territorio; [...]”

187 Exh. R-258, Tribunal’s translation. The original Spanish text of Article 36(III) of the Law on General
Administrative Procedure provides: “La realizacion de actuaciones administrativas fuera del tiempo
establecido para ellas solo dara lugar a la anulabilidad del acto cuando asi lo imponga la naturaleza
del término 0 plazo.”

54

voidable acts (“actos anulables”) as opposed to acts that are (automatically) null
and void (“actos nulos de pleno derecho’) may be validated by a subsequent act
of the administrative authority.'° The Tribunal considers that the fact that the
Superintendent granted the concessions despite the expiration of the time limit
constitutes such a validation.

d. Even assuming further that the concessions had remained voidable after having
been granted by the Superintendent, voidable acts are deemed to be valid until
they are declared void by a competent authority. °° There is no dispute that the
concessions were not declared null and void until October 2004 after their
revocation in June 2004. Hence, the concessions were valid at the time when
they were revoked.

143. Bolivia also claims that RIGSSA and NMM were not registered with the SETMIN and
thus did not comply with Article 122 of the Mining Code. Article 122 of the Mining
Code spells out SETMIN's responsibilities, including the responsibility to keep a
national data base with all mining documentation (122(c)) and to manage a Mining
Registry recording all mining acts and contracts."° Article 122 makes no specific
reference to mining companies.

144. Finally, the Tribunal notes that one of the guiding principles of the General Law on
Administrative Procedure is the principle of informality, whereby “failure by the
applicant to comply with non-essential formal requirements that can be complied with
in the future may be excused, and that circumstance shall not interrupt the
administrative procedure” (Article 4(I))."“' Although this text did not enter into force
until after the concessions had been granted, it suggests that Bolivian administrative
law is more flexible with breaches of formal requirements than what the Respondent
argues. Based on this provision, the Tribunal cannot accept the Respondent's

138 The original Spanish text of Article 37(I) of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (Exh. R-
258) provides: “Los actos anulables pueden ser convalidados, saneados 0 rectificados por la misma
autoridad administrativa que dicté el acto, subsanando los vicios de que adolezca.”

188 The original Spanish text of Article 36(IV) of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (Exh. R-
258) provides that “[l]as anulabilidades podran invocarse Unicamente mediante la interposicion de los
recursos administrativos previstos en la presente Ley.”

140 Article 122(e) of the Mining Code (Exh. CD-6) provides that the SETMIN’s responsibilities include
"[o]rganizar y mantener el Registro Minero en el cual deberan inscribirse obligatoriamente todos los
actos y contratos mineros.”

141 Article 4(l) of the General Law on Administrative Procedure (Exh. R-258) provides: “Principio de
informalismo: La inobservancia de exigencias formales no esenciales por parte del administrado, que
puedan ser cumplidas posteriormente, podran ser excusadas y ello no interrumpira el procedimiento
administrativo.”

55

argument that the Claimants could not subsequently correct the errors in the
constitution of the concessions, because this is not allowed under Bolivian law ("no
existen en la legislacién boliviana procedimientos correctivos de la naturaleza
invocada por las Demandantes").‘42

145. The Tribunal has also considered the Respondent's claim that the concession files for
Cancha | and Cancha II had been tampered with.'*? Bolivia’s argument is that the
date of the resolutions that granted the concessions (10 July 2003") predates the
payment of the mining patents (25 July 2003145). However, the Tribunal notes that
the title deeds for both concessions specify that the date of the resolutions is 30 July
2003. ‘4° In the absence of more compelling evidence, the Tribunal attaches more
weight to the title deeds, which are documents issued before a public notary.

146. Bolivia also argues that since the Cancha | and Cancha Il resolutions granted the
concessions to Mr. David Moscoso instead of NMM, these administrative acts are
invalid.'47 While the resolutions included at the end of Exhibits R-253 and R-254
indeed do not mention NMM, the same resolutions recorded in the relevant title deeds
state that the concessions are granted to NMM (Exhs. CD-36 and CD-37). As Mr.
Moscoso was acting on behalf of NMM, the discrepancy may be due to a clerical error
which was subsequently corrected in the title deeds. As before, in its assessment of
the evidence, the Tribunal considers that the official deeds carry more weight.

147. As a final matter in respect of Cancha | and Cancha Il, the Tribunal observes that
these concessions were drying fields not used to extract ulexite. Thus, even if the
Claimant had not acquired these concessions validly, their damage claim would not
be affected.

148. The Tribunal has also noted that the legal audit reported that the Claimants had not
paid the compulsory mining fees.'*® As the Claimants have acknowledged, failure to
pay the yearly mining fees (“patentes”) is sanctioned with the expiry (“caducidad’) of
the concessions (Article 65 of the Mining Code). Having examined the legal audit

142 Rejoinder, § 30.

143 Rejoinder, J 38-40, with reference to Exhs. R-253 and R-254.

144 Exhs. R-253 and R-254, pp. 39-40 of the original numbering of both files.
145 See p. 36 of the original numbering of both files.

146 Exhs. CD-36 and CD-37, p. 9 of the original numbering of both files.

147 Rejoinder, § 34.

148 Exh. R-240, p. 11.

56

149.

150.

151.

report, "“° the Tribunal notes that the Prefect of Potosi stated that the Claimants had
failed to pay the required mining fees within the relevant time limit before the
concessions were acquired.'%° However, the concession files submitted by the
Respondent show that the Claimants did in fact pay the required mining fee when
applying for the concessions, after which the concessions were granted.'*' A
concession can only be sanctioned with expiry once it has been granted. As the flaw
was corrected before the concessions were granted, the Tribunal considers that the
sanction of expiry cannot apply in this case. The Claimants have alleged that they
paid all yearly mining fees, '** and the Respondent has not disputed this.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent's allegations
of illegality in the acquisition of the Claimants’ concessions are not well-founded and
that, at the time of the Revocation Decree, the Claimants had rights to the
concessions which could be subject to expropriation.

3. The Respondent’s argument that the Claimants’ claims are
premature

a. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent argues that the Claimants have not made reasonable efforts to
obtain the revocation of Bolivia’s alleged breaches of the BIT before local courts, and
that their claims are therefore premature. More specifically, Bolivia contends that the
Claimants have failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain the revocation of the
Revocation Decree, thereby depriving the State of an opportunity to remedy its
allegedly wrongful conduct.‘

According to the Respondent, such reasonable efforts are a constitutive element of a
breach of treaty and international law. It specifies that "[t]his requirement cannot and
should not be confused with a procedural requirement to exhaust local remedies
before resorting to an international tribunal. On the contrary, it provides that an

148 The Tribunal notes that this document appears to be incomplete and is only partially legible.
180 Exh. R-240, p. 11.

151 Exhs. R-244, p. 24; R-245, p. 38; R-246, p. 24; R-247, p. 24; R-248, p. 24; R-249, p. 30; R-250, p.
23; R-251, p. 56; R-252, p. 66; R-253, p. 59; R-254, p. 60.

152 Reply, J 183.
153 Counter-Mem., § 105.

57

152.

153.

154.

155.

international illicit act can only be established through a definitive decision of the
State that affects the investor's rights."'®

In this respect, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants notified the existence of a
dispute under the BIT before the mining concessions had been returned to the
State.'®> It claims that RIGSSA filed an appeal regarding seven of the concessions,
which was dismissed because it was not timely.'5° Other than that, the Claimants
made no attempt or reasonable effort to challenge the legislative and administrative
acts which they now describe as violations of the BIT and international law.
Consequently, so the Respondent submits, this Arbitral Tribunal must dismiss all of
the Claimants’ claims as premature.

b. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants argue that their claims are not premature and were submitted in
accordance with Article X of the Bolivia-Chile BIT.

In particular, the Claimants submit that they were "under no obligation under the BIT
to seek redress in domestic courts"'S’ before bringing a claim to international
arbitration, and reject the notion of "a general obligation to seek redress in domestic
courts before resorting to international arbitration" entertained by the Respondent. '*
On the contrary, in accordance with Article X of the Bolivia-Chile BIT, the Claimants
may either pursue their claims in domestic proceedings or in international arbitration,
but may not do both. Here, the Claimants argue that they chose to resort to ICSID
arbitration because their experience in Bolivia and the social and political climate in
the country at the time of the expropriation led them to believe that they could not
obtain an impartial judgment in Bolivia. NMM's right to resort to domestic proceedings
to challenge Decree 27589 is irrelevant for the Claimants’ right to initiate international
arbitration under the BIT.

The Claimants assert that Bolivia attempts to impose an obligation to exhaust local
remedies, which may be a requirement for a claim of denial of justice, but not for one
of expropriation. Moreover, under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, Contracting

154 Counter-Mem., § 107, Tribunal's translation (emphasis in original).
185 Exhs. CD-58 and CD-59.

156 Exh. R-277.

157 Reply, § 201.

158 Reply, J 203.

58

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

States have waived the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies as a precondition
to the submission of disputes to ICSID, unless otherwise stated. Bolivia has made no
reservation under Article 26 and is thus fully bound by it.

c. Analysis

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal should dismiss all of the claims as
premature because the Claimants made no reasonable efforts to obtain the
revocation of the act complained of. The Claimants, in turn, deny that they should
have sought redress in local courts prior to initiating international arbitration.

The Tribunal does not believe that the claims brought before it are premature. Indeed,
the wording of Article X(4) of the Bolivia-Chile BIT is unambiguous:

Once the investor has referred the dispute to the competent court of the
Contracting Party on whose territory the investment was made or to the
arbitral tribunal, the choice of one or other proceeding will be final.

(Tribunal's translation)

This Article contains a fork-in-the-road provision that would have prevented the
Claimants from bringing their case to an arbitral tribunal if they would have first gone
through the local judicial channels.

Moreover, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent's argument that the
alleged expropriatory measure, Decree 27589, was not a "definitive decision of the
State." It was a Presidential Decree, issued by the State's highest executive authority,
it was not, as the Claimants have pointed out, "an act of maladministration by some
lower administrative authority." In addition, its wording is clear: it revoked the
Claimants’ concessions and ordered them to be returned to the State within the next
thirty days. To the Tribunal’s mind, Decree 27589 was definitive enough.

Consequently, the Tribunal does not consider that the claims are premature.
4. Was there an unlawful expropriation of the Claimants’ investments?
a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that the Revocation Decree expropriated their investments in
Bolivia (i), and that this expropriation was unlawful under the BIT (ii).

159 Reply, § 211.

59

162.

163.

164.

i. Decree 27,589 expropriated the Claimants’ investments

The Claimants submit that the Revocation Decree expropriated their investments in
Bolivia. In their Memorial on the Merits, the Claimants argued that the expropriation
was both direct and indirect:'©°

On the one hand, the Revocation Decree revoked NMM's concessions and
ordered NMM to deliver them to the authorities of Potosi within a period of thirty
days. The Claimants see this order as a case of a "formal or obligatory transfer
of title in favour of the host State" in accordance with the definition of direct
expropriation found in particular in Metalclad Corp v. United Mexican States.'®'
In other words, there has been a direct expropriation of NMM’s investments.

As a consequence of the expropriation of the concessions, Quiborax's shares in
NMM became worthless overnight. Although Quiborax is still nominally the
owner of 51% of NMM’s shares, it has lost the economic use and enjoyment of
its investments. Relying on Metalclad,'® Starret Housing Corporation v. Iran, '®
and Tecmed,'* the Claimants argue that the revocation of NMM's concessions
has had the effect of depriving Quiborax of the benefits of its property in a
manner equivalent to an expropriation. As a result, there has been an indirect
expropriation of Quiborax’s investments.

In their Reply and during the hearing, the Claimants focused solely on the direct
expropriation of the NMM’s investments, without seeking to establish the diminution in
value of Quiborax’s shares in NMM.

The Claimants add that, while it is not necessary for the State to benefit from the
expropriation, in this case Bolivia has obtained important benefits from the
confiscation of the concessions, as the related land contains valuable natural
resources such as borates, potassium and lithium."

160 Mem., § 137.

161 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1 (“Metalclad v.
Mexico”), Award of 30 August 2000, § 103.

162 Metalclad v. Mexico, Award of 30 August 2000, § 103.
163 Starrett Housing Corporation v. Islamic Republic of Iran (1983) (“Starrett Housing v. Iran”), 1 |ran-

US CTR 9.

164 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)00/2
(“Tecmed v. Mexico”), Award of 29 May 2003.

165 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 111.

60

165.

166.

167.

168.

The Claimants submit that, despite the fact that the Revocation Decree does not
present itself as an expropriation, it is expropriatory in nature. The Respondent's
attempts to characterize it as an act of revocation do not detract from the
unlawfulness of the deprivation of property suffered by the Claimants.

The Claimants further contend that the expropriatory act was the Revocation Decree,
not the ex post writs of annulment of the concessions. According to the Claimants,
“[t]he ex post annulment of the Concessions constitutes a breach of Bolivia’s treaty
obligations to provide fair and equitable treatment and refrain from taking arbitrary or
discriminatory measures,” but they “are not an expropriation. The Claimants had
already been expropriated, directly and definitively, by DS 27,589 of 23 June
2004."166

Citing Santa Elena’®’ and other authorities, the Claimants argue that the date of the
expropriation is the date on which the owner has been deprived of its property rights
or of their economic use. In this case, the Claimants contend that this occurred when
the concessions were revoked on 23 June 2004, and when they were forced to return
them to the Prefect of Potosi on 23 July 2004. After that date, they never operated
the concessions again. The fact that NMM was able to export accumulated ulexite
until 24 September 2004 does not alter this fact, as NMM’s property right of
previously extracted ulexite is separable from its entitlement to the concessions. '®

The Claimants emphasize that they were victims of a direct expropriation through the
revocation of the concessions by the Revocation Decree; they were not victims of a
creeping expropriation that started on 23 June 2004 and became definitive on 28
October 2004, the date on which the writs of annulment were issued. The Claimants
argue that the concepts of direct expropriation and creeping expropriation are
mutually exclusive, and that there cannot be a “repeat” expropriation once the first
expropriation has deprived the owner of its property. Citing Burlington v. Ecuador,‘
they argue that “there cannot be a creeping expropriation where there is direct
expropriation,” and that “later ‘expropriatory’ measures are irrelevant if they merely
formalize an already existing state of affairs.”'° According to the Claimants, the

166 Reply, ¥ 82.

167 Compania del Desarrollo Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID Case No. ARB/96/1
(“Santa Elena v. Costa Rica’), Final Award of 17 February 2000.

168 Mem., 1 83, 86-95.
169 Burlington v. Ecuador, Decision on Liability of 14 December 2012.
170 Reply, § 105.

61

169.

170.

171.

(a)

172.

revocation of their concessions was definitive, and the subsequent annulment of
these concessions did not alter this state of affairs. 17"

Further, the Respondent cannot increase the burden of proof upon them, so say the
Claimants, by having them defend themselves from two direct expropriations. 17

Finally, the Claimants argue that the writs of annulment (as well as the subsequent
revocation of the Revocation Decree) are part of the Respondent’s defense strategy
in this arbitration.'7°

ii. |The expropriation was unlawful

The Claimants argue that Article VI prohibits all forms of deprivation of property,
except by lawful expropriation under the following conditions: the expropriation must
be (i) for a public purpose or in the national interest; (ii) in accordance with the law;
(iii) non-discriminatory and (iv) accompanied by immediate, adequate and effective
compensation. The Claimants contend that none of these conditions were met.

The Revocation Decree was not issued in accordance with the law and did not serve
the public interest

First, the Claimants assert that the Revocation Decree was not issued in accordance
with the law and did not serve the public interest. Although it is allegedly founded on
Law 2,564, this law was “targeted legislation and the first step in the iter
expropriatorio that culminated in DS. 27,589 and the forced delivery of the
concessions as ordered under the same Presidential Decree.”'* Indeed, according
to the Claimants, Law 2,564 was “tailor made to annul the concessions in area of Rio
Grande,”'”> was “adopted under pressure of political organizations of the Department
of Potosi,” and “was specifically designed to provide the Executive with the power to
annul concessions in the Rio Grande area.”1”

171 Reply, 44 95-105.

172 Reply, 4 85.

173 Reply, 49 85, 106-120.

174 Mem., 4 143.

175 Mem., 4 146.

176 Mem., § 143, Exh. CD-65.

62

173.

174.

175.

176.

The Claimants allege that Article 3 of Law 2,564 “created an extraordinary power,
vested in the Executive, to annul previously constituted concessions.”'”” They argue
that this power to annul was “very broadly defined, under the only condition that the
annulment must take place within a peremptory period of sixty days.”'”

According to the Claimants, Law 2,564 is unconstitutional and violates fundamental
principles of international law, in particular because it overruled established
procedures under administrative law and expanded the causes for annulment in the
Mining Code retroactively. Specifically, the Claimants contend that Law 2,564
violates the principles of non-retroactivity and legal certainty set forth in Articles 33
and 7(a) the 1967 Bolivian Constitution, which was in force when Law 2,564 was

enacted. '”?

More specifically, the Claimants argue that Law 2,564 and any annulments
pronounced under it fail to meet the minimum requirements of due process of law
under both international law and Bolivian law. Citing ADC v. Hungary,'®° the
Claimants submit that “due process of law” requires an actual and substantive legal
procedure, providing for certain basic procedural mechanisms such as advance
notice and a fair hearing, in which the investor has a reasonable chance to claim its
rights and be heard. "8

Bolivian law also requires certain minimum standards of due process. Citing
provisions of the Law of General Administrative Procedure'® and of the Mining
Code, '** the Claimants submit that:

Under Bolivian administrative law, the party affected by the annulment of an
administrative act must be notified of the initiation of any procedure that may
affect their [sic] interests or rights. The administrative act is considered lawful
until established otherwise by a judge. The affected party must be given an
opportunity to present evidence within a certain period of time or even at any
time during the procedure. The administrative decision must state its
reasons and legal cause. The affected party can challenge the
administrative decision before the administrative authorities and in court.

17 Mem., § 147.
178 Mem., § 147.
179 Mem., ¥§ 147-149; Reply, 9§ 129-133; Exh. R-286.

180 ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic Hungary, |CSID Case
No. ARB/03/16 (“ADC v. Hungary’), Award of 2 October 2006.

181 ADC v. Hungary, Award of 2 October 2006, 4 435, cited by the Claimants at Mem., § 149.
182 Exh. R-258.
183 Exh. CD-6.

63

177.

178.

179.

180.

Mining concessions particularly can only be annulled for the limited causes
established under Articles 17 and 18 of the Mining Code. 18

According to the Claimants, none of these procedural requirements was respected by
either Law 2,564 or the Revocation Decree, as neither of these instruments provided
for a notification of the initiation of the audits, an opportunity to present evidence or
participate in the proceedings, or means to challenge the decisions. Nor did Law
2,564 explain what breaches would be serious enough to justify the annulment of the
concessions. '®

The Claimants assert that “they were never informed of any auditing procedures nor
participated in any of them.”'®° They claim that the first time that they were able to
review the four audit reports submitted by the Respondent as evidence was in the
context of this arbitration and, except for the SERGEOMIN-COMIBOL audit, until now
they are not even in a position to confirm that these audits had actually occurred. 8”

In any event, the Claimants argue that the Revocation Decree was not issued in
accordance with Law 2,564. First, the Revocation Decree was issued after the 60-
day period set in Law 2,564. Nor were the audits (with the possible exception of the
SERGEOMIN-COMIBIL audit) finalized within that 60-day period.

Second, although the revocation of the Claimants’ concessions was allegedly based
on the auditing procedures established by Law 2,564, the grounds invoked in the
decree have no support in the auditing reports to which it refers. With the exception of
the legal audit conducted by the Prefect of Potosi, all the audits made general
recommendations that applied to all investigated companies. Specifically:

a. The SERGEOMIN-COMIBOL report'® is a document that describes the
concessions in the Rio Grande Delta and the operating companies in that area
(NMM, SOCOMIRG and Copla) in general terms. It does not specify
environmental damages, it only states that the environmental situation is
deficient because of a lack of control and makes general observations applicable
to all three companies. It makes no recommendations specific to NMM.

184 Reply, § 132 (footnotes omitted).

185 Reply, § 133 (footnotes omitted.
186 Reply, J 135.

187 Reply, J 136.

188 Exh. R-261.

64

b. The report by the Ministry of Sustainable Development'® concludes that all four
investigated companies (Copla, NMM, Tecno Quimica and SOCOMIRG) were
operating without proper environmental documentation. The Claimants assert
that NMM had presented a request for an environmental license in January
2003, but that a decision was still pending one year later.'%° The Claimants
argue that, pursuant to Article 107 of the Environmental Regulations for Mining
Activities, °' NMM was allowed to operate the concession pending the license
request. In any event, NMM submitted an updated Manifiesto Ambiental for its
concession Borateras de Cuevitas in May 2004'% and received its
environmental license on 9 June 2004. 1%?

c. The report provided by the Customs Service’ also referred to all companies in
the area that exploited or exported minerals between 1998-2003, and likewise
did not contain conclusions or recommendations specific to NMM.

d. Finally, the legal audit authored by Ms. Ludy Moscoso (a legal consultant of the
Prefect of Potosi, unrelated to Mr. David Moscoso), recommends the annulment
of thirty requests for concessions, only seven of which were the ones requested
by Mr. David Moscoso. The four concessions granted to NMM are not included
in that list.'%°

181. By contrast, the Revocation Decree refers to an alleged refusal to cooperate with the
Bolivian Revenue and Customs Services and to discrepancies in the amounts of
ulexite declared and cargo volumes transported in breach of provisions of the Tax
Code." The Claimants assert that NMM was never approached by the Customs
Services or the Internal Revenue Service, nor was it requested to provide information
for the purpose of an auditing procedure under Law 2,564. The Claimants also

189 Exh. R-267.
199 Exh. CCD-169.
191 Exh. CD-191.
192 Exh. CD-170.
193 Exh. CD-42.
194 Exh. R-270.

195 The Claimants also emphasize that, contrary to the Respondent's suggestions, neither NMM nor
Mr. Moscoso were notified of the legal audit conducted by the Prefect of Potosi. The signature on the
notice performed by the Superintendence of Mines is not his but Ms. Ludy Moscoso’s. In addition,
nothing in the document indicates that it is a notification of an auditing procedure conducted by the
Prefect of Potosi. The Claimants insist that they had no knowledge of this audit until the Respondent's
presentation in its Counter-Memorial (Reply, § 143).

196 Exh. CD-50.

65

182.

(b)
183.

184.

highlight that the SERGEOMIN-COMIBOL report does not refer to any alleged
discrepancies between exported and declared amounts of ulexite; does not make any
specific recommendation with respect to NMM; and that the Customs Service’s report
does not do so either. The Claimants assert that they were able to review these
reports in order to verify the accuracy of this accusation for the very first time after the
Respondent submitted them as evidence in this arbitration.” The Claimants also
note that the National Railway Company (ENFE) mentioned in the Decree has not
been operative since 1996 and could therefore not possibly have been involved in
any transport of ulexite by NMM.

Finally, the Claimants argue that Bolivia itself recognizes that the revocation of the
concessions was unlawful: the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo acknowledged that “the
Mining Code makes no provisions for the revocation of mining concessions.”'% This is
why President Rodriguez revoked the Revocation Decree in December 2005. '%°

The Revocation Decree discriminated against the Claimants

The Claimants contend that the Revocation Decree and ex post annulment of the
concessions discriminated NMM on the basis of the Chilean nationality of its majority
shareholder, Quiborax, "at a time of resurfacing anti-Chilean sentiments."2°°

Other foreign investors operating within the Salar de Uyuni were spared from the
effects of the Law 2546 and other concessionaires subjected to the same audit
proceedings were not deprived of their investments. While they recognize that "[t]he
auditing procedures in and of themselves did not discriminate against NMM,"2" the
Claimants argue that the Revocation Decree singled out NUM among all other mining
companies similar to NMM, but for NMM’s Chilean connection. Copla and Tecno
Quimica, both Bolivian owned companies, exploited concessions in the Salar de
Uyuni, as did NMM. Both were fined for alleged discrepancies in their customs
declarations, as was NMM. Copla obtained and lost its environmental license, just
like NMM. But only NMM lost its concessions.

197 Tr., Day 1, 39:7-17.
198 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal’s translation.
199 Exh. CD-74.

200 Mem., § 175. The Tribunal has taken into account the Claimants’ position on discrimination
regarding both the expropriation and the FET claims.

201 Reply, § 174; Tr., Day 1, 39:22-23.
202 See COSS, slides 35 and 36; Tr., Day 1, 40:9-41:24.

66

185.

186.

(c)
187.

188.

189.

Contrary to Bolivia’s contention, the Claimants argue that they are not required to
prove that the contested measures were driven by a discriminatory intent.
Nevertheless, the Claimants interpret the Bolivian government's analysis of possible
defense strategies in the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo as sufficient proof of the State's
intent to sacrifice the interests of the Claimants for political gain, showing that the
actions of the central government against the Claimants were motivated by political
calculation in the context of an internal regional conflict.20°

Similarly, they claim that the ex post annulment of the concessions was motivated by
the intent to avoid the application of the Bolivia-Chile BIT and the protection of the
Claimants as Chilean investors.

The Revocation Decree did not offer compensation

Finally, the Claimants note that the Revocation Decree did not provide immediate,
adequate and effective compensation for the revocation of the concessions.
According to the Claimants, "[t]his is not surprising, since DS 27,589 never pretended
to be an expropriation but a ‘sanction’ for alleged breaches of law."204

b. The Respondent's position

The Respondent argues that its actions were legitimate and proportionate responses
to the illegalities committed in relation to the mining concessions. In this context, it
argues that "the revocation and annulment of the mining concessions that were not
obtained in accordance with the laws and regulations of Bolivia cannot qualify as an
expropriation under the Treaty or international law" (i). If the Tribunal were to find
that they do qualify as an expropriation, the Respondent argues that the expropriation
does not violate the BIT or international law (ii).

i. Bolivia's measures were not an expropriation

Bolivia argues that the Revocation Decree was adopted on the basis of Law 2,564
and is not illegal. Both the Revocation Decree and the writs of annulment of the
concessions “are part of the same reaction by the State. They are legitimate acts
adopted in application of Bolivian law in response to the illegalities in the [Claimants’]

203 Exh. CD-68, p. 9.
204 Reply, J 232.
205 Counter-Mem., § 175, Tribunal’s translation.

67

Mining Concessions.” It adds that "merely alleging that Bolivia has 'recognized' the
illegality of DS 27,589 and that, as a consequence, this act is equivalent to an illicit
expropriation of the mining concessions under the Treaty is insufficient to prove that
Decree 27,589 is contrary to Bolivian law and to the BIT."2°7

190. The Respondent contends that the enactment of the Ley Valda was extremely
controversial. In Bolivia's view, it undeservedly benefitted certain private interests
(among others, those of Mr. Moscoso) to the detriment of the general interest of the
Bolivian people. The concessions were thus questioned by Bolivia from the
beginning, as shown by several bills which members introduced in the national
Parliament to protect the Salar.?°° Law 2,564 was issued in this context.

191. The Respondent denies that the Revocation Decree qualifies as an unlawful
expropriation of the Claimants’ investments. Specifically, the Respondent argues:

a. That the Revocation Decree was issued on the basis of Law 2,564 is not in
dispute. However, Law 2,564 is not illegal per se under international law, nor
does it amount to a denial of justice. This law "does not revert, annul or revoke
the concessions. On the contrary, it provides the execution of audits to verify the
existence of illegalities and the adoption of the sanctions legally established.
There is no ‘extraordinary power, vested in the Executive’, but a legislative
mandate to inspect the concessions [...] and, if appropriate, sanction the
illegalities committed."?°°

b. It is not true that the Revocation Decree did not respect the time limit set in Law
2,564. The 60-day time period provided in Law 2,564 applies to the
performance of the audits specified in said law, and is not related to the exercise
of the power to declare the concessions null. It is undisputed that the audits
began within this 60-day time period.

c. The Claimants submit no proof to support their accusation of alleged falsity in
the recitals of the Revocation Decree. Bolivia has proved that (i) Mr. Moscoso
was notified of the audits under Law 2,564;?!° (ii) these audits were carried

208 Counter-Mem., § 150, Tribunal’s translation.

207 Counter-Mem., § 149, Tribunal’s translation (emphasis in original).
208 Counter-Mem., § 151.

209 Counter-Mem., § 158, Tribunal’s translation.

210 Exh. R-266.

68

192.

193.

out,?"" and (iii) the audited companies were allowed to submit documentation
and disclaimers before the audits were concluded.?"? The audits were not a
mere pretext for annulment: other companies were audited under Law 2,564
and, when no significant breaches were found, their concessions were neither
revoked nor annulled.

d. The Claimants’ allegations of lack of due process are unsubstantiated. The
Claimants have not proved that they did not have the opportunity to challenge
the revocation before an impartial judge. Indeed, they recognize that they could
have made use of their rights under Bolivian law. The fact that they did not do
so shows that the claims are premature (see Section VI.A.3 above).

e. Under Bolivian law, the acts of the administration are presumed legal, unless an
express judicial statement to the contrary is made."

After their revocation, Bolivia declared the mining concessions null and void on legal
grounds. The Claimants are wrong when they state that the annulment was irregular
under Bolivian law because the grounds relied upon differ from those specified in the
Mining Code. The fact that the Mining Code provides two grounds for annulment?"
does not exclude the application of the general regime on the annulment of
administrative acts under Bolivian law and in particular the Law on General
Administrative Procedure."° The grounds for which the concessions were annulled
are grounds for the annulment of any administrative act under that law.

The Respondent denies that it has recognized the illegality of the Revocation Decree
by revoking it through Decree 28,527 in 2005. The Respondent contends that Decree
28,527, issued during the government of President Rodriguez, is irrelevant. Decree
28,527 is exclusively based on the Mining Code and does not even mention Law
2,564, the only legal foundation of the Revocation Decree. When Decree 28,527
refers to irreparable legal errors contained in the Revocation Decree, the reference

211 Exhs. R-261 and R-240.

212 Informe Final de Fiscalizacion Aduanera Posterior a la empresa NMM del 18 de febrero de 2005
(Exh. R-270).

213 Art. 4 of Law 2,341 (Exh. R-258), Tribunal's translation.

214 Arts. 66, 17 and 18, Exh. CD-6. In accordance with Article 66 of the Mining Code, concessions can
only be annulled for the causes contained in Articles 17 and 18. Article 17 of the Mining Code prohibits
foreign individuals or companies from taking an economic interest in mining concessions within 50
kilometers of international frontiers. Article 18 prohibits certain public officials and their next of kin to
take any kind of economic interest in mining concessions.

215 Art. 4 g) (Exh. R-258).

69

194.

195.

aims at the inexistence of revocation grounds under the Mining Code; it does not
consider Law 2,564, which has the same rank as the Decree. Thus, Decree 28,527
does not imply the illegality of the Revocation Decree under Bolivian law. Further,
Decree 28,527 confirms the legality of the annulment of the mining concessions.?'°

Finally, the Respondent argues that, irrespective of the legality of the Revocation
Decree, the Claimants’ business model was not viable. Indeed, as a result of the
export ban introduced by Decree 27,590 (the validity of which is not questioned by the
Claimants), the Claimants’ business model would have been substantially affected.?1”

ii. The requirements for an unlawful expropriation are not
met

Bolivia submits that, even if, par impossible, the Tribunal were to conclude that there
was an expropriation in the present case, the Claimants have not established that
such expropriation was contrary to the BIT or international law. Article VI of the BIT
only prohibits unlawful expropriations and the Claimants have not shown that the
requirements for an unlawful expropriation are met. Specifically:

a. First, the revocation and annulment were measures taken for reasons of public
or national interest and in accordance with the law, as required by the BIT. The
objective of these measures was to recover the mining concessions illegally
granted in the area of the fiscal reserve of the Gran Salar de Uyuni to the
detriment of national interests.

b. Contrary to what the Claimants suggest, the unlawfulness of the deprivation of
property is in dispute. Neither the recitals of Decree 28,527 nor the 2004 Inter-
Ministerial Memo can be characterized as Bolivia's recognition of the alleged
illegality of the revocation and annulment of the mining concessions. Like
Decree 28,527, the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo is exclusively based on the
Mining Code and makes no reference to Law 2,564.

c. Second, there was no discrimination.*'® According to Bolivia, the Claimants have
failed to submit compelling evidence to support their claim that the revocation
and annulment of the concessions was motivated by the investor's Chilean

216 Recital No. 2 (Exh. CPM-7).
217 Rejoinder, 73-75.

218 The Tribunal has taken into account Bolivia's position on discrimination regarding both the
expropriation and the FET claim.

70

196.

nationality. In particular, the Claimants have failed to show that other similar
cases were treated in a different way without a reasonable justification.?'° To the
contrary, the record shows that the Claimants were treated in the same manner
as the rest of the mining concessionaires in the Salar de Uyuni. All of the
companies that were granted concessions under the Ley Valda were subject to
the same auditing procedures in accordance with Article 3 of Law 2,564.°2°
Additionally, no distinction was made in Law 2,564 between concessions owned
by Chileans or by other foreigners. Likewise, the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo
contains no indication that the revocation and annulment of the mining
concessions were motivated by a desire to harm the investor by reason of its
nationality. As summarized by the Respondent:

Law 2,564 was applied to all of the concessions granted within the fiscal
reserve area of the Salar de Uyuni. It was not, therefore, a measure
"focused" on the Claimants or motivated by an alleged "anti-Chilean
sentiment." If the revocation and annulment following the audits only affected
the [Claimants’] Mining Concessions that is because their factual
circumstances were unique.?2"

Finally, Bolivia has not breached the obligation to compensate for an
expropriation under the Treaty, for two reasons (already discussed): (i) the
concessions were obtained illegally, and (ii) the Claimants’ claim is premature.

c. Analysis

Art. V1.1 of the BIT provides:

1. Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take measures depriving,
directly or indirectly, an investor of the other Contracting Party of its
investment unless the following conditions are met:

a) the measures are taken for reasons of public purpose or national
interest and in accordance with the law;

b) the measures are not discriminatory;

c) the measures are accompanied by provisions for payment of
immediate, adequate and effective compensation.

219 Saluka Investments BV (Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL (“Saluka v. Czech Republic’),
Partial Award of 17 March 2006, § 313: “State conduct is discriminatory, if (i) similar cases are (ii)
treated differently (iii) and without reasonable justification” (Exh. R-176).

220 Exh. CD-39.

221 Counter-Mem., § 184, Tribunal's translation (emphasis in original).

71

197.

198.

199.

200.

The Claimants contend that the Revocation Decree effected a direct expropriation of
NMM's investments in Bolivia. Although they did not reassert this claim in the latter
part of the proceedings (see paragraphs 162-163 above), they also argued that the
Revocation Decree resulted in an indirect expropriation of Quiborax’s investments in
Bolivia.

According to the Claimants, it is the Revocation Decree that constituted the
expropriatory act because that is the measure that deprived them permanently of their
investments. The subsequent annulment of the concessions is not part of the iter
expropiatorio, say the Claimants. Bolivia could not take a second time what it had
already taken. Nor do the writs of annulment constitute the culmination of a creeping
expropriation, when the Revocation Decree qualified as a direct expropriation. The
Tribunal will therefore focus on whether the Revocation Decree was an expropriatory
measure.

The Tribunal will first address whether the disputed measure qualifies as a direct
expropriation of NMM's investments and/or as an indirect expropriation of Quiborax’s
investments. In the affirmative, it will assess whether such expropriation(s) were
unlawful.

i. Was there a direct expropriation of the Claimants’
investments?

The tribunal in Burlington which the Claimants cite, articulated the standard for a
direct expropriation as follows: “a State measure constitutes expropriation under the
Treaty if (i) the measure deprives the investor of its investment; (ii) the deprivation is
permanent; and (iii) the deprivation finds no justification under the police powers
doctrine.” This Tribunal agrees with this enunciation of the relevant standard.
Tribunals dealing with direct expropriations have emphasized the need for a
deprivation of property which must amount to a forcible taking or transfer to the
State,?*5 and its permanent nature.” Case law also insists on the fact that the taking

222 Burlington v. Ecuador, Decision on Liability, | 506.

23 See also LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine
Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/1 (“LG&E v. Argentina”), Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006,
| 187; Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets,
L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3 (“Enron v. Argentina’), Award of 22 May 2007,
4 243; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (“Sempra v.
Argentina’), Award of 28 September 2007, § 280; National Grid P.L.C. v. Argentina Republic,
UNCITRAL, Award of 3 November 2008, § 145; E/ Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine
Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15 (“El Paso v. Argentina’), Award of 31 October 2011, § 265;
Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/1 (“Roussalis v. Romania’), Award of 1

72

must not qualify as the legitimate exercise of the State’s police powers.2 The
Tribunal will start by reviewing the third component of this standard before addressing
the other two.

(a) Does the deprivation find a justification under the police powers doctrine?

201. The Respondent argues that the Revocation Decree was a legitimate and
proportionate response to the illegalities in the Claimants’ concessions and therefore
cannot qualify as an expropriation. The Respondent claims that "direct expropriation
is a concept, revocation is another concept," and that "Decree 27,589 is clearly an act
of revocation and it can in no way be deemed as an act of direct expropriation."
The Tribunal understands that the Respondent’s argument is that the measures taken
by Bolivia are sanctions imposed upon the Claimants in the legitimate exercise of the
State’s police powers, and as such are not a compensable taking under international
law.

202. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that, if the Revocation Decree was the
legitimate exercise of its sovereign right to sanction violations of the law in its territory,
it would not qualify as a compensable taking. International law has generally
understood that regulatory activity exercised under the so-called “police powers” of
the State is not compensable. In this regard, Comment (g) to §712 of the American
Law Institute’s Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Relations Law provides:

A state is not responsible for loss of property or for other economic
disadvantage resulting from bona fide general taxation, regulation, forfeiture
for crime, or other action of the kind that is commonly accepted as within the
police power of states, if it is not discriminatory, [...] and is not designed to

cause the alien to abandon the property to the state or sell it at a distress
price.227

203. The Reporters’ Note 6 to §712 of the Restatement adds:

 

December 2011, § 327. See also R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles of International Investment
Law (2008), p. 92 (“The difference between a direct and formal expropriation and an indirect
expropriation turns on whether the legal title of the owner is affected by the measure in question.”)

224 Although the requirement of permanence has been addressed mostly in the context of indirect
expropriations, its rationale also applies to direct expropriations. See, e.g., LG&E v. Argentina,
Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006, § 193 (“Generally, the expropriation must be permanent, that
is to say, it cannot have a temporary nature, unless the investment’s successful development depends
on the realization of certain activities at specific moments that may not endure variations”); Fireman's
Fund Insurance Company v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/02/01, Award of 17
July 2006, § 176(d) (holding that one of the elements of an expropriation is that “[t]he taking must be
permanent, and not ephemeral or temporary”).

225 See Section (a) below.
226 Tr., Day 1, 133:13-14 and 135:6-7; ROSS, slide 54.
227 Restatement (Third) of The Foreign Relations Law (1986), § 712(g).

73

“It is often necessary to determine, in the light of all the circumstances,
whether an action by a state constitutes a taking and requires compensation
under international law, or is a police power regulation or tax that does not
give rise to an obligation to compensate, even though a foreign national
suffers loss as a consequence.

204. The tribunal in Tecmed confirmed this approach by holding that

[tlhe principle that the State’s exercise of its sovereign powers within the
framework of its police power may cause economic damage to those subject
to its powers as administrator without entitling them to any compensation
whatsoever is undisputable.??6
205. Similarly, the tribunal in CME v. Czech Republic noted that “deprivation of property
and/or rights must be distinguished from ordinary measures of the State and its
agencies in proper execution of the law. Regulatory measures are common in all
types of legal and economic systems in order to avoid use of private property contrary
to the general welfare of the (host) State.””9

206. This is particularly true in the case of rights of exploitation (such as licenses or
concessions) that depend on the fulfillment of certain requirements by the foreign
investor. If a State cancels a license or a concession because the investor has not
fulfilled the necessary legal requirements to maintain that license or concession, or
has breached the relevant laws and regulations that are sanctioned by the loss of
those rights, such cancellation cannot be considered to be a taking by the State.7°°

207. The Tribunal must thus consider whether, in light of all the circumstances, the
Revocation Decree was a legitimate cancellation of the Claimants’ concessions in the
exercise of Bolivia’s sovereign power to sanction violations of Bolivian law and is
therefore not a compensable taking or whether it is a veritable taking disguised as the
exercise of the State’s police powers. This will depend on whether (i) the Revocation
Decree is based on actual violations of Bolivian law by the Claimants; (ii) whether
those violations of Bolivian law are sanctioned with the termination of the concessions

228 Tecmed v. Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003, 4119.

229 CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 13 September 2001,
603.

230 See, e.g., Genin v. Estonia, Award of 25 June 2001, § 348-373 (holding that the cancellation of a
banking license resulting from the legitimate exercise of the State's regulatory and supervisory
functions cannot be regarded as a breach of the relevant treaty or international law). See also
Swisslion DOO Skopje v. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/16,
Award of 6 July 2012, §§ 312-314 (holding that a court's confirmation that a contract had been
legitimately terminated due to non-compliance by the investor was not an expropriation: “The
internationally lawful termination of a contract between a State entity and an investor cannot be
equated to an expropriation of contractual rights simply because the investor's rights have been
terminated [...]”).

74

(whether by revocation, cancellation, annulment or otherwise), and (iii) whether the
revocation was carried out in accordance with due process."

208. The Revocation Decree issued by the President of Bolivia, Mr. Carlos Mesa, reads as
follows:

WHEREAS:

Mining Company Non Metallic Minerales [sic] S.A., which operates the
mining concessions object of the present Supreme Decree, has
systematically refused to provide information both to the National Tax
Service and to the National Customs, thus preventing the audits mandated
by Law No. 2,564 of 9 December 2003.

It has been shown that the exports of ulexite minerals declared by Mining
Company Non Metallic Minerales [sic] S.A. do not match the cargo volumes
transported by the National Railways Company — ENFE, as shown in the
audit performed by SERGEOMIN and COMIBOL of February 2004 and the
Preliminary Report of the Revenue Service.

These facts evidence economic damage to the State, contravening, in
addition, provisions of the Tax Code currently in force, in compliance with
the provisions of the Law of the Public Reserve of the Gran Salar de Uyuni.

THE CABINET COUNCIL
DECREES:

SOLE ARTICLE.- |. The revocation of the constitutive resolutions and loss
of the mining concessions Cancha |, Dofia Juanita, Tete, Borateras de
Cuevitas, Basilea, Inglaterra, Don David, Sur, Pococho, La Negra, Cancha
ll, located at the Rio Grande Delta of the Gran Salar de Uyuni, Nor Lipez
Province of the Region of Potosi, is hereby ordered.

Il. Mining Company Non Metallic Minerales [sic] S.A., which operates the
abovementioned concessions, is granted a period of thirty days to physically
hand over the concessions to the Prefecture of the Potosi Region, without
prejudice to the criminal and civil actions that may be appropriate.

Ill. All provisions contrary to the present Supreme Decree are abrogated and
derogated.?32

231 Metalclad v. Mexico, Award of 30 August 2000, {| 106-107 (“[T]he Municipality's denial of the
construction permit without any basis in the proposed physical construction or any defect in the site,
and extended by its subsequent administrative and judicial actions regarding the Convenio, effectively
and unlawfully prevented the Claimant's operation of the landfill. These measures, taken together with
the representations of the Mexican federal government, on which Metalclad relied, and the absence of
a timely, orderly or substantive basis for the denial by the Municipality of the local construction permit,
amount to an indirect expropriation”).

282 Exh. CD-50, Tribunal's translation (see note 38 for Spanish original).

75

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

Accordingly, the Revocation Decree is grounded on two alleged violations:

a. A systematic refusal to provide information to the National Tax Service and the
National Customs Service, thus preventing the audits mandated by Law 2,564 of
9 December 2003;

b. Discrepancies in the amount of ulexite declared and actually transported in
violation of the Tax Code.

With respect to (a), as discussed further below, the record shows that the Claimants
were not notified and thus could not participate in the audits mandated by Law 2,564
before the revocation. There is one document that suggests that the Claimants
participated in the customs audit, but this was six months after the revocation. The
first ground invoked by the Revocation Decree is therefore not supported by the facts.

With respect to (b), neither the SERGEOMIN-COMIBOL report nor the report of the
Customs Service concluded that there were discrepancies in the amount of ulexite
declared and exported. Hence, the second ground invoked by the Revocation
Decree is not supported by the facts either.

Even if NMM had failed to provide information to the tax and customs services and
even if there had been discrepancies in the amounts of ulexite declared and exported,
the Respondent has not directed the Tribunal to a single provision of Bolivian law that
could justify the revocation of the concessions on such grounds.

It is true that the Respondent has relied on Law 2,564. However, such reliance
appears misconceived. As the Respondent itself acknowledges, Law 2,564 “requires
the performance of audits to verify the existence of illegalities and apply the sanctions
provided by the law. There is no ‘extraordinary power, vested in the Executive’, but a
legislative mandate to inspect the concessions [...] and, if appropriate, sanction any
illegalities committed."*° The text of Article 3 of Law 2,564 confirms this
understanding:

233 Counter-Mem., § 158., Tribunal’s translation (emphasis added by the Tribunal). The original
Spanish text reads as follows: “El articulo 3 de la Ley 2564 no revierte, anula 0 revoca concesiones.
Por el contrario, prevé la realizacion de auditorias para verificar la existencia de ilegalidades y adoptar
las sanciones previstas legalmente. No se trata de un “extraordinary power, vested in the Executive,”
sino de un mandato legislativo para fiscalizar las concesiones (cuya regularidad fue, de hecho,
cuestionada desde su origen) y, en su caso, sancionar las ilegalidades cometidas.” Footnotes omitted.

76

The Executive Power is authorized, after the evaluation of audits, technical,
legal, economic and financial, tax, social and labor legislation and
environmental and ecological preservation, to declare null the
concessionaires' mining rights that are liable to sanctions provided by the
Laws and regulations in force, within a deadline of 60 days calculated
from the enactment of this Law, with the subsequent recovery of such
concessions and non-metallic resources originally belonging to the State.25+

Or, in the original Spanish text:

214.

215.

216.

Facultase al Poder Ejecutivo, luego de la evaluacién de auditorias, técnica,

juridico legal, econdmico financiera, regalitario — tributaria, legislacion

sociolaboral y preservacién ecolégica y medioambiental, a declarar la

nulidad de los derechos concesionarios mineros que, sean pasibles a

sanciones establecidas por las Leyes y disposiciones vigentes, en un

plazo perentorio de 60 dias a computar a partir de la promulgacion de la

presente Ley, con la consiguiente recuperacién de tales concesiones y

recursos no metalicos a propiedad originaria del Estado.
In the Tribunal’s understanding, Law 2,564 did not provide a blanket authorization to
the Executive to annul concessions if the audits verified the existence of any
breaches of Bolivian law. It only allowed the Executive to annul concessions if the
audits established breaches that were sanctioned by nullity pursuant to the laws and
regulations in force. As the Revocation Decree determines the termination of the
concessions for alleged violations of Bolivian law that do not appear to be sanctioned
with termination under that law (at least the Respondent has not proved that this was
the case), the Tribunal cannot but conclude that the Revocation Decree finds no
justification in Bolivian law.

Bolivian government officials appear to have shared this view. For instance, a report
issued by Ministry of Mining made the following comment on the audits mandated by
Law 2,564:

It is necessary to clarify that all of the conclusions and recommendations

reached by the abovementioned audits, will identify breaches that might

have been committed by the mining concessionaires of the area in question,

reparable breaches that do not necessarily identify grounds to annul the

concessions.?°5
The government that took power after the issuance of the Revocation Decree also
concluded that the latter did not comply with Bolivian law, although on more formal
grounds. Indeed, on 16 December 2005, President Rodriguez issued Supreme
Decree 28,527, which abrogated the Revocation Decree as a result of “irreparable

234 Exh. CD-39, Tribunal's translation (emphasis added by the Tribunal).
235 Exh. CD-65, Tribunal's translation.

77

217.

218.

219.

220.

legal defects,” namely the fact that the Mining Code did not provide for the
“revocation” of mining concessions, but rather their caducidad or annulment.?°°

Even if Law 2,564 did intend to provide a blanket authorization, the revocation of the
concessions on the grounds cited in the Revocation Decree appears unjustified on
the facts, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 210 and 211 above.

In addition, although the Tribunal does not attach decisive weight to this circumstance
because of its formalistic nature, it notes that the Revocation Decree did not meet the
time limit set in Law 2,564. Article 3 of Law 2,564 provided that the Executive was
authorized to annul the concessions “within a deadline of 60 days calculated from the
enactment of this Law” (“en un plazo perentorio de 60 dias a computar a partir de la
promulgacién de la presente Ley’). It is undisputed that the Revocation Decree was
issued on 23 July 2004, more than 60 days from the enactment of Law 2,564 on 9
December 2003.

Other than the tax and customs violations allegedly identified in the audits, which the
Tribunal has addressed above, the Respondent has also submitted that the illegalities
brought to light in the audits include breaches in matters of industrial safety,
environment and labor, as well as a lack of mining certificates.7°” Bolivia relies on the
technical audit report to support its allegation.”*® Having reviewed this report, the
Tribunal concludes that the irregularities identified therein were minor breaches of
law. Indeed, Bolivia has not pointed to any legislative or regulatory provision that
would trigger the termination of concessions on these grounds. Thus, to the extent
relevant at all in light of the reasons stated in the Revocation Decree,”% the Tribunal
finds that they could not have served as basis for the revocation of the concessions.

In addition, although the Claimants acknowledge that on the date of the revocation
none of the concessions had environmental licenses, Bolivia has not established that
a lack of environmental licenses would warrant the termination of the concessions.
The concession of Borateras de Cuevitas had previously been granted an

236 Exh. CD-74, see § 34 above. (“[The Revocation Decree] suffers from irreparable legal defects
because the Mining Code does not provide in any of its legal provisions for the revocation of mining
concessions, but provides rather for the legal figures of caducidad or annulment of mining concessions
after an administrative proceeding under the competence and jurisdiction of the Superintendence of
Mines,” Tribunal's translation)).

237 Rejoinder, § 58.

238 Exh. R-261.

239 The Tribunal notes that these non-compliances were not invoked in the Revocation Decree.

78

environmental license, but this license was revoked by an administrative resolution
one day before the Revocation Decree was enacted;° that revocation seemed to
respond to pressure of the local community rather than breaches of the law by
NMM.4t

221. Finally, the Tribunal finds that the revocation of the Claimants’ concessions did not
comply with minimum standards of due process, whether under international law or
Bolivian law. The standard of due process under international law, and more
specifically in the expropriation context, has been summarized in ADC v. Hungary as
demanding "an actual and substantive legal procedure for a foreign investor to raise

its claims against the depriving actions already taken or about to be taken against
it."242

222. Bolivian law also establishes certain basic procedural guarantees that must be
respected in judicial and administrative proceedings. In particular, Article 16 of the
Law on General Administrative Procedure“? establishes the right (i) to participate in
an ongoing proceeding whenever the individual's legitimate interests are concerned;
(ii) to be informed of the status of a proceeding to which he or she is a party; (iii) to
submit allegations and evidence; (iv) to receive a reasoned response to any request
or application; (v) to demand that the terms and time limits of the proceedings be
respected; and (vi) to be treated with dignity, respect, equality and without
discrimination.2*

240 Exh. CD-173.
241 See Section iii.(b) below.
242 ADC v. Hungary, Award of 2 October 2006, § 435. The tribunal in ADC continues explaining:

Some basic legal mechanisms, such as reasonable advance notice, a fair
hearing and an unbiased and impartial adjudicator to assess the actions in
dispute, are expected to be readily available and accessible to the investor
to make such legal procedure meaningful. In general, the legal procedure
must be of a nature to grant an affected investor a reasonable chance within
a reasonable time to claim its legitimate rights and have its claims heard.

See also loannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, |CSID Case No. ARB/05/18, Award of 3 March 2010,
9395, 396, 404). See also AIG Capital Partners, Inc. and CJSC Tema Real Estate Company v.
Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/6, Award of 7 October 2003, § 10.5.1
(“Expropriation of alien property is not itself contrary to international law provided certain conditions
are met, and perhaps the most clearly established condition is that expropriation must not be arbitrary
(i.@., must not be contrary to “the due process of law”) and must be based on the application of duly
adopted laws. [...] The requirement that expropriation should be in a non-discriminatory manner (i.e.,
as between alien and national) and in accordance with due process is also widely accepted, and is
relevant to the assessment whether the expropriation was or was not arbitrary and in furtherance of
the public interest.”).

243 Exh. R-258.
244 See also Arts. 4.g, 33, 46, 47, 54 and 70.

79

223.

224.

225.

The auditing procedures that were the basis for the Revocation Decree failed many of
these requirements. Although the final report of the customs authorities (/nforme
Final de Fiscalizacién Aduanera Posterior a la empresa Non Metallic Minerals S.A. of
18 February 20055) suggests that NMM was notified of and participated in the
customs audit, the report states that NMM was notified of the initiation of the audit on
22 June 2004 (i.e., the day before the concessions were revoked).”4° The Claimants
have denied that this notification took place, but even if it had, it would not have
allowed the Claimants to participate in the audit prior to the revocation of the
concessions. The final report also suggests that NMM was notified of the issuance of
the Preliminary Report on 28 December 2004,74” (six months after NMM's
concessions were revoked), and that NMM’s defense memorial ("memorial de
descargos"*“*) was submitted on 28 January 2005, long after the concessions were
revoked. As a result, NMM’s alleged notification and participation in the audit does not
show that due process was respected in the revocation of the concessions.

There is no other evidence in the record showing that the Claimants were notified of
the audits. Relying on Exh. R-266, the Respondent, claims that Mr. David Moscoso
was notified of the audits under Law 2,564. Having examined the notification
contained in Exh. R-266, the Tribunal observes that it is a certificate issued by the
Superintendence of Mines of Tupiza-Tarija that indicates that certain copies have
been handed over to a Ms. Ludy Moscoso, a consultant of the Prefect of Potosi
(unrelated to Mr. David Moscoso). There is no indication that the copies are meant
for an audit, nor is the document signed by any person related to NUM.

The record also shows that the Claimants unsuccessfully attempted to obtain
information on the audits. Exh. CD-56 contains several letters between mid-June to
end of July 2004 from NMM to Corporacién Minera de Bolivia (COMIBOL), Servicio
Geoldégico Minero (SERGEOMIN), Empresa Nacional de Ferrocarriles (ENFE) and
the National Customs of Bolivia. In those letters, NMM refers to the Revocation
Decree and the audits carried out under Law 2,564 and requests that the reports be
sent to NMM together with the legalized copies of the notifications informing NMM of
the audits and requesting information.*° Apart from a reply from COMIBOL directing

245 Exh. R-270, pp. 56 et seq.

246 Exh. R-270, p. 56.

247 Exh. R-270, p. 58.

248 Exh. R-270, p. 58.

249 Exhs. CD-56-A, B, C, D and I.

80

226.

227.

(b)

228.

229.

230.

231.

NMM to the Vice Ministry of Mining§° (from which the record contains no answer)
there does not appear to have been any response to NMM's reiterated requests.

Once the audits were concluded, the Claimants contend that they were not given the
opportunity to challenge their findings due to the fact that "Law 2,564 does not
provide for any kind of appeal against the outcome of the audits or the annulment
decision."*5' As the Respondent has noted, Bolivian law provides for several
constitutional or administrative actions? that the Claimants may have attempted.
That being said, the availability of domestic actions to challenge the Revocation
Decree does not change the Tribunal’s conclusion that the revocation did not comply
with due process, the determinative factors being that the Claimants were not heard
during the audits and that the revocation lacked valid reasons.

As a result, the Tribunal finds that the Revocation Decree was not a legitimate
exercise of Bolivia's police powers. It will therefore proceed to review whether the
remaining requirements for a direct expropriation are fulfilled, namely the Claimants
are deprived of their investment (b), and whether the deprivation was permanent (c).

Did the Revocation Decree deprive NMM of its investment?

As noted above, for a direct expropriation to occur, there must be a forcible taking or
transfer of title to the State that deprives the investor of its investment.

Here, it is undisputed that the Revocation Decree had the effect of transferring the
title of NMM’s mining concessions to the State. The Decree clearly orders (“dispone”)
the revocation of the constitutive resolutions of NMM’s mining concessions, as well as
their loss (“pérdida”), directing NMM to physically hand over the concessions to the
Prefecture of the Potosi Region within thirty days.

In compliance with this clear order, issued by the President of Bolivia himself, it is
undisputed that NMM returned its concessions to Bolivia on 23 July 2004. In the
Tribunal’s view, this amounts to a deprivation of NMM’s investments in Bolivia.

The fact that NMM exported ulexite that had previously been extracted until 23
September 2004 does not change this conclusion. What gave value to the

250 Exh. CD-56-H.
251 Reply, J 133.

252 ROSS, slide 30.
253 See § 200 above.

81

232.

(c)

233.

234.

investment were the concessions; without them, the investment was lost in its
entirety. The fact that some product of the investment was still sold may reduce the
damage, but cannot undo the economic deprivation of the investment.

Nor does the introduction of an export ban by Decree 27,590 on the day of the
Revocation Decree change the fact of the deprivation. That export ban, which came
into force 90 days after its enactment (i.e, on 21 September 2004), did indeed
prohibit exports of non metallic minerals, such as unprocessed boron and
unprocessed or partly processed ulexite.25* However, Decree 27,590 was revoked in
October 2004 through Decree 27,799, as a result of which the export ban was
lifted.255 The Respondent argued during the hearing that Decree 27,799 was in turn
revoked in 2008, but did not submit evidence to support this assertion.2° In any
event, the Claimants have shown that there were significant exports of ulexite from
Bolivia to Brazil between 2003 and 2012,75” which shows that there was no effective
export ban in place during those years.

Was the deprivation permanent?

Finally, the Tribunal must determine if the deprivation had permanent effects. It is
undisputed that, after NMM returned the concessions to Bolivia on 23 July 2004, it
never again exploited those concessions. Indeed, subsequent acts by Bolivia
confirmed that deprivation. On 28 October 2004, the concessions that had already
been “revoked” were also “annulled.” Decree 28,527, which revoked the revocation
about a year and a half thereafter in December 2005, did not undo the deprivation.
To the contrary, Decree 28,527 expressly recognized that the concessions were
annulled and the writs of annulment were definitive.7°

Hence, the date on which NMM was deprived of the economic benefits of its
concessions was 23 July 2004. In the Tribunal’s view, this is the date of the
expropriation, as this was the date on which due to the governmental interference the
legal and economic use of the concessions was definitively lost.

254 Articles 1 and 2, Exh. CD-51.
285 Exh. CD-195.

256 Tr., Day 1, 12-15.

287 Exh. CD-196.

258 Exh. CD-74 (“Considerando [...] Que las Resoluciones Administrativas dictadas por la
Superintendencia de Minas anulan las resoluciones constitutivas de las concesiones mineras de la
Empresa Non Metallic Minerals S.A. y en la actualidad se encuentran ejecutoriadas y causan
estado”).

82

235.

236.

237.

ii. Was there an indirect expropriation of Quiborax’s
investment?

In their Memorial, the Claimants argued that, as a consequence of the expropriation
of NMM’s concessions, Quiborax's shares in NMM became worthless overnight. As a
result, although Quiborax is still nominally the owner of approximately 51% of NMM’s
shares, it has lost the economic use and enjoyment of its investments. For the
Claimants, this had the effect of depriving Quiborax of its property in a manner
equivalent to an expropriation, thus constituting an indirect expropriation.*°°

The Claimants did not repeat this claim in their Reply or during the hearing. As a
result of this silence, the Respondent argued that the Claimants had not advanced a
claim for indirect expropriation. The Claimants did not rebut these assertions;
neither did they expressly withdraw their indirect expropriation claim. At the hearing,
they mentioned that their written submissions were reiterated even if not expressly
repeated orally." The Tribunal thus understands that the claim for indirect
expropriation has not been withdrawn and will address it here.

It is undisputed that expropriation does not need refer solely to the overt taking of a
physical asset or formal transfer of title (direct expropriation). Measures other than
actual takings or formal transfers of title may amount to indirect expropriation or
measures tantamount to expropriation. This is expressly recognized in Article VI of
the BIT and has been accepted by numerous tribunals.

For an indirect expropriation to exist, it is generally accepted that the State measure
must have the effect of substantially depriving the investor of the economic value of
its investment. For instance, the Pope & Talbot tribunal considered “whether [the
State’s] interference is sufficiently restrictive to support a conclusion that the property
has been ‘taken’ from its owner,” adding that “under international law, expropriation
requires a ‘substantial deprivation.” Similarly, according to the first Occidental

259 Mem., 4] 137-141.
260 Rejoinder, 71-72; Tr., Day 1, 131-132; Tr., Day 3, 88.
261 Tr., Day 3, 51.

262 See, e.g., Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA, 6 \ran-US CTR, Award of 22 June
1984, at 225; Starrett Housing v. Iran, 16 lran-US CTR, Award of 14 August 1987, p. 154; Metalclad v.
Mexico, Award of 30 August 2000, § 103; Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. The United States of
America, UNCITRAL, Award of 8 June 2009, § 355; Tecmed v. Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003, {{
113-114.

263 Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Interim Award of 26 June 2000, §

102.

83

240.

tribunal, the question is whether there has been a “substantial deprivation” of “the use
of reasonably expected economic benefit of the investment.”?* In addition, as noted
in Burlington, the deprivation must be permanent and must not be justified by the
police powers doctrine.

Quiborax qualifying as an investor holding an investment under the BIT,?°° the
question is thus whether the revocation of the concessions had the effect of
substantially depriving Quiborax of the value of its investment in Bolivia, i.e., of its
shares in NMM. Although the Claimants have not submitted proof of that diminution
in value, the Tribunal agrees that, in the absence of the concessions, which were
NMM's raison d’étre, the Claimants’ investment in NMM was virtually worthless.
Indeed, NMM has been repeatedly described by the Claimants as Quiborax's
investment vehicle,2°7 and appears to have no other business than the
concessions.” The Tribunal has already determined that this deprivation was
permanent and was not justified by the police powers doctrine. Accordingly, the
Tribunal finds that the revocation of the concessions indirectly expropriated Quiborax
of the value of its investments.

iii. Was the expropriation unlawful under the BIT?

Having concluded that Bolivia expropriated the NMM’s investment, the Tribunal will
now determine whether the expropriation complied with the requirements of Article
IV(1) of the BIT or, in other words, whether it was a lawful or an unlawful
expropriation. Article IV(1) of the BIT provides:

Expropriation and compensation

1. Neither of the Contracting Parties will take measures that deprive, directly
or indirectly, an investor of the other Contracting Party of its investment
unless the following conditions are met:

a. the measures are adopted for the public or national interest and in
accordance with the law;

264 Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador (“Occidental v.
Ecuador |”), LCIA Case No. UN3467, Award of 1 July 2004, § 89.

265 Burlington v. Ecuador, Decision on Liability, {] 471-473.
266 Decision on Jurisdiction, J 192, 196, 210, 237, 282.
287 Mem., i 1, 67, 106, 109.

268 See NMM's financial statements for the years 2003 and 2004 (Exh. NCI-62), which show that
virtually all of NMM's assets related to the exploitation of the concessions.

84

241.

242.

(a)

243.

244.

245.

b. the measures are not discriminatory;

c. the measures are accompanied by provisions for the payment of an
immediate, sufficient and effective compensation.

(Tribunal's translation)
Or, in the original Spanish text:
Expropiacién y compensacién

1. Ninguna de las Partes Contratantes adoptaraé medidas que priven,
directa o indirectamente, a un inversionista de la otra Parte Contratante, de
su inversion, a menos que se cumplan los siguientes requisitos:

a. las medidas se adopten por causa de utilidad publica o interés nacional
y de conformidad con la ley;

b. las medidas no sean discriminatorias;

c. las medidas vayan acompafadas de disposiciones para el pago de una
compensacion inmediata, suficiente y efectiva.

Accordingly, the Tribunal will assess whether the expropriation served the public or
national interest and was in accordance with the law (a), whether the measure
discriminated against NMM (b), and whether the expropriation was accompanied by
the appropriate compensation (c). The Tribunal will then reach its conclusion on the
legality of the expropriation (d).

Did the expropriatory measure serve the public or national interest? Was it in
accordance with the law?

The Tribunal has found that the Revocation Decree was not a legitimate exercise of
Bolivia's police powers. That does not necessarily prevent the possibility that the
motive for which it was issued was in the public or national interest.

Bolivia argues that the revocation and annulment of the concessions were measures
adopted “for the public or national interest and in accordance with the law,” as
required by the BIT. Specifically, the purpose of these measures (which were in
accordance with Bolivian law) was to recover concessions granted illegally in the
Gran Salar de Uyuni Fiscal Reserve.”8° They were based on the national interest of
the State to protect the Gran Salar de Uyuni Fiscal Reserve.?”°

The Tribunal defers to Bolivia’s sovereign right to determine what is in the national
and public interest. It accepts that Bolivia may have had a legitimate interest in

269 Counter-Mem., § 182, Tribunal’s translation.
270 Counter Mem., § 98.

85

protecting the Gran Salar de Uyuni Fiscal Reserve. That being said, the Tribunal has
already determined that the revocation was not carried out in accordance with
Bolivian law, whether as a matter of substance or procedure (see Section (i) above).
Hence, even if the expropriation was in the national or public interest, it was not
carried out in accordance with the law, as Article IV of the BIT requires. The Tribunal
cannot but conclude that the expropriation was unlawful in this regard.

(b) Was the expropriatory measure discriminatory?

246. The Claimants allege that the Revocation Decree discriminated NMM on the basis of
the Chilean nationality of its majority shareholder, Quiborax. Bolivia claims that the
Revocation Decree was not discriminatory and describes it as a fair, reasonable and
proportional act, stressing that there is "no evidence to the contrary."27!

247. To determine whether the Revocation Decree discriminated against NMM, the
Tribunal will apply the three-pronged test formulated in Saluka, cited by the
Respondent: "State conduct is discriminatory, if (i) similar cases are (ii) treated
differently (iii) and without reasonable justification."*” As to the third element, the
Tribunal agrees with Parkerings that there are situations that may justify differentiated
treatment, a matter to be assessed under the specific circumstances of each case.?”

271 ROSS, slide 59; Tr., Day 1, 138:12-139:6.

272 Saluka v. Czech Republic, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, § 313. Other tribunals (whether
dealing with the prohibition of discriminatory treatment, or with national treatment provisions, which
prohibit nationality-based discrimination), have applied a similar standard. See, e.g., Joseph C.
Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18 (“Lemire v. Ukraine”), Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability of 21 January 2010, § 261 (footnotes omitted) (“Discrimination, in the words of pertinent
precedents, requires more than different treatment. To amount to discrimination, a case must be
treated differently from similar cases without justification; a measure must be “discriminatory and
expose[s] the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice”; or a measure must “target[ed] [sic] Claimant's
investments specifically as foreign investments”); Champion Trading Company and Ameritrade
International, Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/9, Award of 27 October 2006,
4 130 (“The national treatment obligation does not generally prohibit a State from adopting measures
that constitute a difference in treatment. The obligation only prohibits a State from taking measures
resulting in different treatment in like circumstances”); Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case
No. ARB/04/01 (“Total v. Argentina”), Decision on Liability of 27 December 2010, § 344 (‘This
standard requires, as a rule, a comparison between the treatment of different investments, usually
within a given sector, of different national origin or ownership [...] The purpose is to ascertain whether
the protected investments have been treated worse without any justification, specifically because of
their foreign nationality. The similarity of the investments compared and of their operations is a
precondition for a fruitful comparison.”).

273 Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award of 11
September 2007, § 368 (“Discrimination is to be ascertained by looking at the circumstances of the
individual cases. Discrimination involves either issues of law, such as legislation affording different
treatments in function of citizenship, or issues of fact where a State unduly treats differently investors
who are in similar circumstances. Whether discrimination is objectionable does not in the opinion of
this Tribunal depend on subjective requirements such as the bad faith or the malicious intent of the
State: at least, Article IV of the Treaty does not include such requirements. However, to violate

86

248.

249.

In this case, other mining companies operating in the Rio Grande Delta were audited
under Law 2,564. Other mining companies, such as Copla and Tecno Quimica,
were fined for alleged errors in their export declarations, like NMM.?’4 Additionally,
Copla obtained and lost its environmental license at the same time as NMM.
However, NMM was the only one that lost its concessions. The record thus shows
that NMM received different treatment than other companies in like circumstances.

In the Tribunal’s view, there was no reasonable justification in Bolivian law for this
different treatment. This is confirmed by compelling evidence on record of a
discriminatory intent showing, in particular, that the Revocation Decree targeted NVM
because of the Chilean nationality of its main shareholder, Quiborax.

It is undisputed that the promulgation of the Ley Valda in April 1998 was
controversial. It is also clear from the record that the local population did not welcome
concessions being granted in an area that had previously been a fiscal reserve.
Although there was public opposition to all concessions, the focus of the hostility was
on NMM as a consequence of the Chilean nationality of its main shareholder.

The public opposition escalated significantly when the Claimants were granted an
environmental license on 9 June 2004 to operate the concession "Borateras de
Cuevitas." The press articles included in the record bear witness to the upheaval
caused by this license, which continued to mount until the issuance of the Revocation
Decree in 23 June 2004.?’5 In particular:

a. Comcipo (Comité Civico Potosinista) had always been one of the more vocal
critics of the Ley Valda and of the presence of Chilean companies operating in
the Salar de Uyuni.?”° According to the press, as a reaction to the issuance of
the environmental license, it declared "a war to death with the national
authorities that make viable the exploitation of the Bolivians' natural resources

 

international law, discrimination must be unreasonable or lacking proportionality, for instance, it must
be inapposite or excessive to achieve an otherwise legitimate objective of the State. An objective
justification may justify differentiated treatments of similar cases. It would be necessary, in each case,
to evaluate the exact circumstances and the context.”).

274 Exhs. R-268, R-269 and R-270.
275 Exhs. CD-43, CD-45, CD-46, CD-47, CD-48, CD-49, CD-52 and CD-55.
276 Exhs. R-241 and R-242.

87

251.

252.

253.

for the benefit of the Chileans"*”” and demanded that an end be put to "the
surrender of the Salar de Uyuni to Chilean interests."?”°

b. During several days in mid-June 2004, riots, hunger strikes and the blockade of
roads and railways were the public's response to the perception that "David
Moscoso and his Chilean partners" were looting the Salar while the State did
nothing to prevent this.2”° The Prefect of Potosi publicly endorsed these protests
and was quoted as questioning the government's benevolence towards "Chilean
capital."26°

c. Media also reported that the region was declared in state of emergency.”°'

On 23 June 2004, following the enactment of the Revocation Decree and the Export
Ban Decree, the press reported that "the pressure has taken effect."*°? The
revocation of the concessions was celebrated as an "historical measure" by which the
national government "ended the looting of ulexite that up to that date was benefiting
the Chileans."28° Wilson Magne, a member of the Bolivian Parliament, was quoted as
saying that "the Potosino people achieved an overwhelming victory against the looting
of our sources of wealth by Chilean companies."?64

Finally, the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo confirms that the Revocation Decree "was
enacted because of the social and political pressure from the authorities in Potosi
and, in particular, from the town of Uyuni."285

As stated above (see Section (a)), the Tribunal has no reason to doubt that Bolivia
was motivated by the public or national interest. Yet, as stated in Corn Products v.
Mexico "[djiscrimination does not cease to be discrimination, nor to attract the
international liability stemming therefrom, because it is undertaken to achieve a

277 Exh. CD-43, Tribunal's translation.
278 Exh. CD-47, Tribunal's translation.
279 See, e.g., Exhs. CD-43 and CD-45.
280 Exh. CD-45.

281 Exh. CD-45.

282 Exh. CD-49.

283 Exh. CD-55, Tribunal's translation.
284 Exh. CD-55, Tribunal's translation.
285 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal's translation.

88

254.

255.

256.

257.

laudable goal or because the achievement of that goal can be described as
necessary."86

The Tribunal thus finds that the expropriation was discriminatory and thus failed to
meet the condition of non-discrimination for a lawful expropriation.

iv. Was the expropriatory measure without compensation?

It is undisputed that Bolivia neither paid nor offered compensation to NMM for the
revocation of its mining concessions. The Respondent asserts that no compensation
was due because there was no expropriation. However, the Tribunal has found that
NMM was indeed expropriated of its investment in Bolivia. Accordingly, the
expropriation also fails to meet this requirement for legality.

v. Conclusion

As a consequence, the Tribunal concludes that NMM and Quiborax were unlawfully
expropriated of their investments by the Respondent.

B. Fair and equitable treatment; impairment of investment
1. The Claimants' position

The Claimants submit that Bolivia breached its obligation to ensure fair and equitable
treatment (FET) to their investment in Bolivia set out in Article IV.1 of the Bolivia-Chile
BIT. They also claim that Bolivia breached Article III(2) of the BIT by impairing the
Claimants’ investments through unreasonable or discriminatory measures ("medidas
injustificadas o discriminatorias").?"7 Doing so, they note that the scope of the
prohibition of unreasonable or discriminatory measures is similar to the scope of the
fair and equitable treatment standard, stressing that Bolivia shares this
understanding.?% Indeed, the prohibition of unreasonable or discriminatory treatment
of foreign investments is usually considered one of the components of the FET
standard, often alongside the legitimate expectations component. As a result, the

288 Corn Products International Inc. v. United Mexican States, Decision on Responsibility of 15 January
2008, 142.

287 The Tribunal notes that the Claimants hold that the Spanish original "injustificada" and the terms
"unreasonable" and "arbitrary" are similar in scope and have used both English terms to describe the
Respondent's conduct.

288 Counter-Mem., § 208.

89

258.

260.

261.

Claimants address Bolivia’s alleged breaches of FET and of the prohibition of
unreasonable or discriminatory measures jointly.

a. The scope of the FET standard

The Claimants argue that the FET standard must be interpreted in accordance with
Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention of the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”). They note that
this standard is not a hard and fast rule and that it is not easy to define. Its
constitutive elements “fair” and “equitable” require tribunals to engage in a subjective
appreciation of the conduct of the host State taking all circumstances into
consideration.° When seeking a more objective or quantifiable definition of the
standard, tribunals have referred to legitimate expectations created by the host State
which it is bound to respect.?9°

For the Claimants, there is no controversy that the obligations of the host State
towards foreign investors derive from the terms of the applicable investment treaty.
The concept of an investor's "legitimate expectations" is a widely recognized notion
that helps define the scope of the FET provision.?°"

In response to Bolivia's argument that an FET obligation cannot limit sovereign
prerogatives, the Claimants maintain that none of the obligations under the BIT
threaten sovereignty. In support, it refers to the 1923 judgment of the Permanent
Court of International Justice in the case of the S.S. Wimbledon that obligations
undertaken in treaties are not a limitation on state sovereignty, but rather a
manifestation of it.2

The Claimants agree that their legitimate expectations, which are protected by the
FET standard, do not render the legal system of the host state immutable. Their
protection only ensures that Bolivia may not enact legislation or secure its compliance
in a manner that violates its treaty obligations.?°°

289 Reply, § 244, citing Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, |CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2 (“Mondev v. USA”), Award of 11 October 2002, § 127, Exh. R-295.

290 Reply, § 245, citing Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. and Vivendi Universal,
S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on Liability of 30 June 2010, { 203.

231 Reply, § 245.
292 Permanent Court of International Justice, Case of the S.S. “Wimbledon,” United Kingdom, France,
Italy & Japan v. Germany, Judgment of 17 August 1923, p. 25.

293 Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award of 5
September 2008, § 254.

90

262. The Claimants disagree with Bolivia’s contention that the FET standard is equivalent
to the minimum standard under international law. The Respondent relies on Genin v.
Estonia for this submission; however, "the factual circumstances of the Genin case
cannot be compared to those that affected the Claimants’ investments."”°> Further,
"[flrom a conceptual point of view, the Genin tribunal's assimilation of the FET
standard to the minimum standard of treatment under international law is not
convincing. The assimilation does not reflect contemporary development of
international law and has been rejected by a number of arbitral tribunals." Indeed,
FET is not equivalent to the minimum treatment standard, on which the Genin tribunal
relied, because "FET cannot be understood as synonymous to a limited and
exceptional notion comprised within the minimum treatment standard as phrased in
1926. It is rather a basic and autonomous requirement that frames the integral
treatment that should be accorded to foreign investment."?97

263. That said, the Claimants contend that Bolivia's conduct breaches not only the broader
FET standard but also the stricter one adopted by Genin, according to which unfair
and inequitable treatment is “a willful neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action falling
far below international standards, or even subjective bad faith.”*°° The Claimants
argue in this respect that (i) Bolivia's expropriation of the Claimants’ concessions was
openly illegal, (ii) Bolivia later revoked the revocation and “substituted” it by ex post
facto writs of annulment and (iii) achieved this through a joint operation of the Ministry
of Mining, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Presidency.

294 Genin v. Estonia, Award of 25 June 2001.
295 Reply, ¥ 253.

296 Reply, § 255, citing Enron v. Argentina, Award of 22 May 2007, § 258; Compania de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/3 (“Vivendi
v. Argentina II’), Award of 20 August 2007, 9 7.4.5-7.4.11 (Exh. R-310); Sempra Energy International
v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award of 28 September 2007, | 302, (Exh. R-
337); OKO Pankki Oyj and others v. Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/6, Award of 19
November 2007, § 230; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania, \CSID Case
No. ARB/05/22 (“Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania’), Award of 24 July 2008, 4 591 (Exh. R-194); Lemire v.
Ukraine, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability of 21 January 2010, § 253; Total v. Argentina, Decision
on Liability of 27 December 2010, § 125; Inmaris Perestroika Sailing Maritime Services GmbH and
others v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/8, Award of 1 March 2012, § 265.

297 Reply, § 260.
298 Genin v. Estonia, Award of 25 June 2001, § 367 (Exh. R-287).

91

264.

265.

266.

b. The Claimants’ reasonable and legitimate expectations were
defrauded by the Respondent

The Claimants submit that Bolivia instilled legitimate expectations in them that were
protected under Article IV of the BIT and later violated them. Specifically, they allege
that, at a presentation in Santiago de Chile in May 2002, officials at the Ministry of
Mining expressed Bolivia’s commitment to provide and maintain favorable conditions
for investors in Bolivia, particularly in the mining sector in the Salar de Uyuni.7° The
presentation listed all the benefits of the legislation in force at that time, making
special mention of the Mining Code, the Investment Law, and the investment treaties
signed by Bolivia. In addition to the ICSID Convention, these included 25 BITs among
which the BIT with Chile.

In the preceding decade between 1990 and 2002, Bolivia had signed more than 20
BITs with countries such as Spain and the United States. Bolivia had also adopted a
new investment law in 1990°° which imposed virtually no restrictions on foreign
investment and contained all the common protections for investors, such as
guarantees of national treatment, non-discrimination, fair and equitable treatment,
and access to international arbitration. In 1997, Bolivia had further adopted a Mining
Code which reinforced the rights of concessionaires and reduced the causes for
annulment of concessions.°°'

Under these circumstances, the Claimants expected Bolivia to act consistently and
transparently, not taking any arbitrary or discriminatory measures against investors
and respecting acquired property rights. According to the Claimants:

a. "It is reasonable for an investor to expect that it is not going to be deprived of its
investment by way of a legally non-existing procedure. It is legitimate to expect
that if its investment were to be subjected to expropriation, the latter would occur
in compliance with the international protection it enjoys."

b. It is also reasonable for an investor to expect that concessions issued and
granted by the appropriate Bolivian authority, i.e. the Tupiza and Tarija Regional
Mining Superintendent, comply with Bolivian law. The alleged incompetence of

299 Exh. CD-30.

309 Law 1.182, Exh. CD-4.
301 Exh. CD-6.

302 Reply, § 265.

92

267.

268.

269.

that Superintendent or any formal errors incurred by her cannot be held against
the Claimants nor be used to deprive them of their concessions.

c. It is further reasonable for an investor to expect that the host State’s public
authorities will not conspire to remedy an unlawful expropriation and give it an
appearance of legality. The 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo and the order of the
Minister of Mining to annul the concessions demonstrate that this expectation
was not honoured.

d. It is finally legitimate for an investor to expect that, after his concessions have
been confiscated, they will not be annulled ex post on facts that do not exist and
on legal grounds not provided in the applicable legislation.

c. The revocation and ex post annulment of the mining
concessions were unreasonable and arbitrary measures

The Claimants contend that the “erratic revocation of [the Ley Valda] by Law 2.564,
allowing for the annulment of Concessions acquired under the previous law,” was in
itself already unreasonable.*? But more importantly, they claim that "the revocation
and the annulment of the Concessions lacked legal grounds and were not based on a
previous lawful investigation procedure, which renders them unreasonable and
arbitrary."9°*

As set forth in the context of the expropriation claim, the Claimants contend that the
revocation of the mining concessions was issued without foundation in Bolivian law,
and that this was later acknowledged by the Bolivian authorities.°°° The non-
observance of social, tax, environmental, technical or procedural laws noted in the
audits were not causes for nullity of mining concessions under the existing pro-
investment regime. Furthermore, any such non-observance could have been
corrected had the Claimants been given an opportunity to be heard or to remedy any
alleged irregularity.

According to the Claimants, the ex post annulment of the concessions also failed to
comply with applicable substantive and procedural law. The formal and procedural
causes invoked by the Mining Superintendent to annul NMM’s concessions are not
recognized by Bolivian law. Moreover, the Mining Superintendent abused the

303 Reply, J 284.
304 Reply, § 285.
305 Decree 28.527, Exh. CD-74.

93

270.

271.

272.

273.

procedure and notified NMM of the resolution to annul the concessions in Tupiza
instead of La Paz.°°° The Claimants’ submission is that "[e]ach of these measures
accounts for an unreasonable treatment of the Claimants’ investment" and that
"[v]iewed together their arbitrariness is even more undeniable."°°”

d. The revocation and ex post annulment of the concessions
were also discriminatory

The Claimants’ allegation that the revocation and ex post annulment of the
concessions were discriminatory has been included in the Claimants position on
discrimination regarding expropriation (Section VI.A.4.a.ii.(b) above).

e. The Respondent cannot rely upon its own unlawful conduct to
the detriment of the Claimants

The Claimants contend that Bolivia tries to justify its misconduct by blaming the
Claimants for faults that can only be attributed to Bolivia itself. Bolivia invokes its own
inconsistent law-making, in particular its decision to first reduce the area of the fiscal
reserve and later restore it. It also blames corrupt intervention in the Senate as the
reason for the outcome of its own legislative processes. The Claimants argue that
these facts have not been proven and in any event cannot be held against them.

Similarly, the Claimants emphasize that the alleged incompetence of the Regional
Mining Superintendent and any errors made cannot be invoked to deprive them of
their treaty rights. Errors in administrative proceedings committed by Bolivia’s own
authorities are the responsibility of the Respondent, not of the Claimants.

f. Post-expropriation acts of harassment

On 22 July 2004, one month after the Revocation Decree was issued and one day
before the term established for the forced delivery of the concessions, the Claimants
requested the initiation of negotiations under Art. X of the BIT.%°° According to the
Claimants, from that moment on Bolivia began a harassment strategy to avoid
international liability under the BIT and force the Claimants to give up their claim.

306 According to the Claimants, the Superintendent of Mines notified RIGSSA and NMM of its
resolution to annul the concessions at the offices of the Superintendent of Mines of Tupiza by posting
the notice on the bulletin board of the secretary of the Superintendence (see Exh. R-275, regarding
Pococho). The registered domiciles of RIGSSA and NMM, however, were not in Tupiza but in the city
of La Paz.

307 Reply, § 288.
308 Exh. CD-58.

94

274. The Claimants rely in particular on the 8 December 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo,
which was produced by an inter-ministerial task force set up to evaluate the merits of
their claim.°°° They interpret the memorandum as a confirmation that the Revocation
Decree had been issued under pressure from the Department of Potosi and that the
revocation of the concessions was unlawful.

275. Specifically, the task force analyzed two different scenarios and identified a "best
alternative" in the following terms:
FIRST SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may try to reach an amicable
and mutually satisfactory agreement with the company. However it is clear
that the only settlement possible with the company would be an indemnity or
recovery of its concessions. For the Government, said option would involve

a significant political cost and the generation of new social and regional
conflicts with the Potosi Department.

SECOND SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may attempt to defend its
decisions. Unfortunately, the Mining Code makes no provisions for the
revocation of mining concessions. Therefore, this option has a great
weakness. Another alternative would be to try to prove irregularities in the
processing of the original mining concessions of Non Metallic Minerals S.A.,
so as to demonstrate that these are and always have been invalid. For the
time being, this has been considered the best alternative.*'°
276. The Claimants believe that this "best alternative" had already been put into practice at
the time when the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo was written. For them, Bolivia
implemented a strategy to frustrate their rights under the BIT and thereby avoid

international responsibility. Specifically, the Claimants allege that:

a. Bolivia carried out tax investigations against the Claimants from November 2004
to November 2007 approximately. In 2006, when President Evo Morales
assumed office and following the registration of this case at the Centre, Bolivia
invited the Claimants to participate in negotiations and agreed to suspend all tax
proceedings,*"' only to resume them ten days later.3'2

b. While the Parties were discussing the implementation of the oral settlement
reached as a result of these negotiations,*'* Bolivia prepared and initiated
criminal actions against several persons related to the present arbitration,
including Mr. Allan Fosk. The Claimants view these criminal proceedings as

309 Exh. CD-68.

310 Exh. CD-68, pp. 10-11. Claimants’ translation.
311 Exh. CD-76.

312 Exh. CD-77.

313 See Procedural History, Section III above.

95

277.

278.

279.

280.

merely instrumental to Bolivia's goals in this arbitration, i.e. (i) to deny the status
of the Claimants as foreign investors under the BIT; (ii) to obtain, manipulate and
fabricate evidence in support of Bolivia's defense, and (iii) to ultimately force the
Claimants to give up their claims.

2. The Respondent's position

The Respondent denies that by revoking and annulling the Claimants’ concessions it
has breached its obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’
investments or impaired those investments with unjustified, arbitrary or discriminatory
measures. It also denies having treated the Claimants unfairly or inequitably by
subsequent acts.

a. __ Bolivia did not treat the Claimants’ investment unfairly and
inequitably by revoking and declaring the annulment of the
mining concessions

Bolivia denies that it has breached its obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment
to the Claimants’ investments. In particular, it submits that, by revoking and declaring
the annulment of the mining concessions, it did not breach any legitimate expectation
of the Claimants protected by the BIT.

While the Respondent submits that the scope of the FET standard under the BIT is
limited to the minimum standard of treatment under customary international law, it
contends that, even under a broad interpretation of the FET standard, the Claimants’
expectations would not be covered. In the Respondent’s view, this standard only
protects legitimate and reasonable expectations of foreign investors that have an
objective and genuine connection with legally binding obligations. The FET standard
does not guarantee the immutability of the legal framework applicable to the
investment, nor does it prevent the State from legislating and guaranteeing the
application and compliance with the law in its territory.

The Respondent contends that, under Bolivian law, the Claimants could not have
legitimately expected the rights acquired under the Mining Code to be maintained,
because (i) the mining concessions were granted to Mr. Moscoso in breach of several
rules of Bolivian law, including the Mining Code, and (ii) these breaches amount to
annulment grounds under Bolivian law, even if these grounds are not specified in the
Mining Code. Thus, the revocation of the mining concessions could not have
frustrated the Claimants' legitimate expectations.

96

281.

282.

Under the BIT and international law, Bolivia is entitled to exercise its State
prerogatives to legislate and enforce the law in its territory. The mining concessions
were defective from the start and their revocation and annulment was the
consequence of these illegalities under Bolivian law. Therefore, those measures
cannot constitute breaches of the FET standard.

Further, the assessment of the FET standard must take into account not only the
State's conduct, but also the Claimants’. When the mining concessions were
acquired, the Claimants were aware of the controversies that surrounded the granting
of the concessions within the fiscal reserve of the Salar de Uyuni and of the illegalities
that affected the concessions. More specifically:

a. The Claimants’ witnesses, Messrs. Carlos Shuffer and Allan Fosk, have
admitted that they knew that they were doing business with former civil servants
of the Ministry of Mining;?"4

b. Quiborax knew that obtaining the concessions in the Rio Grande deposit was
only possible due to the reduction of the fiscal reserve of the Salar de Uyuni by
the controversial Ley Valda. It also accepted to negotiate with Messrs. Moscoso
and Ugalde as if they had title to the concessions, even though the resolutions
constituting the concessions and their title deeds had not yet been issued by the
Tupiza and Tarija Regional Mining Superintendent;?'°

c. In March 2000, Quiborax requested a legal opinion from Teddy Cuentas
Bascopé (a Bolivian lawyer specialized in mining law) on the legitimacy and
validity of RIGSSA's concessions, among other matters. The Claimants have
submitted no evidence in this respect and do not even mention the conclusions
of the opinion;

d. The opposition of the political class and representatives of the civil society to the
Ley Valda was well known in Bolivia.

e. In this context, Bolivia insists that it never made any specific representation or
guarantee to the Claimants with respect to the validity of the mining

concessions.

314 Shuffer WS, {§ 17-18; Fosk WS, 4 31.
315 Exh. CD-10.

97

b. Bolivia has not impaired the Claimants’ investment with
unjustified, arbitrary or discriminatory measures by revoking
and declaring the annulment of the mining concessions

283. The Respondent claims that the revocation and annulment of the mining concessions
were measures justified under the circumstances, as they were adopted to sanction
the irregularities in the granting and administration of the mining concessions. It notes
that international tribunals have found that the standard of Article III(2) of the BIT is
practically identical to the FET standard,°'® and therefore, refers to its position in
connection with that standard.

284. In addition, Bolivia submits that the revocation and annulment of the mining
concessions were not arbitrary. According to the Respondent, the Claimants’
argumentation is deficient as it does not specify (i) the legal basis for the arbitrariness
standard (the BIT only refers to unjustified or discriminatory measures) and (ii) the
reasons for the arbitrariness. In any event, this claim should be dismissed for the
same reason as the other claims: the revocation and annulment of the mining
concessions complied with Bolivian law and had a public interest justification.

285. Even if, par impossible, the Tribunal decided that the revocation and annulment were
unlawful and motivated by local political pressure, this would not suffice to render
them arbitrary. For that, the Claimants would have to prove that Bolivia's conduct
was an intentional violation of due process, which it cannot.°"”

286. Moreover, the Respondent opposes the allegation of discriminatory treatment by
reason of nationality, as has been set out in Section VI.A.4.b.ii above, when
explaining Bolivia's position on discrimination regarding both the expropriation and the
FET claim.

318 Saluka v. Czech Republic, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, § 461: “Insofar as the standard of
conduct is concerned, a violation of the non-impairment requirement does not therefore differ
substantially from a violation of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard. The non-impairment
requirement merely identifies more specific effects of any such violation, namely with regard to the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of the investment by the investor,”
(Exh. R-297). See also Roussalis v. Romania, Award of 7 December 2011, 324 (Exh. R-298).

317 L. F. H. Neer and Pauline Neer (United States of America) v. Mexico, Award of 15 October 1926,
Arbitral Awards Reports, Vol. IV, pp. 60-66: “the propriety of governmental acts should be put to the
test of international standards, [...] the treatment of an alien, in order to constitute an international
delinquency, should amount to an outrage, to bad faith, to willful neglect of duty, or to an insufficiency
of governmental action so far short of international standards that every reasonable and impartial man
would readily recognize its insufficiency” (Exh. R-299).

98

287.

288.

c. Bolivia did not violate its obligations under the BIT through
subsequent acts

Finally, the Respondent holds that the Claimants' claim arising from alleged post-
expropriation acts of harassment is ill-founded for the following main reasons:

The Tribunal has already concluded that the alleged acts of harassment could
not affect the Claimants’ investment, since they ceased once the mining
concessions were revoked;3"8

This claim is moot. The criminal proceedings followed up on allegations that
documents were forged to prove that Quiborax and Mr. Allan Fosk were
shareholders of NMM before 13 September 2001 and therefore qualified as
investors under the Treaty. This matter has already been dealt with by the
Tribunal in its Decision on Jurisdiction, in which it decided that Quiborax was an
investor under the BIT and that it lacked jurisdiction over the claims submitted by
Mr. Allan Fosk;3"2

The claim is based on an unreal and confusing reconstruction of the facts
regarding the tax authorities' actions and the criminal proceedings ongoing in
Bolivia.3°

3. Analysis

Article III(2) of the BIT provides:

Each Contracting Party shall protect within its territory the investments made
in accordance with its laws and regulations, by the investors of the other
Contracting Party and shall not impair the free administration, maintenance,
use, enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and liquidation of those
investments through unreasonable or discriminatory measures.

(Tribunal’s translation).
In the Spanish original:

Cada Parte Contratante protegera dentro de su territorio las inversiones
efectuadas de conformidad con sus leyes y reglamentos, por los
inversionistas de la otra Parte Contratante y no obstaculizara la libre
administracién, mantenimiento, uso, usufructo, extensidn, transferencia,
venta y liquidacion de dichas inversiones a través de medidas injustificadas
0 discriminatorias.

318 Counter-Mem., § 231, citing the Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.

319 Counter-Mem., J 232, citing the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, § 237.
320 Counter-Mem., § 233.

99

289.

290.

291.

292.

In turn, Article IV(1) of the BIT provides:

Each Contracting Party shall guarantee fair and equitable treatment within its
territory to the investments of investors of the other Contracting party and
shall ensure that the exercise of the rights recognized in this Agreement is
not impaired.

(Tribunal's translation).
In the Spanish original:

Cada Parte Contratante debera garantizar un tratamiento justo y equitativo
dentro de su territorio a las inversiones de los inversionistas de la otra Parte
Contratante y asegurara que el ejercicio de los derechos reconocidos en el
presente Acuerdo no sera obstaculizado.
The claims under Articles III and IV of the BIT arise out of (a) the revocation of the
concessions; (b) their subsequent annulment; and (c) alleged post-expropriation acts

of harassment.
a. _ Revocation of the concessions

The Tribunal considers it can be left open here whether the BIT’s obligation to accord
fair and equitable treatment can be equated with the minimum standard under
international law. Indeed, the Tribunal finds that the revocation of the Claimants’
concessions violates international law even under a more demanding standard. As
noted by the Waste Management II tribunal:

[T]he minimum standard of treatment of fair and equitable treatment is
infringed by conduct attributable to the State and harmful to the claimant if
the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is
discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice, or
involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends judicial
propriety—as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural justice in
judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and candour in an
administrative process.°2"

In the context of its analysis of the Claimants’ expropriation claim, the Tribunal has
already held that the revocation of the concessions was discriminatory and unjustified
under Bolivian law. By the same token, it also violates the fair and equitable
treatment standard, even if it were to be equated with the customary international law

minimum standard of treatment.>

821 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3 (“Waste
Management v. Mexico II”), Award of 30 April 2004, § 98.

22 Several tribunals have also considered that discriminatory acts breach the fair and equitable
treatment standard. See, e.g., Saluka v. Czech Republic, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, § 307 (“A
foreign investor protected by the Treaty may in any case properly expect that the Czech Republic
implements its policies bona fide by conduct that is, as far as it affects the investors’ investment,
reasonably justifiable by public policies and that such conduct does not manifestly violate the

100

293. For the same reasons, the revocation of the concessions thus qualifies as an
unjustified and discriminatory measure in the meaning of Article III(2) of the BIT.
Indeed, the use, enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and liquidation of the Claimants’
investments was impaired through unjustified and discriminatory measures.

294. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the revocation of the concessions was done
in breach of Articles Ill and IV of the BIT.

295. This conclusion applies to NMM and Quiborax alike. By revoking the concessions in
the way that it did, Bolivia treated both NMM’s and Quiborax’s investments in Bolivia
unfairly and inequitably, and impaired their use, enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale
and liquidation through unjustified and discriminatory measures. It is easily explained
that the FET breach also affected Quiborax. Indeed, the Tribunal has found that the
very reason for the discrimination was the nationality of NMM's main shareholder,
Quiborax.

b. Annulment of the concessions

296. With respect to the annulment of the concessions, the Claimants contend that the
termination of the investment cannot be confused with the termination of Bolivia's
obligations under the BIT,**° and that the Respondent should not be "freed from its
BIT obligations once it has deprived Claimant[s] from their investment."324

297. The Tribunal shares this view, which was in particular expressed in Mondev in the
following terms:

 

requirements of consistency, transparency, even-handedness and nondiscrimination. In particular, any
differential treatment of a foreign investor must not be based on unreasonable distinctions and
demands, and must be justified by showing that it bears a reasonable relationship to rational policies
not motivated by a preference for other investments over the foreign-owned investment”); Victor Pey
Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/2 ("Pey
Casado v. Chile"), Award of 8 May 2008, 670 (“Il est constant dans la jurisprudence internationale et
dans la doctrine qu’un traitement discriminatoire de la part d’autorités étatiques envers ses
investisseurs étrangers constitue une violation de la garantie de traitement « juste et équitable » inclus
dans des traités bilatéraux d’investissement’); CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Republic of
Argentina, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/8 (“CMS v. Argentina’), Award of 12 May 2005, § 290 (“The
standard of protection against arbitrariness and discrimination is related to that of fair and equitable
treatment. Any measure that might involve arbitrariness or discrimination is in itself contrary to fair and
equitable treatment.”)

323 See COSS, slides 68 and 69.
324 Tr., Day 1, 59:5-6.

101

298.

[O]nce an investment exists, it remains protected by NAFTA even after the
enterprise in question may have failed. This is obvious with respect to the
protection offered by Article 1110 [expropriation]: [...] a person remains an
investor for the purposes of Articles 1116 and 1117 even if the whole
investment has been definitively expropriated, so that all that remains is a
claim for compensation. The point is underlined by the definition of an
“investor” as someone who “seeks to make, is making or has made an
investment.” Even if an investment is expropriated, it remains true that the
investor “has made” the investment.

Similar considerations apply to Articles 1102 [national treatment] and 1105
[minimum standard of treatment]. Issues of orderly liquidation and the
settlement of claims may still arise and require “fair and equitable treatment,”
“full protection and security” and the avoidance of invidious discrimination.
[...]925

The same applies here. The BIT defines the term investor as someone who “has
made investments” (“haya[] efectuado inversiones”) in the territory of the host
State.**° Likewise, the scope of protection of the BIT extends to investments “made”
(“efectuadas’) in the territory of the host State.°?”

However, the Claimants have also noted that "[f]rom the point of view of the
deprivation of property suffered by the Claimants, the annulments are irrelevant. The
Claimants lost their entire investment in Bolivia due to [the Revocation Decree],
followed by the forced return of the Bolivian concessions to the State on 23 July 2004.
The subsequent annulments of these very same concessions are but an ex post
intent to change the true course of events."°8 In other words, the Claimants
recognize that the annulments did not deprive them of any property that they had not
already lost through the revocation of the concessions. As a result, applying the
principle of procedural economy, the Tribunal would not need to examine the
Claimants’ FET and Article Ill claims related to the subsequent annulment of the
concessions. Indeed, with respect to their claims of deprivation of property, the
Claimants would not be entitled to greater monetary relief even if the Tribunal were to
establish a breach of these BIT protections.*® Having said that, the Tribunal will
address these claims for the sake of completeness.

325 Mondev v. USA, Award of 11 October 2002, § 80-81.
326 BIT, Article I(1).

827 BIT, Article Il.

328 Mem., § 102. Footnote omitted.

829 See, e.g., loan Micula, Viorel Micula, S.C. European Food S.A, S.C. Starmill S.R.L. and S.C.
Multipack S.R.L. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20 (“Micula v. Romania”), Award of 11
December 2013, § 874. See also Chevron Corporation (U.S.A.) and Texaco Petroleum Corporation
(U.S.A.) v. Republic of Ecuador [I], PCA Case No. AA 277, Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March
2010, § 275.

102

300.

301.

302.

303.

On 28 October 2004, Bolivia annulled the Claimants’ already revoked concessions.
The writs of annulment stated that the annulments were grounded on a lack of legal
capacity or sufficient legal representation of the principal and the agent
(“impersoneria en el mandante y mandatario”).*°°

The Tribunal has already found that the alleged grounds for the annulment of the
concessions had no basis in the facts nor in the law (see Section VI.A.2 above). The
Claimants have established that the flaws alleged by Bolivia were either non-existent
or were not subject to the sanction of annulment. In particular, the Tribunal has
concluded that the powers of attorney to represent RIGSSA and NMM in the
acquisition of the concessions were valid, and that any flaws attached to them were
not sanctioned by the nullity of the concessions (see paragraphs 140 to 142 above).

To the contrary, the record suggests that the annulment of the concessions was an ex
post attempt to improve Bolivia’s defense in this arbitration, not a bona fide exercise
of Bolivia’s police powers. Indeed, as discussed in Section VI.A.2 above, the
annulment of the concessions appears to have been Bolivia’s way of legalizing the
extinction of the concessions after the legality of the Revocation Decree was
questioned. The Tribunal cannot fail to note that the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo
considered precisely this defense strategy in connection with the Claimants’ BIT case:
SECOND SCENARIO - The Bolivian Government may attempt to defend its
decisions. Unfortunately, the Mining Code makes no provisions for the
revocation of mining concessions. Therefore, this option has a great
weakness. Another alternative would be to try to prove irregularities in the
processing of the original mining concessions of Non Metallic Minerals S.A.,
so as to demonstrate that these are and always have been invalid. For the
time being, this has been considered the best alternative.2°"
Although the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo postdates the writs of annulment, it
confirms the course of action adopted by the Government. The annulment took place
four months after the revocation of the concessions on different grounds. Had the
concessions been improperly granted, they would have been annulled or declared
null and void in the first place, not revoked for other reasons.

The Tribunal concludes that the annulment of the concessions was thus not a
legitimate exercise of the Respondent's police powers; it was not consistent with
Bolivia's obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’
investments. It is also an unjustified measure that impaired the Claimants’ use,

330 Exh. R-276; See § 31 supra.
331 Exh. CD-68, Tribunal's translation.

103

305.

306.

Vil.

307.

308.

309.

enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and liquidation of their investments.
Consequently, the Tribunal holds that by annulling the Claimants’ concessions the
Respondent has breached Articles IV(1) and III(2) of the BIT.

c. _ Post-expropriation acts of harassment

The Claimants also argue that Bolivia breached its obligation to accord their
investments fair and equitable treatment and not to impair them by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures through post-expropriation acts of harassment. In particular,
the Claimants allege that, after the Claimants requested the initiation of negotiations
under the BIT, Bolivia commenced a “harassment strategy” to avoid international
liability under the BIT, consisting of audits and inspections directed to find flaws in the
acquisition of NMM’s concessions, tax investigations, and the initiation of criminal
actions against persons related to the ICSID case, including former Claimant Allan
Fosk.

The Tribunal understands that this claim arises from the same facts as the claims for
a declaratory judgment and moral damages. As a result, it will address these claims
jointly under Section VII.B below.

REPARATION

Having held that the Respondent has breached the BIT, the Tribunal must now turn to
the claims for reparation. The Tribunal will first address the claim for compensatory
damages (A), before turning to the Claimants’ request for moral damages and a
declaratory judgment (B).

A. Compensatory Damages

Following on overview of the Parties' positions (1), the Tribunal will address the
applicable standard of compensation (2). Thereafter, it will determine the appropriate
valuation method (3) and, on that basis, it will quantify the Claimants' damages for the
loss of ulexite reserves and resources (4). It will then deal with the claim for the loss
of lithium resources (5). Finally, it will address the claim for interest on the damages
awarded (6).

1. Overview of the Parties’ positions

The Claimants contend that they are entitled to full reparation of the damage caused
by the Respondent's breaches of the BIT, which can only be achieved by

104

310.

311.

312.

compensatory damages equivalent to the fair market value (FMV) of their investment,
assessed ex post (i.e. on the date of the Award, not at the time of the breach) and
calculated in accordance with the discounted cash flow (DCF) method. Relying on
the valuation performed by their expert Navigant, on the basis of ulexite reserves and
resources in the concessions assessed by their expert Behre Dolbear, the Claimants
contend that the FMV of their investment is equivalent to a maximum of US$
146,112,442 and a minimum of US$ 140,459,669. The Claimants also request
compensation for lithium resources in the concessions in an amount of US$ 736,385.

The Respondent, for its part, contends as a preliminary point that no reparation is
possible given the illegalities that affect the mining concessions. If there were to be a
reparation, there would be a shared responsibility of at least 50% which would reduce
the value of the compensation proportionately.*? Even if the Tribunal were to
consider that Bolivia has breached its obligations under the BIT, the Respondent
objects to the Claimants’ compensation claim, arguing that the Claimants have
inflated their damages by applying an improper valuation method and overestimating
the existing reserves in the concessions. According to the Respondent, the amount
claimed is astronomical compared to the actual damage which the Claimants might
have suffered due to the loss of the mining concessions.

More specifically, the Respondent argues that the Claimants can only be
compensated for damages that have been proven with certainty. On this basis, it
rejects the Claimants' proposed DCF valuation method, arguing that it cannot be
applied when future cash flows cannot be projected reliably. Instead, it proposes
valuing the investment on the basis of investments effectively made and not
recovered (following the “net investments” or “sunk costs” method set out in Article
VI(2) of the BIT). Should the Tribunal choose to apply the DCF method, the
Respondent argues that the valuation date should be that of the alleged
expropriation, not of the Award, and that it should be calculated according to the
variables proposed by its expert, Econ One.

2. Standard of compensation
a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants submit that the BIT does not address damages for violations of the
BIT. Article VI only specifies the compensation to which the investor is entitled in the

382 Counter-Mem., § 248.

105

313.

314.

315.

316.

event of a lawful expropriation, stating that this compensation shall be “based on the
market value of the affected investment immediately before the measure became
public knowledge.”5%

In the absence of any /ex specialis, the Claimants submit that the standard for
damages is the customary international law principle of full reparation, as embodied in
Chorzéw and codified in the ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts (the “ILC Articles”) (specifically, in Articles 31, 34 and 36.2). The
Claimants argue that, in accordance with this principle, the standard of compensation
for the confiscation of the concessions, whether understood as a violation of Articles
lll, IV or VI of the BIT, is that the Claimants must be fully restored to the position in
which they would have been if the unlawful act had not occurred.334

The Claimants propose a valuation method based on the fair market value (“FMV”) of
the concessions, i.e., the price which a hypothetical buyer would be willing to pay for
the concessions at a certain moment in time. They claim that FMV is the generally
accepted standard for compensation in investment arbitration and customary
international law, and allege that Quiborax is entitled to 51% of such value. The
Claimants also clarify that “they have not suggested a valuation method based on the
value of Quiborax as a company but for the confiscation of the Concession, but a
valuation of the fair market value of the Bolivian Concessions [...].”5%

The Claimants agree with the Respondent that their damages must be "sufficiently
certain." As to the degree of certainty required to comply with the burden of proof, it
is the Claimants’ position that future damages must be proven with reasonable
certainty. The degree of certainty that Bolivia demands makes compensation for lost
profits virtually impossible.

To achieve full reparation, the Claimants' damages must be valued on the date of the
Award. Limiting the amount of damages to the value of the undertaking at the
moment of the dispossession is not justified in the present case. Bolivia did not
exercise its right to expropriate, but instead confiscated the concessions in violation of
international law. Indeed, Bolivia's wrongful act did not consist merely in not having
paid the Claimants’ proper compensation (see further Section VII.A.4.c.i below).

333 Claimants’ translation, Mem., J 181.
334 Mem., 4] 181-183.
335 Reply, § 312 (emphasis in original).

106

317. The Claimants contend that their damages can in any event not be less than the
compensation warranted under Art. VI of the BIT, i.e. the FMV of the investment on
the date of the expropriation, as the compensation due for a “lawful” expropriation
should represent the lower limit.°°°

b. The Respondent’s position

318. Asa general matter, the Respondent submits that, under international law, damages
are recoverable if the claimant proves the existence of damage and a causal relation
between the conduct attributable to the State (in this case, a breach of the BIT) and
the damage.*°”

319. The Respondent further contends that damages must be proved with a sufficient or
reasonable degree of certainty.*** This rule is especially relevant when the claimant
seeks to be compensated for the loss of future revenues because "regarding future
damages, the principle of non-reparation of hypothetical damage means that only
losses that can be anticipated with certainty can be compensated."**° Bolivia submits
that the ulexite reserves used by the Claimants' expert to calculate damages are
highly speculative.**°

320. In this case, the Respondent submits that the appropriate standard of compensation
is set out in Article VI of the BIT. °*' This provision requires that all expropriations be
accompanied by the “payment of an immediate, sufficient and effective
compensation,”**? which shall be based on to the “market value of the affected
investments on a date immediately prior to that in which the measure became public

knowledge” [...].”°°

 

3386 Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland) Judgement of 13 September 1928,
Claim for Indemnity (The Merits), P.C.I.J. Series A, No. 17 (1928), Exh. CL-6; Marboe, Irmgard,
Compensation and Damages in International Law - The Limits of "Fair Market Value," in The Journal
of World Investment & Trade (2006), Exh.CL-25.

887 E.g., Exhs. R-302 and R-320.

338 Counter-Mem., §§ 250, 285, 295, 297, 309 and 320.
339 Counter-Mem., § 287, Tribunal's translation.

340 Counter-Mem., 9 290, 297.

341 Counter-Mem., ¥§ 319-326.

342 Article VI(1)(c) of the BIT, Tribunal’s translation. The Spanish original reads: “las medidas vayan
acompajfiadas de disposiciones para el pago de una compensacion inmediata, suficiente y efectiva.”

343 Article VI(2) of the BIT, Tribunal’s translation. The Spanish original reads: “La compensaci6n se
basara en el valor de mercado de las inversiones afectadas en una fecha inmediatamente anterior a
aquella en que la medida llegé a conocimiento publico. [...].”

107

321.

322.

323.

The Respondent recognizes that under this standard the Claimants are entitled to the
FMV of their investments, but argues that, in this case, this is at most equivalent to
the Claimants’ unamortized investments (ie., their "sunk costs" or "Net
Investment").°44

While Bolivia acknowledges the existence of the full reparation standard under
international law as articulated by the PClJ in Chorzow, its position as to its
applicability to this case is unclear. In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent admits
that, "in accordance with customary international law reflected in the Chorzow case,
any unlawful act entails the obligation to repair the damage caused entirely," but
submits that the standard set out in Article VI(2) of the BIT ensures full reparation of
the Claimants’ damages.°“° However, in its Rejoinder, the Respondent appears to
question the standard of compensation set out in Chorzdw, stating that, even
assuming that this standard (or the standard set out in the ILC Articles) reflects
customary international law adequately, its application in this case is questionable.
Relying on the ILC Commentary to Article 34 of the ILC Articles, the Claim against the
USSR for Damage caused by Soviet Cosmos and Diallo, the Respondent maintains
that the full reparation principle should not be followed without due consideration to
the principles of proportionality and reasonableness that arise from customary
international law.*° The Respondent further contends that this case must be
distinguished from Chorzow: “while in that case Poland lacked any right to expropriate
the investment at issue, in the present dispute it is undeniable that Bolivia possesses
that prerogative and that its exercise is fully legitimate.”*”

Even if the full reparation principle did apply, the Respondent contends that the
Claimants have failed to meet the standard of proof that this principle requires, i.e.:

a. There must be a proximate causal link between the damage and the violation of
international law;

b. |The compensation requested must be reasonable;

c. The damage must be certain and not hypothetical or indeterminate;

344 The Respondent refers to it as “Inversion Neta Realizada,” which the Claimants have translated as
“Net Investment Realized.” The Tribunal will refer to it as the “Net Investment” or “sunk costs” method.

345 Counter-Mem., § 338, Tribunal's translation.
346 Rejoinder, § 171.
347 Counter-Mem., § 349-350, Tribunal's translation.

108

324.

325.

326.

d. There must be no risk of double-counting;

e. The investor must prove the causal link, the quantum of damages and that the
damage is recoverable under the applicable law.**

Finally, the Respondent submits that, if the Tribunal were to accept the Claimants’
valuation method, it should calculate the FMV of the concessions on the date of the
alleged expropriation. There is no reason to justify a valuation date after the date of
the alleged expropriation of the concessions (see further Section VII.A.4.c.i below).

c. Analysis

The Tribunal understands that the claim for compensatory damages covers all of the
Claimants' financially assessable damage arising from the loss of their investments in
Bolivia, whether such loss was caused by Bolivia’s unlawful expropriation of those
investments, by Bolivia’s unfair and inequitable treatment or by its impairment of their
investments through unreasonable or discriminatory measures.*“°

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the BIT does not establish the standard
of compensation for internationally wrongful acts. Article VI(2) of the BIT sets out the
standard of compensation for lawful expropriations, possibly including expropriations
that comply with all legality requirements but for the payment of compensation.
The treaty standard does not apply to unlawful expropriations, which are governed by
the full reparation principle as articulated by the PClJ in the Chorzéw case and later
expressed in the ILC Articles. Article VI(2) does not purport to establish a lex specialis
for unlawful expropriations.°°"

348 Rejoinder, § 172.

349 Mem., § 181-183. The Claimants’ requests for relief, cited in | 75 above, specify that that
Claimants request an award:

"Ordering Bolivia to pay Claimants full compensation in an amount not less than US$
61,481,461 as of 1 August 2009 for damages suffered due to the loss of their investment in
Bolivia, plus compound interest at the commercial rate on such amount from such date until
the date of actual payment" (Mem., Section X(8)).

"Ordering Bolivia to pay the Claimants full compensation to an amount of US$ 146,848,827 as
of 30 June 2013 for damages suffered due to the loss of their investment in Bolivia, plus
compound interest at the commercial rate on that amount from such date until the date of
actual payment" (Reply, Section IX(4)).

350 Arbitrator Lalonde and the President note Arbitrator Stern’s observation in her dissent, but deem it
unnecessary to deal with a legal issue that does not arise here.

351 See, e.g., Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case
No. ARB/05/15, Award of 1 June 2009 (Exh. R-348), § 540 (holding that the provision on
compensation for expropriation in the relevant BIT "does not purport to establish a lex specialis

109

327.

328.

329.

330.

It is a basic principle of international law that States incur responsibility for their
internationally wrongful acts. This principle is set forth in ILC Article 1, which provides
that “[e]very internationally wrongful act of a State entails the international
responsibility of that State.” The corollary to this principle, which was first articulated
by the PClJ in the often-quoted Chorzéw case** is that the responsible State must
repair the damage caused by its internationally wrongful act. As stated in ILC
Article 31:

Article 31
Reparation

1. The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation
for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.

2. Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by
the internationally wrongful act of the State.

This reparation must be “full,” ie., it must eliminate all consequences of the
internationally wrongful act and restore the injured party to the situation that would
have existed if the act had not been committed.** If restitution in kind is impossible
or not practicable, the compensation awarded must wipe out all of the consequences
of the wrongful act. In this respect, ILC Article 36 provides that “[t]he State
responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to compensate
for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such damage is not made good by
restitution,” adding that “compensation shall cover any financially assessable
damage, including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”

Here, the Tribunal has found that the Claimants' investments in Bolivia were subject
to direct — as far as NMM is concerned — and indirect — as far as Quiborax is
concerned — expropriation which did not comply with the requirements set out in the
BIT for a lawful expropriation. Consequently, the Claimants are entitled to full
reparation of the damages suffered.

That said, there is authority to suggest that, in certain cases, the State’s obligation to
make full reparation may be reduced after considering certain mitigating factors, such

 

governing the standards of compensation for wrongful or unlawful expropriations."). See also Vivendi
v. Argentina Il, Award of 20 August 2007 (Exh. R-310), § 8.2.3, and Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, |CSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Award of 30 June 2009, § 201.

352 Factory at Chorzow, Jurisdiction, 1927, P.C.I.J., Series A, No. 9, p. 21.
353 Factory at Chorzow, Merits, 1928, P.C.I.J., Series A, No. 17, p. 47.

110

as remoteness of the damage,*™ intervening or concurrent causes,°°> the existence
of contributory negligence on the part of the investor,%° or the application of the
principle of proportionality.°°” However, in the circumstances of this expropriation, the
Tribunal does not see any facts that could justify a reduction for any of these factors.

3. Valuation method
a. The Claimants’ position

331. In the Claimants’ view, the appropriate method for calculating the FMV of a profit
generating enterprise is the DCF method. It notes that Bolivia acknowledges that this
is the valuation method used "for a going concern with a proven record of
profitability."95°

332. The Claimants note that they operated the concessions between 2001 and 2004, and
that both NMM and Quiborax were profit-generating companies during that time.
According to the Claimants, their successful operation of the concessions during
almost three years is sufficient to establish their performance history and generate the
data required to calculate future income. Moreover, given the past success of the
operation, future income could have been expected with reasonable certainty, but for
the loss of the concessions. These three years of operation also demonstrate that the
Claimants were going concerns.

333. According to the Claimants, the DCF method allows tribunals to assess the economic
value of a company in a realistic manner. They claim that by applying the DCF

354 See, e.g., ILC Articles, Commentary to Article 31; Micula v. Romania, Award of 11 December 2013,
49 923-927. See also | 381 et seq. below.

355 Micula v. Romania, Award of 11 December 2013, § 923-927; see also Case Concerning
Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), 20 July 1989, [1989] ICJ Reports 15,
q§ 100 and 101; Gami Investments, Inc. v. The Government of the United Mexican States,
UNCITRAL, Final Award of 15 November 2004, § 85; Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Final Award of 3 September 2001, 9 234-235.

356 See, e.g., Brigitte Stern, Le préjudice dans la théorie de la responsabilité internationale (Paris,
Pedone, 1973); Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case
No. ARB/06/11 (“Occidental v. Ecuador II’), Award of 5 October 2012, 7678; Yukos Universal Limited
(Isle of Man) v. The Russian Federation, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. AA 227 (“Yukos v. Russia’), Final
Award of 18 July 2014, §§ 1601-1606.

387 See, e.g., Ursula Kriebaum, “Regulatory Takings: Balancing the Interests of the Investor and the
State,” 8 The Journal of World Investment & Trade 5, October 2007, pp. 717-744.

358 Counter-Mem., § 294. Reference to World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct
Investment (Guideline IV:6 (i), p. 6, Exh. CL-20).

111

334.

335.

method they will be "fully restored to the position they would have been in, had the

unlawful act not occurred."35?

In reply to the Respondent's objections to the DCF method, the Claimants contend

that international tribunals have acknowledged its appropriateness in the assessment
of going concerns, noting that the DCF has been rejected in cases without a proven

track record of profitability, which is not the case here.

The Claimants object to Bolivia's proposed valuation on the basis of the net

investment made or sunk costs. According to the Claimants, Bolivia's position is

financially incorrect and contrary to established case law. Specifically:

a.

First, the Claimants note that Article VI(2) of the BIT, upon which Bolivia relies,
addresses situations "where [the market value] cannot be readily
ascertained."*©° Here, the projected cash flows of the Claimants’ business are
not difficult to establish. The Claimants' history of profitability during almost three
years provides sufficient data to make a reasonable projection.

Second, as already stated, the Claimants argue that the standard of
compensation contained in Article VI of the BIT is not applicable to unlawful
expropriations. Citing ADC v. Hungary and Siag v. Egypt, the Claimants
contend that the BIT only sets the standard of compensation for lawful
expropriations, which cannot be used to determine the damages payable in
cases of unlawful expropriations.

Third, the Claimants contend that Bolivia's proposed valuation method does not
assess the FMV of the investment nor does it restore the Claimants to the
position they would have been in had the unlawful act not occurred. Citing
Ripinsky and Williams, the Claimants submit that it is wrong to assume that the
historic cost of an investment reflects its market value.**' In addition, the sunk
costs method is inappropriate because "it pretends to put the Claimants in the
position they would have been in if the investment had never occurred. [...] Yet
the investment did take place, it did produce profits, and it would have continued
on that path had it not been for Bolivia's wrongful acts."%

359 Reply, 7 319.

360 Claimants’ translation.
361 Reply, 363.

362 Reply, J 370-371.

112

336.

337.

338.

d. The Claimants also reject Bolivia’s contention that the sunk costs method has
been accepted by international tribunals. According to the Claimants, in three
out of the four cases cited by the Respondent (Metalclad,** Tecmed,* and
Wena**), the tribunals acknowledged the appropriateness of the DCF method
analysis for going concerns, but dismissed it on the specific facts. In the fourth
case cited by the Respondent (Azurix), the Claimant did not request the
application of the DCF method.

e. In addition, the Claimants maintain that the gap between their monetary
investment and the amount of damages claimed is not unreasonable. Large
injections of capital do not necessarily render a business valuable, whereas
there are "numerous examples of businesses being sold for a price much higher
than the amount originally invested, particularly if the business proves
successful."9°7

For these reasons, the Claimants reject the Respondent's proposed valuation
method, arguing that "by requesting the Tribunal to award Claimants the net value of
their investment, Bolivia is pretending that its unlawful behavior remains without
consequence."3%

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent opposes the application of the DCF method to value the Claimants’
investments. It argues that this method is unreliable, in particular because of the
uncertainty of the assumptions necessary to project future cash flows. Some of the
factors commonly recognized by arbitral jurisprudence to conclude that there is
insufficient certainty are the lack of a track record of the activity and profitability of the
asset or the unpredictability of the legal and socio-economic environment.

The Respondent submits that the present case involves numerous uncertainties. In
particular, there is no track record of profitability of the concessions and the

363 Metalclad v. Mexico, Award of 30 August 2000.
364 Tecmed v. Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003.

365 Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4 (“Wena v. Egypt’),
Award of 8 December 2000.

366 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/12 (“Azurix v. Argentina’), Award of 14
July 2006.

367 S. Ripinsky and K. Williams, "Damages in International Investment Law," pp. 229-230, Exh. CL-58.
368 Reply, 372.

113

339.

340.

341.

assumptions necessary to forecast future cash flows are highly speculative,
especially regarding the reserves of ulexite and their price.

Instead of the DCF method, the Respondent proposes calculating the FMV of the
investments in accordance with the parameters set out in the second sentence of
Article VI(2) of the BIT for cases in which such FMV is difficult to ascertain. These
parameters include the invested capital, its depreciation, the repatriated capital and
the replacement value of the investment, among other factors.

The Respondent emphasizes that, for the second sentence of Article VI(2) of the BIT
to apply, the establishment of the FMV must be merely difficult, not impossible.
According to the Respondent, "by using the word ‘difficult’, the Treaty was precisely
looking to include the current situation, where there is not enough certainty to project
future flows."37°

As a consequence, Bolivia proposes a valuation based on the Claimants’
unamortized investments, i.e., their sunk costs or net investment.*”! According to the
Respondent, this valuation method has been accepted by many international tribunals

374

(e.g., Azurix v. Argentina,*” Metalclad v. Mexico,*” Tecmed v. Mexico,?” and Wena

Hotels v. Egypt) and scholars (e.g., Marboe,°”° Wells3”” and Ripinsky and

369 Article VI(2) of the BIT provides: “The compensation shall be based on to the market value of the
affected investments on a date immediately prior to that in which the measure became public
knowledge. When such value is difficult to determine, the compensation may be fixed in accordance
with valuation principles that are generally recognized as equitable, taking into consideration the
invested capital, its depreciation, the capital repatriated to that date, its replacement value and other
relevant factors,” Tribunal’s translation. (The Spanish original reads: “La compensacion se basara en
el valor de mercado de las inversiones afectadas en una fecha inmediatamente anterior a aquella en
que la medida llegd a conocimiento publico. Cuando resulte dificil determinar dicho valor, la
compensacién podra ser fijada de acuerdo con los principios de avaluacion generalmente
reconocidos como eduitativos, teniendo en cuenta el capital invertido, su depreciacion, el capital
repatriado hasta esa fecha, el valor de reposici6n y otros factores relevantes. [...]”).

370 Counter-Mem., § 320, Tribunal's translation.
371 Counter-Mem., ¥§ 319-321.

872 Azurix v. Argentina, Award of 14 July 2006.
373 Metalclad v. Mexico, Award of 30 August 2000.
374 Tecmed v. Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003.

3875 Wena v. Egypt, Award of 8 December 2000

376 |. Marboe, “Compensation and Damages in International Law-The Limits of ‘Fair Market Value,”
The Journal of World Investments and Trade, p. 745 (Exh. CL-25).

877 L.T. Wells, “Double Dipping in Arbitration Awards? An Economist Questions Damages Awarded to
Karaha Bodas Company in Indonesia,” Arbitration International, Kluwer Law International (2003) Vol.
19, Issue 4, p. 471-481 (Exh. R-342).

114

342.

343.

344.

378 S.
R-320)

Williams*”®) to calculate the FMV of investments when there is insufficient certainty
regarding future cash flows, for instance with respect to recently acquired assets or
assets that have not started generating cash flows. Relying on Wena and Tecmed,
the Respondent also submits that tribunals have rejected the DCF method when
there is a significant disparity between the amount invested and the results of a DCF
computation.?”°

As a result, the Respondent contends that the FMV of the concessions in June 2004
should be similar to the value that the Claimants paid for their acquisition in 2001,
minus the depreciation of the invested capital and the capital repatriated as of that
date, in accordance with Article VI(2) of the BIT.3®°

c. Analysis

The Tribunal has held that the appropriate standard of compensation is the customary
international law principle of full reparation. According to that principle, the Claimants
must be restored to the position they would have been in had the unlawful act not
occurred. Both Parties agree that such reparation should reflect the FMV of the
investment, but disagree on the methodology to calculate that FMV. They also
diverge on the relevant valuation date, a matter that is addressed later (see Section
VII.A.4.c.i below). The Claimants assert that the DCF analysis is the appropriate
method to value the FMV of NMM, since it qualifies as a going concern with a proven
track record of profitability.°*' The Respondent, by contrast, submits that the FMV of
the concessions must be established by reference to the net amounts invested in
accordance with Article VI(2) of the BIT.3%

The Tribunal notes that the DCF method is widely accepted as the appropriate
method to assess the FMV of going concerns with a proven record of profitability.
The World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment, cited by

ipinsky and K. Williams, Damages in International Investment Law, BIICL (2008), p. 227 (Exh.

379 Counter-Mem., J 331-333.

380 Counter-Mem., § 326.

381 Reply, 343.

382 "The compensation will be based on the market value of the affected investments on a date
immediately prior to the date on which the measure reaches the general public. Where it is difficult to
determine this value, the compensation may be set in accordance with the valuation principles

generally recognized as fair, taking into account the capital invested, its depreciation, the capital
repatriated to that date, the replacement value and other relevant factors. [...]," Tribunal's translation.

115

both Parties,°®° suggest that the market value of an expropriated investment may be
determined "for a going concern with a proven record of profitability, on the basis of
the discounted cash flow value."*** This approach has been endorsed by a large
number of investment tribunals.°85

345. By contrast, the method proposed by the Respondent is applicable only when it is
difficult to establish the FMV of the expropriated investments.°®° As the Respondent's
economic expert explained during the hearing on the merits, sunk costs are "generally
used when alternative valuation methods are unreliable and/or highly speculative, for
example due to the lack of enough historical information to project with a minimum of
certainty the future evolution of the business that is being valued."°°” While a disparity
between sunk costs and the future profitability of the investment may be one factor
among others to reject the DCF method, there is no authority to suggest that
damages should be quantified on the basis of sunk costs because of that disparity
only. 38

346. The Claimants contend that both NMM and Quiborax were going concerns at the time
of the expropriation and therefore their FMV may be established on the basis of the
DCF method.*®° The Tribunal notes however that the Claimants claim that there has
been an expropriation of NMM’s investments in Bolivia (i.e., the mining concessions)
and of Quiborax’s investments in Bolivia (which the Tribunal understands to have
been mainly its shares in NMM). Hence, Quiborax’s FMV as such is irrelevant. The

383 See Mem., § 208; Counter-Mem., § 294.

384 World Bank, "Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment," 2002 (Exh. CL-20),
Guideline IV.6(i).

385 See, e.g. Merrill & Ring Forestry L. P. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, ICSID Administrated,
Award of 31 March 2010, § 264; Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan, SCC Case
No. V064/2008, Final Award of 8 June 2010, 70-71; Walter Bau v. Thailand, Award of 1 July 2009,
| 14.22; Sistem Muhendislik Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.S. v. Kyrgyz Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/06/1, Award of 9 September 2009, 164; CMS v. Argentina, Award of 12 May 2005, {J 416-
417; Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Award of 24 July 2008, § 793.

386 The Tribunal does not believe that the sunk costs should be disregarded completely simply
because it is spelled out in Article VII(2) of the BIT, which sets out standard of compensation for lawful
expropriations. Even in the absence of the second sentence of Article VII(2), the Tribunal could find it
appropriate to resort to this method if the investments to be valued were not going concerns or did not
have proven record of profitability.

387 Econ One Presentation, slide 47, Tribunal's translation.

388 In Wena and Tecmed, this disparity was only one of several factors considered by the tribunals to
reject the DCF method, such as insufficient financing, short time of operation and lack of reliable
information to perform a DCF calculation. See Wena v. Egypt, Award of 8 December 2000, § 118;
Tecmed v. Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003, § 186). See also Lemire v. Ukraine, Award of 28 March
2011, 98.

389 Reply, 19 342-343.

116

347.

348.

Claimants implicitly concede this, as they have not attempted to calculate Quiborax’s
FMV; rather, they have focused on the valuation of the concessions owned by
NMM.*° In the Tribunal’s view, this suffices to establish the FMV of both NMM’s and
Quiborax’s investments in Bolivia (as the concessions were NMM'’s primary asset and
Quiborax’s main assets in Bolivia were its shares in NMM). The Tribunal will thus
focus on the FMV of NMM’s concessions.

NMM was incorporated in July 2001 and became the owner of the concessions in
August 2001 after RIGGSA’s contribution (see Section Il above). The record
suggests that NMM commenced operating the concessions in late 2001 and
commenced sales in 2002.*°' NMM thus operated the concessions for at least two
full years, and was operating at the time of the expropriation. In the Tribunal’s view,
NMM'’s mining activity has a sufficient record of operations and prospective
profitability to justify applying the DCF method to value the concessions. As
discussed in detail below, there is sufficient evidence in the record to make a
projection of the future cash flows that would have been generated by the
concessions with reasonable certainty. In particular, there is sufficient evidence of
the reserves found in the concessions, prospective future sales (arising from the
Supply Contract between Quiborax and RIGSSA in 2001°°?) and sufficient information
on prospective prices and costs to justify valuing the concessions on the basis of the
DCF method.

4. Valuation of ulexite reserves and resources
a. The Claimants’ position

According to the Claimants, but for Bolivia's expropriation of the concessions, they
would have enjoyed the economic benefits of those concessions during at least forty
further years. This duration is based on an estimate of the reserves and resources of
ulexite in the mining concessions established by the Claimants’ mining expert, Behre

399 See Navigant, First ER, {{] 2-4, describing the scope of the damages' valuation. See also Reply, 4
312, where the Claimants explain that “they have not suggested a valuation method based on the
value of Quiborax as a company but for the confiscation of the Concession, but a valuation of the fair
market value of the Bolivian Concessions [...]” (emphasis in original).

391 Navigant, First ER, § 70; Seraudit’s Independent Audit Report of NMM at 30 September 2002, Exh.

NCI-90.

382 Exh. CD-16 and NCI-06.

117

Dolbear.*°° Indeed, the concessions were not granted for a limited number of years
but for the exploitation of the available mining resources.°***

349. The Claimants rebut the Respondent's criticisms regarding the valuation of the
reserves, and in particular the argument that they did not differentiate between
reserves and resources, of which only the former has economic value according to
Bolivia. The Claimants submit that both reserves and resources should be taken into
account in the evaluation of the concessions and that the assessment carried out by
Navigant and Behre Dolbear is correct from both an economic and industry practice
perspective.2°5

350. According to the projection provided by Behre Dolbear, proven and probable reserves
and indicated resources (the latter factored downward by 50 percent) on the Doha
Juanita, Borateras de Cuevitas and Basilea concessions totaled 5.02 million
tonnes.°°° As for the remaining concessions (Inglaterra, Sur, Don David, Tete, La
Negra and Pococho), Behre Dolbear came up with an estimate of 1.26 Mt inferred
resources (factored downward by 75 percent).°9”

351. Navigant, the Claimants' economic expert, has attributed value to the reserves and
resources in the mining concessions that have commercial value following Behre
Dolbear's estimate. The Claimants contend that, to put them back in the position in
which they would have been had the expropriation not occurred, this valuation must
be calculated on the date of the Award, i.e., under an ex post approach. Their claim
is therefore calculated using 30 June 2013 as a proxy for the date of the Award.
However, for comparative purposes, they also provide an ex ante calculation.°%

393 Behre Dolbear, First ER, { 128-147.

394 See Art. 10 of the Mining Code (Exh. CD-6): “The mining concession grants its titleholder, subject
to the payment of mining fees, an exclusive right in rem to carry out for an indefinite time prospection,
exploration, exploitation, concentration, smelting, refining and commercialization activities regarding all
the mineral substances found it that concession,” Tribunal’s translation. The original reads: "La
concesion minera otorga a su titular y con la condicién del pago de patentes, el derecho real y
exclusivo de realizar por tiempo indefinido actividades de prospeccién, exploracién, explotacion,
concentracién, fundicion, refinacidén y comercializacién de todas las substancias minerales que se
encuentren en ella [...]”.

395 Reply, J 402-418.
396 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 128-133; Second ER, {§ 27, 65.

397 Behre Dolbear First ER, 9] 128-137; Second ER, § 27. Although in its first report Behre Dolbear
only refers to these as “resources,” in its second report it clarifies that they are to be considered
“Inferred Resources” (Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 27, 69-70).

998 Navigant, First ER, § 108-166; Navigant, Second ER, § 155-156.

118

352. As explained by Navigant, total damages under the ex post approach are calculated
under a four-step process:°°°

a. First, the foregone (i.e., past) cash flows are calculated for years 2004 to 2013,
using all information available as of 30 June 2013 (the valuation date). The lost
cash flows for this period amount to US$ 57,709,382.4°

b. Second, pre-award interest is added to these cash flows, "such that these cash
flows can all be summed as of a single date."“°' As a result, all past cash flows
are adjusted for pre-award interest to 30 June 2013. In accordance with Art. V1.2
of the BIT, which establishes that "interest will accumulate at a commercially
established rate,"“? Navigant proposes two alternative interest rates: the
Bolivian sovereign debt rate and LIBOR + 2%, both on a compound basis.
Applying these interest rates, the present value of the lost cash flows for years
2004 to 2013 amounts to either US$ 65,974,958 or US$ 60,322,185.4

c. Third, Navigant calculates projected cash flows from 2013-2037 (which reflects
the time period following the Award during which the Claimants estimate the
reserves in the concessions to last). It then applies a discount rate of 10.78%
(equivalent to the 2013 Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) as calculated
by Navigant*), in order to bring the cash flows back to present value on 30
June 2013. The result of this calculation is US$ 80,137,484.4°>

d. Fourth, the sum of the present value of the past cash flows (b. above) is added
to the net present value of cash flow projected after 30 June 2013 (c. above).
Depending on the interest rate used to adjust past cash flows, the total amount
of damages under the ex post method is calculated at US$ 146,112,442 or US$
140,459,669 respectively.*°°

999 Navigant, First ER, § 167-216; Navigant, Second ER, § 157-160.
400 Navigant, Second ER, § 157, table 9.

401 Navigant, First ER, § 1

402 Claimants’ translation.

403 Navigant, Second ER, § 158-159, tables 10 and 11.

404 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.2 and F. [In its first report, Navigant calculated the 2009 WACC at
14.61%. See Navigant, First ER, § 215).

405 Navigant, First ER, {§ 189-215; Navigant, Second ER, § 160.
408 Navigant, Second ER, § 160, table 12.

119

353.

354.

355.

While the Claimants admit that Behre Dolbear has not been able to confirm the exact
amount of reserves and resources of the concessions, they submit that both Behre
Dolbear's and Navigant's calculations are in line with acceptable industry
standards.*°” More specifically, with respect to Navigant’s DCF calculation, the
Claimants maintain that:

a. The discount rate used by Navigant to bring the projected cash flows back to
present value (equivalent to 10.78%) is reasonable, as it is based on the WACC
of the Claimants’ investments.

b. The currencies used are in accordance with standard practice. The Claimants
note that the revenues related to the concessions are earned in U.S. dollars, but
costs are predominantly incurred in Bolivian currency. Taking this into account,
and since the valuation must be built into a single currency, Navigant has
converted the forecast cash flows in Bolivianos (Bs), while the Respondent's
expert chose to carry out the DCF analysis in U.S. dollars. Nevertheless, the
Claimants point out that “the choice of currency is largely irrelevant, particularly if
purchasing power parity (“PPP”) is employed as suggested by Dr. Flores [of
Econ One].”4°%

The Claimants also deny that Decree 27,590 had any effect on their ex post
valuation. Although Decree 27,590, which was issued on the day of the expropriation
and entered into force on 23 September 2004, did prohibit the export of non-
industrialized non-metallic minerals, this Decree was abrogated by Decree 27,799
issued on 20 October 2004.4°°

For the purposes of comparison, the Claimants also submit the FMV of their
investment using the ex ante valuation method with a result of US$ 61,681,329 or
US$ 49,641,600, depending on which pre-award interest rate (Bolivian sovereign debt
rate or LIBOR + 2%) is applied.*'°

407 Reply, § 411.

408 Navigant, Second ER, 55.

409 Tr., Day 1, 6-8; COSS, slide 27; Exh. CD-195.
410 Navigant, Second ER, table 8.

120

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

b. The Respondent’s position
i. Valuation under the sunk costs method

Applying the sunk costs method, the Respondent contends that the value of the
mining concessions in June 2004 should be similar to the value which the Claimants
invested in 2001, minus (as required by the BIT) the depreciation of the invested
capital and the capital repatriated up to that date.

According to the Respondent's economic expert, Econ One, the Claimants invested
amounts of US$ 800,000"! and repatriated US$ 177,508.42 Accordingly, the
difference (US$ 622,492) is the Claimants’ net investment and the maximum amount
to which they are entitled in accordance with the Treaty and international law.

ii. | Valuation under the DCF method

If the Tribunal were to favor the DCF method, the Respondent submits that the
Claimants have applied it incorrectly, thus exaggerating their claim.

First, the Respondent argues that Quiborax is not the international player it claims to
be and that the loss of concessions did not have a significant impact on its
production. Contrary to what the Claimants allege, Quiborax is not and never has
been the first producer of borates in South America, let alone the fourth producer
worldwide. Quiborax also exaggerates when it claims that the loss of the concessions
caused the loss of its agricultural business, because (i) Quiborax's main activity is not
the sale of agrochemical products but the sale of boric acid; (ii) it did not have an
important market for agrochemical products, and (iii) the loss of the mining
concessions did not prevent Quiborax from continuing the production of agrochemical
products. According to the Respondent, Quiborax did not depend exclusively on
Bolivian resources and could continue its production of agrochemical products without
them.

Second, the Respondent further contends that the Claimants and their economic
expert have oversimplified their assessment of ulexite reserves and resources and
inflated the levels of ulexite in the concessions as a consequence. For the

411 Econ One, First ER, Section IV(B). This refers to the total value of the concessions. Econ One
states that Quiborax’s share is 50% of that value (Econ One, First ER, 9 159, 161). In fact, the
Tribunal has established that Quiborax owns approximately 51% of NMM (see § 18 above).

412 Econ One, First ER, Section IV(C).

121

361.

362.

363.

364.

Respondent, Navigant ignores Behre Dolbear's distinction between reserves and
resources and thus assigns economic value to alleged reserves that not even Behre
Dolbear has included in its assessment. The value of the concessions should be
calculated exclusively on the basis of proved and probable reserves based on
Aquater-EniChem's field work and not on the basis of extrapolations that speculate on
possible quantities of ulexite that remain unconfirmed.

Third, the Respondent and its expert Econ One also submit that the Claimants have
inflated their revenue projections, due to the following flaws in Navigant’s calculations:

a. Navigant has used the different currencies inconsistently, applying different
exchange rates with the sole purpose of artificially inflating the FMV.

b. While Econ One agrees that the discount rate should be based on the WACC, it
argues that Navigant has underestimated the WACC considerably. The discount
rate should be 22.99%, as opposed to the rate proposed by Navigant, which
Econ One characterizes as unreasonable.‘'?

Finally, the Respondent contends that the investment should be valued on a date
immediately prior to the expropriation, as set out in Article VI(2) of the BIT. As
discussed in more detail below, there is no justification for moving the date of
valuation to 2013. In addition, the Claimants’ ex post valuation ignores the economic
effects of Decree 27,590, which prohibited the export of non-industrialized non-
metallic minerals.

Having corrected Navigant's conceptual errors, Econ One estimates that the FMV of
the concessions on 22 June 2004 (i.e. one day before the alleged expropriation),
applying the DCF method, is US$ 2.1 million.*’* In Bolivia's view, this sum is
reasonable, considering the price (US$ 400,000) at which the Ugalde brothers sold
50% of their participation in the seven concessions that surround the area explored
by Aquater-EniChem, and the resulting internal rate of return of 44%.

c. Analysis

Having found that DCF is the appropriate valuation method, the Tribunal will now
determine the variables and assumptions to be used for purposes of the DCF
computation. It will start with the valuation date (i), then review the projected cash

413 Econ One, First ER, 9 121-149; Second ER, 9 133-200.
414 Econ One, First ER, 153; Second ER, § 201.

122

365.

366.

367.

368.

flows, taking into account the alleged reserves and resources (ii) and the Claimants’
projected production profile (iii). It will then assess the forecast of ulexite prices and
costs (iv) and determine the discount rate to be applied (v), before setting out its
conclusions (vi). The Tribunal has reached its conclusions in this Section VII.A.4.c by
majority, Arbitrator Stern dissenting in accordance with her Partially Dissenting
Opinion. Hence, references to the Tribunal in this section must be understood as
references to the majority.

i. Valuation date

The Claimants maintain that, in order to fully repair the damages which they suffered
as a consequence of Bolivia's unlawful expropriation, the FMV of the investment
should be established ex post, that is, on the date of the Award.

The Claimants argue that ex post valuation allows the Tribunal to calculate the
damages actually suffered by them taking into account all available information.
According to the Claimants, "if damages are the result of unlawful acts, as in the
present case, the risk that the investment would have turned out more profitable than
could have been foreseen at the time of expropriation, must be allocated to the
wrongdoer, and not to the investor."*"® Relying on ICSID cases and scholarly writings,
the Claimants argue that an ex post assessment is appropriate when the value of the
expropriated undertaking has increased following the unlawful act.*"®

In addition, they submit that ex post valuation is more accurate since it requires
projections of future cash flows over a shorter duration.*'” As a result, it addresses
the Respondent's concern for the “reasonable certainty” of the Claimants’ lost profits
better than ex ante valuation.

The Claimants explain Navigant’s ex post valuation as follows:

Like the tribunal in Amco, Navigant divides the period of valuation in two:
(i) from the date of the expropriation to the date of the award (or current
date), and (ii) from the date of the award (or current date) until the end of
the life of the Concessions. The value of the Concessions during the first
(past) period is calculated ex post, using all information available as of
current date. The second (future) period is valued as of [the] current date,
using the DCF method. Hence, the ex post valuation combines two

415 Mem., § 195.

416 Ripinsky Sergey, Williams, Kevin, Damages in International Investment Law, British Institute of
Intemational Law and Comparative Law (2008), pp. 242-259, Exh. CL-27.

417 Mem., § 198.

123

369.

different valuation methods for two different time periods, marked by the
date of the award.*"®

The Respondent, on the other hand, rejects an ex post valuation. It argues that, even

if the Tribunal were to accept the valuation method postulated by the Claimants and

"deem that Bolivia should compensate the Claimants for the equivalent of the FMV of

the mining concessions," it should decide that "this value should be calculated at the

date of the expropriation."*'? In the Respondent's view, there are no reasons to justify

setting the valuation date after the date of the alleged expropriation of the

concessions. To the contrary, it argues that the Claimants’ ex post valuation should

be dismissed for the following reasons:42°

a.

First, it is contrary to the BIT and to international case law. Article VI(2) of the
BIT provides that the FMV of the investment shall be calculated on the date of
the expropriation. The Respondent agrees with the Claimants that payment of
compensation pursuant to Article VI(2) of the BIT is a condition for the
lawfulness of the expropriation, but argues that this does not mean that it does
not fully repair the damage suffered by the investor. The Respondent cites
several international tribunals which held that the FMV on the date of the
expropriation provided appropriate compensation for unlawful expropriation
(e.g., Wena Hotels v. Egypt, Middle East Cement v. Egypt, Sedelmayer v.
Russia, Tecmed v. Mexico and Metalclad v. Mexico).

Second, ex post valuation is arbitrary and speculative. The date of the award
has nothing to do with the facts of the case. The date of expropriation is the only
one that is objectively related to the dispute.

Third, the decisions cited by the Claimants are inapplicable to the present case.
In Phillips Petroleum v. Iran and Siemens v. Argentina, the tribunals valued the
investment on the date of the expropriation. In ADC v. Hungary and Amco II, the
tribunals did indeed adopt an ex post valuation, but neither of these cases is
applicable here.

418 Reply, § 392, referring to Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, |\CSID Case
No. ARB/81/8 (“Amco II’), Final Award of 5 June 1990, Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration XVII
(1992), 99 96-105.

419 Counter-Mem., § 354, Tribunal's translation.
420 Counter-Mem., 9 § 335-354.

124

370.

371.

372.

d. Fourth, the Claimants’ position lacks coherence. They accept that the
compensation should be the equivalent of the FMV of the concessions, defined
as the price that a hypothetical willing buyer and an able seller would have
agreed. Hence, the FMV must necessarily be calculated on a certain date
taking into account the information available on that date.

The Tribunal has already held that the standard of compensation in this case is not
the one set forth in Article VI(2) of the BIT, but the full reparation principle under
customary international law as enunciated by the PClJ in Chorzéw and restated in
Article 31 of the ILC Articles, because it is faced with an expropriation that is unlawful
not merely because compensation is lacking (see paragraphs 326-327 above). As
explained in the following paragraphs, the majority of the Tribunal considers that this
requires an ex post valuation, i.e., valuing the damage on the date of the award and
taking into consideration information available then.

The majority has arrived at this conclusion after carefully analyzing the PClu’s
reasoning in Chorzéw. As is in the present case, Chorzéw dealt with an expropriation
where the wrongful act of the expropriating State was not limited to the lack of
payment of compensation.**’ The Court held that the compensation to be awarded in
these cases “is not necessarily limited to the value of the undertaking at the moment
of the dispossession, plus interest to the day of payment. This limitation would only
be admissible if the Polish Government had the right to expropriate, and if its wrongful
act consisted merely in not having paid to the two Companies the just price of what
was expropriated.”“”? According to the Court, a contrary conclusion would be
“tantamount to rendering lawful liquidation and unlawful dispossession
indistinguishable in so far as their financial results are concerned.”4°

Rather, on the basis that “reparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the
consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all
probability, have existed if that act had not been committed,"*** the Court concluded

421 The PClJ held that “[t]he action of Poland which the Court has judged to be contrary to the Geneva
Convention is not an expropriation to render which lawful only the payment of fair compensation would
have been wanting; it is a seizure of property, rights and interests which could not be expropriated
even against compensation, save under the exceptional conditions fixed by Article 7 of the said
Convention.” Factory at Chorzow, Germany v. Polish Republic, PClJ Series A, No. 17, Judgment on
Merits, 13 September 1928, p. 46.

422 Loe. cit., p. 47.

43 Loc. cit.

424 Loc. cit.

125

that an unlawful expropriation’*> “involves the obligation to restore the undertaking
and, if this be not possible, to pay its value at the time of the indemnification, which
value is designed to take the place of restitution which has become impossible.”42°

373. When it came to determining “what sum must be awarded [...] to place the
dispossessed Companies as far as possible in the economic situation in which they
would probably have been if the seizure had not taken place,”*?” the Court found itself
dissatisfied with the data supplied by the parties. It thus ordered an expert inquiry.
The questions the Court asked the expert are enlightening for present purposes: it
asked for two valuations, one based on the asset value of the undertaking on the date
of the taking plus any additional profits accrued until the date of the judgment
(Question |),*7° and another based on the asset value of the undertaking on the date
of the judgment (Question I!).“#? The Court explained that the purpose of the first
question was “to determine the monetary value, both of the object which should have
been restored in kind and of the additional damage, on the basis of the estimated
value of the undertaking including stocks at the moment of taking possession by the
Polish Government, together with any probable profit that would have accrued to the

425 The Court refers to “[t]he dispossession of an industrial undertaking — the expropriation of which is
prohibited by the Geneva Convention —[...].” Loc. cit., pp. 47-48.

426 Loc. cit., p. 48 (emphasis added).
427 Loe. cit., p. 49.

428 In Question |, the Court requested the expert to establish the value of the undertaking on the date
of the expropriation on the basis of its assets, as well as the financial results (profits or losses) that
would have accrued from the date of the taking to the date of the judgment. It did so in the following
terms: “l.- A. What was the value, on July 3rd, 1922, expressed in Reichsmarks current at the present
time, of the undertaking for the manufacture of nitrate products of which the factory was situated at
Chorzow in Polish Upper Silesia, in the state in which that undertaking (including the lands, buildings,
equipment, stocks and processes at its disposal, supply and delivery contracts, goodwill and future
prospects) was, on the date indicated, in the hands of the Bayerische and Oberschlesische
Stickstoffwerke?

B. What would have been the financial results, expressed in Reichsmarks current at the present time
(profits or losses), which would probably have been given by the undertaking thus constituted from
July 3rd, 1922, to the date of the present judgment, if it had been in the hands of the said
Companies?” Loc. cit, p. 51.

429 In Question II, the Court requested the expert to establish the value of the undertaking on the date
of the judgment if that undertaking (considering all of its assets) had remained in the hands of the
dispossessed companies and had either remained substantially as it had been on the date of the
taking or had developed in a similar fashion as other undertakings of the same kind. It did so in the
following terms: “Il.- What would be the value at the date of the present judgment, expressed in
Reichsmarks current at the present time, of the same undertaking (Chorzow) if that undertaking
(including lands, buildings, equipment, stocks, available processes, supply and delivery contracts,
goodwill and future prospects) had remained in the hands of the Bayerische and Oberschlesische
Stickstoffwerke, and had either remained substantially as it was in 1922 or had been developed
proportionately on lines similar to those applied in the case of other undertakings of the same kind,
controlled by the Bayerische, for instance, the undertaking of which the factory is situated at
Piesteritz?” Loc. cit., pp. 51-52.

126

374.

375.

376.

undertaking between the date of taking possession and that of the expert opinion.”4°°
The purpose of the second question, on the other hand, was to ascertain “the present
value [of the undertaking] on the basis of the situation at the moment of the expert
enquiry and leaving aside the situation presumed to exist in 1922."431

Both of these valuations have the same purpose: to establish the value of the losses
suffered by the dispossessed companies on the date of the Court’s judgment, either
by (i) assessing the value of the undertaking on the date of the taking plus any lost
profits accrued between the taking and the judgment, or (ii) assessing the value of the
undertaking on the date of the judgment. Although the Court was using an asset-
based valuation rather than a DCF method,‘ the purpose of the exercise is clear:
either valuation would have allowed the Court to award the dispossessed companies
the value of their losses on the date of the judgment.

Notably, the Court retained full discretion in determining the sum to be awarded.
Indeed, after noting the difficulties raised by these two questions, “difficulties which
are however inherent in the special case under consideration, and closely connected
with the time that elapsed between the dispossession and the demand for
compensation, and with the transformations of the factory and the progress made in
the industry with which the factory is concerned,”“* the Court adopted the following
approach:

In view of these difficulties, the Court considers it preferable to endeavor to
ascertain the value to be estimated by several methods, in order to permit of
a comparison and if necessary of completing the results of the one by those
of the others. The Court, therefore, reserves every right to review the
valuations referred to in the different formulae; basing itself on the results of
the said valuations and of facts and documents submitted to it, it will then
proceed to determine the sum to be awarded to the German Government, in
conformity with the legal principles set out above. 454

The Chorzow case settled after this judgment and history does not tell us how the
Court would have assessed the two valuations and set the amount of damages. This
being so, what matters here is, first, that the Court envisaged two valuations, which
were both aimed at establishing the damage suffered by the dispossessed companies
on the date of the judgment. What matters further is that the Court considered itself to

430 Loc. cit., p. 52.
431 Loc. cit., p. 52.

432 Had the Court been using the DCF method rather than an asset-based method, it would have
valued the undertaking on the basis of its future profit-making capacity.

433 Loe. cit., p. 53.
434 Loe. cit., p. 53-54.

127

have full discretion (“every right’) to assess the valuations for purposes of determining
the sum to be awarded,**° with the obvious aim of implementing the general principle
it had set out earlier in the same judgment, which is to award full reparation of the
harm caused by the unlawful expropriation.

377. The Tribunal thus concludes by majority that, dealing with an expropriation that is
unlawful not merely because compensation is lacking, its task is to quantify the losses
suffered by the claimant on the date of the award (or on a proxy for that date). This is
easily explained by a reference to restitution: damages stand in lieu of restitution
which would take place just following the award or judgment. It is also easy to
understand if one keeps in mind that what must be repaired is the actual harm done,
as opposed to the value of the asset when taken.

378. Several investment arbitration tribunals,“°° other adjudicatory bodies (such as the
European Court of Human Rights),“°” and scholars**® have followed this approach.

435 Loe. cit., p. 53.

438 See, e.g., ADC v. Hungary, Award of 2 October 2006, § 497; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V.,
Conocophillips Hamaca B.V. and Conocophillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 3 September 2013,
§ 343; and Yukos v. Russia, Final Award of 18 July 2014, §§ 1763-1769. In Amco II, although not a
BIT case, an ICSID tribunal chaired by Rosalyn Higgins equated a denial of justice arising from the
revocation of a license to an unlawful taking of contract rights and awarded damages valued on the
date of the award (see Amco Il, { 94-105). See also Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/8, Award of 6 February 2007, 9] 352-353, where the tribunal endorsed the view that
the principle of full reparation required awarding the value of the investment on the date of the award,
but was ultimately guided by the claimant's request for relief, which sought the book value of the
investment at the time of the expropriation plus lost profits and other consequential damages arisen
thereafter (see Siemens, {J 322-389). The majority notes that this approach serves the same purpose
as valuing the investment on the date of the award (see { 374 supra).

437 See, e.g., Amoco International Finance Corp. v. Iran, lran US Claims Tribunal, Award of 14 July
1987, |] 192-204. Papamichalopoulos and others v. Greece, 9 ECHR 118, Judgment of 31 October
1995, 36. See also |. Marboe, Compensation and Damages in International Law: The Limits of "Fair
Market Value", Vol. 4, issue 6, November 2007, p. 752 (noting that the European Court of Human
Rights "has repeatedly awarded amounts that took into account the increase in value of unlawfully
expropriated property between the time of dispossession and the date of the judgment”, and citing in
this respect Belvedere Alberghiera S.r.l. v. Italy, ECHR No. 31524/96, 2000-VI, § 35; Motais de
Narbonne v. France (satisfaction équitable), ECHR No. 48161/99, 27 May 2003, § 19; Terazzi S.R.L.
v. Italy (satisfaction équitable), ECHR No. 27265/95, 26 October 2004, { 37).

438 See, e.g., |. Marboe, "Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law,”
4 3.266 (“As unlawful expropriations represent violations of international law they entail the State's
responsibility to fully repair the financial harm done to the former owner. The applicable differential
method requires assessing the difference between the financial situation of the person affected and
the financial situation he or she would be in, if the expropriation had not taken place. This comparison
is made on the day of the judgment or award. It follows that the decisive valuation date is the date of
the award.”) See also M. Sorensen, Manual of Public International Law (St. Martin's Press, New York
1968) p. 567, ¥ 9.18 ("[s]ince monetary compensation must, as far as possible, resemble restitution,
the value at the date when the indemnity is paid must be the criterion"); and G. Schwarzenberger,
International Law as Applied by International Courts and Tribunals, Vol. 1 (Stevens & Sons Limited,
London 1957), p. 666 (“[m]uch is to be said in favour of the date of the judgment as the operative date.

128

Some authorities also suggest that such valuation date only applies if the value of the
asset increased after the taking, not when it decreased.**° Here, this issue does not
arise and hence can be left open. Indeed, as is explained below, the Claimants have
shown that the value of their investments would have increased after expropriation.

379. In the majority's opinion, assessing the value of the investment on the date of the
award (taking the date of the most recent valuation as a proxy) allows the Tribunal to
take into consideration ex post data, i.e., information available after the date of the
expropriation. Its task is to compensate the Claimants’ actual loss on the date of the
award. What matters is that the victim of the harm is placed in the situation in which it
would have been in real life, not more, not less. Using actual information is better
suited for this purpose than projections based on information available on the date of
the expropriation, as it allows to better reflect reality (including market fluctuations)
when attempting to “re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have
existed if that act had not been committed.”44°

380. The distinction between damage computation for an unlawful taking as opposed to a
lawful one was well put in Amco II:

If the purpose of compensation is to put Amco in the position it would have
been in had it received the benefits of the Profit-Sharing Agreement, then
there is no reason of logic that requires that to be done by reference only to
data that would have been known to a prudent businessman in 1980. It
may, on one view, be the case that in a lawful taking, Amco would have
been entitled to the fair market value of the contract at the moment of
dispossession. In making such a valuation, a Tribunal in 1990 would
necessarily exclude factors subsequent to 1980. But if Amco is to be placed
as if the contract had remained in effect, then subsequent known factors
bearing on that performance are to be reflected in the valuation technique.

[ht

381. It could be argued that ex post valuation or data should not be used because it was
unforeseeable on the date of the breach. As the majority has asked itself this question

 

It is the judgment or award which establishes between the parties with binding force that reparation is
due from one party to the other. If restitution in kind were possible, it would have to take place as soon
as possible after the judgment or award. It, therefore, appears appropriate that the amount of any
monetary substitute for actual restitution should be related to the same date.”).

439 See, e.g., Yukos v. Russia, PCA Case No. AA 227, Final Award of 18 July 2014, § 1768.
440 Factory at Chorzow, Merits, 1928, P.C.1.J., Series A, No. 17, p. 47.

441 See Amco II, § 96. See also Marboe, Compensation and Damages in International Law The Limits
of "Fair Market Value" Vol. 4, issue 6, November 2007, p. 753 (‘It follows, thus, from the principle of
full reparation as formulated by the PClJ in Chorzoéw Factory, that the valuation is not normally limited
to the perspective of the date of the illegal act or some other date in the past. An increase in value of
the valuation object, consequential damage, subsequent events and information, at least up until the
date of the judgment or award, must be taken into account in the evaluation of damages.”).

129

382.

383.

and it is discussed in the dissenting opinion of Arbitrator Stern, it is briefly addressed
here.

The harm for which reparation is sought must be caused by the wrongful act. It is
generally accepted that factual causation is not sufficient. An additional element
linked to the nature of the cause, sometimes called “cause in law’? or adequate
causation“? is required. It is in this context that foreseeability is sometimes resorted
to. The Commentary to Article 31 to the ILC Articles expresses this additional
requirement for an adequate cause as follows:

[C]ausality in fact is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for reparation.

There is a further element, associated with the exclusion of injury that is too

“remote” or “consequential” to be the subject of reparation. In some cases,

the criterion of “directness” may be used, in others “foreseeability’ or

“proximity.”444
In other words, a wrongful act may cause a particular damage as a matter of fact.
However, if the factual link between the act and the damage is composed of an
atypical chain of events that could objectively not have been foreseen to ensue from
the act, the damage may not be recoverable. It can be left open here whether the
requirement of legal causation limits only the categories of damages claimed, e.g. lost
profits, or whether it also goes to the magnitude (certainly not the precise amount) of
the loss within a given category.*#° What matters in any event is that the wrongful act
was objectively capable of causing the damage incurred in the ordinary course of
events. Subject possibly to special circumstances, the expropriation of a going
concern appears objectively capable of causing the loss of future profits which may
fluctuate according to the evolution of the economy and the market. If one focuses on
foreseeability in this context, then it is equally clear that losses of future profits
determined by the fluctuations of the market are objectively foreseeable. As a result,
the majority is satisfied that the test of foreseeability (to the extent that it is deemed
part of causation) is met in the circumstances before it.

442 Vivienne Harpwood, Modern Tort Law, Cavendish Publishing 6th Edition, p. 157.

443 Lighthouses Arbitration, France v. Greece, 24/27 July 1956, XII RIAA 155, p. 218 (“Tout lien
adéquat de causalité fait défaut et dans ces conditions le chef de réclamation n° 19 doit étre rejeté.”)

444 ILC Articles, Article 31, Commentary 10.

445 Amco Il, § 174 (“[Floreseeability goes to causation and damages, and normally not the quantum of
profit. That the revocation of the license would cause Amco to be unable to secure its share of the
profits under the Profit-Sharing Agreement was undoubtedly foreseeable. The principle of
foreseeability does not require that the party causing the loss is at that moment of time able to foresee
the precise quantum of the loss actually sustained.”)

130

384.

385.

386.

In this context, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ FMV calculation is
impossible, as they "envision a hypothetical buyer at the date of the expropriation that
would know the economic evolution following that date."“*° Yet, the task here is not to
establish the FMV of the investment on the date of the expropriation, but rather to
remedy the consequences of the unlawful act. For that purpose, the Tribunal
considers by majority that the use of ex post data allows it to value the Claimants’
loss with increased precision. At the same time, the Tribunal must value the loss with
reasonable certainty.‘‘” If the available ex post data is not reasonably certain, then it
will have no choice but to resort to appropriately adjusted ex ante data (i.e., data
available at the date of the expropriation).

Had the expropriation not occurred, the Claimants would still be in possession of their
investment. Consequently, they would have collected cash flows for their mining
activities until today, and would have had the right to continue collecting them until the
depletion of the concessions. Since some cash flows lie in the past and others in the
future, different computations apply to each category, as the Claimants’ expert has
done.*® Past cash flows, i.e., cash flows that would have accrued from the date of
the expropriation to 30 June 2013 (which is the date of Navigant’s latest calculations)
must be brought forward to present value through the application of an interest rate.
By contrast, future cash flows must be discounted back to net present value through
the application of a discount rate.

The Tribunal will apply the principles so determined when quantifying the Claimants’
damages, with the specifications set out in the following sections.

448 Counter-Mem., § 352, Tribunal's translation.

447 Article 36(2) of the ILC Articles provides that “compensation shall cover any financially assessable
damage including loss of profits insofar as it is established.” See also M.M. Whiteman, Damages in
International Law, Vol. 3 (1937), p. 1837 (“In order to be allowable, prospective profits must not be too
speculative, contingent, uncertain, and the like. There must be proof that they were reasonably
anticipated; and that the profits anticipated were probable and not merely possible. If the evidence
shows that there is doubt that profits would have been realized if the wrongful act had not occurred,
damages will be disallowed.”) See also, Asian Agricultural Products LTD (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri
Lanka, |\CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Final Award of 27 June 1990, 4 104; Archer Daniels Midland
Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/04/5, Award of 21 November 2007, § 285; Micula v. Romania, Award of 11 December 2013,
49 1006-1008.

448 Reply, 392, footnote omitted.

131

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

ii. Effects of Decree 27,590

The Respondent's expert maintains that the Claimants’ ex post valuation should be
denied all validity because it ignores the economic effects of Decree 27,590.*?
Decree 27,590, which was issued on the day of the expropriation, prohibited the
export of non-industrialized non-metallic minerals after a transitory period of 90 days
(i.@., as of 24 September 2004). Econ One argues that, as the Claimants did not
have plants or equipment in Bolivia allowing for the chemical industrialization of
ulexite, they would have had to stop exporting ulexite from Bolivia after that date.
Indeed, the Claimants have acknowledged that they stopped exporting ulexite on 24
September 2004.‘°° For the Respondent, this renders the ex post valuation invalid.

The Claimants deny that Decree 27,590 had any effect on their ex post valuation.
Although Decree 27,590, did prohibit the export of non-industrialized non-metallic
minerals, it was abrogated by Decree 27,799 issued on 20 October 2004.*5'

Article 6(ii) of Decree 27,799 of 20 October 2004 clearly states that “Supreme Decree
No. 27,590 of 23 June 2004 is abrogated.”*** The Decree does not specify a date, so
the Tribunal understands that the abrogation was immediate. This means that the
prohibition to export non-industrialized ulexite was in place from 21 September to 20
October 2004, i.e., about one month. In the Tribunal’s view, this has no effect on the
Claimants’ valuation method: the ulexite extracted during the period in which the
prohibition was in place could be exported when that prohibition was lifted.

The Respondent argued during the hearing that Decree 27,799 was in turn revoked in
2008, but did not submit evidence to support this assertion.“%° In addition, the
Claimants have shown that there were significant exports of ulexite from Bolivia to
Brazil between 2003 and 2012,*°* which shows that there was no effective export ban
in place during those years.

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that the enactment of Decree 27,590 does
not invalidate the Claimants’ damages claim.

449 Exh. NCI-58.

450 Reply, § 94.

451 Tr., Day 1, 6-8; COSS, slide 27; Exh. CD-195.
482 Exh. CD-195.

453 Tr., Day 1, 12-15.

454 Exh. CD-196.

132

392.

(a)

393.

iii. | Cash flows: reserves and resources

The duration of the concessions was not limited. Their useful life must therefore be
determined by the quantity of exploitable minerals. Consequently, the Tribunal must
assess such quantity. For that, it must determine which categories of mineral
reserves and resources have an economic value and determine such value.

Mining and financial standards

The Tribunal understands from the materials on record that the mining industry has
developed uniform definitions of mineral reserves and resources.“ The Tribunal has
in particular considered the “Definition Standards for Mineral Resources and Mineral
Reserves” prepared by the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum
(CIM). These standards divide mineral resources into "inferred," "indicated," and
"measured" in an increasing order of confidence in their estimation:

Mineral Resources are sub-divided, in order of increasing geological
confidence, into Inferred, Indicated and Measured categories. An Inferred
Mineral Resource has a lower level of confidence than that applied to an
Indicated Mineral Resource. An Indicated Mineral Resource has a higher
level of confidence than an Inferred Mineral Resource but has a lower level
of confidence than a Measured Mineral Resource.

A Mineral Resource is a concentration or occurrence of diamonds, natural
solid inorganic material, or natural solid fossilized organic material
including base and precious metals, coal, and industrial minerals in or on
the Earth’s crust in such form and quantity and of such a grade or quality
that it has reasonable prospects for economic extraction. The location,
quantity, grade, geological characteristics and continuity of a Mineral
Resource are known, estimated or interpreted from specific geological
evidence and knowledge.

Ll

An ‘Inferred Mineral Resource’ is that part of a Mineral Resource for which
quantity and grade or quality can be estimated on the basis of geological
evidence and limited sampling and reasonably assumed, but not verified,
geological and grade continuity. The estimate is based on limited
information and sampling gathered through appropriate techniques from
locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes.

Ll

An ‘Indicated Mineral Resource’ is that part of a Mineral Resource for
which quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape and physical
characteristics, can be estimated with a level of confidence sufficient to
allow the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to
support mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the
deposit. The estimate is based on detailed and reliable exploration and
testing information gathered through appropriate techniques from locations

455 See Exhs. BD-8, BD-35, BD-36, BD-39 and R-375 to 385.

133

such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes that are spaced
closely enough for geological and grade continuity to be reasonably
assumed.

Ll

A ‘Measured Mineral Resource’ is that part of a Mineral Resource for which
quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape, and physical characteristics are
so well established that they can be estimated with confidence sufficient to
allow the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to
support production planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the
deposit. The estimate is based on detailed and reliable exploration,
sampling and testing information gathered through appropriate techniques
from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes
that are spaced closely enough to confirm both geological and grade
continuity. 456

394. Mineral reserves as distinguished from resources are divided by the CIM between
"probable" and "proven":

Mineral Reserves are sub-divided in order of increasing confidence into
Probable Mineral Reserves and Proven Mineral Reserves. A Probable
Mineral Reserve has a lower level of confidence than a Proven Mineral
Reserve.

A Mineral Reserve is the economically mineable part of a Measured or
Indicated Mineral Resource demonstrated by at least a Preliminary
Feasibility Study. This Study must include adequate information on mining,
processing, metallurgical, economic and other relevant factors that
demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that economic extraction can be
justified. A Mineral Reserve includes diluting materials and allowances for
losses that may occur when the material is mined.

Ll

The term ‘Mineral Reserve’ need not necessarily signify that extraction
facilities are in place or operative or that all governmental approvals have
been received. It does signify that there are reasonable expectations of
such approvals.

Ll

A ‘Probable Mineral Reserve’ is the economically mineable part of an
Indicated and, in some circumstances, a Measured Mineral Resource
demonstrated by at least a Preliminary Feasibility Study. This Study must
include adequate information on mining, processing, metallurgical,
economic, and other relevant factors that demonstrate, at the time of
reporting, that economic extraction can be justified.

[J
A ‘Proven Mineral Reserve’ is the economically mineable part of a
Measured Mineral Resource demonstrated by at least a Preliminary

Feasibility Study. This Study must include adequate information on mining,
processing, metallurgical, economic, and other relevant factors that

458 Exh. BD-35, emphasis removed.

134

395.

396.

(b)

397.

demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that economic extraction is
justified.457
Regarding reserves, the Claimants’ industry expert, Behre Dolbear, relies on the
standards set out by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
Industry Guide 7 as follows:

Reserve. That part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and
legally extracted or produced at the time of the reserve determination.

Ll

Proven (Measured) Reserves. Reserves for which (a) quantity is computed
from dimensions revealed in outcrops, trenches, workings or drill holes;
grade and/or quality are computed from the results of detailed sampling
and (b) the sites for inspection, sampling and measurement are spaced so
closely and the geologic character is so well defined that size, shape,
depth and mineral content of reserves are well-established.

Probable (Indicated) Reserves. Reserves for which quantity and grade
and/or quality are computed from information similar to that used for
proven (measure) reserves, but the sites for inspection, sampling, and
measurement are farther apart or are otherwise less adequately spaced.
The degree of assurance, although lower than that for proven (measured)
reserves, is high enough to assume continuity between points of
observation. 45°
The Parties' experts dispute whether all of the above categories can be assigned
economic value. The Tribunal discusses below which of these categories can be

considered to assess the value of the concessions.

The Aquater-Enichem report

Both Parties' experts have relied on the findings of the Aquater-Enichem report for the
quantification of ulexite reserves in the Claimants’ concessions. As explained in
Section Il above, in 1993 Italian companies Aquater S.p.a. and EniChem S.p.a.,
commissioned by the Bolivian government and sponsored by Italy, performed a grid-
based study of the mineral reserves of a part of the fiscal reserve of the Salar de
Uyuni.*°° Three of the Claimants’ concessions (Basilea, Borateras de Cuevitas and
Dofia Juanita) are partly located inside this grid.

457 Exh. BD-35, emphasis removed.

488 Exh. BD-8, emphasis in original.

459 Exh. BD-4. This study was performed in two phases. In Phase 1, holes were drilled on a grid with
200 meters spacing within an area of 21.56 km2. In Phase 2, drilling was carried out on a closer-
spaced grid (100 meters) in an area of 7.2 km2. The Tribunal understands that when the Parties refer
to the “Aquater-Enichem grid,” they refer to the grid used in Phase 1.

135

398. The Aquater-Enichem report came to the following results (Table 15 of the Aquater
report, BD-4, p. 208):

 

‘VOLUMEN ‘RESERVAS RESERVAS RESERVAS ‘TOTAL
m cubicos PROBADAS FROBABLES POSIBLES YACIMIENTO

 

‘TOUT-VENANT 2.708.590 2.655.107 10.855.936 16.219.633

 

 

TONELAJE RESERVAS RESERVAS RESERVAS ‘TOIL
t metricas PROBADAS PROBABLES FOSIBLES YACIMIENTO

 

‘TOUT-VENANT 3.867.866 3.791.493 15.502.277 23.161.636

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AGUA DE
IMEIBICION 1.646.584 1.725.324 6.994.020 10.365.928
‘TOOT-VENANT

2.221.282 2.066.169 8.508.257 12.795.708 .
ULEXTIA, 1.723.271 1.453.301 6.303.768 9.480.340
5.0, 740.131 624.136 2.707.327 4.071.594

 

TAB. 15 - RESERVAS GEOLOGICAS

399. Aquater distinguished between the following types of mined material:

a. “Tout-venant’ in cubic meters, which the Tribunal understands to correspond to
“In Situ m3,” defined by Behre Dolbear as “[c]ubic meter volume of material in
place;”4°

b. “Tout-venanf’ in metric tonnes, which the Tribunal understands to correspond to
“In Situ tonnes,” defined by Behre Dolbear as “[t]lonne weight of in place
material, of which approximately 45 percent is H20/moisture;"4*"

c. “Agua de imbibicidn,” which the Tribunal understands to refer to the moisture
present in the In Situ tonnes as defined by Behre Dolbear;

d. “Tout-venant seco,” which the Tribunal understands to correspond to “Dry
Tonnes,” defined by Behre Dolbear as ‘“[alir-dried material, out of which
approximately 74 percent is ulexite and 26 percent is moisture and/or other
impurities. It is almost equivalent to the sun-dried ulexite of approximately 30
percent BzOs content;"4

460 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 110, footnote omitted.
461 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 110.
462 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 110.

136

400.

401.

(c)

402.

403.

e. “Ulexite,” defined by Behre Dolbear as “[p]ure ulexite, of 43.0 percent BzOs
content; 35.5 percent water; 13.8 percent lime and 7.7 percent soda;”4®° and

f.  “BeOs,” defined by Behre Dolbear as “[p]ure content of boron oxide in the
reserves. Often used as a measure of purity when comparing various materials
and products.”464

Aquater’s results are restated in English by Behre Dolbear at Table 4.1 of its First
Report (Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 33).

TABLE 4.1
GEOLOGICAL RESERVES

In-Situ Tonnes

 

In other words, Aquater estimated that a total of 1,723,271 tonnes of ulexite
(2,221,282 dry tonnes) could be classified as proven reserves, 1,453,301 tonnes of
ulexite (2,066,169 dry tonnes) could be classified as probable reserves, and
6,303,768 tonnes of ulexite (8,508, 257 dry tons) could be classified as possible
reserves.

Behre Dolbear's estimate of reserves and resources

Only nine of NMM's concessions are relevant for the calculation of reserves and
resources because the remaining two, Cancha | and Cancha Il, were drying fields
(canchas de secado). Within those nine, Behre Dolbear distinguishes two subsets:

a. Concessions located within the area studied in the Aquater-EniChem report*®>
(Borateras de Cuevitas, Dofia Juanita and Basilea), and

b. Concessions located outside that grid (Pococho, Tete, Inglaterra, Don David,
Sur and La Negra).

Behre Dolbear estimates that the concessions inside the Aquater-Enichem grid
(Borateras de Cuevitas, Dofia Juanita and Basilea) “hosted 790,000 tonnes of Proven

463 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 110.
464 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 110, footnote omitted.
465 Exh. BD-4.

137

404.

405.

406.

Reserves of ulexite, 1,080,000 tonnes of Probable Reserves, and a factored
3,150,000 tonnes of Indicated Resources of ulexite“® for a total of 5.02 [million
tonnes].”“° This is illustrated at table 4.10 (page 38) of their first report:

TABLE 4.10
RESOURCES AND RESERVES IN CONCESSIONS

Reserves
Indicated Resources

Total Reserves/Resources

 

Behre Dolbear does not estimate any “possible reserves,” because today no
recognized code in the industry uses such a reserve classification.“ Rather, in
accordance with international standards, Behre Dolbear computes this tonnage as an
indicated resource.*®

Behre Dolbear also provides an estimate of inferred resources outside the Aquater-
Enichem grid. Based on the sampling and drilling performed by Mr. Astudillo in 2000,
interviews with Quiborax’s personnel, and its own review of the thicknesses of
borates in the drill holes around the boundary of the grid, Behre Dolbear believes that
“a professional examination would delineate additional ulexite equal to that currently
delineated on the three concessions within the ‘grid,’ ie., another 5.02 million
tonnes.”4”° Due to the uncertainty involved and in accordance with industry practice,
Behre Dolbear “categorize[s] these resources as Inferred Resources (those with the
highest degree of uncertainty) and would factor the estimated 5.02 [million tonnes]
downward by 75% to 1.26 [million tonnes] of Inferred Resources.”4”!

Behre Dolbear did not perform its own geological studies but relied on the existing
reports (in particular, the Aquater-Enichem report) to arrive at this estimate. It

466 For its estimation of indicated resources inside the Aquater grid, Behre Dolbear took Aquater’s
estimate of “possible reserves” (6.3 million tonnes of ulexite) and reduced it by 50% (i.e., 31.15 million
tonnes of ulexite).

487 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 65.

468 Behre Dolbear, First ER, 1 9.

469 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 131-133.

470 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 135. See also Second ER, § 69.
471 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 70.

138

407.

explains that it “was not able to make a site visit under the circumstances of the
dispute,” but “[iJt considers that the data in the existing reports is sufficient for it to
arrive at its estimates."4”

After auditing Aquater-Enichem’s methodology and arithmetic results,‘”? Behre
Dolbear extrapolated its findings from actual drill hole data from that report “using
mining industry accepted techniques for bedded deposits of industrial minerals by
extrapolating thicknesses from drill hole data and assigning, in this case for Phase 2
(Proven Reserves), 10,000m2 areas of influence around each hole in the 100m grid
and 40,000m2 areas of influence around each hole in the case of the Phase 1 area
(Probable Reserves).”4’4 A simplified version of Behre Dolbear's methodology using
Aquater’s drill hole data is set out in figure 4.1 of its first report, as explained during
the hearing:4”°

The diamond in the middle of each circle represents the Aquater-EniChem
drill hole. The blue radius of 10,000 square metres is basically a 100m
radius around the hole, or 200m diameter [...]. And that constitutes a
proven reserve. The offshaded grey [...] is then the probable reserve
based upon a 400m diameter or 200m radius, from the centre of the drill
hole, and that is considered a probable reserve. And then anything that is
in between and elsewhere around based upon the categorisation of
possible reserve we considered an indicated resource. 4”

 

Drill hole location

10,000 m?
Proven Reserves

%
40,000 m?
Probable Reserves

 

Mineral Resource

 

 

 

472 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 128.

473 Tr., Day 2, 50:18-51:15; 53:23-55:12.

474 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 129.

475 Behre Dolbear, First ER, figure 4.1, p. 36.
476 Tr. Day 2, 51:4-15.

139

408.

(d)

409.

A410.

411.

A412.

The Respondent claims that "Behre Dolbear's reports rely on methods rejected by the
mining industry."*”” It also argues that the value of the concessions should be
calculated exclusively on the basis of the proved and probable reserves calculated by
Aquater-Enichem, and should not include possible quantities of ulexite estimated on
the basis of extrapolations and that remain unconfirmed.

The Tribunal’s assessment of reserves and resources

As noted above, Behre Dolbear’s estimate covers reserves and resources in the

following concessions:

a. Reserves and resources in the concessions located within the Aquater-
Enichem grid (Borateras de Cuevitas, Dofia Juanita and Basilea), and

b. Resources in the concessions located outside that grid (Pococho, Tete,
Inglaterra, Don David, Sur and La Negra).

The Tribunal notes that Bolivia's criticisms focus on Behre Dolbear's calculation of
resources (both inside and outside the Aquater-Enichem grid), not reserves. Indeed,
Econ One has implicitly accepted Behre Dolbear's estimate of proven and probable
reserves in the Dofia Juanita, Borateras de Cuevitas and Basilea concessions and
has relied on these figures to carry out its valuation: Mr. Flores of Econ One expressly
stated that "[i]n my valuation, | have taken the reserves — proven and probable —
estimated by Behre Dolbear, excluding the resources."4”

The Tribunal will therefore use the reserve estimates prepared by Behre Dolbear
regarding the Dofia Juanita, Borateras de Cuevitas and Basilea concessions.
Consequently, the value of the concessions will be assessed assuming proven
reserves of 787,500 tonnes of ulexite (1,015,054 dry tonnes) and probable reserves
of 1,081,900 tonnes of ulexite (1,394,571 dry tonnes), i.e., total reserves of 1,869,400
tons (2,409,625 dry tonnes).*7

With respect to resources, the Claimants distinguish between those inside the
Aquater-Enichem grid and those outside:

477 Rejoinder, § 182, Tribunals translation.
478 Econ One, First ER, § 57, Tribunal's translation. See also Econ One, Second ER, § 63.
479 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 129.

140

413.

414.

a.

For the concessions located inside the grid (Dofa Juanita, Borateras de
Cuevitas and Basilea), Behre Dolbear has taken Aquater-Enichem’s estimate of
“possible reserves” and classified them as “indicated resources.” In the expert’s
opinion, “the Aquater-EniChem category of Possible Reserves, while acceptable
at the time their report was issued, would be considered an Indicated Resource
under current reporting codes.”“8° Behre Dolbear has thus taken Aquater-
Enichem’s “possible reserves” (6.3 million tonnes of ulexite) and reduced them
by 50% (i.e., 3.15 million tonnes of ulexite).“®’ According to the expert, the 50%
cut "is standard industry practice reflecting the probability that indicated
resources upon further exploration and development will not convert in their
entirety to a Reserve."482

With respect to the concessions located outside the Aquater-Enichem grid,
Behre Dolbear estimates 1.26 million tonnes of inferred (rather than indicated)
resources. As noted in paragraph 405, this figure is not based on Aquater’s
estimate of “possible reserves,” but on the sampling and drilling performed by
Mr. Astudillo in 2000, interviews with Quiborax’s personnel, and the expert's own
review of the thicknesses of borates in the drill holes around the boundary of the
grid. On this basis, Behre Dolbear believes that the concessions outside the
grid contain as much ulexite as those inside the grid, “®° but due to the
uncertainty involved and in accordance with industry practice, it categorizes
them as inferred resources and factors them downward by 75% (i.e., from 5.02
million tonnes to 1.26 million tonnes).*

As noted above, the Respondent opposes the inclusion of any resources in the

calculation of the life of the concessions. Econ One states that "[t]he calculation of the

FMV of the concessions can only include the exploitation of the estimated ulexite

reserves. Including [resources] would be highly speculative."45

The record shows that it is standard mining practice to assign economic value to

resources when valuing a mining operation. While it shares Bolivia’s concern about

including resources the presence of which may be speculative, the majority also finds

480 Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 118.

481 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, 67.

482 Behre Dolbear First ER, § 132.

483 Behre Dolbear, First ER, J 135. See also, Second ER, 4 69.
484 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 70.

485 Econ One, First ER, § 55, Tribunal's translation.

144

415.

416.

that the record establishes the richness of boron in the area of the Claimants’
concessions with sufficient certainty. Indeed, the Orstom-Risacher report carried out
in 19894°° described the Salar as containing "enormous reserves, practically
inexhaustible, of lithium, potassium, magnesium and boron [...] The area with the
highest concentration of these elements is found in the superficial crust at the south
of the salar, close to the Rio Grande estuary,”*®” where the concessions are located.
The high concentration of boron minerals in the areas where the concessions are
located is further confirmed by the report drafted by Bolivia's Servicio Nacional de
Geologia y Técnico de Minas ("SERGEOTECMIN") in 2008.4 In addition, the
Aquater-Enichem study identified “possible reserves” of 6.3 million tonnes of ulexite in
the entire deposit, which in today’s terminology would be categorized as resources. “°°
Although most of the quantification studies in the record were carried out inside the
Aquater-Enichem grid and resources outside this grid were extrapolated, it would be
unrealistic to think that the presence of resources stopped at the border of an
artificially created area of exploration when other elements in the record confirm the
presence of boron in the entire deposit.

Taking these various elements into consideration, the majority will assign a value to
the resources identified by Aquater-Enichem as “possible reserves”, factored down by
90%, without distinguishing whether they are inside or outside the Aquater-Enichem
grid. Indeed, the majority is not persuaded by Behre Dolbear’s distinction between
resources inside and outside this grid, as it appears to contain an element of double-
counting. Behre Dolbear’s estimate of indicated resources inside the grid is based on
Aquater-Enichem’s estimate of “possible reserves” (6.3 million tonnes) factored down
by 50%. Yet, that estimate applies to the area outside the grid or, at best, to the entire
deposit (what Aquater refers to as “the remainder of the deposit”).4°

Accordingly, the majority will assign value to the resources identified by Aquater-
Enichem, factored down by 90% (i.e., 630,777 tonnes of ulexite). It thus finds that the
Claimants could have extracted 2.5 million tonnes of ulexite (the exact amount being
2,499,777 tonnes), including reserves and resources. That being said, on the date of

486 Exh. BD-3.
487 Exh. BD-3, p. 61, Tribunal's translation.

488 Exh. BD-37.

489 Exh. BD-4, p. 201. The exact amount of possible reserves identified by Aquater-Enichem is
6,303,768.

499 In Spanish, el “resto del yacimiento” (BD-4, p. 201).

142

(a)

417.

418.

419.

the expropriation the Claimants had already extracted part of these quantities. On the
basis of the information in the record (in particular of the production profile set out in
the 2001 Supply Contract between NMM and RIGSSA,“%' addressed in the next
section‘*’), the Tribunal estimates that between 2001 and July of 2004 the Claimants
had extracted 179,845 tonnes of ulexite. Accordingly, for its cash flow projections the
Tribunal will assign an economic value to 2,319,932 tonnes of ulexite.

iv. Cash flows: production profile and life of the
concessions

Production profile

For its ex ante valuation, the Claimants' economic expert, Navigant, has submitted a
forecast of the concessions’ production profile relying on the 1999 RIGSSA business
plan and on the 2001 Quiborax-RIGSSA supply contract (the “2001 Supply
Contract”).4°° Navigant clarifies that its ex ante forecast is more in line with the sales
estimated in the 2001 Supply Contract (which requires production of 25,000 MT of
product in 2001 and ramps it up to 104,000 MT of product by 2006, remaining
constant thereafter), although Navigant assumes that the ramp-up in sales occurs
over a longer period of time (reaching 104,000 MT of product in 2009 instead of
2006).4*

Navigant revises these contractual estimates “marginally upwards” to take into
consideration the growth in the agricultural market for borates between 2001 and
2004 (which it forecasts at 5% between 2009-2014 and 1% from 2015 onwards), and
because it believes that “Quiborax [...] could have leveraged its mining and logistics
expertise to ensure a more reliable and scalable supply of ulexite from the Bolivian
Concessions.”*° Navigant’s ex ante production profile forecasts product sales
starting at 59,861 MT in 2004 and up to 171,022 MT in 2014.46

For its ex post valuation, Navigant assumes that “the Bolivian Concessions would
have increased production to a higher level over a shorter time period than what was
projected in the ex-ante valuation, based on the global economic boom (especially in

491 Exhs. CD-16 and NCI-06.

492 See in particular 429 below.

493 Navigant, First ER, 94 114-117; Exhs. NCI-49, NCI-06, and CD-16.
494 Navigant, First ER, § 114-116.

495 Navigant, First ER, § 116.

498 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. C.4.

143

emerging markets) between 2004 and 2008.”4°” Specifically, Navigant states that,
“based on market development it is reasonable to forecast production reaching 75
percent of the RIGSSA business plan objective of 200,000 tons over a 4-year period
by 2008.”4°° Thereafter, Navigant forecasts production on the basis of the expected
growth rate of the agricultural market for borates which is zero for the years 2009-
2010 and 4.6% from 2011 to 2019. “°° As a result of these assumptions, the updated
ex post production profile submitted by Navigant in 2013 is thus slightly higher than its
ex ante forecasts (starting at 65,386 MT in 2004 up to 224,145 MT in 2019). 5°

420. Bolivia and its economic expert, Econ One, object to the production profile used by
Navigant. First, they object to the use of the 1999 RIGSSA business plan and point
out that "NMM was not able to reach the production levels set out in the 2001
contract."©*' According to Econ One, "this indicated that the 2001 contract was too
optimistic and has not taken into account adequately the factors on the demand and
the supply side."° Econ One also criticizes the growth rates forecast by Navigant
that exceed the Supply Contract requirements because they do not consider factors
limiting supply and demand. With respect to limitations on supply, Econ One argues
that Navigant did not consider whether there was sufficient work force to reach its
estimates, or whether the manual processes used would have allowed that growth to
materialize.°°° As to demand, Econ One criticizes Navigant’s reliance on The
Economics of Boron to forecast a 5% growth between 2010-2014, because (i) it was
published in 2006 (two years after the valuation date that Econ One considers
appropriate), (ii) the 2002 version did not forecast a 5% growth rate, and (iii) the 2006
version only forecasted growth up to 2010.5

497 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.6.b, FN 1.
498 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.6.b, FN 1.

499 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.6.b, FN 1, relying on Roskill, The Economics of Boron, 11 ed.
(2006) (Exh. NCI-63) and Oppenheimer & Co Inc., Initiating Coverage: Agricultural Fertilizers,
February 2009 (Exh. NCI-77).

500 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.5 and E.6.b. 2019 is the last year for which Navigant calculates an
actual cash flow, as it then calculates the concessions’ terminal value by calculating the value of a
perpetuity beginning in 2019 minus the value of a perpetuity beginning in 2037, discounted back to
2019 (See Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.2).

501 Econ One, First ER, § 87, Tribunal's translation.

502 Econ One, First ER, 87, Tribunal's translation.

503 Econ One, First ER, 9] 74-79.

504 Econ One, First ER, 9] 80-86; Econ One’s presentation at the hearing, slide18.

144

421.

422.

423.

As a result, Econ One’s production profile assumes that the concessions would have
produced ulexite in accordance with the volumes foreseen in the 2001 Supply
Contract with a one-year delay until the estimated depletion of the concessions, which
Econ One calculates will take place in year 2029 at the proposed production rate, on
the basis of the proven and probable reserves calculated by Behre Dolbear.5°° Econ
One excludes the 50-56% ulexite mentioned in the 2001 Supply Contract, arguing
that the production levels stated in the contract only reflect a maximum subject to the
possibilities of production, and noting that neither Quiborax nor NMM sold this type of
ulexite between 2001 and 2004.5 According to Econ One’s production profile,
production would start at 64,000 MT in 2004, reach 68,000 MT in 2006 and remain
constant until 2029.5°7

The Tribunal has determined by majority that ex post valuation is generally
appropriate in this case, which entails assessing the value on the date of the Award,
in principle using ex post data. However, where such data does not appear certain
enough, it may be necessary to revert to ex ante input. What actually matters, as
stated above, is that the valuation replicates the actual loss as closely as possible.
Here, the Tribunal finds that Navigant's relying solely on market growth to forecast
production is speculative. NMM was a going concern that operated for over two
years prior to the expropriation, and in 2003 (its last full year of operation), it did not
even reach the production levels forecast in the 2001 Supply Contract.5° Likewise,
the Tribunal is not persuaded that “the Bolivian Concessions would serve
approximately one-third of the global agricultural market in 2009,” as asserted by
Navigant in its First Report.°°® Nor have the Claimants substantiated their projected
growth sufficiently in terms of the limitations to supply and demand, in particular with
respect to the workforce and manufacturing requirements needed to support that
projected growth. In these circumstances, it would be speculative to conclude that
the Claimant's production could sustain a 5% growth.

In addition, the Tribunal notes that Econ One criticizes Navigant for projecting sales
between 2004-2012 that are much higher than the ulexite actually sold by Quiborax

505 Econ One, First ER, § 88.

506 Econ One, First ER, {J 70-73.

507 Econ One, First ER, Exh. EO-3, table 4.

508 Navigant, First ER, § 113; Econ One, First ER, § 87.

509 Navigant, First ER, § 117. The Tribunal further notes that Mr. Fosk testified at the hearing that
Quiborax did not aspire to capture 32% of the complete borates market; this aim was limited solely to
the ulexite market. Tr., Day 1, 192:4-193:6.

145

424.

425.

during that period. For instance, Econ One notes that “Quiborax sold a total of
10,500 tons of ulexite plus between 2004 and 2012 [i.e., an average of approximately
1,300 MT per year], while Navigant’s ex post model projects sales of ulexite plus of at
least 15,778 MT per year, reaching even 36,613 MT in 2012. Similarly, Quiborax
only sold 3,200 to 5,800 of natural ulexite per year between 2009-2012, while
Navigant’s ex post model projects sales of natural ulexite for more than 105,285 MT
per year during the same period.”>'° Although Econ One's criticism is directed to
Navigant’s price projections,°"' the Tribunal finds it speculative to assume that NVM
would have been able to sell ten times more ulexite plus and twenty times more
natural ulexite than Quiborax during the same period. Although the absence of the
concessions may account for Quiborax’s lower figures, the Tribunal is not satisfied
that the Claimants’ projections are sufficiently supported.

The Tribunal will thus base its projections on the production profile that was
contractually agreed by Quiborax and RIGSSA in the 2001 Supply Contract. It will
use the 2001 Supply Contract rather than RIGSSA’s 1999 business plan, considering
that Bolivia opposes the use of the 1999 business plan and that Navigant has
acknowledged that it was too optimistic.5'? The Tribunal also finds that it makes
sense to use the most recent forecast.

The 2001 Supply Contract contemplated sales of three different ulexite products
based on the B2Os content of the ulexite:

CLAUSE SIX, PRODUCTS AND QUANTITIES: During each contract year
the seller undertakes to provide and sell to the buyer and the buyer agrees
to buy the volumes listed below: Ulexite thirty percent. Two thousand
one. Twenty-five thousand metric tons. Two thousand two onwards. Fifty
thousand meters. Ulexite forty percent. Year two thousand one up to ten
thousand meters. Year two thousand two twelve thousand meters. Year
two thousand three fourteen thousand metric tons. Year two thousand four
sixteen thousand meters. Year two thousand five eighteen thousand
meters. Year two thousand six — two thousand fifteen eighteen thousand
metric tons. Ulexite fifty to fifty-six percent. Year two thousand five — two
thousand fifteen approximately up to thirty-six thousand metric tons / year.
Compliance by both sides of the volumes of sale and purchase of forty
percent ulexite and fifty to fifty-six percent ulexite is subject to the

510 Econ One, Second ER, § 219, Tribunal’s translation, relying on Quiborax’s Sales Database by
Transaction 2001-2009 (Exh. NCI-40), and Quiborax’s Granulex 24-9 B Borates Costs Report, 2009-
2012 (Exh. NCI-171).

511 Econ One argues that “[t]here is no certainty that Quiborax could have been able to sell twenty
times more ulexite than the ulexite it actually sold at the same prices,” and that “it is very possible that
to sell that much larger quantity, Quiborax would have had to sell at lower prices,” Econ One, Second
Report, § 219, Tribunal’s translation.

512 Navigant, First ER, § 115. Indeed, Navigant’s ex ante projection reaches only 75% of the 1999
RIGSSA business plan (Navigant, First ER, § 115).

146

production possibilities of the seller, the price agreement between the
parties and the marketing conditions. The annual purchase and provision
volumes set forth above may be subject to changes to be agreed in
mandatory meetings between buyer and seller at the end of each contract
year. To adopt the necessary decisions, market needs and requirements
should be taken especially into consideration.5'>

426. These quantities are transcribed below:

Type of ulexite Year Metric tons

30% B2O3 2001 25,000
2002 onwards 50,000

40% B2O3 2001 10,000
2002 12,000

2003 14,000

2004 16,000

2005-2015 18,000

50-56% B2O3 2005-2015 36,000

427. As noted above, Econ One argues that the production levels for 50-56% BzOs ulexite
only reflect a maximum subject to the possibilities of production, and notes that
neither Quiborax nor NMM sold this type of ulexite between 2001 and 2004.54 The
production profile proposed by Econ One thus excludes the 36,000 MT per year
attributable to this type of ulexite, reaching a maximum of 68,000 MT starting in 2006.
Navigant acknowledges that the Claimants did not sell 50-56% BzOs ulexite between
2001-2004,5' but does not reduce the production profile for this reason. Rather,
Navigant’s ex ante production profile anticipates a different mix of ulexite products for
a minimum of 106,000 MT of production starting in 2006.5"°

513 Exhs. NCI-06, CD-16, pp. 5-6, Tribunal's translation. The Tribunal understands that when this
clause refers to “meters” it refers to “metric tons.”

514 Econ One, First ER, 9 70-73.
515 Navigant, First ER, footnote 167.
516 Navigant, First ER, 94 114-116, footnote 167; Navigant, Second ER, Exh. C.4.

147

428.

429.

430.

Again, the Tribunal finds it uncertain that a potential buyer would have produced and
sold a type of ulexite that NMM did not previously sell. In addition, it notes that the
Supply Contract provides that "[clompliance by both sides of the volumes of sale and
purchase of forty percent ulexite and fifty to fifty-six percent ulexite is subject to the
production possibilities of the seller, the price agreement between the parties and the
marketing conditions,"°"” and does not contemplate production of 50-56% B2Os ulexite
before 2005. Given NMM’s historical levels of production (discussed in the following
paragraph), it would also be speculative to assume that the concessions would have
produced an additional 36,000 MT of other types of ulexite. The Tribunal will
therefore base its production profile on the volumes projected in the 2001 Supply
Contract for 30% and 40% BzOs ulexite, and will disregard the production volumes
projected for 50-56% BzOs3 ulexite.

Using the Supply Contract’s projected volumes for 30% and 40% BzOs ulexite as set
out in paragraph 426 above, the concessions would have produced 64,000 MT of
product in 2003, 66,000 MT in 2004, and 68,000 from 2005 onwards. However, it is
undisputed that the Claimants did not reach the production level expected for year
2003 for 30% and 40% BzOs ulexite (50,845 MT instead of 64,000 MT).°'® The
Tribunal thus agrees with Bolivia that NMM’s production from 2004 should be
projected on the basis of the 2001 Supply Contract figures with a one-year delay.
Consequently, the total ulexite production of 30% and 40% BzOs ulexite from 2004
until 2015, with the one-year delay as suggested by Bolivia, would be as follows:

Year Metric tons
2004 64,000
2005 66,000
2006-2015 68,000

The experts disagree on the growth rate from year 2015 until the depletion of the
concessions. While Navigant takes "an assumed annual growth rate in production of 1
percent per year after 2014,"5'9 Econ One submits that "the reasonable thing to
assume [...] is that at some future time production would stop growing and
exploitation costs would rise."5?° Hence, Econ One's production profile assumes

517 Clause 6 of the 2001 Supply Contract, Exhs. NCI-06 and CD-16, Tribunal’s translation.
518 Navigant, First ER, § 113; Econ One, First ER, § 87.

519 Navigant, First ER, § 121.

520 Econ One, First ER, § 79.

148

431.

432.

433.

434.

production levels of "68,000 MT in 2006, remaining stable at that level of 68,000 MT
per year from 2007 until the depletion of the concessions’ reserves, which would have
happened in year 2029."5"

In the absence of compelling evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal will assume that
the production would have remained stable until the depletion of the concessions.

Finally, the Respondent has suggested that any valuation of the concessions must
account for certain exploitation rights allegedly exercised by the SOCOMIRG mining
community within the Claimants’ concessions.°*? The Respondent alleges that there
was an ongoing dispute between NMM and SOCOMIRG with respect to an
exploitation contract between them and that Decree 27,548 of 3 June 20045
recognized some mining rights to SOCOMIRG. According to the Respondent, a
willing buyer would have considered this information when assessing the value of the
investments.

The Claimant has acknowledged that there was a dispute between NMM and
SOCOMIRG regarding the latter's exploitation of certain areas of the Borateras de
Cuevitas concession. According to the Claimants, SOCOMIRG had previously
exploited two concessions in the Borateras de Cuevitas area, but those rights had
expired in 2002.5** The Claimants explain that NMM allowed SOCOMIRG to continue
the exploitation of their former concessions to avoid conflicts with local miners, but
always insisted that NMM was the rightful owner.°*° The Claimants also dispute the
validity of Decree 27,548, arguing that SOCOMIRG’s extinct rights over previous
concessions could not be revived by means of a governmental decree. °°

The Tribunal understands the Respondent to argue that the Claimants’ production
should be reduced because Decree 27,548 recognized exploitation rights to
SOCOMIRG. Yet, the Respondent has not explained the impact of Decree 27,548:
this decree merely states that its object is to establish the relationship between the

521 Econ One, First ER, § 88, Tribunal's translation, footnotes omitted.
522 Rejoinder, I 188-189.

523 Exh. CD-41.

524 Reply, § 150-151, Exh. CD-194, 06, 167.

525 Reply, 151, Exh. CD-171.

526 Reply, § 152, Exh. CD-171.

149

Bolivian State and SOCOMIRG,*”’ recognizes the validity of the contracts entered
into by the Bolivian State and SOCOMIRG,*” requests two state agencies to advise
and supervise SOCOMIRG’s operations,®*° and establishes certain guidelines for the
exploitation of ulexite by SOCOMIRG.*° Even if this decree did have the effect of
reviving SOCOMIRG’s previous contracts (which is not established), those contracts
are not on record and the Tribunal must conclude that SOCOMIRG's rights and
possible impact on the Claimants’ mining rights remain unproven.

435. As to SOCOMIRG’s mining activities on the Claimants’ concessions prior to the
issuance of Decree 27,548, Mr. Ricardo Ramos explained at the hearing that
whatever ulexite was extracted by SOCOMIRG was purchased by NMM.**" In light of
this explanation, which the Respondent did not rebut, the Tribunal sees no reason
why the ulexite extracted by SOCOMIRG should not be included in the Claimants’
production figures.

(b) Life of the concessions

436. During its presentation at the hearing on the merits, Behre Dolbear argued that the
life of the concessions would reach 45 years, on the basis of their calculation of
reserves and resources.°*? Navigant, who calculates cash flows on the basis of Behre
Dolbear’s calculation of reserves and resources, projects those cash flows until 2043
in its ex ante calculation,®** and until 2037 in its ex post calculation.*°4

437. Bolivia's economic expert, on the other hand, argues that the depletion of the
concessions’ reserves would have taken place in 2029, considering Behre Dolbear's

27 Exh. CD-41, Article 1 (“El presente Decreto Supremo tiene por objeto establecer la relacién del
Estado Boliviano y la empresa SOCOMIRG.”)

528 Exh. CD-41, Article 2 (“Se reconoce la validez de los contratos suscritos entre el Estado Boliviano
y la empresa SOCOMIRG y, se instruye al Complejo Industrial de Recursos Evaporiticos del Salar de
Uyuni — CIRESU la suscripcion de un contrato adicional.”)

529 Exh. CD-41, Article 3 (“Se instruye al CIRESU y a la Corporacion Minera de Bolivia - COMIBOL
efectuar el asesoramiento, supervisién y control de las operaciones minero-industriales de la empresa
SOCOMIRG.”)

830 Exh. CD- 41, Article 4 (“La ulexita comercializada por la empresa SOCOMIRG no podra ser inferior
al 32% (treinta y dos por ciento) de la ley de Oxido de Boro sobre base himeda’) and Articl 5 (“La
explotacion de la ulexita se efectuara bajo un Plan de Explotacion racional y sistematica [sic] del
yacimiento, en el marco de las leyes mineras y ambientales vigentes.”)

531 Tr., Day 2, 24:8-17.

532 Behre Dolbear Presentation, slide 6.

533 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. C.1, Note 5.
534 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.2, Note 5.

150

439.

440.

(a)

441.

442.

estimates of proven and probable reserves and excluding resources.**> Although
Econ One does not expressly explain how it arrives at this figure, the Tribunal
understands that it has calculated how many years it would have taken for the
reserves to be depleted at the production rate Econ One proposes. °?°

The Tribunal has conducted its own calculation of the life of the concessions. At the
rate of production determined in the preceding section, the reserves and resources
found in the concessions on the date of the expropriation (which have been quantified
above at 2,319,932 tonnes) would have been depleted by 2039.

In view of the Tribunal’s findings in the preceding sub-sections, the Tribunal will
calculate the concessions’ cash flows taking into account ulexite reserves and
resources quantified at 2,319,932 tonnes at a production rate of 64,000 MT in 2004,
66,000 MT in 2005, and 68,000 from 2006 onwards, until the depletion of the
concessions in 2039.

v. Cash flows: ulexite products, prices and costs

The experts agree on the products that would have been sold by NMM, but disagree
on the price and cost estimates to be applied to the cash flow projections. The
Tribunal will refer first to the products to be sold (a), then to price estimates (b), and
finally to cost estimates (c).

Products to be sold

The Claimants’ expert explains that “[t]he ulexite reserves within the Bolivian
Concessions would enable the owner to manufacture three basic borate products
[...]: 1) sun-dried ulexite (commercial name: “Natural Ulexite”); 2) calcinated ulexite
(commercial name “Ulexite Plus”); and 3) granulated ulexite (commercial name:
“Granulex Plus”). The prices (and profits) of these products are influenced by the
boron content and the processing required to produce the product. The prices and
profits are highest for Granulex Plus, followed by Ulexite Plus and then Natural
Ulexite.”°°”

Navigant projects the annual production of these three products on the basis of
Quiborax’s sales mix between 2002 and 2004. Navigant notes that in 2003

535 Econ One, First ER, § 88.
536 Econ One explained his methodology with examples during the hearing. See Tr., Day 2, 215-217.

537 Navigant, First ER, § 118 (footnotes omitted).

151

443.

(b)

444.

445.

“approximately 60 percent of the sun-dried ulexite used to supply these products to
the agricultural market was sold as Natural Ulexite, while approximately 30 percent
and 10 percent of the sun-dried ulexite was processed and sold as Ulexite Plus and
Granulex Plus, respectively.”°? Navigant assumes that this product mix would remain
constant after the installment of on-site processing equipment in 2006.%°° Before
2006, production is limited to Ulexite Plus and Natural Ulexite because the
granulation plant required to produce Granulex Plus would not be in place.*°

Econ One applies the same assumptions with respect to the production of Natural
Ulexite, Ulexite Plus and Granulex Plus,**' so the Tribunal will use these assumptions
(including the product mix) for its calculations.

Price estimates

Navigant’s ex post calculation considers actual prices for past cash flows and a
projection of future prices on that basis.°* According to Navigant, the actual price of
ulexite in the period after 2009 increased significantly more than it had estimated in its
first report, which had the effect of increasing the cash flows in its second report.54°
Navigant illustrates the rise in prices for Ulexite Plus in the following table:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Actual Price Ex ante First Report
2008 436.33 436.33
2009 480.93 344.14
2010 497.19 251.95
2011 525.63 259.62
2012 463.62 267.53

 

 

 

 

 

However, Navigant explains that “[gliven the sharp increase in ulexite prices that has
occurred, we do not believe it is reasonable to expect that these prices will continue
to rise with inflation. Instead we believe that the four year average price levels are
likely to be viewed as long-term prices. As such, we do not adjust these prices for

538 Navigant, First ER, § 119; Exh. C.

539 Navigant, First ER, § 119.

540 Navigant, First ER, footnote 172.

541 Econ One, First ER, § 91; Second ER, § 43.

542 Navigant, Second ER, Exhs. E.4 and E.6.

543 Navigant, Second ER, footnote 144, Exhs. E.4 and E.6.e.

152

446.

447.

inflation in our updated ex post model.”>* Indeed, the Tribunal notes that, from 2013
onwards, Navigant has projected prices on the basis of the average price between
2009-2012, without adjusting for inflation.

Econ One objects to Navigant’s ex post price estimates. Econ One notes that
Navigant’s prices are based on sales by Quiborax between 2005 and 2012 of ulexite
mined from other deposits, not on the prices at which the ulexite from the
concessions could have been sold. According to Econ One, using prices from other
deposits is highly speculative: ulexite is not a commodity with standardized
characteristics and prices and, as Behre Dolbear recognizes, the prices of ulexite
products will vary depending on the chemical quality, type and level of impurities.5#° In
addition, Econ One argues that the prices estimated by Navigant are not sustainable
at the production rates proposed by Navigant. Econ One notes that the sales
projected by Navigant for 2004-2012 are much higher than the ulexite actually sold by
Quiborax during that period.*4” It therefore argues that “[t]here is no certainty that
Quiborax could have been able to sell twenty times more ulexite than the ulexite it
actually sold at the same prices,” and that “it is very possible that to sell that much
larger quantity, Quiborax would have had to sell at lower prices.”°4°

Econ One thus projects prices on the basis of the 2004 actual price, adjusted for
inflation. Econ One rejects the inflation rate used by Navigant in its ex ante valuation,
where Navigant assumed that ulexite prices would grow at 3.1 percent annually,
equal to the 20-year average U.S. inflation rate through 2003.*° Econ One "agree[s]
to index prices according to the U.S. inflation rate, but this indexation must be done
on the basis of expected future inflation, not past inflation."®°° It relies on inflation
projections from the Executive Office of the President of the United States, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the U.S. Energy Information

544 Navigant, Second ER, footnote 144.

545 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.6, Note 4 (“We believe that 2012 prices are unsustainable in the long
run, therefore for 2013 our forecast is based on the average price for the period 2004-2011. After
2013 we hold prices constant and assume that this new price threshold will hold for the foreseeable
future.”)

546 Econ One, Second ER, § 218, citing Behre Dolbear, First ER, § 16.

547 Econ One, Second ER, § 219, relying on Quiborax’s Sales Database by Transaction 2001-2009
(Exh. NCI-40), and Quiborax’s Granulex 24-9 B Borates Costs Report, 2009-2012 (Exh. NCI-171).

548 Econ One, Second ER, § 219, Tribunal’s translation.
549 Navigant, First ER, § 123.
550 Econ One, First ER, § 94, Tribunal's translation.

153

448.

449.

450.

Administration, among others,®*' and calculates that prices would increase from 2005
onwards at a rate of 2.5 percent per year.

In line with the ex post valuation deemed appropriate here, the Tribunal considers
that it must use actual prices to calculate the Claimants’ loss (whether to calculate
past cash flows or project future cash flows).

Because there is no price information for the ulexite mined from the concessions
during the relevant time period, the Claimants have calculated their cash flows on the
basis of the prices of Quiborax’s ulexite from other deposits. Despite Econ One’s
objections, the Tribunal finds that this is reasonable. Indeed, it is not seriously
disputed that the ulexite mined in the concessions was of very high quality and in any
event of a higher quality that the ulexite mined by Quiborax in Chile.* Both NMM
and Quiborax produced Natural Ulexite, Ulexite Plus and Granulex Plus under the
same commercial names, so it is reasonable to assume that these are substantially
the same products. Finally, the Tribunal is using Econ One’s production profile to
estimate cash flows, so Econ One’s argument that Quiborax would not have been
able to sustain those prices for larger amounts of ulexite is inapposite.

That said, the Tribunal notes that, in order to project prices from 2013 onwards,
Navigant has used an average of the previous four years (2009-2012). While the
Tribunal agrees that using an average is appropriate, it finds the choice of four years
arbitrary. That choice coincides with the period of highest prices. The Tribunal finds it
speculative to assume that prices will remain at such level throughout the life of the
concessions. It will thus use an average of the entire post-expropriation period (2004-
2012). The Tribunal will revert below on the effect of inflation.

551 See Econ One, First ER, footnote 162.
552 Econ One, First ER, § 94.

553 See, e.g., Tr., Day 1, 210:10-211:18 (testimony of Mr. Allan Fosk); WS of Mr. Ricardo Ramos, § 11,
and his testimony at the hearing, Tr., Day 2, 3:20-6:1; 20:21-21:8. See also Aquater-Enichem report,
Section 1.6.2, Exh. BD-4, p. 28.

154

(c)

451.

452.

453.

454.

455.

Costs

There is no disagreement on "selling, general and administrative costs" (SG&A
costs). Navigant projected SG&A costs on a fixed basis "at 19.5 percent of revenues
with marginal reductions of this percentage over time to reflect efficiencies of scale"=*
and Econ One agrees.°°>

The experts disagree, however, on the estimate of “mining and processing costs” and
“transportation costs.” For its ex ante projections, Navigant estimates future costs
concerning mining and processing on the basis of 2004 costs, and inflates them using
the producer price index (PPI) for Bolivia. For its ex post calculations, Navigant
included actual costs for water and fuel.°°° Navigant notes that the Bolivian PPI
increased at a rate that was higher than its forecast, resulting in higher costs in the ex
post valuation.°°”

With respect to transportation costs, in its ex ante valuation Navigant also started
from 2004 figures using “actual freight costs incurred between the two locations
(based on review of product invoices) in conjunction with the change in
transportation/freight price indexes in Chile and Bolivia to project future freight costs
in USD per MT." For its ex post valuation, it used actual transportation indices to
incorporate more accurate figures.°°?

Econ One, for its part, has taken 2004 costs and indexed them from 2005 onwards
"with the long-term inflation rate expected in the United States at the valuation date,
2.5%."°° Econ One also objects to Navigant’s costs in its adjusted ex post valuation,
arguing that it relies on Quiborax’s operation costs in Chile and on transportation
price indices between Chile and Bolivia, instead of observable prices.5*

The majority must be consistent with the pricing rationale chosen. It considers that
Navigant's use of actual costs, updated transportation price indices and an updated
PPI are better suited to an ex post valuation than prices indexed for inflation. In the

554 Navigant, First ER, § 128.

555 Econ One, First ER, § 100.

558 Navigant, First ER, 172.

557 Navigant, First ER, § 171.

558 Navigant, First ER, § 128. The detailed calculation can be found in Exh. C of the report.
559 Navigant, First ER, {§ 173, 197.

560 Econ One First ER, §] 98, Tribunal's translation, footnote omitted.

581 Econ One, Second ER, § 222.

155

457.

458.

459.

absence of a closer proxy, the Tribunal finds that the use of Quiborax’s costs appears
appropriate. In any event, Navigant’s cost projections in its ex post valuation are
higher than Econ One’s projected ex ante costs, thus reducing profits.5° It will
therefore use Navigant's figures in this respect.

vi. Cash flows: other variables

The experts agree on the methodology to calculate depreciation, i.e., they assume a
20-year useful life for fixed assets, resulting in a depreciation of 5% of the cost of
fixed assets.° The experts also agree on the methodology used to calculate working
capital.5* The Tribunal will thus use the same methodology.

The experts disagree however on the amount of capital expenditures. Based on
discussions with Quiborax and Behre Dolbear, Navigant has assumed that the buyer
of the concessions would have made two capital investments to support the growth
and expansion of the concessions:

a. USD2million for a granulation plant to process sun-dried ulexite into dry
granules, to be made between 2005-2006. This investment would have enabled
NMM to sell Granulex Plus;

b. USD 2.5 million for a storage and packaging facility, to be made in 2005.

Econ One agrees with the granulation plant investment, but reduces the expenditure
for the storage and packaging facility to USD 1,322 million, because its lower
production profile would require a smaller facility. As it has adopted Econ One's
production profile, the Tribunal will use Econ One’s capital expenditure figures.

Navigant also assumes that a buyer would incur replacement and maintenance
capital expenditures every six years throughout the forecast period equal to the
accumulated depreciation over this six year period, inflated by Bolivian PPI.5® Econ
One agrees with this approach, but notes that Navigant fails to include this in the

582 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. E.6; Econ One, First ER, Exh. EO-3, Table 2.

583 Navigant, First ER, § 128; Second ER, § 104; Econ One, First ER, § 102; Second ER, §[ 43..

564 Navigant, First ER, 9] Exh. C.2-C.7; Second ER, § 105; Econ One, First ER, § 108; Second ER, §
43.

565 Navigant, First ER, J] 124-126.
586 Econ One, First ER, 9 113-114.
587 Navigant, First ER, § 127.

156

460.

461.

462.

terminal value of the concessions. In its Second Report, Navigant corrects this error.
The Tribunal has included this expenditure in its calculations, based on Econ One’s
depreciation figures, as the Tribunal has used Econ One’s capital expenditure
estimates.

The experts also disagree on the use of the exchange rate. Econ One argues that
Navigant has used Bolivianos and U.S. dollars inconsistently, applying different
exchange rates with the sole purpose of artificially inflating the FMV. According to
Econ One, although prices are in U.S. dollars, Navigant converts them to Bolivianos,
and carries out its calculation in Bolivianos, only to convert the results back into U.S.
dollars. According to Econ One, this results in an incorrect “round-trip” which
overestimates its valuation. Econ One also criticizes Navigant for not using
purchasing power parity (“PPP”) in its first report.

Navigant, on the other hand, argues that the currencies used are in accordance with
standard practice. It explains that the revenues related to the concessions are
earned in U.S. dollars, but costs are predominantly incurred in Bolivian currency.
Taking this into account, and since the valuation must be built into a single currency,
Navigant has converted the forecast cash flows in Bolivianos (Bs), while the
Respondent's expert chose to carry out the DCF analysis in U.S. dollars.
Nevertheless, Navigant argues that “the choice of currency is largely irrelevant,
particularly if purchasing power parity (“PPP”) is employed as suggested by Dr. Flores
[of Econ One].”5% Indeed, in its second report, Navigant applies PPP.

The Tribunal has carried out its calculations in U.S. dollars, thus taking into
consideration Econ One's criticisms of Navigant’s methodology. That said, it has
needed to convert costs in Bolivianos into dollars. For that, it has used the exchange
rates used by Navigant in its ex post valuation, to which Econ One does not appear to
object. Indeed, Econ One argues that “the only data that is observable and more
precise in Navigant’s ex post model than in its ex ante model are the data on inflation
and exchange rate between 2004 and 2013, which are published historical
parameters.”©° The Tribunal has thus used these actual exchange rates in its
calculation of past cash flows. As future cash flows are then calculated in dollars, it
has not needed to use any exchange rate forecasts for that part of its calculations.

568 Navigant, Second ER, 4 55.
589 Econ One, Second ER, § 217.

157

463.

464.

465.

466.

467.

Finally, the Tribunal has adjusted the cash flows for inflation at a rate of 2.5% per
year, which inflation rate was proposed by Econ One. Indeed, in light of the long
duration until the depletion of the reserves and resources, it appears economically
correct to make an adjustment for inflation.

vii. Discount rate

The Tribunal must discount future profits back to the date of valuation, i.e.
30 June 2013. For this it must select a discount rate appropriate for 2013.

The experts agree that the appropriate measure for the discount rate is the WACC.5”°
They disagree, however, on five components of the WACC calculation: the risk free
rate of return, the equity risk premium, the country risk premium, the micro-cap size
premium (all four factors to calculate the cost of equity) and the cost of debt.5”' They
also disagree on the date on which WACC should be calculated: Navigant uses 2013,
which is the date of its latest ex post valuation, while Econ One uses 2004, which is
the date of its ex ante valuation.

As a result of these differences, Econ One calculates the WACC of the Claimants’
investments in 2004 at 22.99%, while Navigant in its ex ante valuation calculates the
WACC in 2004 at 13.27% in its first report®’? and at 11.81% in its second report. §” In
its ex post valuation, Navigant calculates the WACC in 2013 at 14.61% in its first
reportS” and at 10.78% in its second report.6”

Navigant does not explain the reasoning for the variables chosen in its second report;
it simply states that to update its ex post valuation it has “incorporated new
information during this period of time with respect to [...] variables required to
calculate the cost of capital.”5”° Econ One does not expressly object to the variables
used by Navigant to calculate the WACC in its ex post valuation: Econ One’s analysis
is focused on Navigant’s ex ante calculation of the WACC, although it objects to
Navigant’s ex post valuation for other reasons. For the analysis below, unless there

570 See, e.g. Econ One First ER, § 118.
571 Econ One, First ER, table 7, p. 46.
572 Navigant, First ER, § 155, Exh. D.1.
573 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. D.1.

574 Navigant, First ER, § 214, Exh. F.1.
575 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. F.1.

576 Navigant, Second ER, § 157.

158

(a)

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

is evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal will assume that Navigant’s updated figures
are supported by the same justification and sources used in its first report and simply
reflect the updated figure. It will also assume that Econ One’s objections to Navigant’s
ex ante figures apply mutatis mutandis to its ex post figures.

Risk free rate of return

Both Parties agree on using the yield to maturity on U.S. Treasury bonds as a proxy
for a risk free interest rate, but disagree on the type of maturity to use.

Navigant uses a risk free rate in its cost of equity calculation equal to the 10-year U.S.
Treasury bond. It submits that "there are many valuation practitioners that advocate
for the use of the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond rather than the 20-year U.S. Treasury
bond given that the duration of cash flows for many projects are closer to 10
years."5’7 Navigant therefore rejects Econ One's choice of the 20-year U.S. Treasury
bond and in particular its decision to match the duration of the risk free rate with the
horizon of the cash flows.°”

Navigant quotes in support Aswarth Damodaran, who advocates the "use of the 10-
year treasury bond rate as the riskfree rate on all cash flows for most mature firms."
Regarding "young firms," he notes that "an argument can be made that we should be
using a 30-year treasury bond rate as the riskfree rate." However, he then concludes
that "[g]iven that the difference between the 10-year and 30-year bond rates is small
[...] using the 10-year bond rate as the riskfree rate on all cash flows is good practice
in valuation."57°

Accordingly, in its first report Navigant uses a rate of 3.52%, which it asserts was the
yield of the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond as of 1 August 2009,°®° while in its second
report it uses 2.52%, which it asserts was the yield of that bond as of 30 June
2013.58

Econ One claims that the appropriate risk free rate corresponds to the yield of the 20-
year U.S. Treasury bond at Econ One's valuation date of June 2004 (5.43%). It

577 Navigant, Second ER, 9 114-117.

578 Navigant, Second ER, § 115.

579 Exh. NCI-196, pp. 7-8, footnote omitted.
580 Navigant, First ER, § 204; Exh. F.2.

581 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. F.2.

159

473.

474.

(b)

475.

476.

justifies this choice by stressing that the concessions’ cash flows cover a period of
more than 25 years:

The use of the yield of the 20-year bonds is more consistent with
lbbotson's recommendation that the "[t]he horizon of the chosen Treasury
security should match the horizon of whatever is being valued" than the
use of yields of 10-year bonds, given that in this case we are projecting the
concessions’ cash flows for over 25 years (from June 2004 to December
2029).582
Regarding Navigant's criticism that Econ One matches the duration of the risk free

rate with the horizon of the cash flows, Bolivia's expert replies as follows:

Navigant never calculated the duration of the cash flows of the
concessions. Navigant only bases its use of the yield of the 10-year bonds
in trends and general data reported by financial literature [...].

Nevertheless, simple financial calculations prove that the duration of the

concessions' cash flows in my model is approximately 17 years. This

duration is even larger than the duration of the 20-year bonds, which is

12.7 years, and much larger than the duration of the 10-year bonds, which

is 8.2 years. 58
The Tribunal concludes that the 10 - and 20 - year U.S. Treasury bonds could both be
justifiable choices to establish the risk free rate. Given that Navigant's latest proposal
has a yield-to-maturity as of June 2013, while Econ One's alternative takes into
account the yield-to-maturity as of June 2004, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’
choice of the 10-year U.S. Treasury bond provides the more appropriate risk free rate
of return for purposes of the present valuation.

Equity risk premium

The economic experts also disagree on the appropriate equity risk premium to apply
in the cost of equity calculation.

Relying on the 2006 estimates by Dimson, Staunton and Marsh of the long term U.S.
equity risk premium (“ERP”) relative to U.S. Treasury Bonds®* and on Prof.
Damodaran's data comparing returns of the S&P 500 to U.S. Treasury Bonds,
Navigant has assumed an equity risk premium in 2009 of 5% for both of its ex post
valuations. 5%

582 Econ One, First ER, § 121, Tribunal's translation, footnotes omitted. See also Exh. EO-16, p. 53.

583 Econ One; Second ER, 9 142-143, Tribunal's translation, footnotes omitted. See also Exh. EO-24,
tables 4A to 4C.

584 Exh. NCI-70
585 Exh. NCI-08
586 Navigant, Second ER, exhibit F.2, note 2.

160

477.

478.

479.

(c)

480.

According to Navigant, "other reputable sources of data for the ERP” reveal that Econ
One's equity risk premium "is at the very high end of the range of ERPs that many
reliable sources consider to be appropriate."°°’ Specifically, Navigant states:

We note Professor Damodaran publishes ERP calculations of 5.79 percent

using an arithmetic average and 4.10 percent using geometric average for

the period 1928-2011. He also calculates a 3.36 and 2.35 arithmetic and

geometric ERP for the shorter time period of 1962-2011. Professor

Damodaran also presents a forward looking ERP of 6.04 percent as of 1

January 2012. lbbotson/Morningstar publishes an ERP of 7.6 percent for

1928-2014 and 4.9 percent for 1962-2004. Dimson, Staunton & Marsh

consider the ERP for 1900-2010 to be 4.4 percent. Finally, a survey of

academics and practitioners presented by Shannon Pratt and Roger

Grabowski in their book Cost of Capital Applications and Examples list a

number of ERP calculations which average 4.9 percent.58
Econ One, on the other hand, takes the equity risk premium calculated by Ibbotson in
March 2004 (7.2%) based on the yield of the 20-year U.S. Treasury bond. This is
consistent with its calculation of the risk free rate.%®° In addition, Bolivia's expert
claims that the sources cited by Navigant are not comparable because they were
published after the valuation date (2004) and mix data of different periods. Econ
One also asserts that Ibbotson is not at the high end of the range of reasonable
equity risk premiums, and the arithmetic average equity risk premium used by Econ

One is the most appropriate when discounting future cash flows.°°"

The Tribunal notes Econ One's assertion that the definition of the equity risk premium
must be consistent with the choice of the risk free interest rate.°° This statement has
not been contested by Navigant. Accordingly, for the sake of consistency with the risk
free rate defined above, the Tribunal will take into account the Claimants' suggested
equity risk premium of 5%. In addition, the Tribunal notes that Navigant’s figures are
more current than Econ One’s, and thus more appropriate for an ex post valuation.

Country risk premium

When measuring the country risk, the Claimants' expert highlighted that none of the
products generated by the concessions were sold to the Bolivian market. As a

587 Navigant, Second ER, § 120.

588 Navigant, Second ER, 119, footnotes omitted. See also Exhs. NCI-127, 128, 198 and 130.
589 Econ One, First ER, 9§ 121, 125.

599 Econ One, Second ER, 9 148-149 and Exh. EO-18.

531 Econ One, Second ER, § 150-151.

592 Econ One, First ER, § 121; Exh. EO-39, pp. 10-11: "[YJou must be consistent in how you define the
risk free interest rate and how you define the estimated risk premium [.]"

161

481.

482.

483.

consequence, "the Bolivian macro-economic and political risk factors have very
limited (if any) impact on the sales and revenues generated from the Bolivian
Concessions."°°° Country risk should therefore consider the key markets in which
ulexite is sold: Brazil, U.S., China and India. Navigant formulated a composite risk
premium that considers the individual country risk of these markets. For its first ex
post valuation, it measured the country risk for 2009 at 4,24%5° and then lowered it
to 2.67% for 2013.5

Bolivia's expert submits that the appropriate country risk premium is the sovereign
bond spread between Bolivian bonds denominated in U.S. dollars and U.S. treasury
bonds. Accordingly, an appropriate assessment of country risk, averaging the data
published in 2004 by Professor Damodaran (9.75%) and Ibbotson (17.91%) leads to
applying 13.83%, 5%

Navigant criticizes Econ One's approach for two reasons: (i) it ignores the reality that
not all commercial activities conducted within a country are equally affected by
country risk and (ii) the spread between sovereign bonds issued by the host country
and that of the United States is a poor measurement for the country risk faced by any
commercial enterprise.°9”

The Tribunal notes that both experts have relied on Damodaran's article entitled
"Measuring Company Exposure to Country Risk: Theory and Practice." The
Claimants' economic expert quotes Damodaran in support of its contention that not all
companies within a country are equally affected by country risk:

[Njot all companies in an emerging market are equally exposed to country
risk [...] we need to differentiate between firms. [...] [A] company's
exposure to country risk comes not from where it incorporates and trades
but from where it does its business. °°

593 Navigant, First ER, § 147.

594 Navigant, First ER, § 208.

595 Navigant, Second ER, exhibit F.4.

5968 Econ One, First ER, § 140, Tribunal's translation, footnotes omitted. See also Exhs. EO-19 and

E0-20.

597 Navigant, Second ER, 9 125-138.

588 Exh.
588 Exh.

NCI-131.
NCI-131, p. 1.

162

484.

485.

486.

487.

488.

Navigant also refers to Damodaran's "Lambda Approach," an adjustment of the bond
spread to account for the different levels of country risks faced by different
companies,®° although it does not apply it.°

Bolivia's expert, on the other hand, relies on Damodaran to stress that local market
risk is not to be understated, as it claims Navigant does:

A company can be exposed to country risk, even if it derives no revenues
from that country, if its production facilities are in that country. After all,
political and economic turmoil in the country can throw off production
schedules and affect the company's profits. Companies that can move their
production facilities elsewhere can spread their risk across several
countries, but the problem is exaggerated for those companies that cannot
move their production facilities. Consider the case of mining companies. An
African gold mining company may export all of its production but it will face
substantial country risk exposure because its mines are not moveable.
Econ One also quotes Damodaran's "Bludgeon Approach" to support using a general

country risk premium:

The simplest assumption to make when dealing with country risk, and the

one that is most often made, is that all companies in a market are equally

exposed to country risk.6°9
The Tribunal shares the Respondent's view on the relevance of the country risk of the
host State of the investment. Indeed, even if the ulexite products generated by the
mining concessions are not sold locally, the mining operations are located within
Bolivia and cannot be delocalized. As a consequence, they are clearly subject to
Bolivia's country risk. Therefore, the Tribunal will not resort to Navigant's proposed
country risk premium.

Given both Parties' reliance on Prof. Damodaran's writings, the Tribunal is persuaded
to use the country risk premium according to the data published by this source, i.e.
9.75%. The Tribunal is aware that this premium relates to 2004 and that the chosen
ex post analysis calls for the use of a figure from 2013. However, the Parties have
not pointed to the 2013 figure, and the Tribunal considers that the 2004 data better
reflects actual risk than the low premium proposed by the Claimant's expert.

600 Exh. NCI-131, p. 17.
601 Navigant, Second ER, § 134.
602 Exh. NCI-131, p. 18.
603 Exh. NCI-131, p. 16.

163

(d)

489.

490.

491.

492.

493.

Micro-cap size premium

The fourth area of divergence between the Parties' economic experts is Bolivia's
inclusion of a micro-cap size premium of 4.01%.

Econ One explains that small firms tend to produce higher financial returns than
bigger firms. This is because markets perceive that investing in small firms is riskier
than investing in big firms; consequently, small firms need to offer potential investors
higher returns to compensate for the higher risks.°°* Consequently, it has applied the
size premium calculated by Ibbotson for micro-cap companies.®°>

Navigant disagrees with the inclusion of a small company risk premium essentially
because the concessions "were able to produce a commodity with a global demand
that was not dependent on the local market demand."®°

While neither the Claimants nor Navigant dispute that NMM is a small firm, Navigant
argues that this premium is only applicable to companies "with uncertain demand, a
high risk of failure, and a high degree of competition," which was not the case here.°°”
Yet, Navigant has not otherwise supported this assertion. Econ One, in contrast, has
submitted financial authorities supporting the inclusion of a size premium,®® notably
Ibbotson's "Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation, SBBI Valuation Edition 2004
Yearbook," from which it takes the size premium for micro-cap companies.°°

The lack of compelling counter-arguments on the Claimants’ side, together with the
undisputable fact that the Tribunal is valuing a small company, leads it to conclude
that a micro-cap size premium of 4.01% should be factored into the discount rate.
The Tribunal is aware that this premium relates to 2004 and that the chosen ex post
analysis calls for the use of a figure from 2013. However, the 2013 figure is not in the
record, and the Tribunal considers that the 2004 data is reasonable and thus may be
applied in the present valuation.

604 Econ One, First ER, § 141.

605 Exh. EO-16, p. 129.

606 Navigant, Second ER, § 139.

607 Navigant, Second ER, § 139.

608 Exhs. EO-16, EO-21, EO-22, EO-47 and EO-48.
609 Exh. EO-16, p. 129.

164

(e)

494.

495.

496.

497.

498.

Cost of debt

The Claimants’ expert has relied on two sources of information to set the cost of debt:
(i) the bond yields for Rio Tinto and Compass Minerals and (ii) the bank lending rates
that reflect the cost of borrowing to finance the concessions, i.e. a commercial rate of
LIBOR + 4%.°° This premium "reflect[s] the additional risk of the Bolivian
Concessions relative to short-term bank lending."°"'

Navigant adds that it "does not assume that [NMM] would have access to debt on the
same terms as Rio Tinto or Compass Minerals. Rather we use these companies and
LIBOR+4 as reference rates."°!?

Based on these sources, in its first expert report, Navigant calculates the cost of debt
at 7.5% in U.S. dollars, and at 9.44% in Bolivianos to adjust for inflation (Navigant
uses the latter for its discount formula, as its cash flows are in Bolivianos).*" In its
adjusted ex post calculation, Navigant estimates the cost of debt in U.S. dollars at
5.5% and at 7.44% in Bolivianos to adjust for inflation (again using the latter for
purposes of its discount formula).®"4

For Econ One, Navigant's approach is not adequate and results in too low a cost of
debt. It challenges the reference to multinational companies such as Rio Tinto and
Compass Minerals which have different possibilities of issuing debt and accessing
international financial markets.*'® It thus submits that the cost of debt should be
11.93%, the sum of the U.S. risk free rate and the risk premium for Bolivian bonds.*®

Regarding the use of LIBOR + 4%,°'” Navigant explains that “[hlistorically, LIBOR+2
percent tracks the Prime rate of interest,” which “is the rate that the banks charge
their most trustworthy customers, and thus, [...] is not widely available in the public
market. As such, a 2 percent premium to the Prime rate [i.e., LIBOR + 4%] reflects a
rate that would be more broadly available to the public market" and is “fully

610 Navigant, First ER, J] 211-212.

611 Navigant, First ER, § 152.

612 Navigant, Second ER, § 142.

613 Navigant, First ER, § 213; Exh. F.5.

614 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. F.5

615 Econ One, First ER, § 147, Tribunal's translation.
616 Econ One, First ER, § 148 and table 7, Exh. EO-19.

617 Equivalent to 5.52% in 2009 (date of Navigant's first ex post valuation, see Navigant, First ER,
Table 20 at p. 83; Exh. F.5), and equivalent to 4.69% in 2013 (date of Navigant’s adjusted ex post
valuation, see Navigant, Second ER, § Exh. F.5).

165

reasonable.”*'® Navigant also asserts that LIBOR + 4% “adequately reflect[s] the
additional risk of the Bolivian Concessions relative to short-term bank lending."°"?

499. Econ One contends that "it is illogical to assume that the concessions could incur
debt at a cost of only LIBOR + 4%,” because NMM is not comparable to Rio Tinto and
Compass Minerals. For instance, Compass Minerals is valued at US$ 591 million,
ie., 18 times the value of the concessions according to Navigant’s ex ante’s
valuation, and nonetheless its cost of debt is 7.63%.®°

500. The Tribunal does not understand Navigant to be proposing that the cost of debt be
LIBOR + 4%. Navigant has taken this rate, together with Rio Tinto’s and Compass
Minerals’ cost of debt, as reference rates, and has concluded that the appropriate rate
is 7.44%. The Tribunal finds this rate reasonable for 2013. By contrast, it finds Econ
One’s rate of 11.93% (which was calculated for 2004) inappropriate.

(f) Conclusions on the discount rate

501. Consequently, the Tribunal determines that the applicable discount rate, based on the
WACC formula put forward by the Parties' experts, is 18.4%.

viii. Quantification

502. On the basis of the parameters set out in the preceding sections, the Tribunal has
calculated the damages suffered by the Claimants on the basis of the cash flows that
their ulexite reserves would have generated in the absence of the expropriation. It
quantifies these damages at USD 48,619,578, broken down as follows:®"

a. Past cash flows (i.e., cash flows that would have accrued between the date of
the expropriation and the date of the Award, using 30 June 2013 as proxy):
USD 30,081,458. This amount includes pre-award interest, calculated as
specified in Section VII.A.6 below.*°

618 Navigant, Second ER, § 142.
619 Navigant, First ER, § 212.
620 Econ One, Second ER, § 197, Tribunal's translation.

621 The Tribunal notes that, of the total amount awarded, USD 47,229,424 correspond to reserves that
would have been depleted by 2029. The remaining USD 1,390,154 corresponds to resources that
would have been depleted between 2030 and 2039. The relatively low value attributed to resources is
explained by the increased effect of discounting cash flows that lie further in the future.

622 According to the Tribunal’s calculations, net past cash flows from 23 July 2004 to 30 June 2013
amount to USD 27,977,499. As discussed in Section 6 below, the Tribunal has applied an interest at

166

503.

504.

505.

b. Future cash flows (projected from 1 July 2013 until the depletion of the
concessions): USD 18,538,119.

5. The claim for the loss of lithium resources
a. The Claimants’ position

In addition to the value of the ulexite reserves in the concession, the Claimants seek
damages in the amount of US$ 736,385 for the loss of the lithium resources of the
Inglaterra, Tete and part of Don David concessions.®* According to the Claimants,
this claim is supported by the findings of their mining expert®®> and by Bolivia's own
governmental studies confirming the presence of lithium in the Rio Grande area.°6

In order to estimate the FMV of the lithium resources within the concessions, the
Claimants' economic expert has implemented a comparable transactions approach.
Navigant explained the various steps in this approach as follows:

We first identified recent comparable transactions to arrive at a price per
ton of lithium resources multiple. Next, using the data available in the
Orstom study and the location of the Bolivian Concessions area, we
estimated the area within the Bolivian Concessions that would likely
contain lithium resources. Finally, we multiplied the estimated lithium
resources within this subarea of the Bolivian Concession by the price per
ton of lithium resource multiple to arrive at an estimate of fair market value
of the lithium resources. ©”

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent challenges this. While Bolivia has described the Salar as "the largest
lithium mineral deposit" of the world,® Econ One contends that the Claimants'
reliance on the Orstom-Risacher study is flawed,° that Navigant's estimate is far
from conservative,° and that its comparable transaction approach is invalid.®"

 

a rate of 1-year LIBOR + 2%, compounded annually, on these cash flows, which yields a total amount
(interest included) of USD 30,081,458.

623 Navigant, Second ER, § 177, table 16 and the Claimants’ request for relief in page 170 of their

Reply.

624 Navigant, Second ER, §] 176 and table 15.

625 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 87.

626 SNG 2008 Report, Section Il, pp. 5 and 7, Exh. BD-37.
627 Navigant, Second ER, § 170.

628 Counter-Mem., 22, Tribunal's translation.

629 Econ One, Second ER, 9 266-271.

630 Econ One, Second ER, § 278-286.

167

506.

507.

508.

Moreover, it generally opines that "the estimation of the value of the concessions’
lithium resources carried out by Navigant for US$ 736,385 is speculative, erroneous
and not well-founded."®°2

c. Analysis

The Claimants and their expert Navigant have calculated the FMV of the lithium
resources for three concessions: Inglaterra, Tete and part of Don David. The other
concessions are not included because they are considered outside the lithium
concentration area.

Both the report authored by Orstom-Risacher in 1989 (co-commissioned by state
entity Complejo Industrial de los Recursos Evaporiticos del Salar de Uyuni
("CIRESU"), Bolivia's University of San Andrés and French research organization
Orstom) and a 2008 report prepared by Bolivia's SERGEOTECMIN report the
existence of lithium in the Salar de Uyuni in general and in the Rio Grande estuary,
where the concessions are located, in particular. The Orstom-Risacher report
describes the Salar de Uyuni as the "world's first lithium reserve (8,9 million tons
solely in the superficial crust)" and stresses that the "area with a higher concentration
of these elements is located in the superficial crust at the south of the Salar, close to
the Rio Grande estuary."®° The SERGEOTECMIN report considered it "undeniable
that [the Salar de Uyuni] has an important lithium reserve at the global level."°*

Although the existence of high levels of lithium in the Salar de Uyuni is undisputed,
the Tribunal is nonetheless unconvinced by the claim for loss of lithium resources in
three of the concessions. First, while the Claimants requested Behre Dolbear, their
industry expert, to calculate boron reserves and resources, they have tasked
Navigant, their economic expert, with estimating the lithium resources, without
justifying this differentiation. As a consequence, Behre Dolbear vaguely refers to the
"lithium potential" of the Claimants' concessions,®*> while Navigant carries out the
detailed assessment of the lithium resources.® The Tribunal finds it difficult to rely on

 

631 Econ One, Second ER, 9] 287-292.

632 Econ One, Second ER, § 293, Tribunal's translation.
633 Exh. BD-3, p. 61, Tribunal's translation.

634 Exh. BD-37, Part Il, p. 5, Tribunal's translation.

635 Behre Dolbear, Second ER, § 88.

636 Navigant, Second ER, 9 170-181.

168

509.

510.

511.

512.

evidence from a financial expert to assess a geological fact, such as the existence
and extent of presence of a mineral.

Second, the Claimants have not shown that they had any reasonably foreseeable
plans to extract, exploit or market lithium. They have not established either that they
had any expertise and experience in the lithium business and have not alleged that it
was essentially identical to being active in borates industry and market. Their
economic expert confirmed at the hearing that he was not aware that Quiborax was in
the lithium business in 2004.°”

As a result, the Tribunal dismisses the claim for damages arising from the loss of
lithium resources.

6. Interest
a. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants request pre- and post-award compound interest in accordance with
customary international law and Article VI(2) of the BIT. Navigant has provided two
alternative calculations of pre-award interest on the lost cash flows from 30 June
2004 to 30 June 2013, applying two alternative interest rates: LIBOR + 2%* and the
Bolivian sovereign debt rate.°°° This interest has been incorporated into Navigant's
calculation of past cash flows, from the date on which each cash flow was due on a
yearly basis.°° The same interest rates are proposed for the calculation of post-
award interest, which would accrue from the date of the Award to the date of
payment.

b. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent opposes the Claimants’ request for pre-award interest because "to
the extent that the relief sought relates to future earnings, this concept is lost profits.
[...] If damages for lost profits were granted, these damages should not generate
interest."®"' Therefore, if applicable, interest should be awarded from the date of the

637 Tr., Day 2, 184:14-185:10.

638 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. H.1.
639 Navigant, Second ER, Exh. H.2.
640 See Navigant, Second ER, Exh. H.

641 Rejoinder, 206, Tribunal's translation.

169

513.

514.

515.

valuation onwards.*? Bolivia opposes compounding interest but agrees with the
Claimants on using a rate of LIBOR + 2%.**

c. Analysis

The Tribunal finds that both pre- and post-award interest are due. With respect to
pre-award interest, the Tribunal has already determined that, as part of an ex post
valuation, past losses must be brought to present value through the application of an
interest rate. Such interest compensates the fact that the Claimants were not in
possession of the funds to which they were entitled and thus had either to borrow
funds at a cost or were deprived of the opportunity of investing these funds at a profit.
As to post-award interest, there is no dispute that it should apply in principle. Bolivia
accepts that, if compensation is due, "it should be updated according to a simple risk
free rate from the valuation date [...]."°* The Tribunal has established above (see
Section VII.A.4.c.i) that the date of valuation is the date of the Award, using 30 June
2013, as a proxy.

The Tribunal is aware of the Respondent's concern about awarding interest to lost
profits and its allegation of double counting. Indeed, according to the Commentary to
ILC Article 38, “[w]here a sum for loss of profits is included as part of the
compensation for the injury caused by a wrongful act, an award of interest will be
inappropriate if the injured State would thereby obtain double recovery," because “[a]
capital sum cannot be earning interest and notionally employed in earning profits at
one and the same time.”®5 However, the ILC Commentary goes on to explain that
“interest may be due on the profits which would have been earned but which have
been withheld from the original owner.” Consequently, if interest is applied to past net
cash flows (i.e., the cash flows that would have been earned between 23 July 2004
and 30 June 2013 but were withheld from the Claimants due to Bolivia's expropriatory
measure) as of the date on which those cash flows were due, there is no double-
counting. The Tribunal understands that this is what Navigant has done.®“°

Interest must be calculated from the date on which the loss was suffered. With
respect to past cash flows, the loss was suffered whenever those cash flows were

642 Rejoinder, § 210.

643 Rejoinder, §§ 206 and 210.

644 Rejoinder, § 210, Tribunal's translation.

645 Commentary to ILC Article 38, § 11.

646 Navigant, Second ER, table 12 and Exh. H.

170

516.

517.

518.

due and not received, after the date on which the Claimants returned the concessions
to Bolivia, i.e., 23 July 2004. The Tribunal thus awards interest on NMM’s past cash
flows from 23 July 2004 to 30 June 2013, at the rate and on the terms described
further below. This interest, which has accrued on those past cash flows as they
became due, has already been included in the total value of past cash flows set out in
paragraph 502.a above.®4”

Thereafter, interest shall accrue on the total amount awarded from 1 July 2013 until
the Respondent fulfils its payment obligations. Interest accrues on the total amount
awarded because the Tribunal has used 30 June 2013 as valuation date.

The Claimants propose two alternative interest rates for both pre- and post-award
interest: either one year LIBOR + 2% or the Bolivian Sovereign Debt Rate.*® Bolivia
agrees with the Claimants on using LIBOR + 2% and rejects the alternative interest
rate suggested.®° The Tribunal will thus apply the rate considered appropriate by
both Parties, one year LIBOR + 2%, which it deems a suitable rate for debts in U.S.
currency owed outside the United States over the relevant periods.

The Claimants argue that "[bJoth pre-award and post-award interest must be
calculated on a compound basis" since there is a "strong economic rationale for
awarding compound interest, as the most appropriate way to account for the time-
value of money."®° They contend that the interest rate should be determined in
accordance with international law, stressing that while "damages for breach of
contract may be subject to limitations established by domestic law [, t]his is not true
for expropriation cases, which are decided under international law."®' The
Respondent, on the other hand, claims that compound interest "must be strongly
rejected insofar as it collides with Bolivian Law, which requires that the interest rate
be simple."®2 In support, it quotes Article 412 of the Bolivian Civil Code, which reads
as follows:

647 See note 622 above.

648 Reply, § 460.

649 Counter-Mem., 9§ 444-445; Rejoinder, § 210.
650 Mem., § 217.

651 Reply, § 472.

652 Counter-Mem., § 446, Tribunal's translation.

171

Anatocism and all other forms of capitalization of interests are prohibited.
Agreements to the contrary are void.®?

519. The Tribunal must in the first place determine whether it must apply Bolivian or
international law to this issue. In the section on the law applicable to the merits of the
dispute (Section V.B above), the Tribunal held that, absent a choice of law in the
treaty and in application of Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, it was to allocate a
given issue to municipal or international law.

520. The Tribunal is not persuaded that it is appropriate to apply national law to the issue
of compound interest. Reparation for expropriation is governed by international law
and full reparation includes interest for late payment. The application of national law
may be appropriate for contract claims, but not for a claim of breaches of the BIT.
This position is supported by the cases referred to by both Bolivia and the Claimants.

521. Acase in point is Duke Energy v. Ecuador, on which Bolivia has relied to support its
request for simple interest. Duke Energy involved a contract dispute and the tribunal
thus "agree[d] with the Respondent's argument in favor of simple interest,” adding that
“Ecuadorian law prohibits compound interest in the present case." However, that
same award noted that “compound interest may be awarded for expropriation but not
for contract claims."®° Other arbitral tribunals, such as Santa Elena v. Costa Rica,
have also drawn the distinction between cases involving treaty breaches and those
involving contract breaches.

522. The Tribunal finds that the remaining authorities relied upon by Bolivia in favor of
simple interest are unhelpful. Desert Line v. Yemen was a contract dispute and the
tribunal provided no reason for its decision to award simple interest.®’ Aucoven v.
Venezuela awarded simple interest, but it also dealt with a contract claim governed
primarily by Venezuelan law,°° being specified that international law would prevail

653 Exh. R-358, Tribunal's translation. The original text reads as follows: "Art. 412.- (PROHIBICION
DEL ANATOCISMO). Estan prohibidos el anatocismo y toda otra forma de capitalizacién de los
intereses. Las convenciones en contrario son nulas."

854 Duke Energy Electroquil Partners & Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, |CSID Case No.
ARB/04/19 (“Duke Energy v. Ecuador’), Award of 18 August 2008, § 457.

655 Duke Energy v. Ecuador, Award of 18 August 2008, § 432.

656 Santa Elena v. Costa Rica, ICSID Case No. capa Award of 17 February 2000, 4 97. See also
Autopista Ct CA Republic of \ . ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5 (“Aucoven v. Vonoaele )s Award of 23 September 2003, § 394.

®57 Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17 (“Desert Line v.
Yemen’), Award of 6 February 2008, 9 294-295.

658 Aucoven v. Venezuela, Award of 23 September 2003, § 105.

 

172

523.

524.

525.

526.

over conflicting national rules. The tribunal held that the applicable Venezuelan law
combined with the pertinent contract provision did not allow the application of
compound interest. It also concluded that international law did not require compound
interest for contract cases with the result that no conflict arose.®°°

Accordingly, the Tribunal shall apply international law to determining interest. The
applicable standard of compensation under customary international law is full
reparation. Compound interest, which has become the standard to remunerate the
use of money in modern finance, comes closer to achieving this purpose than simple
interest. Indeed, being deprived of the use of the money to which it was entitled, a
creditor may have to borrow funds or may forego investments, for which it would pay

or earn compound interest.

The Tribunal is aware that the Commentary to ILC Article 38, which the Respondent
also invokes, states that "[t]he general view of courts and tribunals has been against
the award of compound interest."®° Yet, a review of arbitral decisions shows that
compound interest has been deemed to "better reflect[] contemporary financial
practice"®*' and to constitute "the standard of international law in [] expropriation
cases." The view that compound interest better achieves full reparation has been
adopted in a large number of decisions®? and is shared by this Tribunal.

As to the periodicity, the Tribunal opts for compounding on a yearly basis.

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal awards interest on the compensatory
damages awarded, compounded annually, at the rate of one-year LIBOR plus two
percent. Interest has been applied by the Tribunal to past cash flows as they became
due from 23 July 2004 until 30 June 2013, and thus does not need to be added to the
damages awarded. Given that the Tribunal has used 30 June 2013 as valuation date,
interest shall accrue on the total amount awarded from 1 July 2013 until the date of
payment.

659 Aucoven v. Venezuela, Award of 23 September 2003, 9 394-395.
660 Commentary to ILC Article 38, § 8.
661 | G&E v. Argentina, Award of 25 July 2007, § 103.

862 Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No.
ARB/99/6, Award of 12 April 2002, § 174. See also Occidental v. Ecuador II, Award of 5 October 2012,

1.840.

683 See, e.g., El Paso v. Argentina, Award of 31 October 2011, 745; Vivendi v. Argentina Il, 9.2.6;
Wena v. Egypt, Award of 8 December 2000, § 129.

173

527.

528.

529.

530.

B. Declaratory Judgment and Moral Damages

1. Overview

The Claimants allege that, by engaging in post-expropriation acts of harassment (in
particular, the initiation of the criminal case in Bolivia), the Respondent has breached
its obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to their investments, as well as its
obligation not to impair those investments through arbitrary and discriminatory
measures. As relief, they request a declaratory judgment that those standards have
been breached, as well as moral damages.

The Claimants also allege that, through its procedural conduct in this arbitration
(including through the initiation and continuation of the criminal case), the
Respondent has breached other international law obligations under the ICSID
Convention or general principles of law. As relief for these alleged breaches, the
Claimants seek a declaratory judgment.

As some of these claims and arguments overlap, the Tribunal will address them
jointly. It will first address the Claimants’ request for a declaratory judgment, whether
as a matter of FET, unreasonable or discriminatory measures, or other breaches of
international law (Section 2 below). It will then turn to the Claimants’ request for
moral damages (Section 3 below).

2. Request for a declaratory judgment

The Claimants first requested the Tribunal to issue a declaratory judgment under
Article 37 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility at the hearing on jurisdiction.°©
Following the Tribunal's instructions in Procedural Order No. 8, the Claimants filed a
Request for Declaratory Judgment on 27 May 2011. This request therefore complies
with the temporal requirement set forth in Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The
Respondent filed a Reply to the Claimants' Request for Declaratory Judgment on 10
June 2011. In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal decided that it would entertain
the Claimants' request for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Article 37 of the ILC

864 See, e.g., Mem., pp. 98-100, Reply, p. 170, COSS, slide 78.

665 The Tribunal notes that already in their Memorial the Claimants had requested an award declaring
that Bolivia had breached its obligations under Articles Ill and IV of the BIT by submitting the
Claimants to acts of harassment, in particular the initiation of criminal proceedings, although this
request was not articulated under Article 37 of the ILC Articles.

174

531.

532.

Articles in the final Award.® Both Parties made additional submissions on this
request in the second round of briefs on the merits.

a. The Claimants’ position

As already described in the Decision on Jurisdiction,’ the Claimants request the
Tribunal to formally declare, pursuant to Article 37 of the ILC Articles, that
"Respondent's conduct in the present arbitration violates its obligations under the
[ICSID Convention] as well as its general obligation under international law to
arbitrate fairly and in good faith."°* In their Reply, the Claimants modified their
request and called for the Tribunal to declare that the Respondent's conduct in this
arbitration "constitute[s] breaches of the Respondent's obligation to provide fair and
equitable treatment, not take arbitrary or discriminatory measures, and its general
duty to arbitrate fairly and in good faith."°°° Specifically:

The Claimants [...] request the Tribunal to declare that the Respondent's

conduct in the arbitration, in particular: (i) the Respondent's initiation of

the criminal case in Bolivia and refusal to suspend that criminal case,

[tlhus, knowingly and willfully harming the integrity of the arbitration

proceeding, (ii) the Respondent's attempts to benefit from its own

unlawful conduct in its written and oral submissions on jurisdiction, (iii)

the Respondent's refusal to pay its share of the advance payments, and

(iv) the Respondent's bad faith accusations of fraud, both in the

jurisdictional and merits phase, all constitute breaches of the

Respondent's obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment, not take

arbitrary or discriminatory measures, and its general duty to arbitrate
fairly and in good faith.67°

As reformulated in their Reply, the Claimants’ request is based on the following
allegations:

a. The initiation of the criminal case by Bolivia was part of “an orchestrated
campaign directed against the Claimants”®”' in order to avoid its international
responsibility in this arbitration.°”2

866 Decision on Jurisdiction, § 308.

667 Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 299-303.
668 CDJ, 41.

669 Reply, § 550.

670 Reply, § 550.

671 Reply, 9 519.

672 This is not the first time that the Claimants contend that the initiation of the criminal proceedings
violates their rights. As discussed in Section VI.B above, the Claimants argue that Bolivia’s post-
expropriation acts of harassment (notably the initiation of the criminal case) amounts to a breach by
Bolivia of the FET standard as well as an arbitrary or discriminatory measure under Articles IV and III

175

533.

Bolivia’s conduct has been disrespectful towards the Tribunal, the Centre and
the ICSID system as a whole, including by failing to comply with the Tribunal’s
Decision on Provisional Measures, challenging the entire Tribunal for alleged
prejudgment of the case following that decision, and failing to pay its share of
the advance costs of the arbitration.

By failing to suspend the criminal case as directed by the Tribunal in its Decision
on Provisional Measures, the Respondent has harmed the integrity of the
arbitration and aggravated the dispute.

The Respondent has used the criminal case to its own advantage in this
arbitration, in particular by obstructing the Claimants’ access to witnesses and
using the criminal case to gather evidence for this arbitration.

The Respondent has falsely accused the Claimants and persons associated with
them of fraud and corruption, with no regard for the consequences of those
accusations for those involved, and advanced incompatible factual accounts
intended to deny the Claimants’ access to arbitration.

The Claimants contend that Bolivia's conduct amounts to an internationally wrongful
act within the meaning of Article 2 of the ILC Articles. This provision requires for the
act to (i) be attributable to the State and (ii) constitute a breach of an international
obligation of the State. They submit that both requirements are met. First, the acts of
the Respondent in this arbitration are attributable to the State of Bolivia. Second,
through the acts described above, Bolivia has breached:

Its international obligations under the BIT (specifically, its obligations to provide
fair and equitable treatment and not take arbitrary or discriminatory
measures) ;°”

Its international obligations under the ICSID Convention (in particular, Articles 47
and 61 of the ICSID Convention, Regulation 14 of the Administrative and
Financial Regulations and the ICSID Arbitration Rules),°’4 and

 

of the BIT, respectively. In their Request for Provisional Measures, the Claimants also invoked their
(procedural) rights to the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute, the
exclusivity of ICSID arbitration under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, and the integrity of the
arbitration proceedings.
673 Reply, 99 515, 524.

674 CDJ, 9 63-65; 88; Reply, 4 535.

176

535.

536.

537.

c. _ Its general obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good faith.°”

As a result, the Claimants argue that, pursuant to Articles 31 and 34 of the ILC
Articles, they are entitled to full reparation for the injury caused.

The Claimants note that, pursuant to Article 34 of the ILC Articles, full reparation may
take the form of either restitution, compensation or satisfaction. However, as
restitution is not appropriate and compensation is not sufficient in this case, the
Claimants seek satisfaction in the form of a declaration that Bolivia's conduct in this
arbitration constitutes an internationally wrongful act. The Claimants submit that a
declaratory judgment is a permissible form of satisfaction under Article 37 of the ILC
Articles, and one that also lies within the Tribunal's inherent powers.

b. The Respondent's position

The Respondent's objections to the Claimants’ request for a declaratory judgment
have evolved. In its Reply to the Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory Judgment,
Bolivia submitted that the Claimants' request for a declaration under Article 37 of the
ILC Articles was (i) premature and (ii) inadmissible to the extent that it exceeds the
scope of the remedy of satisfaction under Article 37 of the Articles. The Respondent
further submitted that (iii) the Tribunal lacks the power to grant the punitive relief
requested by the Claimants, and (iv) relief under Article 37 is not available to
investors. In the alternative, the Respondent argues that (v) the evidence fails to
support the Claimants' request, and (vi) Bolivia has not breached any international
obligation, nor caused any damage to the Claimant that would not be compensable
though monetary relief.

In turn, in its Rejoinder and during the hearing on the merits, the Respondent raised
certain jurisdictional objections that it had not previously raised. As in its Reply to the
Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory Judgment, Bolivia also argued that (i) the
Tribunal lacks the power to rule on that request, but now appears to do so as a matter
of jurisdiction. The Respondent also submits that (ii) the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to
rule on the Claimants' Request for a Declaratory Judgment because the Tribunal is
only competent to decide claims arising directly out of an investment. The
Respondent also appears to argue that (iii) the Claimants’ request is inadmissible, but
other than enunciating this objection in the title of the relevant section it does not

675 CDJ, 4 63-65; 88; Reply, § 550.

177

articulate this objection in the text of its Rejoinder.®”* Finally, the Respondent asserts
that (iv) the Claimants have not proved their allegations of procedural misconduct.
Separately, the Respondent (v) denies that it has breached the FET standard or
subjected the Claimants to unreasonable or discriminatory measures through post-
expropriation acts of harassment.

c. Analysis
i. Objections to jurisdiction

538. In its Rejoinder and during its closing arguments at the hearing on the merits, the
Respondent raised certain jurisdictional objections to the Claimants’ Request for a
Declaratory Judgment that it had not previously raised.®”” First, Bolivia argued that
the Tribunal lacks the power to rule on that request. Although Bolivia had already
raised that argument in its Reply to the Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory
Judgment, it now appears to do so as a matter of jurisdiction. The Respondent's
argument appears to be that, as neither the ICSID Convention, nor its Rules of
Arbitration, nor the BIT (i.e., the instruments setting out the contracting parties’
consent) grant the Tribunal the power to issue a declaratory judgment or to order any
other remedy that is not specifically envisaged therein to sanction the Parties’
procedural conduct, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to rule on this claim.®”

539. Second, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to rule on the
Claimants' Request for a Declaratory Judgment because "the Tribunal is only
competent to decide claims arising directly from an investment and not claims based
on the actions of Bolivia's judicial branches, its procedural behavior or the alleged
harassment the Claimants claim they are victims of."°79

876 See Rejoinder, Section V.B.3 entitled “The Claimants’ request for a declaration under Article 37 of
the Draft ILC Articles is inadmissible and legally incorrect”, Tribunal’s Translation, (“La solicitud de las
Demandantes de una declaracién bajo el Articulo 37 del Proyecto de Articulos de la CDI es
inadmisible y legalmente incorrecta.”)

877 Rejoinder, 4] 123, 154-155. See also Respondent's closing arguments during the hearing on the
merits, Tr., Day 3, 93:3-16. Although in its Reply to Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory Judgment
the Respondent argued that “[o]bviously, the Arbitral Tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction in this case extends
to its jurisdiction to examine Claimants’ Request” (RDuJ, § 3), it did not otherwise deny the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction to rule on that request for reasons specific to it.

678 Rejoinder, 7§ 154-155, 157. The Respondent first articulated this jurisdictional objection in its
Rejoinder. In its Reply to Claimant's Request for a Declaratory Judgment, the Respondent did argue
that the Tribunal lacked the power to issue a declaratory judgment. However, it did not assert that as
a result the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction, as it does now.

679 Rejoinder, § 125, Tribunal’s translation (emphasis in original).

178

540.

541.

542.

543.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory Judgment was
made at the hearing on jurisdiction. Both Parties had the opportunity to submit their
views on the request during the phase devoted to determining the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. Yet, the Respondent chose not to raise jurisdictional objections at that
stage.

The jurisdictional phase concluded with the Decision on Jurisdiction, in which the
Tribunal established that it had jurisdiction over the claims of Quiborax and NMM.
The Tribunal finds that there is no reason that can justify reopening the jurisdictional
issues at this stage, assuming this were at all possible. It therefore denies the
Respondent's new jurisdictional objections.

ii. | Objections to admissibility

In its Reply to the Claimants’ Request for a Declaratory Judgment, Bolivia submitted
that the Claimants' request for a declaration under Article 37 of the Articles was
premature, “because it would require the Arbitral Tribunal not only to sustain its
jurisdiction, but also to prejudge the merits of Claimants’ claims, assess the damages
suffered by Claimants (if any) and determine whether the other forms of relief sought
by Claimants (including the allocation of costs) are sufficient to compensate such
damages.”*° The Tribunal understands that this objection has been rendered moot,
as the Tribunal has decided to address the Claimants’ request as a part of its Award
on the merits and has already established its jurisdiction.

The Respondent further argues that, because the Tribunal only granted the Claimants
leave to make submissions under Article 37 of the ILC Articles, any request for relief
exceeding the scope of Article 37 (i.e., relief other than satisfaction) is inadmissible.
The Tribunal finds the Respondent’s objection excessively formalistic. The
Claimants’ request for a declaratory judgment is not grounded solely in Article 37 of
the ILC Articles. In their Memorial on the Merits, the Claimants had already
requested an award declaring that Bolivia had breached its obligations under Articles
Ill and IV of the BIT by submitting the Claimants to acts of harassment, in particular
the initiation of the criminal proceedings.®*' To the extent that the Claimants’ request

680 RDJ, § 18.
681 In their Memorial, the Claimants requested an award:

“(5) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT by failing to accord
Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by submitting Claimants to acts of harassment intended to
obstruct Claimants' rights under the BIT;

179

544.

545.

546.

547.

rests on various legal bases, the Tribunal finds that it was admissible for the
Claimants to elaborate on them in their subsequent submissions on the subject.

iii. Does the Tribunal have the power to grant the relief
requested?

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks the power to grant the relief
requested by the Claimants. Although the Tribunal has dismissed this argument as a
matter of jurisdiction, it must examine it as part of its analysis of the Claimants’
request, be it a matter of admissibility or merits, an issue that can remain open.

First, the Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks the power to grant punitive
relief. It submits that “the Tribunal’s powers are limited to those mentioned in the
ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules and in the Treaty, none of which include the
power to grant punitive relief for an alleged breach of procedural duties.”®°?

According to the Respondent, "[t]he only relief that could operate as a sanction
admitted in ICSID arbitration for improper conduct during the proceedings is the
award of costs against the party responsible for such conduct in the award."©° This
sanction is based on the Tribunal’s power to allocate costs under Article 61(2) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the Arbitration Rules. ®* By contrast, there is no
power to impose a penalty on a State for non-compliance with a provisional measure:
the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention show that a sanction was
expressly refused by the Contracting States.°°°

Nor does the Tribunal have an inherent power to grant punitive relief for an alleged
breach of procedural duties, the Respondent continues. Bolivia agrees with the
Claimants that “it is within the authority of any tribunal to declare conduct by either
party in a dispute unlawful, as an inevitable step in the settlement of any legal

 

(6) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article Ill of the BIT by submitting Claimants to
unreasonable and discriminatory measures, consisting of acts of harassment intended to obstruct
Claimants' rights under the BIT[.]” Mem., pp. 99-100.

682 RDJ, § 30 (emphasis in original).

683 RDJ, § 40 (emphasis in original). See also Rejoinder, § 156.

684 RDJ, 7 40. See also Rejoinder, J 156.

685 RDJ, § 39 (citing Aron Broches, Chairman of the Legal Committee, Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States: Documents Concerning the

Origin and the Formulation of the Convention, Volume II, Part 2, International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ed.), 1968, Exh. R-226, p. 815.

180

dispute.” However, the “Claimants have not demonstrated how or why a ‘firm
response’ by the Arbitral Tribunal, declaring Bolivia ‘guilty of alleged procedural
misconduct, is ‘an inevitable step in the settlement of [the instant] legal dispute.”®*”
The fact that the Claimants only made this request at the hearing on jurisdiction
shows that it is not. Nor have the Claimants demonstrated that their claim for moral
damages and costs cannot fully make good the injury allegedly caused by Bolivia.

548. According to the Respondent, none of the cases cited by the Claimants supports their
request. In Enron, the tribunal did not decide that it had the power to grant punitive
declaratory relief; rather, as the parties had agreed that the tribunal could make a
declaratory statement, the tribunal only examined its power to order measures of
performance and injunction.®° In Cementownia, the tribunal rendered a declaratory
judgment that was not based on Article 37 of the ILC Articles, granted that relief to the
State, not the investor, and declared that the claimant had brought a fraudulent claim
as part of its rationale for dismissing the claim.®°

549. For the Respondent, the punitive nature of the requested relief is evident from the
Claimants’ statements. It thus argues that “[o]nly the punitive nature and purpose of
the relief, by publicly presenting Bolivia as a rogue State (which it is not), could serve
to compensate Claimants’ purported damage.”©

550. Second, the Respondent further contends that a declaratory judgment under Article
37 of the ILC Articles (i.e., satisfaction) is not one of the remedies available to
investors in the context of investor-State disputes. Relying on ICSID case law®"' and
legal doctrine,°? the Respondent submits that the ILC Articles are not fully
transposable to investor-State disputes, and that “satisfaction is only available as a

686 RDJ, 4 45, citing CDJ, 4 82.

687 RDJ, 4 46, emphasis in original, footnotes omitted.

688 RDJ, ¥ 49, citing Enron v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 January 2004, § 81, Exh. R-
108.

689 RDJ, 4 50, citing Cementownia “Nowa Huta” S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2,
Award of 17 September 2009, § 158, Exh. R-186.

699 RDJ, § 35.

or ifically, on Wintershall Aktie v. A ine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/14,
Award of 8 December 2008, § 113, and CMS v. ‘Argentina, Award of 12 May 2005, § 399.

62 Specifically, on S. Ripinsky, K. Williams, Damages in International Investment Law, British Institute
of International and Comparative Law, 2008, p. 30, Exh. R-220 and Carole Malinvaud, Non-pecuniary
Remedies in Investment Treaty and Commercial Arbitration, in: Albert Jan van den Berg (ed), 50 years
of ICCA International Arbitration Conference, ICCA Congress Series, 2009 Dublin Volume 14, p. 225,
Exh. R-221.

 

181

551.

552.

553.

remedy to an injured State against a responsible State.”*° As the purpose of
satisfaction is to reestablish the dignity, the honor or the sovereignty of the injured
State,” “satisfaction can only fulfill its role as reparation inasmuch as it expresses a
certain degree of punishment of the responsible State.”** The Respondent also
argues that the Corfu Channel case does not support the Claimants’ request.®°

Even if the Tribunal were to consider that Article 37 of the ILC Articles is applicable in
this case, the Respondent argues that the conditions for its application are not met.
Under Article 37 of the ILC Articles, satisfaction is meant to repair an injury that
cannot be made good by restitution or compensation. However, the Claimants have
failed to demonstrate that they have suffered any injury, let alone an injury not
reparable through monetary compensation.®°°

The Claimants, for their part, insist that satisfaction is an available remedy for
investors. Pursuant to Article 37 of the ILC Articles, a State must provide satisfaction
if its internationally wrongful act cannot be made good by restitution or compensation.
However, they stress that satisfaction may take different forms and is not limited to
the examples provided under Article 37. Indeed, one of the most common forms of
satisfaction is a declaration of the wrongfulness of the act by the competent tribunal.
The Claimants also argue that the Tribunal has the inherent power to issue a
declaratory judgment, as it is within the authority of any tribunal to declare conduct by
either party in a dispute unlawful, as an inevitable step in the settlement of any legal
dispute.

The Claimants do not deny that a declaratory judgment would serve an exemplary
role. Specifically, they submit that “[t]he cornerstone of an international arbitration
system involving States is the fundamental assumption that States will comply with
their international obligations, once undertaken voluntarily."°°? Consequently, “the
Respondent's professed indifference towards non-compliance with its international
obligations [...] strikes at the heart of the ICSID arbitration system” and “renders

83 RDJ, J 62.

694 RDJ, { 63, citing E. Wyler, A. Papaux, “The Different Forms of Reparation: Satisfaction,” in The
Law of International Responsibility, ed. J. Crawford, A. Pellet, S. Olleson, OUP 2010, p. 623, Exh. R-
222; the Manouba case (France v. Italy), Award of the Tribunal of 6 May 1913, Unofficial English
Translation, p. 7; the Rainbow Warrior case, Decision of 30 April 1990, UNRIAA Vol. XX, 1990, p. 273.

65 The Corfu Channel case (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland v. People’s
Republic of Albania), Judgment on merits of 9 April 1949, ICU Reports 4, 1949, p. 35.

696 RDJ, §] 67.
°97 Reply, 7 537.

182

554.

555.

unsustainable any court or arbitration proceeding involving private persons and
States.”®® In the Claimants’ view, “the Respondent's open defiance of the ICSID
arbitration system during the arbitration cannot remain without consequence” and
“requires a firm response from this Tribunal.”®°° Hence, as in the Corfu Channel case,
"a declaratory judgment by the Tribunal is necessary to ensure respect for the ICSID
arbitration system, of which the Tribunal is the organ and to which the Respondent
has voluntarily submitted this dispute in accordance with Article X of the BIT."7°°

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that some types of satisfaction are not a
remedy available to investors in investor-State arbitrations. Article 34 of the ILC
Articles includes satisfaction as a form of reparation,” such remedy being further
advanced in Article 37 as follows:

Satisfaction

1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to give satisfaction for the injury caused by that act insofar
as it cannot be made good by restitution or compensation.

2. Satisfaction may consist in an acknowledgement of the breach, an
expression of regret, a formal apology or another appropriate
modality.

3. Satisfaction shall not be out of proportion to the injury and may not
take a form humiliating to the responsible State.

However, it finds that some types of satisfaction as a remedy are not transposable to
investor-State disputes. It must be remembered that Part Two of the ILC Articles,
including the rules on reparation and in particular Article 37, “does not apply to
obligations of reparation to the extent that these arise towards or are invoked by a
person or entity other than a State.””°? That said, the ILC Articles restate customary
international law and its rules on reparation have served as guidance to many
tribunals in investor-State disputes.’°° In this Tribunal’s view, the remedies outlined
by the ILC Articles may apply in investor-state arbitration depending on the nature of
the remedy and of the injury which it is meant to repair.

698 Reply, § 540.
699 Reply, 4 541.
700 Reply, 543.

701 Article 34 of the ILC Articles (forms of reparation) provides that “[flull reparation for the injury
caused by the internationally wrongful act shall take the form of restitution, compensation and
satisfaction, either singly or in combination, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.”

702 Commentary to the ILC Articles, Article 28, 4 3.
703 See, e.g., Micula v. Romania, Final Award of 11 December 2013, § 916, Note 172.

183

556. The ILC's commentary explains that satisfaction “is not a standard form of reparation,
in the sense that in many cases the injury caused by an internationally wrongful act of
a State may be fully repaired by restitution and/or compensation.” It is an
exceptional remedy, which is available only “insofar as [the injury] cannot be made
good by restitution or compensation."”°

557. International case law strongly suggests that some types of satisfaction are a remedy
exclusively designed for States. For instance, the Rainbow Warrior tribunal stressed
that satisfaction “relates particularly to the case of moral or legal damage done
directly to the State, especially as opposed to the case of damage to persons
involving international responsibilities."°° Indeed, the injuries that traditionally have
been redressed through satisfaction relate to injuries that can only be suffered by
States, such as violations of national sovereignty,’”’ or "insults to the symbols of the
State, such as the national flag, violations of [...] territorial integrity, [...] ill-treatment
of or deliberate attacks on heads of State or Government or diplomatic or consular
representatives or other protected persons and violations of the premises of
embassies or consulates or of the residences of members of the mission."7°?
Gaetano Arangio-Ruiz, Special Rapporteur of the ILC, further explains that "the
‘moral’ damage to the State [...] is in fact distinct [...] from the ‘private’ moral damage
to nationals or agents of the State. This ‘moral damage to the State’ notably consists,
on the one hand, in the infringement of the State’s right per se and, on the other, in
the injury to the State’s dignity, honor or prestige."79

558. The traditional forms in which satisfaction has been expressed (such as an apology)
are also better-suited to inter-State relations. Conversely, the injury caused to
individuals as a result of harassment, threat or violence, as well as reputational harm,
can be redressed through monetary compensation.”'° The practice of international

704 Commentary to the ILC Articles, Article 37, 4 1.
705 Commentary to the ILC Articles, Article 37, 4 1.

708 Case concerning the Rainbow Warrior Affair, New Zealand v. France, Arbitral Award of 30 April
1990, 12.

707 Corfu Channel Case, United Kingdom v. Albania; |CJ, Judgment on the Merits of 9 April 1949, p. 35
(where the ICJ awarded declaratory relief to Albania by stressing that "the action of the British Navy
constituted a violation of Albanian sovereignty”).

708 Commentary to ILC Articles 2001, Article 37, 4 4, footnotes omitted.

709 Gaetano Arangio-Ruiz, Special Rapporteur, Second Report on State Responsibility, Yearbook ILC,
1989, Vol Il, part 1, 4 14, emphasis added.

710 Desert Line v. Yemen, Award of 6 February 2008, § 286. See also Opinion in the Lusitania Cases,
US-Germany Mixed Claims Commission, 1923, UNRIAA, vol VII, p. 40;

184

human rights courts further shows that the harm resulting from an individual's
suffering, distress or impairment of significant values can be compensated in
monetary terms.”"!

559. Accordingly, the type of satisfaction which is meant to redress harm caused to the
dignity, honor and prestige of a State, is not applicable in investor-State disputes.
This position is shared by authors and tribunals alike. For instance, Ripinsky and
Williams have found that "it is clear that certain rules, such as the one introducing
satisfaction as a form of reparation, will be of value only in a State-State context."7'2
Similarly, the tribunal in CMS held that, as it was not dealing with a case of reparation
due to an injured State, satisfaction could be “ruled out at the outset.” 71

560. The fact that some types of satisfaction are not available does not mean that the
Tribunal cannot make a declaratory judgment as a means of satisfaction under Article
37 of the ILC Articles, if appropriate. Moreover, this is also a power inherent to the
Tribunal's mandate to resolve the dispute. The Parties agree — and rightly so — that “it
is within the authority of any tribunal to declare conduct by either party in a dispute
unlawful, as an inevitable step in the settlement of any legal dispute.””'4 As the ILC
commentary explains and the ICJ/PClJ case law demonstrates,’'® such a declaration
can or cannot be a form of satisfaction, depending on the circumstances:

[W]hile the making of a declaration by a competent court or tribunal may be
treated as a form of satisfaction in a given case, such declarations are not
intrinsically associated with the remedy of satisfaction. Any court or tribunal
which has jurisdiction over a dispute has the authority to determine the
lawfulness of the conduct in question and to make a declaration of its
findings, as a necessary part of the process of determining the case. Such

71 Vernava et al v. Turkey, ECHR Application Nos. 16064/90, 16065/90 etc., Grand Chamber
Judgment of 18 September 2009, § 84; Villagran Morales et al v. Guatemala, Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, Series C, No. 77, Judgment of 26 May 2001, { 84.

712 S. Ripinsky, K. Williams, Damages in International Investment Law, British Institute of International
and Comparative Law, 2008, p. 30, Exh. R-220.

713 CMS v. Argentina, Award of 12 May 2005, § 399, footnote omitted.
714 RDJ, 4.45, citing CDJ, 4 82.

715 See, e.g. Northern Cameroons Case, Cameroon v. United Kingdom, Judgment of 2 December
1963, p. 37 (‘That the Court may, in an appropriate case, make a declaratory judgment is
indisputable”); Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia, Germany v.
Poland, PClJ (Merits) 1926, p. 19 (“[T]here is nothing to prevent the Court's giving judgment on the
question whether or not [...] Poland is acting in conformity with its obligations towards Germany under
the Geneva Convention”); Haya de la Torre Case, Colombia v. Peru, Judgment of 13 June 1951, p.
16; Asylum Case, Colombia v. Peru, Judgment of 20 November 1950, p. 18, 26 (where the Court
stated that making a declaration with respect to an alleged breach of the Havana Convention was part
of the Court's judicial duty to resolve the existing legal dispute between the Parties).

185

561.

562.

563.

(a)

564.

565.

a declaration may be a preliminary to a decision on any form of reparation,

or it may be the only remedy sought.7'6
The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that such a declaration could not be
punitive in nature. The Tribunal’s mandate is to resolve the dispute before it, not to
punish the Parties. That said, as part of the process of settling the dispute, a
declaration can be conceived in a manner that is not punitive.

With this legal framework in mind, the Tribunal will now address the Parties’
arguments on the merits of the Claimants’ request.

iv. Has the Respondent’s conduct breached its
international obligations?

The Claimants contend that the Respondent has breached essentially three
categories of international obligations: (a) its substantive obligations under Articles III
and IV of the BIT; (b) certain obligations under the ICSID Convention, and (c) its duty
to arbitrate in good faith. The Tribunal will address each category separately.

Has the Respondent's conduct breached its substantive obligations under the BIT?

The Claimants allege that, by engaging in post-expropriation acts of harassment (in
particular, the initiation of the criminal case in Bolivia), the Respondent has breached
its obligations to accord fair and equitable treatment to their investments and not to
impair those investments through arbitrary and discriminatory measures (Articles IV
and Ill of the BIT, respectively).

As described in Section VI.B above, the Claimants contend that, from the moment on
which they filed their request for arbitration, the Respondent initiated a harassment
strategy (which they describe as an “orchestrated campaign”’’”) to avoid international
liability under the BIT and force the Claimants to give up their claim. This harassment
strategy is evidenced by Bolivia's initiation of corporate audits against NMM and the
criminal case against Allan Fosk, David Moscoso and other persons related to
Quiborax and NMM's operation in Bolivia, as well by the 2004 Inter-Ministerial Memo
in which Bolivia sets out its defense strategy with respect to the ICSID arbitration.
Indeed, according to the Claimants, in its Decision on Provisional Measures the

716 Commentary to the ILC Articles, Article 37, | 6.
717 Reply, 4519.

186

566.

567.

568.

569.

Tribunal accepted that the criminal case was part of Bolivia’s defense strategy with
respect to this arbitration.”"®

The Claimants submit that Bolivia's conduct amounts to a violation of its obligations to
accord fair and equitable treatment to their investments and not to impair those
investments through arbitrary and discriminatory measures. Citing Vivendi Il, the
Claimants contend that measures aimed at frustrating investors’ rights and punishing
investors for exercising their right to arbitrate amounts to unfair and inequitable
treatment.’"? Indeed, they submit that such measures are arbitrary by definition, as
they lack any foundation in law.

The Claimants deny that their procedural complaints have been dealt with in the
Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures. Although the Tribunal ordered Bolivia
to suspend the criminal case for the duration of the arbitration in order to ensure its
integrity, this does not render the Claimants’ substantive complaints moot under the
FET and the arbitrary or discriminatory measures standards. Likewise, the fact that
the criminal case has not substantially affected the Claimants’ rights in the arbitration
does not disprove that the purpose of that case was to deny the Claimants their
condition of foreign investors under the BIT.’

The Respondent denies that its conduct breaches its obligation of fair and equitable
treatment. It contends that, because the alleged acts of harassment ceased once the
mining concessions were revoked, they could not affect the Claimants’ investment,
arguing that the Tribunal concluded as much in its Decision on Provisional
Measures.”*' It also argues that the claim is based on an unreal and confusing
reconstruction of the facts regarding the tax authorities’ actions and the criminal
proceedings ongoing in Bolivia. Finally, the Respondent submits that the claim is
moot, because the criminal proceedings followed up on allegations of forgery related
to Quiborax’s and Allan Fosk’s status as shareholders in NMM and as investors under
the BIT, a matter which has already been dealt with in the Tribunal’s Decision on
Jurisdiction.

In its Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal did indeed find that “[s]een
jointly with the 2004 Memo, the corporate audit and the criminal proceedings

718 Reply, 7§ 521-523.

719 Reply, 4 524, citing Vivendi v. Argentina II, Award of 20 August 2007, § 7.4.45.
720 Reply, ¥§ 516-518.

721 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.

187

570.

571.

appear[ed] to be part of a defense strategy adopted by Bolivia with respect to the
ICSID arbitration.”’*? However, the Tribunal also found that whether such defense
strategy amounted to harassment was unclear.’? The Tribunal also found that, while
it exacerbated the climate of hostility in which the dispute was unfolding, the initiation
of the criminal case did not aggravate the dispute.’”** To reach that conclusion, the
Tribunal took into account the fact that after the revocation of the mining concessions,
the Claimants had no more activities or presence in Bolivia, and that Allan Fosk (the
only Claimant implicated in the criminal proceedings) did not live in Bolivia. Under
those circumstances, the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ contentions that the
criminal proceedings placed “intolerable pressure” on them to drop their claims.72

The Claimants have not provided convincing evidence to alter these conclusions.
The Tribunal is aware that Bolivia has not suspended the criminal proceedings and
that it has taken various procedural steps in the context of those proceedings that
involve Mr. Fosk, Mr. Moscoso, and other persons related to the Claimants.’° While
it acknowledges that those steps exacerbate the climate of hostility in which this
arbitration has developed, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the criminal case or
corporate audits initiated by the Respondent against the Claimants after the
expropriation of their investments amount to a breach of fair and equitable treatment
or to an impairment of their investments. This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that
the Tribunal has declined jurisdiction over Allan Fosk.

In its Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal stressed that “Bolivia has the
sovereign power to prosecute conduct that may constitute a crime on its own territory,
if it has sufficient elements justifying prosecution,” as well as “the power to investigate
whether Claimants have made their investments in Bolivia in accordance with Bolivian
law and to present evidence in that respect,” while emphasizing that “such powers
must be exercised in good faith and respecting Claimants’ rights, including their prima
facie right to pursue this arbitration.”’2” Although in its Decision on Jurisdiction, the
Tribunal rejected the allegations of forgery that underlie the criminal proceedings
initiated against Allan Fosk and others, it confirmed that certain discrepancies did

722 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 122.

723 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 123.

724 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.

725 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.
726 See § 64 and 66 above.

727 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 123.

188

572.

(b)

573.

574.

indeed exist in NMM’s corporate records.’”® Whether these discrepancies were
sufficient to justify prosecution in Bolivia is not for the Tribunal to determine.
However, they confirm the Tribunal’s conclusion that Bolivia did not act unfairly and
inequitably when it initiated the criminal proceedings or the corporate audits.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not shown conduct amounting
to a breach of Articles Ill or IV of the BIT resulting from an alleged harassment
strategy following the Claimants’ filing of their Request for Arbitration.

Has the Respondent breached its obligations under the ICSID Convention?

The Claimants also allege that, through its procedural conduct in this arbitration
(including through the initiation and continuation of the criminal case), the
Respondent has breached obligations established by the ICSID Convention and has
been disrespectful towards the Tribunal, the Centre and the ICSID system as a
whole. ”° Specifically, the Claimants contend that:

a. _ By refusing to comply with the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures, the
Respondent breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.”° Contrary to the
Respondent's contentions, that Decision is not a mere “recommendation” but is
binding on the Respondent.

b. By challenging the entire Tribunal for alleged prejudgment of the case following
that decision, the Respondent has been disrespectful to the Tribunal and the
ICSID system.

c. _ By failing to pay its share of the advance costs of the arbitration, it has violated
Article 61 and Regulation 14 of the Administrative and Financial Regulations.

The Respondent denies contentions (a) and (c). Specifically, it argues that:

728 Decision on Jurisdiction, 192 (“On the basis of its review of the entire record, the Tribunal finds
that the Claimants’ account of facts is consistent and well-documented. Whilst there are some
documentary discrepancies — primarily the NMM's and Rio Grande's balance sheets of 2001 and
2003, respectively, and the 11 September 2001 minutes —, these do not prove fraud nor suffice to
overcome the plentiful evidence in support of the Claimants’ case. For these reasons, the Tribunal is
persuaded that Quiborax acquired and Allan Fosk received, respectively, 13,636 shares (50.995%)
and 1 share (0.005%) of NMM in August and September of 2001, and that they did not engage in
fraud or fabricate evidence to gain access to ICSID arbitration.”)

729 Reply, (§] 533-534; 535(iii).
730 Reply, 49 526, 535(i).

189

575.

576.

a. Non-compliance with the Tribunal’s recommendation of provisional measures is
not in breach of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.”*' Citing the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention and legal authority, the Respondent
argues that provisional measures granted under the ICSID Convention are not
binding and that there is no sanction for their non-compliance. The ICSID
tribunals cited by the Claimants erred in adopting, without an independent
analysis, the holding of LaGrand in relation to the binding nature of decisions on
provisional measures by the ICJ.

b. _ Bolivia’s non-payment of part of the advance on costs does not violate the ICSID
Convention or Administrative and Financial Regulations, nor Bolivia’s duty of
good faith. Neither Article 61 of the ICSID Convention nor Article 14(3)(d) of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations establish an obligation on the parties to
an arbitration to pay the advance on costs. In any event, Bolivia did not breach
its duty to arbitrate fairly and in good faith by merely not paying advances on
costs.

The Tribunal will first address the Claimants’ contention that the Respondent has
breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention (1). It will then turn to their allegation
that the Respondent has breached the ICSID Convention by failing to pay advances
on costs (2). As to the Claimants’ allegation that, by challenging the entire Tribunal
following the Decision on Provisional Measures, the Respondent has been
disrespectful to the Tribunal and the ICSID system, the Claimants do not invoke the
breach of a particular obligation under the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal
understands this to be another alleged breach of the duty to arbitrate in good faith
and will thus address it in the appropriate section.

(1) Did the Respondent breach Article 47 of the ICSID Convention?

The Claimants contend that, by failing to comply with the Decision on Provisional
Measures, the Respondent has breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. It is
undisputed that the Respondent did not comply with these provisional measures. ”°?

731 The Respondent has also argued that Bolivian law prevents it from suspending the criminal
proceedings, as recommended by the Tribunal. See, e.g., Bolivia's letters of 2 June 2014 and 12
June 2015.

732 According to the Decision on Provisional Measures, the Respondent was to “take all appropriate
measures to suspend the criminal proceedings identified as Case N° 9394/08 [...] and any other
criminal proceedings directly related to the present arbitration, until this arbitration is completed or until
reconsideration of this decision, whether at the request of a Party or of the Tribunal’s own motion,” and
to “refrain from initiating any other criminal proceedings directly related to the present arbitration, or
engaging in any other course of action which may jeopardize the procedural integrity of this

190

The question which thus arises is whether Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
imposes upon the Respondent the obligation to comply with the provisional
measures.

577. Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that
the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which
should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

578. It is true that the ordinary meaning’ of this provision, especially the terms
“recommend’”* and “should be taken” do not convey the notion of a binding order.
The same can be said for the context; other provisions of the ICSID Convention use
different language when referring to binding obligations.”° Similarly, the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, to the extent relevant as supplementary
means of interpretation,’”° show that an earlier draft using the word “prescribe” was
then changed to “recommend.” 7°”

579. Despite this, ICSID tribunals have consistently found that they have the power to
make binding orders for provisional measures.’* The rationale is that these decisions
derive their mandatory force from the function of provisional remedies, which is to

 

arbitration.” (Decision on Provisional Measures, Section V). It is undisputed that the Respondent did
not suspend the criminal proceedings identified as Case N° 9394/08.

733 In accordance with the rules of treaty interpretation set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties (“VCLT”), this provision must be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose”
(Article 31(1) of the VCLT).

734 Article 39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules establishes the specific procedures for provisional
measures. It also uses the term “recommend.”

735 For instance, Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention use the term "shall" in relation to awards.
736 See Article 32 of the VCLT.

737 History of the ICSID Convention, Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States,
Volume II, Part 2, Documents 44-146 (1969), SID/LC/SR/16 (30 Dec. 1964), Summary Proceedings of
the Legal Committee Meeting, 8 December 1964, pp. 812-815.

738 See, e.g, Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural
Order No. 2 of 28 October 1999, § 9; Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Provisional Measures of 25
September 2001, 9§ 17-25; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order
No 1 of 1 July 2003, § 4; Occidental v. Ecuador II, Decision on Provisional Measures of 17 August
2007, ¥ 58; City Oriente v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional
Measures of 19 November 2007, §] 51-53; Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and
Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador, |\CSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Provisional Measures
of 8 May 2009, § 67-70; Millicom International Operations B.V. and Sentel GSM S.A. v. Republic of
Senegal, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/20, Decision on the Application of Provisional Measures of 9
December 2009, § 49; Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID
Case No. ARB/12/1, Decision on Claimant Request for Provisional Measures of 13 December 2012,
4 120.

191

secure the applicant's rights while the proceedings are pending. To use the words of
the ICJ in LaGrand, “the power in question is based on the necessity, when the
circumstances call for it, to safeguard, and to avoid prejudice to, the rights of the
parties as determined by the final judgment of the Court.””°° While the wording and
the context of Article 41 of the ICJ Statute are not strictly identical to those of the
ICSID Convention (“indicate” instead of “recommend’),”4° the function of the
measures is the same.

580. The European Court of Human Rights (the “ECtHR”) justifies the binding force of its
provisional measures on the same principles. For instance, in Mamatkulov, it
stressed that interim measures ordered in accordance with Article 39 of the Rules of
the ECtHR:

[...] play a vital role in avoiding irreversible situations that would prevent
the Court from properly examining the application and, where appropriate,
securing to the applicant the practical and effective benefit of the
Convention rights asserted. Accordingly, in these conditions a failure by a
respondent State to comply with interim measures will undermine the
effectiveness of the right of individual application guaranteed by Article 34
and the State's formal undertaking in Article 1 to protect the rights and
freedoms set forth in the Convention.”*

581. Essentially the same reasoning was adopted by the City Oriente tribunal, which noted
that

[...] a teleological interpretation of [Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules] leads to the conclusion that the
provisional measures recommended are necessarily binding. The Tribunal
may only order such measures if their adoption is necessary to preserve
the rights of the parties and guarantee that the award will fulfill its purpose
of providing effective judicial protection. Such goals may only be reached if
the measures are binding, and they share the exact same binding nature
as the final arbitral award. Therefore, it is the Tribunal’s conclusion that the
word “recommend” is equal in value to the word “order.””42

582. In light of these reasons, the Tribunal will follow this consistent line of cases and the

evolution of international law evidenced in ICJ and ECtHR jurisprudence. It thus
holds that the operative part of the Decision on Provisional Measures was binding

739 LaGrand, Germany v. United States of America, ICJ Rep. 466, Judgment of 27 June 2001, ¥ 102.

740 Article 41.1 of the ICJ Statute provides that "[t]he Court shall have the power to indicate [...] any
provisional measures," while Article 94.1 of the UN Charter expressly refers to the binding force of the
decisions of the Court, just as does Article 53 of the ICSID Convention.

741 Mamatkulov and Askarov. v. Turkey, Applications Nos. 46827/99 and 46951/99, ECHR, Judgment
of 4 February 2005, 125, emphases added.

742 City Oriente v. Republic of Ecuador, |ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional
Measures of 19 November 2007, § 52.

192

583.

584.

585.

586.

upon the Respondent and was not merely an optional recommendation. It therefore
concludes that, by failing to comply with those provisional measures, the Respondent
has breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.

That being said, given the text of Article 47 and the relatively recent evolution of
international law with respect to its interpretation, the Tribunal does not find that the
Respondent's failure to comply with the Decision on Provisional Measures amounts to
a breach of its duty to arbitrate in good faith. Bolivia may not have been aware of the
binding nature of these provisional measures when it failed to comply with them. In
addition, as discussed further below, the Tribunal finds that the underlying right that
these measures sought to protect — the right to the procedural integrity of the
arbitration proceedings — was ultimately not impaired. As a result, although the
Respondent breached Article 47 by failing to comply with the provisional measures,
under the facts of this case this breach did not entail a violation of the duty to arbitrate
in good faith.”

(2) Did the Respondent breach Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and Article 14
of the Administrative and Financial Regulations?

The Claimants contend that Bolivia has breached Article 61 of the ICSID Convention

and Article 14 of the Administrative and Financial Regulations by failing to pay its

advances on costs.

Article 61 of the ICSID Convention only speaks of advances in the context of
conciliation proceedings. It is silent about advances in arbitration. By contrast,
Article 14 of the Administrative and Financial Regulations provides that the parties
"shall make advance payments" to the Centre in equal shares.’“* That wording indeed
expresses an obligation to make advance payments.

It is undisputed that the Respondent has failed to make the major part of the advance
payments called by the Centre.”5 That said, such failure can be adequately
remedied by an award of costs and a declaratory judgment is not necessary to
resolve the dispute in this respect. The Tribunal therefore dismisses the request for a

743 The Tribunal sees no contradiction in so holding. Because provisional measures issued under
Article 47 are binding per se, a failure to comply with them will automatically entail a breach of Article
47. This does not necessarily give rise to a breach of the underlying right that the measures seek to
preserve; whether those rights are harmed will depend on the facts of the case.

744 Article 14 (3)(a) and (d).

745 See Section VIII (Costs) below.

193

(c)

587.

declaratory judgment relating to the advance payments and will take the failure into
account in allocating the costs of the proceedings.

Has the Respondent breached its duty to arbitrate in good faith?

Finally, the Claimants allege that the Respondent has breached a series of duties,
which can all be understood to be a part of the duty to arbitrate in good faith.
Specifically, the Claimants allege that:

The Respondent's failure to comply with the Decision on Provisional Measures
not only breaches Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, but also “the underlying
principle that parties shall refrain from any action that harms the integrity of the
proceeding."”*° Indeed, the Claimants assert that the Tribunal held that the
criminal case ipso facto harmed the integrity of the arbitration.

The Respondent's failure to suspend the criminal case constitutes a breach of its
duty to refrain from aggravating the dispute.”4”

The Respondent has used the criminal case to its own advantage in this
arbitration. Specifically, the Claimants allege that Bolivia has questioned the
authenticity, veracity and correctness of NMM’s corporate documents, while at
the same time ensuring that the persons who prepared those documents (in
particular Claimants’ former counsel, Fernando Rojas) would not be available to
testify at the hearing. They also allege that Bolivia has submitted “evidence”
obtained in the criminal case to support its false accusations of fraud in this
arbitration, notably David Moscoso’s forced “confession.” For the Claimants, this
constitutes a breach of the principle nemo auditur propriam turpitudinem
allegans.”®

The Respondent has falsely accused the Claimants and persons associated with
them of fraud and corruption, with no regard for the consequences of those
accusations for those involved. Despite the fact that, in its Decision on
Jurisdiction, the Tribunal found that the Claimants had not engaged in fraud or
fabricated evidence to gain access to ICSID arbitration,”“° the Respondent
continues to make unsubstantiated allegations of corruption and fraud in its

746 Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment, 24.

747 Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment, § 24
748 Reply, 9] 527-529; 535(ii).
749 Reply { 531, citing Decision on Jurisdiction, J 192.

194

588.

Counter-Memorial. This time, the Respondent accuses Mr. Moscoso of having
abused public office and bribed Bolivian senators to obtain RIGSSA’s mining
concessions, without submitting any evidence of these accusations and ensuring
that Mr. Moscoso would not be able to testify.

The Respondent has advanced incompatible factual accounts intended to deny
the Claimants’ access to arbitration (in particular, by accusing the Claimants of
fabricating their condition of shareholders after the expropriation, while at the
same time accusing them of concealing their condition of shareholders before
the expropriation). The Claimants argue that through the conduct described in
(d) and (e), the Respondent has breached its duty to arbitrate fairly and in good
faith.’°°

By challenging the entire Tribunal for alleged prejudgment of the case following
the Decision on Provisional Measures (challenge that was rejected by the
President of the World Bank), the Respondent has been disrespectful to the
Tribunal and the ICSID system.

The Respondent denies the Claimants’ allegations. Specifically, it argues that:

The continuation of the criminal proceedings in Bolivia does not harm ipso facto
the integrity of the arbitration proceedings. In its Decision on Provisional
Measures, the Tribunal only found that “Claimants have shown the existence of
a threat to the procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings, in particular with
respect to their right to access to evidence through potential witnesses,””*" it did
not find that such threat had materialized. Indeed, the Claimants have failed to
demonstrate that, on the facts, the criminal proceedings have prevented the
Claimants from accessing potential witnesses or were unlawfully used by Bolivia
to produce evidence for this arbitration. In particular, the Claimants have not
proved that Mr. Fernando Rojas (Claimants’ former counsel in Bolivia) was
unavailable as a witness, nor have they explained what he would have testified
about. The Claimants’ assertion that the Ugalde brothers were unwilling to
testify is irrelevant, as they are not part of the criminal case. As to Mr. Moscoso,
the Respondent claims that the Claimants do not appear to consider his
testimony relevant.

750 Reply, J 530-532; 535(iv).
751 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 148 (emphasis added).

195

589.

Nor does the continuation of the criminal proceedings aggravate the dispute.
Indeed, in its Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal found that the
criminal case did not aggravate the dispute nor change its status quo.’°*

The Claimants have failed to demonstrate that the criminal proceedings in
Bolivia were unlawfully used by Bolivia to produce evidence for this arbitration.
This allegation refers to three documents (specifically, Mr. Moscoso’s
Declaracién Jurada (R-22) admitting that the minutes of NMM shareholders’
meeting of 13 September 2001 were fabricated; the Informe Documentolégico
(R-146) showing that NMM'’s practice was to glue typed board and shareholders’
meeting minutes over the book’s pages where the minutes should have been
handwritten, and a certification by the Bolivian Registro de Comercio showing,
inter alia, that Quiborax was never registered in Bolivia (R-123). These
documents were not obtained for the only purpose of being used in this
arbitration. In any event, the fact that Bolivia obtained documents in domestic
criminal proceedings that are relevant to the arbitration cannot, in and of itself,
constitute a “wrongful act” or a violation of Bolivia’s duty to arbitrate in good faith.
The Claimants had an opportunity to contest this evidence, the Tribunal remains
free to assess its probative value, and Bolivian officers would have risked
personal liability if they had disregarded evidence arising during the criminal
proceedings that could be relevant to dismiss the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Claimants have not proved that by pursuing the criminal proceedings Bolivia
has violated its duty to arbitrate in good faith. That allegation “is absurd and an
insult to Bolivia [;], [als any other country, Bolivia not only has a right, but a duty
to investigate and prosecute serious crimes committed within its territory.””°>

The Claimants have failed to demonstrate that Bolivia’s jurisdictional objections
amount to bad faith conduct in breach of Bolivia’s duty of good faith. Bolivia's
arguments on jurisdiction are not contradictory, but consistent.

The Claimants’ allegations refer to different facets of the duty to arbitrate in good
faith. The existence of such a duty is undeniable. It arises out of Article 26 of the
VCLT in connection with Article X of the BIT. Article 26 of the VCLT provides that
“[e]lvery treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed by them
in good faith.” As stated by the ICJ in the Nuclear Tests case, "[o]ne of the basic

752 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.
753 RDJ, 9G 117-118.

196

590.

591.

592.

593.

principles governing the creation and performance of legal obligations, whatever their
source, is the principle of good faith. [...] the very rule of pacta sunt servanda in the
law of treaties is based on good faith [...]."754

In turn, Article X of the BIT contains the Contracting State's agreement with respect to
the settlement of investor-state disputes, including the agreement to arbitrate under
the ICSID Convention, to which an investor adheres by initiating arbitration
proceedings.”°> This commitment to arbitrate must be complied with in good faith in
accordance with Article 26 of the VCLT. In other words, the Parties must arbitrate in
good faith.

The existence of the duty to arbitrate in good faith is recognized by international
tribunals. For instance, the Methanex tribunal stressed that "the Disputing Parties
each owed in this arbitration a general legal duty to the other and to the Tribunal to
conduct themselves in good faith during these arbitration proceedings."75 Similarly,
the Libananco tribunal held that "parties have an obligation to arbitrate fairly and in
good faith; [...] this principle applies in all arbitration, including investment arbitration,
and to all parties, including States (even in the exercise of their sovereign powers)."757

The principle of good faith involves the duty not to perform any act that would defeat
the object and purpose of the obligation that has been undertaken by the parties,
even if the act itself is not expressly prohibited by the provisions of the treaty.”5° As
emphasized by the ICJ in Gabcikovo-Nagymaros, "[t]he principle of good faith obliges
the parties to apply [the obligation] in a reasonable way and in such a manner that its
purpose can be realized."759

The Respondent's obligation to arbitrate provided by Article X of the BIT thus implies
the duty not to act in a manner that will undermine or frustrate the arbitral process.

754 Nuclear Tests, New Zealand v. France, ICJ Rep. 457, Judgment of 20 December 1974, § 49.

785 In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal already determined that the Parties validly consented to
arbitrate in accordance with the rules of the ICSID Convention, Respondent's consent being provided
through Article X of the BIT (see Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 255, 309).

788 Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, UNCITRAL Tribunal under NAFTA Chapter
XXI, Final Award of 3 August 2005, Part Il — Chapter I, § 54, emphasis added.

787 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on
Preliminary Issues of 23 June 2008, § 78.

758 Oliver Dorr, Kristen Schmalenbach (eds.), Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties: A
Commentary, Springer 2012, p. 446.

759 Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project, Hungary v. Slovakia, ICU Rep. 7, Judgment of 25 September 1997,
4 149, emphasis added.

197

594.

This includes, for instance, the duty to refrain from harming the procedural integrity of
the arbitration or aggravating the dispute. Thus, actions directed against the efficient
conduct of the arbitral proceedings may breach this duty even if such action is not
prohibited by the express terms of the BIT or the ICSID Convention.

Under the circumstances, the Tribunal is not convinced that it should issue a
declaration of breach of the duty to arbitrate in good faith. First, the Tribunal does not
find that the Respondent breached its duty to arbitrate in good faith by initiating or
failing to suspend the criminal proceedings. As the Tribunal has emphasized on
several occasions, Bolivia has the sovereign prerogative to prosecute crimes on its
territory, and such prerogative is not barred by the BIT or ICSID Convention. Given
the existence of discrepancies in NMM’s corporate records, the Tribunal cannot
conclude that Bolivia's sole purpose in initiating the criminal proceedings was to
frustrate the Claimants’ rights in this arbitration. More importantly, the criminal
proceedings did not cause actual harm to the Claimants’ procedural rights. In the
Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal found that the criminal case had not
aggravated the dispute or changed the status quo.” The Tribunal confirms this
conclusion: while the criminal proceedings have undoubtedly increased the climate of
hostility in which this arbitration unfolded, they have not rendered the solution to the
dispute more difficult." It is true that, in that Decision, the Tribunal found “the
existence of a threat to the procedural integrity of the ICSID proceedings, in particular
with respect to their right to access to evidence through potential witnesses."”© It has
not been shown, however, that this threat materialized. In spite of the fact that the
Claimants could not call Messrs. Moscoso and Rojas as witnesses, they have
presented evidence (including other witnesses) and have had the opportunity to rebut
the evidence produced by the Respondent. In other words, the Claimants have had
ample opportunity for their “claims and requests for relief in the arbitration [to be] fairly
considered and decided by the arbitral tribunal.””° The Claimants themselves seem
to recognize this, as they acknowledge that “the criminal case has not substantially
affected the Claimants’ rights in the arbitration [...].””*

760 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 138.

761 Amco Asia v. Indonesia, Decision on request for provisional measures of 9 December 1983, ICSID
Reports, 1993, p. 412.

762 Decision on Provisional Measures, § 148. The Tribunal did not hold that the continuation of the
criminal case jpso facto harmed the integrity of the arbitration proceedings, as the Claimants have
contended. It merely recognized the existence of a threat to such integrity.

763 Plama v. Bulgaria, Order of 6 September 2005, § 40.
764 Reply, 4518.

198

595.

596.

597.

598.

599.

Similarly, the Tribunal does not find that the Respondent has breached the duty of
good faith through its procedural conduct in this arbitration. It is the Respondent's
right to submit the factual allegations and legal arguments of its choice, and it is the
Tribunal’s duty to accept or reject them on their merits. More particularly, the Tribunal
has found the Respondent's allegations of fraud and corruption to be baseless, and
has so stated in its Decision on Jurisdiction and in this Award. It regards this as
sufficient relief for the Claimants. Similar considerations apply to the Respondent's
right to challenge the members of the Tribunal. A party can exercise this right if it
deems it justified under Article 14(1) of the Convention,’® as long as it does not do so
for sole purpose of frustrating the arbitral process. The Tribunal finds no indication in
the record that this was the case.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal does not grant the Claimants’ request for a
declaratory judgment.

3. Moral damages

The Tribunal now turns to the Claimants’ request for moral damages. It will first
address the Respondent's jurisdictional objections with respect to this request (a),
before turning to its merits (b).

a. Objections to jurisdiction

In its Rejoinder and during its closing arguments at the hearing on the merits, the
Respondent argued that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to rule on the Claimants’
requests for moral damages.”°° As in the case of a declaratory judgment, Bolivia
submits that "the Tribunal is only competent to decide claims arising directly from an
investment and not claims based on the actions of Bolivia's judicial branches, its

procedural behavior or the alleged harassment the Claimants claim they are victims
of."767

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants' request for moral damages was made in its
Memorial of 14 September 2009. During the phase of this arbitration which dealt with
the Respondent's jurisdictional objections, Bolivia filed Objections to Jurisdiction and

765 Article 57 of the ICSID Convention provides that “[a] party may propose to a Commission or
Tribunal the disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of
the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14.”

766 Rejoinder, § 123; Tr., Day 3, 93:3-16.
767 Rejoinder, § 125 (emphasis in the original).

199

600.

601.

602.

603.

a Reply on Jurisdiction (dated 30 July 2010 and 13 January 2011, respectively).
Neither of those briefs argued that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction regarding the
request for moral damages, nor was this raised at the hearing on jurisdiction.

As a result, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent's new jurisdictional objections are
extemporaneous and therefore denies them. This being so, had the Tribunal not held
the objections to be extemporaneous, it would have denied them for the reasons set
out below.

b. Merits
i. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants allege that Quiborax has suffered a loss of credit and reputation
resulting from the criminal prosecutions initiated in Bolivia against Alan Fosk, David
Moscoso and persons related to NMM, as well as harm to their procedural rights
before this Tribunal, as they have lost important witnesses for their case due to the
criminal prosecution and intimidation carried out by Bolivia. In reparation, they claim
an amount of US$ 4 million.768

The Claimants argue that they are entitled to damages because they have suffered
moral harm "due to the criminal prosecution to which they have been submitted in
Bolivia."” They claim that "[tlhe purpose of the Claimants’ request for moral
damages is to, as far as possible, wipe out the non-material consequences of
Bolivia’s wrongful acts."””° Contrary to the Respondent’s contentions, the purpose is
not to punish Bolivia.

According to the Claimants, it is a general principle of international law that States are
under the obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by an internationally
wrongful act, including any damage, whether material or moral resulting from the
wrongful act (Art. 31 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility). The principle that
reparation for wrongful acts includes moral damages is also widely recognized by

768 Reply, Section IX(6). In the Memorial, the Claimants had requested US$ 5 million (see Mem.,
275 and Section X(9).

769 Mem., § 266.
770 Reply, § 487.

national legal systems.””' In the realm of international law, it was recognized in the
Lusitania case and is equally established in investment case law.’

604. The Claimants submit that "[i]t is also clear that legal entities may suffer non-
pecuniary damages."’” In support of this assertion, they rely on the International Law
Commission,’ the European Court of Human Rights’’> and ICSID tribunals.’

605. Citing international investment awards,’’’ the Claimants argue that the standard for
awarding moral damages is a matter for the Tribunal’s discretion. As a consequence,
they challenge Bolivia's contention that the Lemire v. Ukraine three-prong test should
apply,””8 requiring that (i) the State's actions amount to ill-treatment contravening the
norms according to which civilized nations are expected to act; (ii) the State's actions
cause loss of reputation, and (iii) both cause and effect are grave and substantial.

606. Nonetheless, if the Tribunal were to find that this test is indeed applicable, the
Claimants are confident that their case meets these requirements:

a. "It is not accepted among civilized nations that Bolivia should have been willing
to sacrifice Quiborax's reputation in order to avoid its international responsibility
for its wrongful acts."”7°

b. Quiborax has suffered a loss of reputation, caused by Bolivia's wrongful acts. It
has been discredited”° and "will never again be able to set up business in

771 Dinah Shelton, Remedies in International Human Rights Law, OUP (2005), p. 37, Exh. CL-29.

772 Lusitania (US v. Germany), 1 November 1923, 7 UNRIAA p. 36, Exh. CL-19; Benvenuti & Bonfant
v. Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2, Award of 8 August 1980, § 4.96, Exh. CL-4; Aucoven v.
Venezuela, Award of 6 February 2008, § 289.

773 Mem., § 269.

774 James Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility, Introduction,
Text and Commentaries, Cambridge University Press (2002), Comment on Article 36(4), Exh. CL-23.

775 Comingersoll S.A. v. Portugal, ECHR, Judgment of 6 April 2000 (Grand Chamber), {| 35, Exh. CL-
9; Freedom and Democracy Party (OZDEP) v. Turkey, ECHR, Judgment of 8 December 1999 (Grand
Chamber), 57, Exh. CL-10.

778 Sergey Ripinsky, Damages in International Investment Law (2008), p. 310, referring to Tecmed v.
Mexico, Award of 29 May 2003, § 198, Exh. CL-27; Yury Bogdanov v. Republic of Moldova, SCC
Arbitration No. V (114/2009), Award of 22 September 2005, Exh. CL-17.

777 The Rompetrol Group 548 N. V. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/3 (“Rompetrol v. Romania’),
Award of 6 May 2013, § 289, Exh. R- 354; Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, \CISD
Case No. ARB/11/23 (“Arif v. Moldova’), Award of 8 April 2013, 4 591.

778 Lemire v. Ukraine, Award of 28 March 2011, § 333, Exh. R-350.
779 Reply, § 506.
780 Reply, 498.

201

607.

608.

609.

Bolivia due to the public accusations of fraud and corruption by the Respondent
against the company." ”*' They also insist on the causal relationship between
Bolivia’s unlawful conduct and the injury, as Quiborax’s reputation in Bolivia
would be intact but-for the Respondent's actions.’®2

c. The Claimants also argue that "[flor Quiborax to be effectively excluded from its
neighbouring country carries substantial financial costs" and the deprivation of
important competitive advantages.’®°

As for the amount of US$ 4 million claimed, the Claimants submit that given that
reputational damage "is very difficult to calculate [...] [and] given the uncertainties [,] a
conservative figure is appropriate." They further claim that this sum "will assist in
placing Quiborax in a position to receive redress for the international wrong. Moral
damages are the only way to achieve this."

ii. |The Respondent's position

The Respondent denies that the Claimants suffered moral damages, and submits that
in any case the sum claimed is disproportionate. According to the Respondent, "the
Claimants' 'moral damages’ claim is in reality a claim for punitive damages in
disguise,"”°° seeking to impose on Bolivia an exemplary punishment.’®’ In the
Respondent's view, this type of claim is inadmissible in international law and must
thus be dismissed.

Even if this Tribunal were to find that the claim for moral damages does not pursue a
punitive objective, the Respondent claims that Quiborax does not have the right to
receive compensation because none of the conditions set out by international case
law are met. Citing Lemire v. Ukraine, the Respondent argues that moral damages
can only be awarded in exceptional cases, when

the State's actions imply physical threat, illegal detention or other

analogous situations in which the ill-treatment contravenes the norms
according to which civilized nations are expected to act; the State's actions

781 Reply, 498.

782 Reply, § 502.

783 Reply, 499.

784 Reply, ¥§ 510-511.

785 Reply, 512.

786 Counter-Mem., § 415, Tribunal's translation.
787 Counter-Mem., § 415.

202

610.

611.

612.

cause a deterioration of health, stress, anxiety, other mental suffering such
as humiliation, shame and degradation, or loss of reputation, credit and
social position; and both cause and effect are grave or substantial.7°°

Consequently, so says the Respondent, the Claimants must prove that (i) the State
has committed an unlawful act; (ii) the act must have caused damage; and (iii) both
the act and the damage must be particularly serious.”®° For the Respondent, these
three conditions, which must be met cumulatively, have been constantly confirmed by

international tribunals.7°

More specifically, the Respondent contends that:

Bolivia has not acted unlawfully.

Quiborax has not proven that it suffered moral damages. According to Bolivia,
investment case law shows that tribunals have been very strict in demanding
compelling evidence and numerous tribunals have dismissed requests for moral
damages for lack of proof.

Quiborax has failed to show a causal link between Bolivia's allegedly unlawful
acts and the alleged damage. Indeed, there is no evidence that "permits
verification of economic losses, loss of credit or of clients."”°' Moreover, "the
Claimants should show that said moral damage is not attributable to its own

conduct."”22

Neither the alleged acts nor their consequences are of a particularly grave
nature. There are only two international investment cases in which moral
damages were granted: Benvenuti and Desert Line. The former was decided ex
aequo et bono, and thus has limited precedential value. The latter presented
truly extreme circumstances, in which human lives were put at risk, and
therefore cannot be compared to the case at hand.

Moreover, even if par impossible the Tribunal would consider that there was an
unlawful international act and moral damages are due, the Respondent contends that

788 | emire v. Ukraine, Award of 28 March 2011, § 333, Exh. R-350.
789 Counter-Mem., § 419.
799 Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Award of 7 July 2011, § 282, Exh.

R-351.

731 Rejoinder, 141.
792 Counter-Mem., § 432, Tribunal's translation.

613.

614.

615.

616.

617.

monetary compensation is not an available remedy, because "this type of damage, by
definition, is not financially assessable."7°

In any case, the Respondent argues that the amount claimed "is exaggerated and
groundless"’™ and that the facts leading to an award of US$ 1 million in moral
damages in Desert Line cannot be compared with the present ones.

Finally, Bolivia asserts that "in view of the Claimants’ irregular conduct in obtaining
and administrating the operations, this Tribunal should not move away from the
venerable trend developed by recent tribunals, which have rejected claims for moral
damages in similar contexts to this unjustified litigation."”°

iii. Analysis

The Claimants seek moral damages in an amount of US$ 4 million,’ to wipe out the
non-material consequences of Bolivia's wrongful acts as far as possible. The
Respondent opposes this request as a concealed claim for punitive damages, which
cannot succeed under international law.

This request seeks relief for the moral injury allegedly caused to the Claimants by the
post-expropriation acts of harassment that Bolivia allegedly inflicted on them and
related persons. Specifically, the Claimants refer to the criminal proceedings against
Allan Fosk, David Moscoso and others. Thus, the damage at issue does not stem
from the loss of the Claimants’ investments, but from acts allegedly committed after
the expropriation.

The Tribunal understands that the legal basis for the Claimants’ moral damages claim
is Bolivia's alleged breach of Articles III and IV of the BIT as a result of these post-
expropriation acts of harassment. While the Claimants have not expressly linked their
claims under Articles Ill and IV of the BIT with their request for moral damages, the
same criminal proceedings which constitute the basis for part of their FET and
impairment claims are, according to the Claimants, the source of their loss of credit

793 Rejoinder, 133, Tribunal's translation.

794 Counter-Mem., § 439, Tribunal's translation.
795 Rejoinder, § 144.

798 Reply, Section IX(6). In the Memorial, the Claimants had requested US$ 5 million (see Mem., ¥
275 and Section X(9)).

204

618.

and reputation and of the impairment of their procedural rights in this arbitration.’9”
The Tribunal thus understands that the purpose of the Claimants’ request for moral
damages is to repair the non-material damage caused by the alleged breaches of
Articles Ill and IV resulting from these post-expropriation acts of harassment. The
Tribunal has already held that the Respondent has not breached Articles III and IV of
the BIT through post-expropriation acts of harassment. As a result, there can be no
basis for a claim for reparation.

That said, had the Tribunal entertained this claim, it would in any event have denied it
for lack of evidence of any specific moral injury. Indeed, the Tribunal agrees with
Bolivia and Lemire that the threshold to award moral damages is high. It also shares
Bolivia's view that the Claimants’ case and the evidence on record do not meet the
exacting criteria required in order to grant moral damages. In addition, the Tribunal
shares the opinion of other tribunals according to which moral damages are an
exceptional remedy.7°°

797 In their requests for relief, the Claimants claim moral damages for Bolivia’s post-expropriation acts
of harassment, by requesting an award:

"Ordering Bolivia to pay compensation in an amount not less than US$ 5,000,000 for moral
damages suffered by Claimants due to the unlawful acts of harassment by Bolivia,
subsequent to the loss of Claimants’ investment in Bolivia." (Mem., Section X(9), emphasis
added.)

"Ordering Bolivia to pay compensation to an amount of US$ 4,000,000 for moral damages for
Quiborax due to the unlawful expropriation and acts of harassment by Bolivia,
subsequent to the loss of Claimants’ investment in Bolivia." (Reply, Section IX(6), emphasis
added). Although the Claimants link this request to Bolivia's expropriation of their concessions,
that link is not made in their arguments.

In turn, those same requests for relief characterize Bolivia's post-expropriation acts of harassment as
breaches of fair and equitable treatment and the prohibition of impairment by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures. Specifically, the Claimants request an award:

"Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT by failing to accord
Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by unlawfully expropriating Claimants’ investment in
Bolivia and by to the expropriation of the Claii i "
(Reply, Section IX(2); emphasis added). See also Mem., Section X(5), in which they request
an award “[dJeclaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of the BIT by failing to
accord Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by submitting Claimants to acts of harassment
intended to obstruct Claimants' rights under the BIT.”

"Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article Ill of the BIT by failing to protect
Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and obstructing its free administration, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and liquidation, by unreasonable and discriminatory
measures consisting of the unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Bolivia and by

to the exp iation of the Clail ir " (Reply,
Section IX(3); emphasis added). See also Mem., Section X(6), in which they request an
award “[dJeclaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Art. Ill of the BIT by submitting
Claimants to unreasonable and discriminatory measures, consisting of acts of harassment
intended to obstruct Claimants' rights under the BIT." Emphasis added.

 

798 Arif v. Moldova, Award of 8 April 2013, § 592: "The element of exceptionality must be
acknowledged and respected. [...] The Tribunal is therefore aligning itself to the majority of arbitral

205

619.

Vill.

620.

621.

622.

623.

624.

Therefore, the claim for moral damages is dismissed.
COSTS

As explained in the Procedural History,”°° both sides seek an award of the entirety of
the costs related to this arbitration, including the legal fees and expenses incurred in
connection with these proceedings.

The Claimants' legal fees and expenses amount to USD 7,660,375. They have paid
the non-refundable lodging fee of USD 25,000,000 and advanced USD 1,500,000 on
account of the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the ICSID
administrative fees and expenses, including the Respondent's second, third, fourth
and fifth advance payments.®°

The Respondent's legal fees and expenses amount to USD 1,844,051.57. It has
advanced USD 150,000 to ICSID.®"

The Parties have not disputed that the Tribunal has broad discretion to allocate the
costs of the arbitration between the Parties, including legal fees and expenses as it
deems appropriate pursuant to Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the

parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in

connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom

those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal

and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid.

Such decision shall form part of the award.
The Tribunal has considered all of the circumstances of this case and observes in
particular that the proceedings have been delayed on various occasions, with related
consequences in terms of costs, as a result of (i) the Respondent's proposal to
disqualify the Tribunal, which caused the suspension of the proceedings, (ii) its
opposition to the Tribunal's jurisdiction and (iii) its request for document inspection of
NMM's original share certificates, which took place in the World Bank Office in Paris.

 

decisions and holds that compensation for moral damages can only be awarded in exceptional cases,
when both the conduct of the violator and the prejudice of the victim are grave and substantial"; see
also Rompetrol v. Romania, Award of 6 May 2013, 9 289, 293.

788 See Section Ill above.

800 Specifically, the Claimants have paid to ICSID (i) the lodging fee of USD 25,000; (ii) their own share
of the advance payments requested by ICSID, in an amount of USD 825,000, and (iii) the
Respondent's share of the second, third, fourth and fifth advance payments requested by ICSID, in an
amount of USD 675,000 (Claimants’ Statement of Costs, § 12 and Section 6.1).

801 The Respondent has paid to ICSID only the first and sixth advance payment requested by ICSID.

206

625.

626.

Moreover, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants have prevailed on jurisdiction and
have established breaches of Articles Ill, IV and VI of the BIT. In addition, given the
Respondent's refusal, the Claimants have had to pay the Respondent's second, third,
fourth and fifth advance payments to ICSID, amounting to USD 675,000.

In light of these factors and considering all the circumstances, the Tribunal concludes
in its discretion that it is fair for the Respondent to bear its share of the costs of the
arbitration, ie. the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre, plus 50% of the Claimants’ share of
those costs. Specifically, the Respondent shall (i) reimburse the Claimants for the
second, third, fourth and fifth advance payments to ICSID that the Claimants paid on
behalf of the Respondent, for a total of USD 675,000, and (ii) pay the Claimants an
additional amount equivalent to 50% of the Claimants’ share of the actual costs of the
arbitration which will be reflected in ICSID’s final financial statement of the
proceedings. This allocation does not include the lodging fee, which shall remain the
burden of the Claimants. By majority, the Tribunal considers it fair for each Party to
bear its own legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred in connection with the
case.°2

DECISION
For the reasons stated in this Award, the Tribunal makes the following decision:

a. The Respondent has breached Article VI of the BIT by expropriating the
Claimants’ investments in Bolivia without complying with the requirements set
out in that Article;

b. |The Respondent has breached Article IV(1) of the BIT by failing to guarantee fair
and equitable treatment within its territory to the Claimants’ investments;

c. The Respondent has breached Article III(2) of the BIT by impairing the free
administration, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, transfer, sale and
liquidation of the Claimants’ investments through unreasonable or discriminatory
measures;

d. As a result of the Respondent's breaches of the BIT, the Respondent shall pay
to the Claimants damages amounting to USD 48,619,578;

802 Arbitrator Lalonde would have preferred that the Respondent bear 50% of the Claimant's legal
representation costs and expenses.

207

The Respondent is ordered to pay interest on the amount specified in sub-
paragraph (d) above at the rate of 1-year LIBOR + 2%, compounded annually,
calculated from 1 July 2013 until payment in full;

The Respondent shall bear its share of the costs of the arbitration, as well as
50% of the Claimants’ share of those costs. Consequently, the Respondent
shall pay the Claimants USD 675,000 as well as an amount equivalent to 50% of
the Claimant's share of the actual costs of the proceedings as reflected in
ICSID’s final financial statement of the proceedings.

Each Party shall bear the fees and expenses it incurred for the preparation and
presentation of its case;

All other claims or prayers for relief are dismissed.

Mave da ang “Beis flte Slew

  

The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., 0.C., Q.C. Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: SEP 15 2015 Date: SEP 07 2015

Subject to her partially dissenting opinion

   

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
President of the Tribunal
Date: SEP 03 2015

209

