International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A.
and Allan Fosk Kaplun

The Claimants

Vv.

Plurinational State of Bolivia
The Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President

Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C., Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Natali Sequeira

Assistant to the Tribunal
Gustavo Laborde

Date: 27 September 2012

TABLE OF CONTENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 6

A. THE PARTIES 6

1. The Claimants 6

2. The Respondent 6

THE FACTS 7

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 10

A. _ INITIAL PHASE 10

B. — WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION ......ssssessssssssessesssssesssssssssesssessnessssnsscsntentsansneene 12

C. HEARING ON JURISDICTION 16

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 18

A. — THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION .....sssssssessssssssessessesssssesseesssassessnesssenssnssssntsansneentennee 18

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION 18

ANALYSIS 19

A. THRESHOLD MATTERS 19

1. The Relevance of Previous Decisions or AWArdS ............:ccccseesesesteesteeenees 19

2. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal .............:cccccceseseeneeees 20

3. Undisputed Facts 22

4. Test for Establishing Jurisdiction .............ccccscssesseeteseeseseseseseseseseeeseeeseen 22

B. ADMISSIBILITY OF THE OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND EVIDENCE ......sssesssssesees 23

1. The Claimants’ Position 23

2. Bolivia's Position 23

3. Analysis 24

3.1. Admissibility of jurisdictional objectionS...............ccccccceeeneees 24

3.2. Admissibility Of CVIDENCE.............ccccsecesesesteeeeeeseeeeteesteeeteneteneteeneees 25

C. OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION 26
1. First Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Ratione Personae Jurisdiction Over

the Claimants 26

1.1. Bolivia's POSItION...........ccccccescsesceeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeeseeestenseenseenscenseenseees 26

The facts and documents preceding the revocation of the
mining concessions show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were
not shareholders of NUM

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.1.2. The internal documents submitted by the Claimants to show
that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of NMM have
no probative value
1.1.3. NMM has solely Bolivian shareholders and thus it is not a
Chilean national under the ICSID Convention and the Treaty......... 32
1.1.4. Claimants’ evidence suggests that Quiborax acquired 50% of
the shares of Rio Grande, not NMM . 32
1.2. The Claimants’ Position .... 33
1.2.1. Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired mining
concessions in Bolivia
1.2.2. Quiborax and Allan Fosk are shareholders of NMM as a matter
of Bolivian law. 36
1.2.3. NMM is to be deemed a Chilean national because it is under
Chilean control 37
1.3. Analysis 37
1.3.1. Were Quiborax and Allan Fosk shareholders of NMM at the
time the dispute arose in June 2004? ou... cece cece ceteris 37
(i) Burden of proof
(ii) Proof of shareholder status under Bolivian law .
(iii) The Claimants’ account and evidence of the events
(iv) Respondent's account and evidence of the events ............0c 56
(v) Conclusion 67
1.3.2. Was NMM a Chilean national by reason of foreign control at the
time the dispute arose in June 2004? «uci cece eeeeeeeeeee 68
Second Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Ratione Materiae Jurisdiction
Over the Dispute 69
21 Bolivia's POSItION..........cccescecsesesesesescseseeeseeeseeeseecseenseenseenseenseeseeea 69
2.1.1. The definition of "investment" under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention 69
2.1.2 The Claimants have not made an "investment" within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
2.2 The Claimants’ Position
2.2.1 Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention does not create a double-
test and, at any rate, its meaning is not the one Respondent
alleges 71
2.2.2 The Claimants have made an "investment" within the meaning
of the Treaty and of the ICSID Convention............0.cccceeeeeee 72
2.3 Analysis 73

 

Vi.

2.3.1 Does Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention include an
investment test independent from, and thus additional to, the
investment test of the BIT? ...............

2.3.2 What are the elements of the investment test of Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention? ..........cccceseeeseseeeeeeeeee

2.3.3 Does the Claimants’ investment meet the objective test of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention? ............ccccccesceteseteteteeees 78

 

 

3. Third Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Because Claimants’
Alleged Investment Was Made in Breach of Bolivian Laws and
Regulations 81

 

3.1. The Respondent's Position
3.2. The Claimants’ Position ....
3.3. Analysis 86

3.3.1 Is Bolivia estopped from contesting the legality of Claimants’
investment under the Treaty on account of its previous

 

 

conduct? 87

3.3.2 What party bears the burden of proof concerning alleged
violations of the legality requireMent? .............ccccceeeeseteseteteteeees 87
3.3.3 What is the scope of the legality requirement?..............:cccccee 89
3.3.4 Did the Claimants breach the legality requirement?................0 90
OBJECTION TO AL ITY 94

 

1. The Respondent's Position...

 

 

 

 

 

2. The Claimants’ Position 96
3. Analysis. 97
THE REQUEST FOR A DECLARATORY JUDGMENT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 37 OF
THE ARTICLES ON STATE RESPONSIBILITY ......sesssssssssssesssssssesssessssessesessntssneneentensee 99
1. The Claimants’ Position 99
2. The Respondent's PoSition ...........ccccccccccscsesssesseseesssesssesssesssesssesesessaeees 100
3. Analysis. 101
DECISION ON JURISDICTION 102

 

Allan Fosk
Articles

BCC
BIT or Treaty

CDJ
Claimants

CM

DPM

Exh. CD-
Exh. CL-
Exh CPM-
COSS

Exh. R-
Exh. RL-
ICJ
ICSID
Mem.
MFS

Ou

NMM
NoA

PO
Quiborax
RDJ

Reply
Rep. PM

Respondent

RFA

Rej.

Rio Grande or RIGSSA
ROSS

Tr. [page:line]

M=-md 3

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Mr. Allan Henry Isaac Fosk Kaplun ("Allan Fosk")

International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Responsibility of States
for Internationally Wrongful Acts, November 2001, Supplement No. 10
(A/56/10), chp.IV.E.1

Bolivian Commercial Code

Bilateral Investment Treaty; specifically “Agreement between the
Republic of Bolivia and the Republic of Chile on the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments”, signed on 22 September 1994 and
in force since 21 July 1999

Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment of 27 May 2011

Quiborax S.A. ("Quiborax"), Mr. Allan Henry Isaac Fosk Kaplun ("Allan
Fosk"), and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. ("NMM")

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of 29 October 2010

Decision on Provisional Measures of 26 February 2010

Claimants’ Exhibits

Claimants’ Legal Exhibits

Claimants’ Exhibits — Provisional Measures

Claimants' Opening Statement Slides for the hearing on jurisdiction of 12-13
May 2011

Respondent's Exhibits

Respondent's Legal Exhibits

International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Claimants’ Memorial of 14 September 2009

Minutes of the First Session of 17 February 2009

Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction of 30 July 2010

Non-Metallic Minerals S.A.

Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration of 4 October 2005

Procedural Order

Quiborax S.A.

Respondent's Reply to Claimants’ Request for Declaratory Judgment of 10
June 2011

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction of 13 January 2011

Claimants’ Reply to Respondent's Opposition to Provisional Measures of 21
October 2009

Plurinational State of Bolivia ("Bolivia").

Request for Arbitration of 4 October 2005

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of 1 April 2011

Compajiia Minera Rio Grande Sur S.A. ("Rio Grande" or "RIGSSA")
Respondent's Opening Statement Slides for the hearing on jurisdiction of 12-
13 May 2011

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction of 12-13 May 2011

Footnote

Page

Paragraph

Section

INTRODUCTION

THE PARTIES

1. The Claimants

The Claimants are Quiborax S.A. ("Quiborax"), a Chilean mining company, Mr. Allan
Henry Isaac Fosk Kaplun ("Allan Fosk"), a Chilean national, and Non-Metallic Minerals
S.A. ("NMM'"), a Bolivian mining company (collectively, the "Claimants").

Quiborax, a corporation created under the laws of Chile, is a mining company
dedicated in particular to the extraction of ulexite, a non metallic mineral, and to the
manufacture of products derived from this mineral, including boric acid. It operates in
the northern part of Chile, near the border with Bolivia, and it is mostly owned by
members of the Fosk family. Allan Fosk is the Chief Financial Officer of Quiborax.
NMM, a corporation created under the laws of Bolivia, is a mining company that
operates in the Rio Grande Delta in Bolivia. Who actually owns NMM is one of the
issues lying at the heart of this jurisdictional dispute.

The Claimants are represented in this arbitration by Andrés Jana, Jorge Bofill, Johanna
Klein Kranenberg, Ximena Fuentes, Rodrigo Gil, and Constanza Onetto of BoFILL MIR
& ALVAREZ JANA.

2. The Respondent

The Respondent is the Plurinational State of Bolivia ("Bolivia" or the "Respondent'").

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Hugo Montero, Attorney
General of Bolivia; Ms. Elizabeth Arismendi Chumacero, Minister of Legal Defense of
the State; Mr. Danny Javier Lépez Solis, General Director of Investment Arbitration
Defense (Attorney General's Office); and by Mr. Pierre Mayer, Mr. Eduardo Silva
Romero, Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa, Ms. Ana Carolina Simdes E Silva, Mr.
Francisco Paredes-Balladares, Ms. Anna Valdés Pascal, and Mr. Pacéme Ziegler of
DECHERT (PARIS) LLP.

THE FACTS

This Section summarizes the facts of this dispute insofar as they bear relevance to rule
on Bolivia's objections to jurisdiction.

Quiborax is the largest supplier of borates in South America. Borates are minerals
which contain boron, a semi-metallic element which is always combined with oxygen
and other chemical compounds, such as arsenic and chloride. Few of the two hundred
existing borates are commercially relevant: ulexite, the borate that the Claimants
exploit, is one of them. Borates are used for a variety of products and manufacturing
processes, such as the production of fibreglass, detergents, cleaning products, and
fertilizers.'

Quiborax was created in Chile in the 1980s by the Fosk and Fux families. Co-claimant
Allan Fosk is the Chief Financial Officer of Quiborax. The company's operations were
centred in the North of Chile, with its headquarters in the city of Arica. From its
inception, Quiborax obtained its boron from a boron mine located in a dry salt lake in
the Salar de Surire, Chile. Deposits of boron minerals are very rare, as they are
formed only in extremely dry regions. In point of fact, most commercially relevant
boron deposits are located in a handful of countries: Turkey and the United States
concentrate over half of the world boron reserves’, followed by Russia, China, Chile,
Peru, and Bolivia. As a result, the borates market is naturally oligopolistic.*

The borates market appears to have the greatest potential for growth in the production
of fertilizers for agricultural uses. Pursuing an expansion strategy from the mid-1990s,
Quiborax resolved to diversify borate production in order to enter the borate market for
agricultural uses. The ulexite resources from the Salar de Surire, however, proved
insufficient to meet Quiborax's growing boron demands resulting from this expansion
strategy. Eventually, searching for additional sources of ulexite, Quiborax turned its
attention to neighbouring Bolivia, where the ulexite-rich Salar de Uyuni is located.‘

The Salar de Uyuni, in Bolivia, is the largest dry salt lake in the world. It contains about
9.5 million tons of ulexite of admittedly outstanding quality, ie. high boron
concentration and low content of impurities such as arsenic. The highest concentration

Mem., {J 25-26, 29, 36.

As a matter of fact, the Turkish state-owned company Eti Mine and the American privately-
owned company Rio Tinto are the main suppliers of borates worldwide (Mem., § 34).

Mem., 18, 20, 22-23, 33-34, 36.

Id., at 49 30, 40, 44.

of minerals in the Salar de Uyuni is located in the Rio Grande area. At the time
Quiborax became interested in acquiring ulexite from Bolivia in 1999-2000, Bolivian
company Compajiia Minera Rio Grande Sur S.A. ("Rio Grande" or "RIGSSA"®) owned
the mining concessions that authorized the exploitation of the boron deposits in the
Salar de Uyuni. ®

Rio Grande is a mining company that was incorporated under the laws of Bolivia in
December 1997. When Rio Grande and Quiborax first came into contact, the
shareholders of Rio Grande were David Moscoso, a Bolivian national (50% of shares);
Edsal Finance Inc., a corporation created under the laws of Panama and represented
by Alvaro Ugalde, a Bolivian national (49.5%); and Gonzalo Ugalde, a Bolivian national
and brother of Alvaro Ugalde (0.5%).”

It is common ground between the Parties that in 2001 Quiborax made commercial
arrangements with Rio Grande in order to secure for itself the supply of ulexite from the
Salar de Uyuni. The precise nature of those arrangements, though, is vigorously
contested by the Parties and constitutes the key factual issue in dispute in this
arbitration. Part and parcel of this factual issue is the role played by the third and last
co-claimant in this arbitration: Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. ("NMM"). NMM is a
corporation created under the laws of Bolivia on 25 July 2001, and has its legal
domicile in La Paz. The Parties’ conflicting factual accounts are recounted below.

According to the Claimants, Quiborax and Allan Fosk became shareholders of NMM in
2001. Whereas in January 2001 Quiborax and Rio Grande initially entered into an
exclusive contract whereby Rio Grande would supply ulexite to Quiborax (the
“Exclusive Supply Contract"), this contract was soon left without effect because the
Ugalde brothers offered to sell their 50% shareholding in Rio Grande to Quiborax in
March of that same year. Quiborax, however, was solely interested in the mining
concessions, not in the shares of Rio Grande. Thus, it was agreed that Rio Grande
would transfer its mining concessions into a new vehicle corporation of which Quiborax
would become a shareholder.®

The Claimants refer to this company as "RIGSSA"; the Respondent as "Rio Grande."

Mem., 99 45, 47.

Id., at 4 46, 0.72.

Id., at {§ 55-62. The Claimants note that this Exclusive Supply Contract already provided (i)
that Quiborax had a right of first refusal to acquire Rio Grande's mining concessions should Rio
Grande decide to sell them, and (ii) that Quiborax had the right to purchase the mining
concessions in case the Exclusive Supply Contract was breached by Rio Grande.

The Claimants allege that the Ugalde brothers agreed to sell their 50% interest in the
mining concessions to Quiborax for USD 400,000. By August 2001, Quiborax paid the
full purchase price. In the meantime, on 25 July 2001, Non Metallic Minerals S.A.
("NMM") a new vehicle corporation was founded under Bolivian law. The original
shareholders of NMM were Mr. Fernando Rojas (58 shares), Ms. Dolly Paredes (1
share) and Ms. Gilka Salas (1 share). Fernando Rojas was Quiborax's counsel in
Bolivia. Dolly Paredes and Gilka Salas were members of the administrative staff of Mr.
Rojas's law firm.°

The Claimants further maintain that the following transfers took place in August and
September of 2001. On 3 August 2001, Rio Grande transferred its mining concessions
to NMM, receiving NMM shares in return (26,680 shares). On 17 August 2001, Rio
Grande transferred the totality of its NMM shares to Quiborax (26,680 shares). On 4
September 2001, Quiborax in turn transferred 50% of the total NMM shares to David
Moscoso (13,370 shares).'°? Also on 4 September 2001, following an agreement that
Quiborax would be the majority shareholder of NMM, David Moscoso sold 1% of its
NMM shares (267 shares) to Quiborax for USD 9,985. Finally, on 10 September 2001,
Fernando Rojas and Dolly Paredes transferred their shares to Quiborax (59 shares),
and Gilka Salas transferred her one share to Allan Fosk."’ As a result, according to the
Claimants, the shareholders of NMM are Quiborax (50.995%), David Moscoso (49%),
Allan Fosk (0.005%).'?

In contrast, the Respondent contends that Quiborax and Allan Fosk never became
shareholders of NMM. Instead, Quiborax and Rio Grande had merely an exclusive
distribution relationship, as reflected in the Exclusive Supply Contract. Once this
dispute arose between the Claimants and the Respondent, the Claimants fabricated
evidence purporting to show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of NVM
solely to gain access to ICSID arbitration under the Chile-Bolivia BIT (the "Treaty"). In
reality, however, the shareholders of NMM were Bolivian nationals at all relevant times.

In 2002 and 2003, NMM secured four additional mining concessions for a boron
deposit adjacent to the original concession area. Therefore, by August 2003, NMM

Id., at 99 63-64.
NMM issued a total of 26,740 shares: 60 original shares issued to Fernando Rojas, Dolly
Paredes and Gilka Salas, and 26,680 shares issued to Rio Grande following the contribution of
the seven mining concessions.

The Claimants argue that this one share was transferred to Allan Fosk in order to comply with
Bolivian law requirement that a corporation must have at least three shareholders.

Mem., 9 65-66.

13

14

held eleven mining concessions in the Salar de Uyuni.'* The rate of NMM sales grew
substantially between 2001 and mid-2004. On 23 June 2004, Bolivia revoked NMM's
eleven mining concessions. In July 2004, the Claimants requested the initiation of
friendly consultations with Bolivia under Article X of the Bolivia-Chile BIT. As these
consultations did not prosper, the Claimants initiated these arbitration proceedings
against Bolivia in October 2005.

In December 2008, Bolivia initiated criminal proceedings against Allan Fosk, David
Moscoso and others on the ground that the accused allegedly fabricated evidence that
allowed the Claimants to establish jurisdiction in this arbitration (the "domestic criminal
case" or the "domestic criminal proceedings").'* As explained in the Procedural History
below, the criminal case prompted the Claimants to file a request for provisional
measures and a request for a "temporary restraining order." In August 2009, Mr.
Moscoso pleaded guilty of the criminal charges and admitted that the minutes of 13
September 2001 were fabricated. "®

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE

On 4 October 2005, the Claimants filed a Notice of Arbitration with the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("ICSID") pursuant to Article 36 of the
ICSID Convention and the Bolivia-Chile BIT. In the Notice of Arbitration, the Claimants
requested the following relief:

"a) Declare that Bolivia breached Article Ill of the Bolivia-Chile
BIT by failing to protect the Claimants’ investments on Bolivian
soil;

b) Declare that Bolivia breached Article Ill of the Bolivia-Chile

BIT by adopting measures that impaired [...] Claimants’
investments on Bolivian soil, and that such impairment was
carried out by means of arbitrary and discriminatory
measures;

c) Declare that Bolivia has breached Article IV of the Bolivia-
Chile BIT by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to
Claimants’ investments;

Id., at § 76.
Exh. CD-82.
Exh. R-76, Exh. CPM-20.

20.

21.

22.

d) Declare that Bolivia has breached Article IV of the Bolivia-
Chile BIT by directly or indirectly depriving Claimants of their
investments on Bolivian soil;

e) Order Bolivia to compensate the Claimants for all the
damages sustained by each of them as a consequence of the
violations committed by Bolivia, including payment of
appropriate interests;

f) Order Bolivia to bear the full costs of these arbitral

proceedings, as well as all those costs that have been

incurred as a result of Bolivia's violations (Tribunal's

translation).”"®
Despite the commencement of the arbitration, the Parties continued to hold settlement
negotiations, without however reaching an agreement. Thus, on 21 November 2006,
the Claimants appointed as arbitrator Hon. Marc Lalonde, a Canadian national. On 6
April 2007, the Respondent appointed as arbitrator Prof. Brigitte Stern, a French
national. On 18 December 2007, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
appointed Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as President of the
Tribunal, in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention. All three arbitrators
accepted their appointments. Further, the Centre designated Ms. Natali Sequeira as
Secretary of the Tribunal. Thus, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted and the
proceedings commenced in late December 2007.

On 20 March 2008, the Tribunal and the Parties held a first procedural session at the
World Bank's office in Paris. At the beginning of the first session, the Parties informed
the Tribunal that they had reached a "preliminary oral settlement agreement"’’ and that
they expected to set it in writing within the next fifteen days.'® Nevertheless, the
Parties decided to conduct the first session as scheduled lest a final agreement were
ultimately not reached. Thus, the Parties and the Tribunal discussed and agreed on a
number of procedural issues. Thereafter, the arbitration proceedings were suspended
pending the conclusion of the settlement agreement between the Parties.

The Parties requested multiple time extensions to finalize the settlement agreement.
Eventually, on 13 January 2009, the Claimants requested that the arbitration be
resumed on the alleged ground that the Respondent's conduct was "inconsistent" with
settlement negotiations. As a result, on 17 February 2009, the Tribunal issued the final
minutes of the first session, attaching a draft timetable upon which the Parties would be
able to comment. On 5 March 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1,

NoA, 974.
MFS, p. 2.
Id.

including a final timetable of the proceedings. This timetable was amended on various
occasions at the request of both Parties.

B. WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

23. On 14 September 2009, the Claimants filed their Memorial, enclosing ninety-nine
exhibits'® and thirty-two legal exhibits.”° In the Statement of Claim, the Claimants
requested the following relief:

"(1) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article VI of
the BIT by expropriating Claimants’ investment in Bolivia, in an
unlawful manner and not in accordance with the requirements of
Article VI;

(2) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of
the BIT by failing to accord Claimants fair and equitable
treatment, by unlawfully expropriating Claimants’ investment in
Bolivia;

(3) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article III of
the BIT by failing to protect Claimants’ investment in Bolivia [...]
by unreasonable and discriminatory measures consisting of the
unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Bolivia;

(4) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under international
law by aggravating the dispute between the parties, by submitting
Claimants to acts of harassment intended to obstruct Claimants’
rights under the BIT;

(5) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article IV of
the BIT by failing to accord Claimants fair and equitable
treatment, by submitting Claimants to acts of harassment
intended to obstruct Claimants’ rights under the BIT;

(6) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Article III of
the BIT by submitting Claimants to unreasonable and
discriminatory measures, consisting of acts of harassment
intended to obstruct Claimants’ rights under the BIT;

(7) Declaring that Bolivia violated its obligations under Art. 26 of the
ICSID Convention by initiating parallel criminal proceedings in
Bolivia;

(8) Ordering Bolivia to pay Claimants full compensation in an amount
not less than US$ 61,481,461 as of 1 August 2009 for damages
suffered due to the loss of their investment in Bolivia, plus
compound interest at the commercial rate on such amount from
such date until the date of actual payment;

S

Ordering Bolivia to pay compensation in an amount not less than
US$ 5,000,000 for moral damages suffered by Claimants due to

18 Exhs. CD-1 to CD-99.
0 Exhs. CL-1 to CL-32.

24.

25.

26.

27.

the unlawful acts of harassment by Bolivia, subsequent to the
loss of Claimants’ investment in Bolivia;

(10) Ordering Bolivia to pay all costs, fees and expenses incurred by

Claimants as a result of Bolivia's violations of the BIT, including

all cost, fees and expenses of these arbitration proceedings."”"
Together with the Memorial, the Claimants also submitted a request for provisional
measures, asking that the Respondent refrain from engaging in any conduct that could
aggravate the dispute and requesting that the Bolivian criminal proceedings be
discontinued. On 2 October 2009, the Claimants requested a “temporary restraining
order” with immediate effect, asking that the Respondent discontinue the Bolivian
criminal proceedings pending the Tribunal’s decision on the request for provisional
measures. The Respondent opposed this request on 5 October 2009. The Tribunal
denied the Claimants' request for a "temporary restraining order."

On 13 and 29 October 2009, Bolivia filed briefs opposing the Claimants’ request for
provisional measures. On 21 October 2009, the Claimants submitted a second brief in
support of their request for provisional measures. On 24 November 2009, the Tribunal
and the Parties held a conference call to address the request for provisional measures.
On 26 February 2010, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Provisional Measures,
according to which the Respondent was to "take all appropriate measures to
suspend"” the Bolivian criminal proceedings against Allan Fosk, David Moscoso and

123

others, and "refrain from initiating"™ new criminal proceedings which could "jeopardize

the procedural integrity of this arbitration."**

On 7 April 2010, the Respondent filed a proposal to disqualify the Tribunal (the
"Proposal"), the effect of which was to temporarily suspend the proceedings. On 19
April 2010, the Claimants submitted observations opposing the Respondent's Proposal.
Each Party then presented an additional brief in support of its position. On 6 July 2010,
the Secretary-General of ICSID dismissed the Respondent's Proposal. The
proceedings resumed shortly thereafter and the procedural calendar was amended
accordingly.

On 12 July 2010, the Respondent informed that it would file objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal by no later than 30 July 2010. At the same time, the
Respondent requested an order from the Tribunal directing the Claimants to produce

Mem., § X.
DPM, p. 46.
Id.
Id.

28.

29.

30.

the documents identified in the Redfern schedule dated 28 May 2010. On 19 July
2010, the Claimants presented objections to the Respondent's requests for document
production. On 26 July 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, partially
granting the Respondent's requests for document production, as specified in the
Redfern schedule attached to the order.

On 30 July 2010, the Respondent filed Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
together with ninety-eight exhibits** and the expert report of Prof. Ivan Salame. In the
Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal:

"a. Declare that it has no ratione personae jurisdiction over the
Claimants;
b. Declare that it has no ratione materiae jurisdiction over the

claims brought by the Claimants;
c. Declare that Claimants’ claims are inadmissible;

d. Order, in any event, the Claimants to fully reimburse the State
for the costs it has incurred in the defense of its interests in
the present arbitration, together with interests at a
commercially reasonable rate in the view of the Tribunal, from
the time the State incurred those costs until the time of
effective payment (Tribunals translation).”*°

On 29 October 2010, the Claimants submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
enclosing forty-two exhibits’, eleven legal exhibits, the expert report of Carlos
Rosenkrantz, and the report of Juan Pablo de Luca. In the Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, the Claimants requested that the Tribunal:

"(1) Dismiss the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction;
(2) Declare it has jurisdiction to hear Claimants’ claims;
(3) Proceed to the merits phase of the proceeding;

(4) Order the Respondent to pay all costs, fees and expenses
incurred by Claimants as a result of the Respondent's
presentation of Objections to Jurisdiction.”*°

On 13 January 2011, the Respondent submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction, together with
thirty-five exhibits®° and the second expert report of Prof. lvan Salame. In the Reply on

Exhs. R-84 to R-181.

OJ, 4274.

Exhs. CD-100 to CD-141.
Exhs. CL-33 to CL-43.
CM, § IX.

Exhs. R-182 to R-216.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Jurisdiction, the Respondent reiterated the requests made in the Objections to
Jurisdiction, and requested in addition that the Tribunal "declare inadmissible the De
Luca Report" and "order the Claimants to submit the original share certificates of NUM
in order that they may be inspected by an expert, under the supervision of the Tribunal,

for purposes of determining their authenticity and date."*"

In the Reply on Jurisdiction and a letter of 4 February 2011, the Respondent requested
the Claimants to produce the original share certificates Nos. 1 to 11 of Non Metallic
Minerals S.A. (the "original share certificates") for inspection by an expert under the
supervision of the Tribunal in order to determine their authenticity and date. On 25
January 2011, the Claimants objected to the Respondent's request for document
inspection, but stated that they would make the original share certificates available if
the Tribunal deemed it necessary.

On 8 February 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, granting
Respondent's request for document inspection and ordering the Claimants to make the
original share certificates available for inspection. Since the Parties failed to agree on
the practicalities of the inspection, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 on 10
March 2011, providing specific directions on the time, place and logistics of the
inspection and setting a timetable for the submission of expert reports. In accordance
with this timetable, the Respondent submitted its expert report on the document
inspection on 8 April 2011 and the Claimants on 22 April 2011.

On 1 April 2011, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, together with
eighteen exhibits®, five legal exhibits*, the second expert report of Carlos
Rosenkrantz, and the second report of Juan Pablo de Luca. In the Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction, the Claimants reiterated the requests made in the Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, and requested in addition that the Tribunal "[rjeject the Respondent's
request to declare the De Luca Report inadmissible."

On 12 April 2011, the Tribunal and the Parties held an audio-recorded, pre-hearing
conference call. Two days later, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5,
containing directions for the hearing. By letter of 15 April 2011, the Respondent made a
request to cross-examine Mr. Allan Fosk and Mr. Ricardo Ramos at the hearing on

Reply, § 259 (Tribunal’s translation).
Exhs. CD-142 to CD-159.

Exhs. CL-44 to CL-48.

Rej., § XI, p. 99.

35.

jurisdiction. By letter of 19 April 2011, the Claimants opposed Respondent's request. In
Procedural Order No. 6, the Tribunal declared, inter alia, the admissibility of the De
Luca Report, granted the Respondent’s request to cross-examine Mr. Allan Fosk and
reserved its decision on the admissibility of Mr. Ramos's witness statement. As stated
in that order, the Tribunal does not consider that Mr. Ramos's evidence is relevant for
purposes of jurisdiction and will thus not rely on it in this decision; at the same time, it
does not perceive any good reason to declare the witness statement of Mr. Ramos
inadmissible should this arbitration proceed to the merits phase. In Procedural Order
No. 7, the Tribunal issued hearing directions on pending procedural logistical matters.

HEARING ON JURISDICTION

On 12-13 May 2011, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris. In
attendance at the hearing were the members of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Secretary and
the Assistant, and the following party representatives, witnesses and experts:

(i) On behalf of the Claimants

e Mr. Andrés Jana, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

e Mr. Jorge Bofill, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

e Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana
e Mr. Rodrigo Gil, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

« Ms. Ximena Fuentes, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

« Ms. Constanza Onetto, Bofill Mir & Alvarez Jana

Claimant's Witness:
e Mr. Allan Henry Isaac Fosk Kaplun
Claimant's Experts:
e Mr. Albert Lyter Ill
« Mr. Carlos Rosencrantz
(ii) On behalf of the Respondent

« Mr. Hugo Montero Lara, Attorney General of the State

e Ms. Elizabeth Arismendi Chumacero, Deputy Attorney General of
Legal Defense and Representation of the State

e Mr. Danny Javier Lépez Soliz, General Director of the Jurisdictional
and Arbitral Defense of Investments (Attorney General’s Office)

36.

37.

38.

e Mr. Pierre Mayer, Dechert (Paris) LLP

« Mr. Eduardo Silva Romero, Dechert (Paris) LLP

e Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa, Dechert (Paris) LLP

e Ms. Ana Carolina SimGes E Silva, Dechert (Paris) LLP

e Mr. Francisco Paredes-Balladares, Dechert (Paris) LLP
« Ms. Anna Valdés Pascal, Dechert (Paris) LLP

« Mr. Pacéme Ziegler, Dechert (Paris) LLP

Respondent's Expert:

e Mr. Ivan Salame Gonzalez-Aramayo

Mr. Andrés Jana and Ms. Johanna Klein Kranenberg presented oral arguments on
behalf of the Claimants; Mr. Hugo Montero Lara, Prof. Pierre Mayer, Mr. Eduardo Silva
Romero and Mr. José Manuel Garcia Represa, in turn, presented oral arguments on
behalf of the Respondent.

The hearing was sound and video recorded. A verbatim transcript of the hearing on
jurisdiction was produced and subsequently distributed to the Parties. After the
hearing, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8, confirming, as discussed at the
end of the hearing, that there would be no post-hearing briefs and setting a calendar for
the filing of submissions regarding the Claimants' request that the Tribunal issue a
declaration pursuant to Article 37 of the Articles on State Responsibility. The
Claimants filed these submissions on 27 May 2011, and the Respondent filed its reply
on 10 June 2011.

The Tribunal, having deliberated and carefully considered the arguments presented by
the Parties in their written and oral submissions, renders the present decision on
jurisdiction. The Tribunal will first briefly summarize the positions of the Parties
(Section IV), then analyze the arguments in support of those positions (Section V), and
finally render a decision on jurisdiction (Section VI).

Iv.

A.

39.

40.

4.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

THE RESPONDENT'S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Bolivia has raised the following objections:

(i)

(ii)

The Claimants are not "investors" within the meaning of
the Treaty. The Claimants have committed a serious
breach of the principle of good faith by fabricating
evidence showing that Quiborax and Allan Fosk are
shareholders of NMM for the sole purpose of gaining
access to ICSID arbitration.

The Claimants did not make an "investment" within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
because the Claimants (a) made no contribution in the
territory of Bolivia, and (b) the alleged investment has
not contributed to the economic development of the
area.

In the alternative, the Claimants' alleged investment was
made in breach of Bolivian laws and regulations.

In the further alternative, Claimants’ claims are
inadmissible because Quiborax and Allan Fosk
concealed their participation in NMM, thereby
committing an abuse of nationality contrary to the
principle of good faith.

For these reasons, Bolivia requests that the Tribunal:

Declare that it has no ratione personae jurisdiction over the
Claimants;

Declare that it has no ratione materiae jurisdiction over the
claims brought by the Claimants;

Declare that Claimants’ claims are inadmissible;

In any event, order the Claimants to fully reimburse the State
for the costs it has incurred in the defense of its interests in
the present arbitration, together with interests at a
commercially reasonable rate in the view of the Tribunal, from
the time the State incurred those costs until the time of
effective payment."

THE CLAIMANTS' POSITION

In their written and oral submissions, the Claimants have replied to Bolivia's objections

as follows:

(i)

All three Claimants are "investors" within the meaning of
the Treaty.

OJ, § 274 (Tribunal's translation).

42.

43.

44.

45.

(ii) The Claimants acted at all times in good faith and did
not fabricate evidence showing that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk were shareholders of NMM in order to gain access
to ICSID arbitration.

(iii) The Claimants made an "investment" in Bolivia,
consisting of shares and eleven mining concessions in
the Rio Grande area, within the meaning of the Treaty
and the ICSID Convention.

(iv) | The Claimants' investment was made "in accordance
with the laws of the host State" as required by the
Treaty.

(v) Quiborax and Allan Fosk did not conceal their condition
of shareholders in NMM prior to Respondent's
expropriation.

(vi) | The Respondent's objections to jurisdiction constitute an
abuse of process and must be declared inadmissible.

For these reasons, the Claimants request the Tribunal to:

SESS

Dismiss the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction;

Declare it has jurisdiction to hear Claimants’ claims;

Proceed to the merits phase of the proceeding;

Order the Respondent to pay all costs, fees and expenses

incurred by Claimants as a result of the Respondent's

presentation of Objections to Jurisdiction."**

The Tribunal will expand on the Parties' positions and arguments in the course of its

analysis.

ANALYSIS

THRESHOLD MATTERS

Prior to entering the merits of the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal will address the
following threshold matters: the relevance of previous decisions or awards (1); the law
applicable to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal (2); matters that are undisputed by the
Parties (3); and the test for establishing jurisdiction (4).

1. The Relevance of Previous Decisions or Awards

Both Parties have relied on previous decisions or awards in support of their positions,
either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present case, or in
an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

CM, § IX.

46.

47.

48.

49.

The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by previous decisions.*” At the same time, it
is of the opinion that it must pay due consideration to earlier decisions of international
tribunals. Specifically, it deems that, subject to compelling contrary grounds, it has a
duty to adopt solutions established in a series of consistent cases. It further deems
that, subject to the specifics of the Treaty and of the circumstances of the actual case,
it has a duty to contribute to the harmonious development of investment law, with a
view to meeting the legitimate expectations of the community of States and investors
towards the certainty of the rule of law. Arbitrator Stern does not analyze the
arbitrator's role in the same manner, as she considers it her duty to decide each case
on its own merits, independently of any apparent jurisprudential trend.

2. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

Both Parties agree, and rightly so, that the Tribunal's jurisdiction is governed by the
ICSID Convention, by the Bolivia-Chile BIT (the "Treaty" or the "BIT") and, to the extent
the latter refers to it, by Bolivian law. It is equally common ground between the Parties
that the interpretation of both the ICSID Convention and the Treaty is governed by
customary international law as codified by the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties. The relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the BIT are quoted
below.

Jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention is governed by Article 25(1), which reads as
follows:

"The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated
to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting
State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to
the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may
withdraw its consent unilaterally."

In accordance with the terms of Article II of the Bolivia-Chile BIT, the dispute must fall
within the Treaty’s scope of application, ratione personae, ratione materiae and ratione
temporis:

"The present Agreement shall apply to investments made before and

after its entry into force by investors of a Contracting Party, in
accordance with the legal provisions of the other Contracting Party, in

See e.g., Saipem S.p.A. v. the People's Republic of Bangladesh (hereafter “Saipem”), Decision
on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007, § 67; AES
Corporation v. Argentine Republic (hereafter “AES’), Decision on Jurisdiction, 13 July 2005, §]
30-32.

20

the territory of the latter. However, it shall not apply to disputes or
controversies that would have arisen before its entry into force."*

50. In the event that a dispute arises between a Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party, Article X provides for the following dispute settlement
mechanism:

"1. Disputes arising within the scope of this Treaty between one of
the Contracting Parties and an investor of the other Contracting
Party who has made investments in the territory of the former
shall, to the extent possible, be settled through friendly
consultations.

2. If a solution was not reached through those consultations within a
period of six months from the date when the request for
settlement was made, the investor may submit the dispute:

a) to the competent court of the Contracting Party on whose territory
the investment was made; or

b) to international arbitration under the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), created by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, signed in Washington on 18
March 18 1965."°°

51. Under Article (2) of the Bolivia-Chile BIT, "investment" is defined as "any kind of assets
or rights related to as "investment" made in accordance with the "laws and regulations"
of the host State, which includes shares in corporations:

"For purposes of this Agreement:
LJ

2. The term "investment" means any kind of assets or rights related to
an investment as long as this has been made in accordance with the
laws _and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made, and shall comprise in particular, albeit not
exclusively:

[el

88 Exh. CL-+1 (Tribuna''s translation).

Id. (Tribunals translation). The original in Spanish reads as follows:

"1. Las controversias que surjan en el ambito de este Acuerdo, entre una de las Partes
Contratantes y un inversionista de la otra Parte Contratante que haya realizado
inversiones en el territorio de la primera, seran, en la medida de lo posible, solucionadas
por medio de consultas amistosas.

2. Si mediante dichas consultas no se llegare a una solucion dentro del plazo de seis meses
acontar de la fecha de solicitud de arreglo, el inversionista podra remitir la controversia:
(a) al tribunal competente de la Parte Contratante en cuyo territorio se efectud la inversion;
o
(b) a arbitraje internacional del Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
Inversiones (CIADI), creado por la Convencién para el Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de otros Estados, firmada en Washington el 18 de
marzo de 1965."

39

21

52.

53.

54.

 

b) Shares, debentures, and any other kind of participation in

corporations" (emphasis added)."*°
Therefore, Bolivian law applies to determine (i) whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk were
shareholders of NMM at the time the dispute arose in June 2004, and (ii) whether the
Claimants' purported investment was made "in accordance with the laws and
regulations" and the "legal provisions" of Bolivia (henceforth, "in accordance with
Bolivian law" or "the legality requirement"). Both Parties agree that these issues are
governed by Bolivian law.*"

3. Undisputed Facts

The following facts are undisputed: (i) NMM was constituted under Bolivian law’; (ii)
Rio Grande contributed seven mining concessions to NMM and became the majority
shareholder of NMM‘*°; (iii) NMM subsequently acquired four additional mining
concessions.

4. Test for Establishing Jurisdiction

At the jurisdictional stage, the Claimants must establish (i) that the jurisdictional
requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and of the Treaty are met, which
includes proving the facts necessary to meet these requirements, and (ii) that they
have a prima facie cause of action under the Treaty, that is, that the facts they allege
are susceptible of constituting a breach of the Treaty if they are ultimately proven.“®
The Tribunal finds that this test strikes a proper balance between a more exacting
standard which would call for examination of the merits at the jurisdictional stage, and a
less exacting standard which would confer excessive weight to the Claimants' own
characterization of their claims.

Id. (Tribunal's translation).

OJ, 4 58; CM, § II(2).

Id., at 1 6; CM, 34.

Id., at 1 6; CM, $f 40-43.

Id., at 4 6; Rej., 19 2, 78, 187.

On the prima facie test of treaty breach for purposes of jurisdiction, see among others United
Parcel Services (UPS) v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Award on Jurisdiction,
22 November 2002, §{ 33-37; Siemens v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3
August 2004, § 180; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, (hereafter “Plama’),
Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, 9§ 118-120, 132; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret
VeSanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (hereafter “Bayindir’), Decision on Jurisdiction, {4
185-200; El Paso International Company v. Argentine Republic, (hereafter “E/ Paso”), Decision
on Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006, §§ 40-45, 109; Jan de Nul and Dredging International N.V. v.
Arab Republic of Egypt, (hereafter “Jan de Nul’), Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006, {J 69-
71; Telenor Mobile Communications AS v. Hungary (hereafter “Telenor’), Award, 13 September
2006, 4 34, 53, 68, 80; Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic, Award, 15 April 2009, 9 60-64.

22

55.

56.

57.

58.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND EVIDENCE

1. The Claimants’ Position

According to the Claimants, the Tribunal must declare the objections to jurisdiction
inadmissible on account of Respondent's conduct in this arbitration. In addition, the
Tribunal must declare the inadmissibility of any evidence obtained in violation of
international law, i.e. through the conviction of David Moscoso. This is because
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction constitute an abuse of process, and because
Respondent should not be able to profit from its own wrongful conduct (nemo auditur
Propriam turpitudinem allegans). The Tribunal has the inherent power to dismiss
Respondent's objections in order to preserve the integrity of the proceedings. “°

First, the Respondent created a case on jurisdiction. Second, it has harmed the
integrity of this arbitration by initiating criminal proceedings against persons involved in
this matter. As a result, key fact witnesses for the Claimants are unwilling to testify,
and no Bolivian attorney is willing to give evidence on behalf of the Claimants. Third, in
continuing to pursue the criminal claims despite the Tribunal's Decision on Provisional
Measures, the Respondent has breached international law. Fourth, the Respondent,
whilst availing itself of different procedural opportunities, has failed to pay its share of
the advance on costs, in an effort to discourage the Claimants from pursuing this
arbitration. For these reasons, the Respondent has forfeited its right to object to the
Tribunal's jurisdiction.”

2. Bolivia's Position

According to Bolivia, the Claimants' request that its objections to jurisdiction be
dismissed without consideration is stunning and preposterous for the following five
reasons. “®

First, the Respondent's objections are sound in fact and in law. Second, the Claimants
have failed to explain why the Respondent's pursuance of the criminal case in Bolivia
and its failure to comply with the recommended provisional measures should result in
the forfeiture of its right to present objections to jurisdiction. Third, the Kompetenz-
Kompetenz principle prevails over any inherent power of the Tribunal to dismiss a

CM, 99 199, 218, 222-223; Rej., § IX.

CM, 9 200-221; Rej., 99 244-255.
Reply, 9 247-250.

23

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

party's objection to jurisdiction when such party commits an abuse of process. In any
event, the Respondent committed no abuse of process.“°

Fourth, the Claimants’ reliance on the nemo auditur principle is inapposite as the
Respondent's right to object to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal arises from the Treaty.
Fifth, evidence arising from the Bolivian criminal proceedings, on which the Claimants
themselves rely, should not be declared inadmissible. Disregarding this evidence would
not only constitute a misapplication of the nemo auditur principle, but would also be
contrary to the principle that the Tribunal has full discretion to assess the evidence
under Arbitration Rule 34(1). The real purpose of this request is to confer jurisdiction
where there is none.°

3. Analysis

3.1. Admissibility of jurisdictional objections

The Claimants request that the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction be declared
inadmissible, as the Respondent has forfeited its right to object to jurisdiction through
its conduct in the arbitration. The Respondent opposes this request.

Jurisdiction in ICSID treaty arbitration depends on a number of objective requirements
(nationality, legal dispute, investment) which are set forth in Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and in the relevant BIT and on one subjective requirement, consent, which
is required under Article 25(1) and generally given by the State in the BIT and by the
investor through filing a request for arbitration.

Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that "[t]he Tribunal shall be the judge of
its own competence." In other words, it is up to the Tribunal to determine whether the
jurisdictional requirements set in the treaties are met or not.

This is an expression of the well-established principle of Kompetenz-Kompetenz.*'
That principle implies the power to rule on one's jurisdiction as well as the duty to do
so. As a consequence, the Tribunal cannot abdicate the task of ascertaining whether
the jurisdictional requirements are met.

Id., at 9 251-253.

Id., at 9 254-258.

Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Viera v. Republic of Chile, (hereafter “Pey’), Award, 21 August
2007, § 203 (Tribunal's translation).

24

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

The Claimants rely on the International Court of Justice's ("ICJ") judgment in the
Nuclear Tests case to argue that the Tribunal has the inherent power to preserve the
integrity of the proceedings.®* That is certainly right. Yet, the ICU expressly stated that
the purpose of this inherent power was to "ensure that the exercise of its jurisdiction, if
and when established, shall not be frustrated"®* (emphasis added). In other words,
such inherent power does not allow a tribunal to dispense with establishing whether it
has jurisdiction. This confirms this Tribunal's duty to review whether the treaty
requirements for jurisdiction are met, irrespective of the procedural conduct of the
Respondent. Thus, the Tribunal cannot but deny the Claimants’ request that the
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction be declared inadmissible.

3.2. Admissibility of evidence

The Parties also disagree on whether evidence emanating from the Bolivian criminal
proceedings should be admitted or not. The Claimants request that evidence arising
from the Bolivian criminal proceedings be declared inadmissible. The Respondent
opposes this request.

Arbitration Rule 34(1) reads as follows:

"The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any
evidence adduced and of its probative value.”

Under this Rule, the Tribunal has ample discretion to rule on the admissibility of any
evidence adduced. The Tribunal does not consider that declaring the evidence
gathered in the Bolivian proceedings admissible would give the Respondent an undue
advantage. Neither does it believe that admitting this evidence would harm the
integrity of this arbitration. If and when it will have to consider any such evidence, the
Tribunal will weigh its probative value taking into account other evidences on record as
well as the circumstances surrounding this very evidence. In the exercise of its
discretion under Arbitration Rule 34(I), it will then give this evidence more or less
weight, or no weight at all.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the evidence from the Bolivian proceedings is
admissible, being specified that its probative value will be addressed if and when
necessary for the resolution of the issues before the Tribunal.

Nuclear Tests case (New Zealand v. France), 15 June 1962, ICJ Reports 1974, p. 457.

Id.

25

c.

69.

70.

71.

72.

OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

Bolivia objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the following three grounds:

(i) The Tribunal lacks ratione personae jurisdiction over the
Claimants;

(ii) The Tribunal lacks ratione materiae jurisdiction over the
dispute;

(iii) In the alternative, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because

the Claimants’ alleged investment was made in breach

of Bolivian laws and regulations.
There is no dispute between the Parties regarding the other requirements for
jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the BIT. Specifically, it is not disputed that
Bolivia was an ICSID Contracting State at the relevant time, that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk are nationals of Chile — another ICSID Contracting State — and that there is a
legal dispute. Likewise, there is no dispute that Bolivia consented to submit to
arbitration disputes falling within the framework of application of the BIT. The Tribunal
agrees that these requirements are met, and will next examine those requirements
which are disputed.

1. First Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Ratione Personae Jurisdiction Over the
Claimants

1.1. Bolivia's Position

Bolivia contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Quiborax and Allan Fosk
are not "investors" and NMM is not a Chilean national within the meaning of the Treaty.
At the time the dispute arose in June 2004, Quiborax and Allan Fosk were not
shareholders of NUM™, and NMM, not being under the control of Chilean investors,
was accordingly not a Chilean national under the ICSID Convention and the Treaty.
Hence, the Tribunal lacks ratione personae jurisdiction over Quiborax, Allan Fosk, and
NMM.

In actuality, the Claimants have fabricated evidence in order to create the impression
that NMM was under the control of Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk. In so

Ou, 114.
Id., at $19.

26

73.

74.

75.

76.

doing, the Claimants have unduly sought to avail themselves of the Bolivia-Chile BIT.
This improper conduct constitutes a serious breach of the principle of good faith.°°

The facts and documents preceding the revocation of the mining concessions show
that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were not shareholders of NMM at the time the dispute
arose in June 2004 (1.1.1 below). The only documents submitted by the Claimants
showing that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of NMM are post-June 2004
internal documents without any probative value (1.1.2 below).°”

1.1.1. The facts and documents preceding the revocation of the mining
concessions show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were not shareholders of

NMM
The Claimants’ account of how Quiborax and Allan Fosk became shareholders of NUM
lacks credibility and logic. On the same date, Quiborax sold to and bought from David
Moscoso 267 NMM shares and David Moscoso would have paid USD 9,985 for 267
NMM shares, the same price Allan Fosk would have paid for only one share of NMM.°°

Although the Claimants bear the burden of proof, they have submitted no evidence
predating the dispute to show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares of NMM in
August and September 2001.°° They have failed to submit the most elemental proof of
their allegations, such as the contract/s for the purchase and proof of payment of the
shares.

The Claimants’ account of events lacks evidentiary support. The transfer of the shares
must have left some physical trace, i.e. an endorsement of the original share
certificates and explanatory entries in the shareholders registry or a contract for the
sale of shares. Further, in order for Quiborax to have validly acquired shares of NMM,
the power of attorney of the agent acting on its behalf should have been registered in
the Commercial Register. However, there is no evidence that Quiborax registered any
power of attorney. Moreover, the bylaws of NMM require that the shares be offered to
its own shareholders before they are offered to third parties. There is no evidence on
record that this procedure was followed. There is no evidence either that Quiborax and
Allan Fosk filed tax returns or made tax payments, which they should have done if they
had received dividends from NMM. What is more, the 2003 balance sheet of Rio

Reply, 9 133-136.
OJ, 99 27-29.

Id, at $33.

Id., at 99 39-46.
Id., at 99 47-57.

27

77.

78.

79.

Grande, which was filed with the Commercial Register, shows that Rio Grande was still
the owner of NMM's shares.®" Lastly, if, as it appears, Rio Grande transferred its NUM
shares to Quiborax for free, there should be evidence of payment of the tax on
gratuitous transfers. There are no such records. Similarly, if this transfer entailed
most of Rio Grande's capital, Rio Grande's capital reduction should have been
recorded in the Commercial Register. However, there is no record of any such
registration.

In contrast, the documents that do exist and predate the dispute show that Quiborax
and Allan Fosk did not acquire shares of NMM in August and September 2001. Rio
Grande could not have transferred to Quiborax shares of NMM on 17 August 2001,
because on that date Rio Grande did not own any shares of NMM. Under Bolivian law,
a corporation increases its capital by issuing new shares only after obtaining approval
from the Commercial Register. In this case, the Commercial Register approved NMM's
capital increase only on 28 August 2001 — 11 days after Rio Grande's alleged transfer
of NMM shares to Quiborax. And before the Commercial Registry's approval, Rio
Grande should have entered the transfer of its seven mining concessions to NMM in
the Mining Register and in the Real Property Register, which was not done until
December 2001. In sum, Quiborax could not have acquired shares of NMM from Rio
Grande on 17 August 2001.

In addition, NMM's bylaws prohibited the sale of shares to a competing company such
as Quiborax. Therefore, Quiborax could not acquire NMM shares without breaching
NMM's bylaws. Further, the 2001 balance sheet of NMM and the 2003 balance sheet
of Rio Grande show that the shareholders of NMM were exclusively Bolivian — and that
Rio Grande was one of them. Similarly, the powers of attorney to represent NMM,
which were registered in the Commercial Register, show that the shareholders of NVM
were exclusively Bolivian and that one of them was Rio Grande.

1.1.2. The internal documents submitted by the Claimants to show that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of NMM have no probative
value

Bolivia first notes that Claimants acted in bad faith in producing evidence of their
alleged "investment" in a piecemeal and fragmented fashion. In any event, attaching

Id., at § 58-70; Reply, 44 48-49.

Reply, 206; Tr. 67:16:68:14.

Reply, § 49.

Od, 99 73-83; Reply, 19 43-45.

Ou, 49 84-98; Reply, 99 39-42, 46-47.

28

80.

81.

82.

83.

probative value to these internal documents, composed of simple private documents,
would violate the principle according to which no party may procure its own evidence.
The Claimants in this case have failed to produce the key document on which its entire
case is based: the contract for the sale of shares between Rio Grande and Quiborax.®®

The existence of the internal documents on which the Claimants rely became apparent
only after the dispute arose in June 2004. Only on 22 July 2004 did Bolivia learn, for
the first time and to its great surprise, that NMM would have Chilean shareholders. On
13 August 2004, Bolivia requested Allan Fosk to provide evidence that Quiborax and
Allan Fosk himself were shareholders of NMM. As Allan Fosk's response was
insufficient, Bolivia decided to look into the matter.°”

The Claimants rely on three types of internal documents, all of which fail to support the
Claimants' allegations: (i) the shareholders registry, (ii) the share certificates of NMM,
and (iii) the minutes of the shareholders’ meetings of 17 August and 13 September
2001.

In the first place, the Claimants allege that shareholder status is to be proven
exclusively by reference to the shareholders registry. For the Respondent, this
proposition is untenable as a matter of Bolivian law. As Prof. Salame notes, the
shareholders registry merely creates a presumption of shareholder status, which may
be rebutted by any evidence that shows who the real shareholders are. This is
consistent with previous ICSID decisions, which take into account various elements of
proof when it comes to determining shareholder status. In the case of nominative or
registered shares — which is the case of NMM's shares — the appropriate proof is proof
of purchase by endorsement and proof of payment.°°

NMM's shareholders registry presents multiple irregularities: (i) there are blank spaces,
which are proscribed; (ii) information is missing, e.g. regarding the issuance of new
shares; and (iii) there are inconsistencies in the manner in which the transfer of shares
is reported.”

Reply, 9 72-78.
OJ, 99 105-119.

This is why Bolivia argues that the conclusions that Superintendencia reached in February 2005
are to be disregarded: the Superintendencia only took into account the shareholders registry.

OJ, 49 120-123, 127-128.
Id., at 4 124.

29

84.

85.

86.

Contrary to what the Claimants argue, registration in the shareholders registry is not
the essential prerequisite to acquire shareholder status. In so arguing, the Claimants
improperly rely on Article 251 of the Commercial Code, which governs the relationship
between the corporation and its shareholders, when they should rely on Article 254 of
the Commercial Code, which governs the relationship between shareholders and third
parties. Under Article 254 of the Commercial Code, the prerequisite to become a
shareholder is the transfer of the shares by endorsement. The shareholders registry
only serves to give notice of that status to third parties.”'

Moreover, the Claimants confuse the Jegal effects of the registration in the
shareholders registry with the issue of its probative value. Even assuming for a
moment that registration in the shareholders registry were the essential prerequisite to
become shareholder, this would not mean that such registration would constitute
irrebuttable proof of shareholder status. Otherwise the holder of the shareholders
registry would turn into a notary public. Moreover, such irrebuttable presumption would
facilitate fraud by denying any value to other evidence which would indicate that fraud
is afoot. It would be contrary to the Tribunal's power to assess the evidence under
Arbitration Rule 34. It would equally go against Bolivian law for which the shareholders
registry does not constitute irrebuttable evidence of shareholder status, being noted
that on this point Bolivian law is in accord with the laws of other countries such as
Spain, England, and Argentina. Finally, the Respondent's interpretation would not
jeopardize the certainty of legal transactions.”

In the second place, the share certificates produced by the Claimants have scant, if
any, probative value for the following seven reasons. First, it is remarkable that the
share certificates were newly issued when they could have been transferred simply by
endorsement, and that share certificates 1-7 are missing.”* Second, there is no
evidence that the share certificates existed before the dispute arose. Indeed, share
certificates 1-7 were first produced after the dispute had arisen. Third, these are
merely internal documents. Fourth, the documents produced are not the originals.”

Reply, 9 87-96.

Id., at 49 82, 85; 9 97-111.

It should be noted that the Respondent made this argument in the Objections to Jurisdiction, at
a time when the Claimants had only produced copies of share certificates Nos. 8-11.
Subsequently, however, the Claimants did produce share certificates Nos. 1-3, 5 and 7.
Therefore, this argument appears to be moot except for share certificates Nos. 4 and 6.

The Claimants did produce the original of the share certificates, except for share certificates
Nos. 4 and 6. These originals were the subject of a document inspection in Paris, following
which each Party submitted expert reports (Mr. Lyter, on behalf of the Claimants, and Mr.

30

87.

88.

89.

Fifth, it is absurd that share certificates 1-5 were transferred by endorsement, and then
were, on the same day, voided and reissued. Sixth, the sequence of transactions
between Quiborax and David Moscoso is equally absurd: Quiborax transferred to David
Moscoso two different batches of NMM shares (one of 267 shares and another of
13,103 shares); and whereas David Moscoso did not pay anything for these shares, he
received USD 9,985 when he returned the batch of 267 shares to Quiborax on the
same date. Seventh and last, Dolly Paredes' signature on these certificates is different
from her signature on other documents.”®

In the third place, the minutes of the shareholders' meetings of 17 August and 13
September 2001 were forged. By 17 August 2001, NMM had not yet requested the
approval to increase its capital from the Commercial Register. Therefore, Rio Grande
could not have participated in a shareholders' meeting of NMM, and the sale of NUM
shares to Quiborax could not have been approved. Furthermore, the minutes of the 17
August meeting were not registered in the notary's record book and in the Commercial
Register until after the dispute arose in 2004. This is specially suspicious when one
considers that the minutes of the shareholders’ meeting of NMM of 3 August 2001 were
registered in the notary's record book and in the Commercial Register within a few
weeks. Finally, NMM's minute book contains serious irregularities insofar as it consists
of loose pages being affixed to the book. Within the context of the criminal trial taking
place in Bolivia, the authenticity expert concluded that the minutes of 17 August 2001
are not the ones originally included in NMM's minute book.”®

The Claimants also fabricated the minutes of the shareholders’ meeting of 13
September 2001. This becomes clear when one takes into account the following
observations.

First, the minutes of 13 September 2001, which list Quiborax and Allan Fosk as
shareholders of NMM, are inconsistent with the minutes of 11 September 2001, which
do not list them. Whilst the minutes of 11 September 2001 were registered in the
Commercial Register in 2001, the minutes of 13 September 2001 were never
registered and were first sent to the Superintendencia in January 2005 after this
dispute arose. Second, Allan Fosk, whose presence is mentioned in the minutes, was
not in Bolivia on 13 September 2001 and therefore could not have been in attendance.

 

Clément, on behalf of the Respondent). Thus, except for share certificates Nos. 4 and 6, this
argument appears to be moot.

OJ, $9 129-135; Reply, 19 112-122.
OJ, 49 136-147.

31

90.

91.

92.

81

82

Third, Mr. David Moscoso admitted that the minutes of 13 September 2001 were
fabricated. Fourth, Dolly Paredes’ signature on these minutes is different from her
signature on other documents. Fifth, the authenticity expert also concluded that the
minutes of 13 September 2001 are not the ones originally included in NMM's minute
book. Sixth, the minutes of 13 September 2001, signed by Allan Fosk, refer to
Quiborax "S.A.". However, the corporate name is Quiborax "Ltd."; surprisingly, Allan
Fosk did not notice this mistake at the time he signed the minutes.”’

The Claimants have also submitted three certificates issued by Chilean authorities.
These certificates, however, do not predate the dispute and were indeed expressly
issued for purposes of this arbitration. These certificates merely demonstrate that
Quiborax declared to have invested in NMM to the Chilean authorities.”

1.1.3. NMM has solely Bolivian shareholders and thus it is not a Chilean
national under the ICSID Convention and the Treaty
NMM is owned solely by Bolivian shareholders. It follows that NMM may not be
considered a Chilean national either under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention or
under Article X(4) of the the Bolivia-Chile BIT.” Therefore, as is the case with respect
to Quiborax and Allan Fosk, NMM is not an "investor" within the meaning of the
Treaty.®°

1.1.4. Claimants' evidence suggests that Quiborax acquired 50% of the shares
of Rio Grande, not NUM

In the Reply, Bolivia asserted for the first time that the Claimant's evidence, in particular
the registered contract for the purchase of Rio Grande (the "Rio Grande Contract"*’),
and the payments to Alvaro Ugalde and Edsal Finance®, suggests that what Quiborax
purchased in reality was 50% of the shares of Rio Grande — not of NMM. While the
Claimants argue that the Rio Grande Contract was left without effect by the Leonardo
Fosk-David Moscoso contract (the "Fosk-Moscoso Contract"), this contract is not valid

OJ, $9 148-159; Reply, 1 123-129.

Reply, 9 51-52.

Article X of the Bolivia-Chile BIT is entitled "Settlement of Disputes Between a Contracting Party
and an investor of the Other Contracting Party." Article X(4) in turn provides: "For purposes of
this Article, any legal person constituted under the laws of one of the Contracting Parties and
whose shares, before the time the dispute arises, are majority-owned by an investor of the other
Contracting Party, shall be considered as a legal person of the other Contracting Party,
pursuant to Article 25 2) b) of the aforementioned Washington Convention" (Tribunal's
translation; Exh. CL-1).

Ou, 9 161-186; Reply, 19 130-132.

Exh. CD-17.

Exh. CD-116.

32

93.

94.

95.

because: (i) the parties to this contract are different from the parties to the Rio Grande
Contract; (ii) the Fosk-Moscoso Contract was not registered in a notary's record book
unlike the Rio Grande Contract; (iii) the Fosk-Moscoso Contract is of dubious
authenticity because it falsely states in its third clause that the Rio Grande Contract
"was not executed by the parties"; (iv) payments were indeed made in accordance with
the Rio Grande Contract; and (v) the Fosk-Moscoso Contract was only produced with
the Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.®

Nevertheless, even if the Fosk-Moscoso Contract were valid, this would not confirm
Claimants' version of the facts because under this contract Quiborax would acquire
50% of Rio Grande's mining concessions, not of NMM; further, under the Fosk-
Moscoso Contract, the parties considered the possibility of creating a corporation
where each contracting party would own 50% of the shares, not one where Quiborax
would be the majority shareholder.

1.2. The Claimants' Position

The Claimants argue that they have made a protected "investment", and therefore all
three Claimants are "investors" within the meaning of both the Treaty and the ICSID
Convention. They contend that Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired
mining concessions in Bolivia, that Quiborax and Allan Fosk are shareholders of NUM
as a matter of Bolivian law, and that NMM is deemed to hold Chilean nationality
because it is controlled by Chileans. The Respondent has never questioned that
NMM is the 100% owner of eleven mining concessions in the Rio Grande area, but
claims that Quiborax and Allan Fosk never became shareholders of NMM.®

1.2.1. Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired mining concessions
in Bolivia

In 1999, David Moscoso and Alvaro Ugalde, owners of Rio Grande, contacted
Quiborax with a proposal to jointly develop a project concerning seven mining
concessions in the Rio Grande area. The shareholders of Rio Grande were Moscoso
(50%); Edsal Finance Inc. ("Edsal Finance"), a company incorporated under the laws of
Panama and represented by Alvaro Ugalde (49.5%); and Gonzalo Ugalde, brother of
Alvaro Ugalde (0.5%). Rio Grande's only assets were the seven mining concessions.

Reply, 9 59-64.
Reply, 9 65-69.
CM, §§ Il, V.
Rej., 12.

33

96.

97.

98.

99.

Messrs. Moscoso and Ugalde were looking for a strategic partner that would provide
know-how and capital to develop their business.®”

After examining the viability of the project and the investor-friendly Bolivian legislation,
Quiborax accepted to negotiate. Thus, Quiborax, on the one hand, and Messrs.
Moscoso and Ugalde, on the other, began to explore ways in which to structure their
cooperation. Proposals for a joint venture and a lease were discussed and eventually
discarded. In the end, on 12 January 2001, Rio Grande and Quiborax entered into an
exclusive supply contract for a period of 15 years (the "Exclusive Supply Contract").
Under the Exclusive Supply Contract, Quiborax had a right of first refusal over Rio
Grande's mining concessions, and a right to purchase the mining concessions in the
event that an arbitrator found that Rio Grande had breached the contract.

A month after the Exclusive Supply Contract was executed, Alvaro and Gonzalo
Ugalde offered to sell their 50% shareholding in Rio Grande to Quiborax because
Alvaro Ugalde was looking to raise capital for other projects. Quiborax accepted the
offer. On 12 March 2001, Quiborax, on the one hand, and Edsal and Gonzalo Ugalde,
on the other, entered into an agreement whereby Edsal and Gonzalo Ugalde would sell
their combined shares in Rio Grande (50%) to Quiborax (the "Share Transfer
Agreement"). The agreed purchase price was USD 400,000, to be paid in six
instalments.®°

Eventually, to avoid the risks inherent to an existing corporation, Quiborax decided to
structure the operation through a new company, rather than as shareholders of Rio
Grande. For this reason, on 12 May 2001, Leonardo Fosk, on behalf of Quiborax, and
David Moscoso, on behalf of Rio Grande, annulled the Share Transfer Agreement and
entered into a new agreement to create either a joint venture or a new corporation (the
“Fosk-Moscoso Contract"). Quiborax retained Fernando Rojas, of C.R. & F. Rojas
Abogados (the "Rojas law firm"), as its local counsel to implement the Fosk-Moscoso
Contract.

The Rojas law firm devised a scheme to implement the Fosk-Moscoso Contract in
three steps. First, Mr. Moscoso and the Ugalde brothers would contribute the Rio
Grande mining concessions to a new corporation. Second, Quiborax would replace the

CM, 99 14-15.
CM, $9 16-24.

Id., at 99 25-27.
Id., at 99 27-31.

34

100.

101.

102.

Ugalde brothers as shareholders of the new corporation. Third, Quiborax would
acquire an additional 1% share capital from Mr. Moscoso to secure control of the new
corporation, and Allan Fosk would receive one share to comply with the Bolivian law
requirement that there be a minimum of three shareholders.°*"

On 25 July 2001, the Rojas law firm incorporated NMM. The founding shareholders of
NMM were Fernando Rojas (with 58 shares), Ms. Dolly Paredes (1 share) and Ms.
Gilka Salas (1 share). Ms. Paredes and Ms. Salas are secretaries at the Rojas law
firm. NMM was registered with the Internal Revenue Service and with the Commercial
Register. On 3 August 2001, after Rio Grande's and NMM's approvals, Rio Grande
transferred its seven mining concessions to NMM. On 8 August 2001, Alvaro Ugalde
received the last payment for the sale of his 50% interest in the mining concessions,
thereby completing payment of the USD 400,000 total purchase price.”

On 17 August 2001, Rio Grande received 26,680 NMM shares in exchange for the
seven mining concessions it had transferred to NMM. On that very day, Rio Grande
transferred all of its NMM shares (26,680) to Quiborax by endorsement, as reflected in
share certificate No. 4. Whilst Mr. Moscoso was entitled to 50% of these shares,
Quiborax and Mr. Moscoso had agreed that Quiborax would own 51% of the shares of
NMM and Mr. Moscoso 49%. Therefore, on 4 September 2001, Quiborax transferred
50% of the NMM shares to Mr. Moscoso in two batches: a batch of 13,013 shares
(equal to 49% of the shares of NMM) and a batch of 267 shares (equal to 1% of the
shares of NMM). On the same day, Mr. Moscoso sold the batch of 267 shares to
Quiborax for USD 9,985. These transfers are reflected in share certificates 4, 5, and 6,
10 and 11. Finally, on 10 September 2001, the founding shareholders transferred their
shares to Quiborax and Allan Fosk: Fernando Rojas and Dolly Paredes transferred
their shares to Quiborax, while Gilka Salas transferred her one share to Allan Fosk.
These transfers are documented in share certificates Nos. 8 and 9.°°

As a result, the shareholder composition of NMM as of 10 September 2001 was the
following: Quiborax held 50.995% of the shares; David Moscoso held 49%; and Allan
Fosk held 0.005%. Thus, Chilean national Quiborax became the majority shareholder
of NMM as of that date.**

Id., at 19 32-34.
Id., at 19 35-42, 44.
Id., at 19 43-55.
Id., at 19 56-57.

35

103.

104.

105.

106.

In the Reply on Jurisdiction, the Respondent has alleged for the first time that the
evidence would show that Quiborax acquired 50% of the shares of Rio Grande, and
not 50% of the shares of NMM. The Respondent acknowledges that Rio Grande
owned 99% of the shares of NMM. Thus, even if Respondent's theory were true,
Quiborax would own 49.5% of the shares of NMM, only 1.5% less of the 51% it has
always claimed to own. This would suffice to confer standing on Quiborax to bring this

arbitration.

1.2.2. puiborax and Allan Fosk are shareholders of NMM as a matter of Bolivian
jaw

Under Bolivian law, in particular Articles 251 and 268 of the Commercial Code ("CC"),
shareholder status is proven exclusively by the shareholders registry.°° Otherwise
stated, those appearing in the shareholders registry are the shareholders of the
company. Quiborax and Allan Fosk are registered in the NMM shareholders registry.
Therefore, the Claimants have met the only requirement they need to meet to prove
their shareholder status under Bolivian law.°”

Contrary to what the Respondent and Prof. Salame assert, registration in the
shareholders registry does not merely give rise to a rebuttable presumption of
shareholder status. Rather, registration itself creates the status of shareholder. This
has been confirmed by a legal commentator, by expert Prof. Rosenkrantz, and by the
Bolivian government itself. Prof. Salame simply misinterprets or ignores Art. 268 CC.°°

At any rate, there is plenty of additional evidence showing that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk are shareholders of NMM: the certificates from the Chilean authorities; Quiborax's
financial statements audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers in Chile; all the minutes of
shareholders’ meeting of NMM celebrated from September 2001; the field study of Mr.
Juan Pablo de Luca and the expert report of Prof. Rosenkrantz.°?

Rej., 1 40.
Id., at 1 46.

CM, $9 58-70.

Id., at 19 62-74; Rej. $9 149-152.
CM, ff 75-82.

36

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

1.2.3. NMM is to be deemed a Chilean national because it is under Chilean
control

Since Quiborax is the majority shareholder of NMM, NMM is a Chilean national for

purposes of the Treaty. As a Chilean national, NMM has standing to act as a claimant
in this arbitration.’

1.3. Analysis

The Tribunal must determine whether Quiborax, Allan Fosk and NMM are "investors"
within the meaning of the Treaty. In order to reach this determination, the Tribunal
must ascertain (1.3.1) whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of NMM at
the time when the dispute between the Parties arose in June 2004; and, if so, (1.3.2)
whether NMM was to be considered a Chilean national at the time as a result of its
being majority-owned by Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk.

1.3.1. Were Quiborax and Allan Fosk shareholders of NMM at the time the
dispute arose in June 2004?

For the purpose of ascertaining whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of
NMM at the time the dispute arose in June 2004, the Tribunal will examine (i) what
party bears the burden of proof with respect to the various allegations put forward; (ii)
how shareholder status is to be established under Bolivian law; (iii) the Claimants’
account and evidence of the events; and (iv) the Respondent's account and evidence
of the events. On the basis of the preceding analysis, (v) the Tribunal will then state its
conclusion.

(i) Burden of proof

The main issue in this jurisdictional dispute is whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk were
shareholders of NMM in June 2004. The Claimants allege that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk collectively acquired 51% of the shares of NMM in August and September 2001,
and have been the majority shareholders of NMM ever since. The Respondent, on the
other hand, argues that the Claimants fabricated evidence showing that Quiborax and
Allan Fosk were shareholders of NMM at the time the dispute arose solely to gain
access to ICSID jurisdiction.

It is common ground between the Parties, and rightly so, that the burden of proving that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares of NMM in August and September 2001 rests
upon the Claimants. At the hearing, Counsel for the Respondent stated that in order

Id., at ¥ 159-166.

37

112.

113.

114.

106

"to establish the jurisdiction of the tribunal, [the Claimants] have to discharge a certain
burden of proof. They have to establish that, first, they are investors and, second, that
there is an investment.""®' Counsel for the Claimants concurred: "We accept, as we
always did, that the burden of proof regarding the proof of investment is on [the
Claimants].""

Yet, there is no common ground with respect to the Respondent's allegations that the
Claimants fabricated evidence to initiate this arbitration. At the hearing, Counsel for the
Respondent argued: "Although we think that the Tribunal will be fully convinced [...] that
Quiborax and Mr. Fosk have not acquired these shares, we would say that even if we
only had raised a doubt, that should suffice because they are [the] Claimants, they bear
the burden of proof, and when there is room for doubt, the burden is not discharged.
[IIn Cementownia v. Turkey, [...] the tribunal conclude[d] that the transaction which
would have constituted the investment [...] 'never took place’ and ‘the claim is a sham.’

And that's what we think. The claim here is a sham."

In other words, the
Respondent does not consider that it must prove its allegations of fraud; it is enough if

those allegations "raise[] a doubt."'™*

By contrast, the Claimants maintain that the Respondent bears the burden of proving
its allegations of fraud. During oral argument, counsel for the Claimants submitted that
while "the burden of proof regarding the proof of investment is on [the Claimants], [...]
the burden of proof on the fraud allegation is on the Respondent, and [...] they have
never accepted that. That's the difference. It is not sufficient [...] just to create doubts
on the Tribunal."*°° Counsel for the Claimants further stated that the "Respondent has
not just the burden of proof, but also the responsibility and [...] the duty to proceed to
prove their accusations, and these accusations and the evidence produced shall be
subject to a strict standard of proof."'°

The question which the Tribunal must answer is whether the Claimants are "investors"
under the Treaty and, more specifically, whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk became
majority shareholders of NMM in August and September 2001. Thus, it will first

Tr. 19:11-13.

Id., at 535:20-22.

Id., at 21:7-14, 22:15-20.

Id., at 21:11; see also Reply, p. 10, n. 23: "it is not necessary for the State to prove that the
Claimants have fraudulently fabricated their condition of investors for the Tribunal to find that it
has no jurisdiction; it is enough if it [the Tribunal] deems that the evidence submitted is
insufficient."

Tr., 533:21-534:5.
Id., at 113:20-114:3.

38

115.

116.

117.

118.

examine whether the Claimants have discharged their burden of proving that they are
"investors". Assuming the answer is positive, it will then review whether the
Respondent has disproven or raised sufficient doubts on the Claimants' allegations that
they are "investors". Finally, on the basis of this overall analysis, it will conclude
whether or not the Claimants are "investors".

(ii) Proof of shareholder status under Bolivian law

The Parties disagree on what needs to be proven to show shareholder status under
Bolivian law. According to the Claimants, shareholders status under Bolivian law is
proven solely by reference to the shareholders registry:

"The only and sufficient proof of the condition of shareholder is [...] the

Shareholders Registry.'°’ Given that Quiborax and Allan Fosk are

registered in the NMM Shareholders Registry, it is undisputable that,

according to Bolivian law, Quiborax and Allan Fosk are shareholders

of NMM [...]. For this reason, any additional evidence the Respondent

has requested is immaterial and serves no purpose."'®
The Respondent, by contrast, contends that the shareholders registry merely creates a
presumption of shareholder status, which can be rebutted by "any means which allows
to establish who the real shareholder is." Thus, the Claimants are wrong to argue
that the shareholders registry gives rise to an irrebuttable presumption (presumptio
juris et de iure). Even if it were true, that registration in the shareholders registry is an
essential requirement to acquire shareholder status, quod non, this would still not mean

that the evidentiary value of the shareholders registry is unquestionable. ""°

The relevant provisions of the Bolivian Commercial Code (“BCC”) reads as follows:

Art. 251

"The corporation deems as owner of the shares whoever is registered
as such in the certificates and in the shareholders registry.""""

Art. 268

"It has shareholder status whoever is registered in the corporation's

shareholders registry, if the shares are nominative; and whoever is the
holder, if the shares are bearer shares."'?

On the basis of these provisions, the Tribunal is not convinced that proof of
shareholder status is established exclusively on the basis of the shareholders registry.

Rep. PM, 45.

CM, $9 65, 73.

OJ, § 121 (Tribunal's translation).

Rej., 19 85, 97-111.

CM, p. 28, n. 76; missing from Annex CD-1 (Tribunal's translation).
Annex CD-1.

39

119.

120.

121.

First, Article 251 refers not only to the shareholders registry but also to the share
certificates. Even if this provision focuses on the relationship between the corporation

113

and its shareholders’, its plain terms appear to defeat any claim that the shareholders

registry is the sole source by which to ascertain shareholder status.

Second, it is true that Article 268 of the BCC, on which the Claimants chiefly rely,
provides that "whoever is registered in the corporation's shareholders registry" is a
shareholder.''* However, it does not necessarily follow that the shareholders registry is
the sole source of evidence to determine who enjoys shareholder status. Article 268 of
the BCC does not exclude other means to establish shareholder status. The Tribunal
therefore agrees with the Respondent's legal expert, Prof. Salame, that the
shareholders registry "merely creates a rebuttable presumption [...] in favour of the
person therein registered"''®, and "does not exhaust the discussion over who really is
the shareholder of the corporation."""°

Third, the legal effects of registration in the shareholders registry must be distinguished
from the probative value of the registry. Even assuming arguendo that registration in
the shareholders registry for nominative shares were a requirement to acquire
shareholder status, it would not imply that the facts recorded in the registry are not
open to challenge. To this extent, the Tribunal agrees with Prof. Salame, who explains
that:

"The legal effect of registration in the shareholders registry and its
probative value [are] two different issues [...]. Whereas in the first
scenario we are situated on a legal plane, in the second scenario we
are situated on a plane of facts and presumptions.

Even if [...] registration in the shareholders registry serves a
constitutive function, this does not mean that the facts recorded in
such a registry cannot be disproven by other evidence [...]."""”

Fourth, as the Claimants acknowledge, the "shareholders registry reflects the
ownership of the shares; it cannot change it."'"® Yet, as the Claimants further concede,

this "reflection" may be inaccurate: there could be a "discrepancy between the [share]

ita

titles and the registry"''~ — in short, between the registry and reality. Perhaps for this

reason, the Claimants accept that the shareholders registry would have no effect "in

CM, 9 147, 149.

Supra, at § 117.

Salame ER I, § 75 (Tribunal's translation).

Id, at $81.

Salame ER Il, 44 9, 13 (Tribunal's translation).
Rej., 9151.

Id., at 141 (Tribunal's translation).

40

122.

123.

124.

125.

case of fraud, force, deceit or any other cause of annulment of legal acts."'”° In this
case, Bolivia is precisely alleging fraud. In these circumstances, it is difficult to see
why Quiborax and Allan Fosk's shareholders status would need to be ascertained
exclusively on the basis of the registry.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal will examine whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk
became shareholders of NMM not only on the basis of the shareholders registry, but on
the basis of the entire record before it.

(iii) The Claimants’ account and evidence of the events

In this sub-section, the Tribunal will examine the Claimants’ statements of facts and
supporting documentation.

According to the Claimants, in 1999, David Moscoso and Alvaro Ugalde, owners of Rio

Grande, approached Quiborax "to develop a business project involving [Rio Grande's]

W121

seven mining concessions in Bolivia. The first documented contact between

Quiborax and Rio Grande is allegedly a letter from David Moscoso and Alvaro Ugalde
to Eng. Carlos Shuffer of Quiborax, dated 26 January 2000 but seemingly faxed on the
following day from Bolivia to Chile:

"Dear Sirs,

Ratifying the terms of the recent telephone conversations, we hereby
confirm our interest in participating with you in the development,
exploitation and sale of our ulexite deposit in Rio Grande, executing
an association or joint venture contract, by which Quiborax could
assume the management and 50% or more of the shares and rights in
our Company in exchange for the economic and financial resources
required to implement and set in motion [the] project [...].

Taking into account that our mining concessions are more than 50
kilometres away from the border, there is no restriction of any kind
preventing a foreign company from acquiring the entirety of those
concessions, or eventually 100% of the shares of our Company.

We look forward to your comments. Very truly yours,

David Moscoso Ruiz Alvaro Ugalde Canedo" (emphasis
added).

At that time, Quiborax and Rio Grande were purportedly in the process of exploring

0123

“different alternatives to give form to their plans for the joint exploitation of the

ulexite deposits in the Rio Grande area. As part of that process, David Moscoso sent a

Id., at § 144 (Tribunal's translation).
CM, 15.

Exh. CD-9 (Tribuna''s translation).
CM, 4 19.

4

126.

127.

128.

letter to Allan Fosk and Eng. Shuffer, dated 29 March 2000 and seemingly faxed on the
same day from Bolivia:

"Dear Sirs,

In the first place, we would like to express our satisfaction for the
fruitful and worthy exchange of opinions with the esteemed Alan Fosk
and Carlos Shuffer in relation to the exploitation of the Rio Grande
deposit owned by our Company.

Our agreement was, in principle, that the most suitable procedure to
reach_an agreement for the exploitation of the ulexite would be a
property lease with a purchase option within a three-year period at a
pre-determined price. Following a discussion and review between
partners [...], we have agreed to submit the following proposal to you:

We look forward to your useful comments. Truly yours,

David Moscoso" (emphasis added). '**

However, the proposal for a lease and purchase option did not prosper. Eventually, on
12 January 2001, Quiborax and Rio Grande finally reached an agreement, formalized
in a notarized contract, whereby Quiborax would acquire ulexite from Rio Grande on an

exclusive basis (the "Exclusive Supply Contract"). '*

Under the Exclusive Supply
Contract, Quiborax, the "buyer", committed to buy specified quantities of ulexite from
Rio Grande, the "seller" or "supplier", on an exclusive basis for a 15-year period

beginning in January 2001. '°

The Exclusive Supply Contract is significant because its terms are not disputed by the
Parties. The Claimants and the Respondent accept that Quiborax and Rio Grande
entered into this contract in early 2001. It is only from that point onwards that their
disagreement begins to emerge. According to the Claimants, the Exclusive Supply
Contract was terminated “shortly thereafter"’*” because it had “lost its purpose".'”
According to the Respondent, however, this contract "was never terminated"'”, as

"there is no document in the record that shows that."'*°

The uncontested, notarized Exclusive Supply Contract contained the following relevant
provisions for purposes of this dispute:

Exh. CD-103 (Tribunal's translation).

Exh. CD-16.

Id., at clause 1, "Definitions"; clause 5, "Contract Term."
Tr. 127:6-7.

Id., at 561:20.

Id., at 105:17-18.

Id., at 28:19-20.

42

129.

130.

131.

"Clause nineteenth — Covenants: [...] In case this contract were
rescinded on account of the supplier's [Rio Grande's] breach of its
obligations, as declared in an award issued by the arbitrator appointed
in accordance with clause sixteen, such an award shall provide that
RIGSSA [Rio Grande] grants to Quiborax, for a 60-day period, an
exclusive and_ irrevocable option to purchase _all_the mining
concessions specified in clause three of this instrument [...].

Clause twentieth — Sale Prohibition and Right of First Refusal: The

supplier may not transfer the mining concessions it owns and which

are specified in clause three. After five years have elapsed from this

date, RIGSSA [Rio Grande] may offer such concessions for sale, but

in that case, should there be a definite purchase offer, the supplier

shall refer to Quiborax said offer [...]. Quiborax will have_a 90-day

period to match the offer referred by RIGSSA [Rio Grande] and in this

case the latter [Rio Grande] irrevocably commits to sell and transfer to

the former [Quiborax] the concessions with priority over any other

potential buyer" (emphasis added). 5
In sum, the Exclusive Supply Contract contemplated two different scenarios under
which Quiborax would enjoy an exclusive option to acquire Rio Grande's mining
concessions: (i) in the event that an arbitral tribunal constituted under the arbitration
clause in the contract were to "rescind" the contract for a breach by Rio Grande, and
(ii) in the event that Rio Grande decided to sell the mining concessions after a five-year
period. In other words, the possibility that Quiborax could acquire a participation in the
mining concessions was envisaged as early as 2001. This undisputed provisions lend
credence to the previous correspondence of 26 January and 29 March 2000, where

this possibility appears to have been discussed as well.

According to the Claimants, a "month after signing"’®* the Exclusive Supply Contract,
the Ugalde brothers "offered to sell their 50 percent participation"'®* in Rio Grande, with
Mr. Moscoso keeping his participation. Quiborax accepted this offer and, on 12 March
2001, exactly two months after concluding the Exclusive Supply Contract, entered into
a Share Purchase Agreement ("SPA") with Edsal Finance Inc. — represented by Alvaro
Ugalde — and Gonzalo Ugalde in order to acquire 50% of the shares of Rio Grande. '*
The SPA is consistent with the already-entertained possibility that Quiborax could
acquire an interest in the mining concessions. Under the SPA, Quiborax would acquire
such an interest by purchasing shares in Rio Grande.

The SPA is documented in a notarized contract.'®° It was signed by Alvaro Ugalde, on
behalf of both Edsal Finance Inc. and Gonzalo Ugalde, and by Leonardo Fosk, father

Exh. CD-16, clauses 19 and 20 (Tribunals translation).

Mem., 4 59.

Id.

Exh. CD-17, p. 1.
Id.

43

132.

133.

of Allan'®, on behalf of Quiborax.'®” As collateral to ensure payment of the purchase
price and also seemingly to secure the transfer of the shares, the shares were pledged

for the benefit of both parties to the transaction.‘

Quiborax agreed to pay USD
400,000 for 50% of the shares of Rio Grande in accordance with the following payment

schedule:

 

Date Payment

 

Execution SPA | USD 90,000

 

21 March 2001 | USD 110,000

 

21 April 2001 USD 50,000

 

21 May 2001 USD 50,000

 

21 June 2001 | USD 50,000

 

 

 

 

21 July 2001 USD 50,000

 

Quiborax seems to have made the first payment under the SPA by issuing two checks
in favor of Edsal Finance Inc. on 9 March 2001: a check for USD 50,000 and another
check for USD 40,000, totaling USD 90,000.'%° Indeed, the 9 March 2001 checks tally
in timing and amount with the first scheduled payment under the SPA, stipulated to
occur at the time of the execution of the SPA. This suggests that Quiborax did make

these payments. Nevertheless, according to the Claimants, "the transfer was never

performed and Quiborax never became a shareholder in RIGSSA [Rio Grande]""*°

because "Quiborax preferred to avoid the risk of participating in an existing company

tat
t.

and started exploring alternatives to structure its investmen These alternatives

would presumably change the legal form but not the substance of the transaction.

At one point, Bolivia appears to have alleged that the SPA was evidence that Quiborax
acquired shares of Rio Grande, as opposed to NMM.'“? However, at the hearing,

Tr. 32:10-11.

Exh. CD-17, pp. 2, 4.

Rej., 4 85; Exh. CD-17, clause 5, p. 3; Exh. CD-101, pp. 8-11.

Exh. CD-116, p. 1.

Mem., § 60.

CM, § 27.

Rej., 977.

Reply, § 3.1.3, p. 19 ("The evidence submitted by the Claimants suggests that what Quiborax
acquired in reality was 50% of the shares in Rio Grande") (Tribunal's translation).

44

134.

135.

Counsel for the Respondent clarified that "Bolivia does not accept" that Quiborax
acquired a "50 percent shareholding in Rio Grande."'** Thus, Bolivia agrees with the
Claimants that the SPA was never implemented and that Quiborax never became a
shareholder of Rio Grande, albeit for different reasons. Whereas for the Claimants the
SPA was not implemented in order to change the "legal form", but not the substance, of
the transaction, for Bolivia the SPA was not implemented because the Exclusive
Supply Contract was and remained in force.“

At this juncture, the Parties’ diverging factual accounts take diametrically opposed
paths. According to the Claimants, on 10 May 2001, nearly two months after the
execution of the SPA, Quiborax, again represented by Leonardo Fosk, and Rio
Grande, this time represented by David Moscoso, entered into a new contract (the
“May 2001 Contract"). This contract was intended to "substitute and replace" the
SPA.'° The May 2001 Contract, which unlike the SPA was not notarized, stipulated
the following in its relevant parts:

"Third.- [...] [I]t was agreed to sell and transfer all of the shares that
EDSAL FINANCE, represented by Mr. Alvaro Ugalde, and Mr.
Gonzalo Ugalde hold in [Rio Grande] to Quiborax. The price agreed
is US$ 400,000, of which the buyer has already paid to the sellers the
sum of USD 250,000 [...]. The [SPA] has not yet been executed
between the parties.

Fourth.- [...] It_was agreed to substitute and replace the [SPA|
referred in clause 3 with another one by virtue of which [Rio Grande’
sells_and transfers to Quiborax 50% of all the perfected mining
concessions, and of any other that is in the process of being awarded,
under the same economic terms and conditions provided for in the
substituted agreement [the SPA].

Fifth.- For its part [Rio Grande] shall transfer 50% of the same
perfected mining concessions or in the process of being awarded to
Mr. David Moscoso Ruiz.

 

Sixth.- The goal of the trar i specified in the last two preceding
clauses is to facilitate the creation of a corporation or a joint venture
contract [...] in order to associate both owners in the mining
exploitation and commercial development of this property" (emphasis
added).""4”

 

It thus appears that whilst the May 2001 Contract was intended to "substitute and
replace" the SPA, the "economic terms and conditions" of the SPA would remain
unchanged."*® Indeed, the payments made until the time of the execution of the May

Tr. 30:8-11.

Tr. 105:17-18 (The Exclusive Supply Contract "was never terminated").
Exh. CD-104, clauses third and fourth, pp. 1-2.

Id., at clauses third to sixth, pp. 1-2.

Id., at clause fourth, p. 2.

45

136.

137.

2001 Contract again tally with the schedule of payments under the SPA: (i) two 9
March 2001 checks payable to Edsal Finance for a total of USD 90,000"? (tallying with
the first SPA installment); (ii) two 27 March 2001 checks — one of which had the word
"Quiborax" printed on it - and one 29 March 2001 check, all payable to Edsal Finance,
for a total of USD 110,000" (tallying with the second SPA installment'®’); and lastly,
(iii) two 20 April 2001 checks payable to Edsal Finance Inc. for a total of USD 50,000‘?
(tallying with the third SPA installment).

Hence, it appears that, by the time the May 2001 Contract was executed, Quiborax had
already made payments to Edsal Finance Inc. for a total of USD 250,000. This accords
not only with the terms of the SPA, but also with the plain terms of the May 2001
Contract, which specifies in its third clause that Quiborax had already paid "the sum of
USD 250,000"'** to Edsal Finance Inc. and Gonzalo Ugalde. On the other hand,
although the "economic terms and conditions" of the May 2001 Contract were no
different from those of the SPA, the legal terms and the form of the transaction were
different.

Clause No. 4 of the May 2001 Contract stipulates that Rio Grande would "sell[] and

transfer[] to Quiborax 50% of all [the] mining concessions."'®*

But contrary to the
impression this clause read in isolation might convey, this contract is not a mere asset
purchase. Rather, the fourth clause must be read in conjunction with the sixth clause,
according to which the goal of the transfers stipulated in the fourth and fifth clauses "is
to facilitate the creation of a corporation or a joint venture contract."'®> It thus seems
that the substance of both the SPA and the May 2001 Contract was the same and
consisted in the transfer of 50% of the mining concessions to Quiborax. What would
change was the structure of the transaction: under the SPA, the transfer of the mining
concessions was to take place through the purchase of shares in Rio Grande; under
the May 2001 Contract, by contrast, the transfer would be effected through the creation
of a new "corporation or a joint venture contract."

Exh. CD-116, p. 1.

Id., at pp. 2-3.

With a few days of delay, as the second installment was due on 21 March 2001.
Id., at p. 4.

Exh. CD-104, pp.1-2.

Id.

Id., at clause sixth, p. 2.

46

138. In this regard, it should be noted that, although Alvaro Ugalde did not execute the May

2001 Contract’, clause eleven stipulates that its terms "bind Alvaro Ugalde in all of its

parts"’®”

, as they were "previously agreed"'® with him. On 14 May 2001, only four
days after the execution of the May 2001 Contract, it appears that Alvaro Ugalde wrote
the following to Quiborax, Leonardo Fosk, David Fux "and others"?

“[t]ransfer of the Rio Grande shares"'®°:

with regard to the

"Dear friends

LJ]

In accordance with the commitments undertaken with Quiborax, |
have previously faxed the certificates showing the transfer of shares

of EDSAL FINANCE INC. and Gonzalo Ugalde Canedo in favor of
Quiborax. The originals have been sent to Santiago via Courier.

If your decision is to become shareholders of RIGSSA [Rio Grande],
you should complete the "definitive registration" in the shareholders
registry [...]

If your decision is _not to become shareholders of RIGSSA [Rio
Grande], you should create a new corporation [...].

Truly yours,

Alvaro Ugalde" (emphasis added). '®"

139. On 17 May 2001, Alvaro Ugalde again wrote to the addressees of his preceding letter:

"Dear friends

As |am still unaware of the decision you have made with respect to
the type of company that will devote itself to the exploitation of ulexite
in Rio Grande, | attach a report [...] describing that the share transfer
is perfected, being only required that it be registered in the corporate
books for it to become valid as against the corporation and third-
parties.

 

  

Regards,

Alvaro Ugalde [Report attached]" (emphasis added). ‘©

140. These two letters tend to suggest that Alvaro Ugalde was aware of and in agreement

with the terms of the May 2001 Contract. Just as important, the letters suggest that Mr.
Ugalde was not concerned about the particular legal structure or form the transaction
would adopt, but was on the contrary willing to let Quiborax make that decision ("Tif

Alvaro Ugalde did, however, execute the SPA on behalf of both Edsal Finance Inc. and Gonzalo
Ugalde (see Exh. CD-17, p. 4).

Id., at clause eleventh, p. 5.

Id.

Exh. CD-18.

Id.

Id. (Tribunals translation).

Exh. CD-144 (Tribunal's translation).

47

141.

142.

your decision is to become shareholders of RIGSSA [Rio Grande] [...] [i]f your decision

163)
)

is not to become shareholders of RIGSSA [Rio Grande]""™). The letters also appear to

reveal that the terms of the SPA were close to being fully performed ("the share
transfer is perfected, being only required that [...]""®).

Consistent with one of the options envisioned in the May 2001 Contract, it appears that
Quiborax opted for the "creation of a [new] corporation" as the vehicle through which to
accomplish the transfer of the mining concessions. In June 2001, the Claimants allege
that they retained Fernando Rojas, "a reputed and well known lawyer within and

"'85 and partner of the Rojas law firm, to structure this operation."° The

outside Bolivia
plan was allegedly to create a new company, to which the mining concessions would
be transferred, and to replace the Ugalde brothers — or, more precisely, Edsal Finance
and Gonzalo Ugalde — with Quiborax. Allan Fosk would, in turn, receive one share "in
order to comply with the minimum three shareholders’ requirement under Bolivian
corporate law."'°”

Presumably also on the advice of Mr. Rojas, Quiborax would also acquire an additional
1% of the shares from Mr. Moscoso to secure "control of the new company."'® For
jurisdictional purposes, this additional 1% participation is fundamental insofar as NMM
can only act as claimant in this arbitration if it is majority-owned by Quiborax. This
additional step would also entail an amendment of the May 2001 Contract, which
provided that Quiborax and Mr. Moscoso would each own a "50%" participation in the
new corporation."®® On examination from the Tribunal, Allan Fosk offered the following
reason as to why it was decided that Quiborax would become the majority shareholder
of the new corporation:

"[Tribunal]: It is unclear from the record [...] why at some point it was
decided that Quiborax would have 51 percent of the shares of NVM
when before that there are documents that say it would be shared
50/50 [the May 2001 Contract], and there is no document [...] [or]
explanation for the change to 51. Can you explain this?

[Allan Fosk]: Yes [...]. At first, what we agreed was 50 percent for
Quiborax and 50 percent for Moscoso, but we came to realize over

the months that that could give rise to [...] corporate _governance
problems over time [...]. [T]herefore [...] we came to an agreement

Exh. CD-18.

Exh. CD-144.

Mem., § 62.

Id., at § 62; CM, 431.

CM, 4 34.

Rej., 4 92(e).

Exh. CD-104, clause seventh, p. 3.

48

143.

144.

145.

that he was willing to sell us the 1 percent of the shares at a price of $

9,985, and then we [...] transferr[ed] the shares and _majfde] the

corresponding payment" (emphasis added)."”
The Tribunal finds this explanation plausible. It is well-known and easy to understand
that 50-50 joint ventures are a source of difficulties. Moreover, the change from a 50-50
to a 51-49 joint venture ("the 51/49 agreement") was but the latest of a series of
changes in the contractual arrangements between Quiborax, Rio Grande and Rio
Grande's shareholders. Originally, after exploring different collaborative schemes'”',
Quiborax and Rio Grande concluded the Exclusive Supply Contract in January 2001.'7
Two months later, the Exclusive Supply Contract would have given way to the SPA‘,
which in turn was soon replaced by the May 2001 Contract.' Thus, this additional
change appears to have been unexceptional in light of the preceding chain of events.

In any event, it is undisputed that, on 25 July 2001, Fernando Rojas, Dole Paredes and
Gilka Salas constituted NVM." This was the "new corporation" referred to in the May
2001 Contract, created to complete the transfer of 51% of the mining concessions to
Quiborax. The timing of the incorporation of NMM, about two and a half months after
the execution of the May 2001 Contract and the two letters from Alvaro Ugalde, is
consistent with the Claimants’ preceding account of the facts. On the same day, NVM
was registered with the Bolivian Internal Revenue Service.'”° As of 27 July 2001, NUM
was also registered with the Commercial Registry (the "Senarec" at the time).'””

The Claimants allege that Dole Paredes and Gilka Salas were staff members of the
Rojas law firm, and that they acted as founding shareholders of NMM together with
Fernando Rojas in order to spare Quiborax "the trouble of dealing with the necessary

0178

administrative formalities. The records issued by the Commercial Registry

(currently "Fundempresa"), showing the multiple corporations with which Fernando
Rojas, Dole Paredes and Gilka Salas have had "commercial links" as shareholders,
tend to bolster this allegation.'’? Fernando Rojas would have received 58 shares, and

Tr. 238:9-239:7.

Exhs. CD-9 and CD-103.

Exh. CD-16.

Exh. CD-17.

Exh. CD-104.

Exh. CD-23; CM, § 35; Rej., 93.
Exh. R-137; CM, § 37; Rej., 4 93.
Exh. R-139.

CM, 436.

Exh. CD-130 (1 to 3). The Tribunal notes that whilst Prof. Salame testified that having lawyers
incorporate companies for the clients was not "common practice", he did not argue that this was

49

146.

147.

148.

Dolly Paredes and Gilka Salas would each have received one share, presumably to
comply with the Bolivian law requirement that the corporation be composed of at least
three shareholders.

The initial shares issued to Fernando Rojas, Dole Paredes and Gilka Salas are
documented both in the shareholders registry'®’, which seems to have been formally
opened on 27 July 2001, and on the NMM share certificates Nos. 1 to 3 of the same
date. Thus, the dates of the shareholders registry and the NMM share certificates Nos.
1 to 3 tally with each other, with the date of incorporation of NMM and, more generally,
with the previous sequence of events. In the meantime, Quiborax continued making
payments under the May 2001 Contract, whose "economic terms and conditions"
reproduced those of the SPA; by the time NMM was constituted on 25 July 2001,
Quiborax had disbursed USD 380,000 of the total USD 400,000 purchase price.

As of May 2001, Quiborax ceased making payment for the balance of the USD 400,000
purchase price to Edsal Finance, and instead began to issue payments in favor of
Alvaro Ugalde. This is one of the reasons why the Respondent took "issue [...] with
these checks."'*' Indeed, Quiborax made payments to Edsal Finance for a total of
USD 250,000, whereas it paid the balance of USD 150,000 to Alvaro Ugalde.'®* The
Tribunal sees no issue here because, first and foremost, the key point is that Quiborax
continued making the payments due under the May 2001 Contract for the purpose of
acquiring the mining concessions that would be transferred to a new corporation. To
whom exactly Quiborax made the payments is not relevant so long as it is clear that the
payments were made pursuant to the May 2001 Contract.

Additionally, there appears to be no contradiction between the change of payee and
the evidence on record. In fact, Edsal Finance was a party to the SPA, but not to the
May 2001 Contract. Alvaro Ugalde was not a party to the SPA, but was bound by the
terms of the May 2001 Contract.'®* This may well explain why all the payments made
after the 10 May 2001 Contract were made to Alvaro Ugalde and not to Edsal Finance.
It is true that under the May 2001 Contract the seller was Rio Grande, not Alvaro

 

unheard of, merely limiting himself to declare that "out of personal ethics, [he] wouldn't do that
[but iJf Dr. Rojas or any other lawyer does so, that is their opinion, and that requires no comment
on my part" (Tr. 326:10-20, 327:12-18).

Exh. CD-24, pp. 1, 3 and 5.

Tr. 29:20-30:6.

Exh. CD-116, payments to Edsal Finance Inc. (pp. 1-4) and payments to Alvaro Ugalde (pp. 5-
9).

Exh. CD-104, clause eleventh, p. 5.

50

149.

150.

188

Ugalde.'®* However, the record suggests that Alvaro Ugalde was the ultimate seller
and thus the ultimate beneficiary of the payments — except for the 0.5% of shares held
by his brother Gonzalo. "©

Between 2 and 17 August 2001, Rio Grande and NMM supposedly adopted the
corporate steps necessary to complete the transfer of the mining concessions to
Quiborax, in accordance with the terms of the May 2001 Contract as modified by the
51/49 agreement. Specifically, on 2 August 2001, Rio Grande approved the transfer of
its seven mining concessions to NMM, as shown by the minutes and a notarized
version of the concessions. '®°
allegedly "decided to sell and transfer in favor of [Quiborax] the share certificates to be
issued by [NMM] in favor of [Rio Grande] as a result of the latter's contribution of seven

On that same day in the afternoon, Rio Grande

mining concessions.""®”

On 3 August 2001, NMM approved Rio Grande's contribution of the seven mining
concessions and authorized a capital increase of 26,680 shares, as evidenced by both
a copy and a notarized version of the minutes.'®® This brought the total number of
NMM shares to 26,740 — 60 original shares plus the approved 26,680 shares. In the

Id., at clause fourth, p. 2.

There appears to be ample evidence on record that Alvaro Ugalde was the ultimate seller and
the person with whom Quiborax dealt throughout the transaction. Alvaro Ugalde signed the
letter that constitutes the first documented contact between Rio Grande and Quiborax (letter of
26 January 2000). It was also him who executed both the Exclusive Supply Agreement of 12
January 2001 — on behalf of Rio Grande — (Exh. CD-16) and the SPA of 12 March 2001 — this
time on behalf of Edsal Finance Inc. and of his brother Gonzalo (Exh. CD-17). Although not a
signatory of the May 2001 Contract, clause eleventh provides that its terms "bind Alvaro Ugalde
in all of its parts" (Exh. CD-104). Within days of the execution of the May 2001 Contract, Alvaro
Ugalde wrote to Quiborax to follow up on the terms of the new contract and with the apparent
goal of completing the transaction. The fact that Alvaro Ugalde, rather than Edsal Finance Inc.,
began to receive Quiborax payments for the balance of the purchase price as of May 2001 is
but one additional piece of evidence corroborating that he was the ultimate seller and
beneficiary of the sale of the mining concessions to Quiborax. It also appears that Alvaro
Ugalde received payment from Quiborax on behalf of his brother Gonzalo, who owned 0.5% of
the shares of Rio Grande.

Exhs. CD-107 and CD-108.

Exh. CD-109. There seems to be a contradiction between the May 2001 Contract (as modified
by the 51-49 Agreement) and Rio Grande's minutes of 2 August 2001 (14:30 PM) (Exh. CD-
109). Indeed, under the May 2001 Contract, Rio Grande would "sell[] and transfer[] to Quiborax
50% of all [...] mining concessions." Yet, the minutes of 2 August 2001(14:30 PM) suggest that
Rio Grande would "sell and transfer" to Quiborax virtually 100% of the mining concessions, as
Quiborax would receive, as it eventually did, all "the share certificates to be issued by [NMM] in
favor of [Rio Grande]", representing nearly 100% of the NMM shares (26,680 out of a total of
26,740 shares). However, the contradiction is apparent only: whilst Quiborax would receive
nearly 100% of the NMM shares, it eventually redistributed them in a way that was consistent
with the terms of the May 2001 Contract, as modified by the 51-49 Agreement. The Tribunal
does not consider that this is in any way an indication that Quiborax or Allan Fosk fabricated
their status as shareholders of NMM.

Exhs. CD-110 and CD-25.

51

151.

152.

meantime, on 8 August 2001, less than a week after Rio Grande approved the sale of
its NMM shares to Quiborax, Quiborax would have made the last payment of the total
USD 400,000 purchase price stipulated in the May 2001 Contract.'® Again, the timing
of this payment tallies with the Claimants’ general account of the facts. '%°

On 15 August 2001, the minutes show that NMM issued 26,680 shares in favor of Rio
Grande.'*' As a result, on 17 August 2001, Rio Grande received 26,680 shares of
NMM, a transfer reflected in both the shareholders registry'** and on share certificate
No. 4.'% It is not in dispute that Rio Grande received 26,680 shares of NMM. On the
contrary, the Respondent's position is that Rio Grande did receive those NMM
shares’, but that those shares were never transferred to Quiborax — an allegation
which by implication challenges the veracity of Rio Grande's decision taken in the
afternoon of 2 August to "sell and transfer" the NMM shares to Quiborax.

As soon as Rio Grande received the newly issued shares from NM\M, it purportedly
transferred them in their entirety to Quiborax on the same day, as documented in the
minutes of the extraordinary shareholders' meeting of NMM dated 17 August 2001, the
shareholders registry, and the endorsement on share certificate No. 4 in favor of
"Quimica e Industrial del Borax Ltd.""%© The Respondent has questioned the
authenticity of all three documents: the NMM minutes of 17 August 2001'°%, the
shareholders registry'®’ and the share certificates.‘ These allegations of fraud will be
examined later in greater detail.

Exh. CD-116, p. 9.

Indeed, this last payment took place after Rio Grande's 2 August afternoon approval of the sale
of its NMM shares to Quiborax, but before that transfer materialized on 17 August 2001. While
the last payment for USD 20,000 on 8 August (preceded by a USD 30,000 payment on 18 July)
was not exactly in accordance with the payment schedule reflected in the SPA and later
adopted in the May 2001 Contract, which would have called for a USD 50,000 payment on 21
July, this change in the payment schedule appears to be of no consequence; indeed none of
the Parties has raised any issue with it.

Exh. CD-111.

Exh. CD-24.

Exh. CD-105. This is one of the share certificates for which only a copy is available.

This is presumably the reason why the Respondent has contended that the 2001 balance sheet
of NMM and the 2003 balance sheet of Rio Grande, which would show that Rio Grande still
holds all these NMM shares even after the alleged transfer to Quiborax, "have considerable
probative value" (Reply, 39).

Exh. CD-105, p. 7.

OJ, 9141.

Reply, 4 100.

Id., at $122.

52

153.

154.

155.

On 21 August 2001, NMM applied to the Commercial Registry — Senarec at the time —
to obtain approval for the capital increase following Rio Grande's contribution of the
seven mining concessions. '°° The Senarec approved NMM's capital increase as well
as "the admission as new shareholder of Rio Grande."*°° The Respondent claims that
Quiborax should have been mentioned in NMM's application because, by that time, Rio
Grande's shares had supposedly been transferred to Quiborax."" The Tribunal cannot
agree. The purpose of NMM's application to the Senarec was to request approval of its
capital increase, not of Rio Grande's share transfer to Quiborax.”” Thus, there was no
reason for NMM to mention Quiborax in its application to the Senarec.

On 4 September 2001, Quiborax allegedly transferred to David Moscoso 50% of the
total NMM shares (26,740 shares) in two sets: one set of 267 shares (1% of the total
NMM shares) and one set of 13,103 shares (49% of the total). These transfers are
documented in two endorsements on share certificate No. 4, and in the issuance of
new certificates Nos. 5 (for 267 shares) and 6 (for 13,103 shares). On the same day,
Mr. Moscoso would have transferred the set of 267 shares back to Quiborax in
exchange for USD 9,985, as reflected in the endorsement of share certificate No. 5 and
in a check dated 27 September 2001. Allan Fosk, on behalf of Quiborax, apparently
attached this check to the following letter addressed to Mr. Moscoso on 28 September
2001:

"Dear Mr. Moscoso,

We hereby enclose [a] check [...] in the amount of USD 9,985.00 to
pay the balance [for] endorsement of shares of [NMM].

Allan Fosk

[Quiborax]."*°°
The Respondent has referred to this series of operations as "absurd" because
Quiborax first transferred two sets of shares to Mr. Moscoso for free, only for Mr.
Moscoso to transfer the set of 267 shares back to Quiborax for a fee of USD 9,985.
The Tribunal cannot agree. These operations are consistent with both the May 2001
Contract and the 51/49 agreement. Under the May 2001 Contract, Rio Grande was to

NMM's application stated that "it was resolved to increase the capital of [NMM] with the
contribution of seven mining concessions [...] by the new shareholder [Rio Grande]" (Exh. R-
125).

Exh. R-126.

Ou, 4 80; Reply, § 44.

In fact, the share transfer between Rio Grande and Quiborax was a private transaction for which
no government approval appeared to be required.

Exh. CD-117.

53

156.

157.

transfer 50% of the mining concessions to David Moscoso” — as it turned out, via the
shares of a newly-created corporation. Thus, Mr. Moscoso was entitled to receive
50% of the shares of NMM, that is, 13,370 shares — the exact amount of shares he
received from Quiborax combining the two sets.°° By the same token, Quiborax had
no right to keep those NMM shares. Thus, it does not appear that the Claimants’
version of the facts is absurd or even inconsistent on this point.

On the other hand, under the 51/49 agreement, Quiborax was to acquire an additional
1% from Mr. Moscoso to become the majority shareholder of NMM. This would explain
why Quiborax transferred the NMM shares to David Moscoso in two sets: the 1% set of
shares was presumably "earmarked" for purposes of completing the 51/49 agreement.
One may wonder why Rio Grande transferred all of its NMM shares to Quiborax rather
than allocating 50% of them directly to David Moscoso. This question, however, bears
no relevance for purposes of ascertaining the key issue under examination: whether
Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares in NMM. In sum, the Tribunal finds that the
series of share transfers between Quiborax and Moscoso are consistent with the
Claimants’ account of events and the evidentiary record.

On 10 September 2001, the final steps in the shareholding configuration of NMM took
place, with five new share certificates — 7 to 11 — being issued on that day. The new
certificate No. 7 appears to have been issued to Quiborax for a total of 13,577
shares.” In addition, Gilka Salas endorsed her one share to Allan Fosk, as shown in

new share certificate No. 8°%

(1 share), whereas Fernando Rojas (58 shares) and
Teresa Paredes (1 share) endorsed their NMM shares to Quiborax, as shown in new

certificate No. 9 (659 shares). The new share certificate No. 7 was then cancelled and

Exh. CD-104, fifth clause, p. 2.

As previously analyzed, the May 2001 Contract contemplated that ownership over the mining
concessions would be transferred via a new corporation or a joint venture contract (Exh. CD-
104, clause sixth).

CM, 9 47-48.

This figure was presumably the sum of two different transfers: one from Rio Grande
(endorsement of 13,310 shares) and one from David Moscoso (endorsement of 267 shares).
As share certificate No. 4 shows, Rio Grande endorsed 26,680 shares to Quiborax, which in
turn endorsed 13,103 shares (49%) and 267 (1%) to David Moscoso, keeping for itself the
balance of 13,310 shares (resulting from the following arithmetical operation: 26,680 — 13,103 —
267 = 13,310).

Whilst the Claimants stated in their letter to ICSID of 5 January 2006 that Allan Fosk had paid
USD 9,985 for his one and only NMM share, the Claimants later clarified that this was the sum
Quiborax paid to David Moscoso for 1% of the shares in NMM. Allan Fosk, by contrast, does
not appear to have made any payment to receive his one share in NMM (Exh. R-93; CM, p. 22,
n. 70).

54

158.

159.

replaced by two new share certificates: share certificates No. 10 (for 13,310 shares)
and No. 11 (for 267 shares).7°°

Therefore, the Claimants allege that the final shareholding composition of NMM as of
10 September 2001 was the following: Quiborax held 16,636 shares (50,995% of
NMM shares); David Moscoso held 13,103 shares (49%); and Allan Fosk held 1 share
(0.005%).°"° Thus, Quiborax and Allan Fosk would collectively have become majority

shareholders of NMM. It would appear that, contrary to the Respondent's allegation,

211

the Claimants present one — not three“'’ — versions of the facts: that Quiborax

purchased shares in NMM, and Allan Fosk received one share in NMM, in order to
obtain, as shareholders of NMM, a participation in Rio Grande's mining concessions.

In October 2001, Quiborax declared to the Chilean Internal Revenue Service (the
"Chilean IRS") its "investments" in Bolivia.?? The Chilean IRS issued a certificate,
dated 27 October 2010, stating that "on 29 October 2001"2"° Quiborax advised of its
“investments in the company [NMNJ [...] located in [Bolivia]."*"* These "investments"

correspond exactly, in both dates and amounts, with the previously examined checks
that Quiborax issued in favor of Edsal Finance, Alvaro Ugalde and David Moscoso.?"*

On 13 December 2001, Rio Grande's transfer of its seven mining concessions to NUM

The Respondent submitted that cancelling new share certificate No. 7 in order to issue two new
share certificates - 10 and 11 — is "one of a number of irregularities" that would call into
question the authenticity of the NMM share certificates (Tr. 55:13-16). It is unclear why exactly
share certificate No. 7 was cancelled and two new share certificates issued instead. It could be
that it was to "earmark" the one percent set of shares that would confer a majority position to
Quiborax, as happened with the transfers between Quiborax and David Moscoso. At any rate,
in the absence of additional evidence, the Tribunal is not persuaded that this is a sign that the
share certificates are not authentic. This issue, however, will be examined at greater length in
the section dealing with Respondent's account of events.

CM, 4 56.

According to the Respondent, "[t]he Claimants’ pleadings include up to three different factual
accounts": (i) Quiborax acquired NMM shares from Rio Grande, (ii) Quiborax acquired shares in
Rio Grande, and (iii) Quiborax acquired 50% of the mining concessions (Reply, § 9). The
Claimants’ account is in fact a mixture of (i) and (iii): Quiborax acquired shares in NMM from Rio
Grande in order to secure an ownership interest in the mining concessions — its ultimate goal.
The Respondent's suggestion that the evidence would show that Quiborax acquired shares in
Rio Grande seems to disregard evidence that this transaction was subsequently left without
effect (Exhs. CD-145, CD-146, CD-105, CD-18, CD-144).

Exh. CD-141. The Claimants allege that at the time Quiborax would also have registered its
investment with the Central Bank of Chile (Exh. CD-138; CM, § 76). However, because the
Central Bank's certificate does not state when Quiborax provided the information reflected in
that certificate, it is not possible to determine whether it is contemporaneous or post-dispute
evidence, which considerably reduces its probative value.

Id.

Id.

Exhs. CD-116, CD-117 and CD-141.

55

160.

161.

162.

163.

was registered with the Mining Registry*"® and on 19 December 2001 with the Real
Property Registry.?"”

On the basis of this examination, the Tribunal cannot but observe that the Claimants’
account of events and evidence appear consistent and plausible. Having reached this
preliminary assessment, it will now turn to review Bolivia's understanding of the facts
and related evidence before reaching a definitive conclusion.

(iv) | Respondent's account and evidence of the events

Bolivia argues that the Claimants’ account of events is a "sham" and that, as in
Cementownia v. Turkey, the transaction which allegedly constituted the investment

"never took place."?"®

In other words, Quiborax and Allan Fosk did not become
shareholders of NMM in August and September 2001, were not shareholders of NVM
at the time the dispute arose in June 2004, and are thus not "investors" under the
Treaty. Instead, the Claimants fabricated evidence purporting to show that Quiborax
and Allan Fosk became shareholders of NMM in 2001 in order to fraudulently create

the conditions to gain access to ICSID jurisdiction.2'°

The Respondent argues (i) that there is no evidence that Quiborax and Allan Fosk
acquired the majority of NMM shares in August and September 2001”; (ii) that the
facts and documents that predate the origin of the dispute in June 2004 show that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk did not become majority shareholders of NMM in August and
September of 2001"; and (iii) that the evidence upon which the Claimants rely has no
probative value because it consists of internal documents that were fabricated after the
dispute arose.”* The Claimants have, in short, failed to shoulder their burden of
proving that they are "investors" under the Treaty.

In the first place, Bolivia asserts that the Claimants have failed to submit evidence that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares in NMM. In particular, there is no evidence
of "registrations, declarations and payments that should have been produced, had

Salame ER I, Annex 12.
Exh. R-181.

Tr. 22:16-20.

OJ, 9.14; Reply, § 13.
Ou, §§ 2.1.1.2- 2.1.1.3.
Id., at § 2.1.2.

Id, at § 2.2.

56

164.

165.

166.

Quiborax and Allan Fosk really acquired the majority of the shares of NMM in August
and September of 2001."?"%

The Respondent maintains that there is no "physical trace" of the share transfers,
either in the form of endorsements of the original share certificates or of registrations

4,

and explanatory annotations in the shareholders registry. However, the Tribunal

notes that the Claimants have submitted copies of the shareholders registry?

and,
since Bolivia filed its objections to jurisdiction, both copies*”® and originals of the
endorsed and new NMM share certificates. Hence, it appears that the Claimants have
submitted evidence and "physical traces" of the process by which Quiborax and Allan

Fosk would have acquired the NMM shares.

Bolivia further argues that Quiborax should have registered the power of attorney of its
legal representative with the Commercial Registry in order to validly acquire shares in
NMM, but that there is no evidence that it did so.’ In the Tribunal's view, whilst this
issue could be relevant to determine whether Quiborax made its investment in
accordance with Bolivian law, it is indifferent to determine whether Quiborax as a
matter of fact acquired shares in NMM.

Bolivia also contends that there is no evidence that the Claimants complied with the
bylaws of NMM. According to these bylaws, NMM shares must first be offered in
writing to its own shareholders before being sold to third parties such as Quiborax or
Allan Fosk; yet, there is no evidence that this procedure was followed. The
Respondent appears to rely on Article 14 of NMM's bylaws.”*° In the Tribunals view,
the application of this right of first refusal to a transaction that both predated the
bylaws”* and constituted the very purpose for the creation of NMM would make little
sense. In addition, whether the procedure for a right of first refusal was followed or

Id., at § 2.1.1.3, p. 19 (Tribunal's translation).

Id., at $60.
Exh. CD-24.

Exh. CD-105.

Od, 19 61-62.

RFA, Exh. C-9, Art. 14, p. 13.

The May 2001 Contract (Exh. CD-104) was executed before the date on which NMM was
incorporated and its bylaws passed on 25 July 2001 (RFA, Exh. C-9).

The same considerations would apply with respect to Bolivia's argument that Rio Grande's
transfer of NMM shares to Quiborax would also have breached Article 14 of NMM's bylaws
because it was a sale to a third-party with a "competing activity" (RFA, Exh. C-9, Art. 14, p. 15.).
Since the purpose of NMM would have been precisely to enable Quiborax to become the
majority shareholder as a result of a pre-existing agreement, this internal rule would have no
effect on Rio Grande's transfer to Quiborax.

57

167.

168.

169.

236

not has no impact on the question of whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk as a matter of
fact acquired shares in NMM.

As a further argument, the Respondent maintains that there is no evidence that the
Claimants paid the taxes to which they would have been subject had Quiborax and
Allan Fosk become shareholders of NMM in 2001. Specifically, Quiborax and Allan

Fosk should have paid taxes on any dividends received from NMM, but there is no

231

evidence of these payments. The record, however, shows otherwise. NMM first

declared dividends on 3 December 2003.** Taxes on dividends distributed to

Quiborax appear to have been paid on 21 July and 21 October 2004, and taxes on

dividends distributed to Allan Fosk appear to have been paid on 21 July 2004.7%

Hence, these allegations do not tend to disprove that Quiborax and Allan Fosk

acquired shares of NMM in 2001.5*

In the second place, the Respondent states that the facts and documents that predate
the origin of the dispute in June 2004 show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk did not
become majority shareholders of NMM in August and September of 2001.

Bolivia alleges that NMM could only have issued new shares to Rio Grande after the
transfer of the mining concessions to NMM had been registered with the Mining
Registry and the Real Property Registry, and after NMM's capital increase had been
authorized by the Commercial Registry.° However, because none of these steps had

taken place by 17 August 2001, Rio Grande's transfer of NMM shares to Quiborax was

1236

"legally" and "materially impossible. In the Tribunal's opinion, the legal effects of

these requirements might be relevant in the context of the illegality objection. They are
by contrast not relevant for the purpose of ascertaining whether Quiborax and Allan

OU, 99 64-68.
Exh. CD-118.2: Rej., 4 37(0), 62, 121-122.

Exh. CD-149, attaching form F-54 dated 21 July 2004; Exh. CD-150, attaching form F-54 dated
21 October 2004. On a letter to Quiborax dated 18 August 2004, PricewaterhouseCoopers
noted that the F-54 form of 21 July 2004 included the taxes on dividends of both Quiborax and
"A. Fosk" (Exh. CD-149).

The Respondent further asserts that, had Rio Grande transferred its shares in NMM to Quiborax
for free, there should be a record of the payment of the Free Transfer Tax — but there is no such
record (Reply, § 49). The Tribunal does not understand the Claimants to be alleging that Rio
Grande transferred its shares in NMM for free, but rather for a price of USD 400,000 (Exh. CD-
17 and CD-104). Since the transfer was for a price, this would dispose of the Respondent's
argument that a free transfer would amount to fraud to Rio Grande's creditors (Reply, p. 20; Tr.
39:8-15). At any rate, the Tribunal considers that any allegation that the Claimants failed to pay
taxes or committed fraud may be relevant for the analysis of the legality requirement, but not to
determine whether in actuality Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares in NMM.

OJ, 9 74-83.

Id., at 1 79, 83.

58

170.

171.

Fosk acquired shares in NMM or whether these transactions were fraudulently
fabricated after the dispute arose.**”

Bolivia also points out that NMM's audited balance sheet for the year 2001, as well as
Rio Grande's audited balance sheet of September 2003, show that Rio Grande still
owned the NMM shares that it was supposed to have transferred to Quiborax on 17
August 2001.7%8 In Bolivia's submissions, this disproves that Quiborax and Allan Fosk
acquired shares of NMM in 2001. The Claimants retort that this was "just a
mistake."°° The record also shows that Quiborax's financial statements for 2001°%°,
2002", 2003*4? and 2004*°, audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers, indicate that
Quiborax held a 50.99% participation in NMM. More specifically, Quiborax's 2001 and
2002 financial statements expressly note that it "acquired 50.99% of Bolivian
corporation [NMM]" during the fiscal year 2001.*“* This would suggest that NMM's and
Rio Grande's balance sheets were simply mistaken. The Tribunal will for the time
being flag this issue and only reach a definitive conclusion at the end of its analysis.

Bolivia posits that NMM's two powers of attorney registered with the Commercial
Registry between 2001 and 2003 show that NMM only had Bolivian shareholders.”
The reason would be that these powers of attorney incorporate the minutes of NMM's
ordinary shareholders' meeting of 11 September 2001, where Rio Grande — and not
Quiborax or Allan Fosk — appears as shareholder of NMM. Nevertheless, those very

The Respondent has argued that, on account of these alleged registration and approval
deficiencies, Quiborax acquired "inexistent shares" (OJ, § 79). This raises the issue whether
the shares that Quiborax acquired from Rio Grande have /egal existence, i.e. whether the legal
effects of this transaction are recognized under Bolivian law. This is different from the factual
and antecedent question of whether the parties in actuality entered into such a transaction —
which is disputed by the Respondent and is the gist of its fraud allegation. This is a factual
inquiry: whether Quiborax genuinely entered into the May 2001 Contract with Rio Grande,
subsequently into the 51/49 Agreement, issued checks in favor of Edsal Finance Inc., Alvaro
Ugalde and David Moscoso, and received endorsed and new share certificates of NMM — in
short, whether Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares in NMM.

Exhs. R-124, R-127; Ou, 9 69-70, 88-91.

At the hearing, Counsel for the Claimants stated that they bore no responsibility for Rio
Grande's mistake, as the Claimants neither controlled nor managed Rio Grande (Tr. 538:6-12;
CM, p. 22, n. 67). With respect to NMM's alleged mistake, Counsel argued that the balance
sheets recorded the capital increase, but not the change in shareholding composition (Tr.
538:13-18), and that the "purpose of financial statements is not to reflect" who the shareholders
are (Rej., J 63).

Navigant Report, Annex NCI-30.

Id., at Annex NCI-31.

Id., at Annex NCI-32.

Id., at Annex NCI-33.

Id., at Annexes NCI-30 and NCI-31.

Exhs. R-129 and R-130.

59

172.

173.

174.

same powers of attorney lend substantial support to the Claimants’ version that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk acquired shares of NMM in 2001. The first power of attorney
of 27 September 2001 is in favor of Allan Fosk™®; the second power of attorney of 1
July 2002 is in favor of Omar Leén™”, a Chilean national and employee of Quiborax.“*
Again, the Tribunal flags this matter and will return to it at the end of its analysis.

Third, Bolivia contends that the evidence upon which the Claimants rely has no
probative value because it consists of purely internal documents that only became
known after the dispute arose. The Claimants fabricated this evidence after the dispute
arose in order to fraudulently manufacture the conditions for ICSID jurisdiction.

Despite the Respondent's allegations to the contrary, the Tribunal notes that the
Claimants do rely on public evidence predating the origin of the dispute in June 2004.
On 15 April 2004, NMM updated its registration file with the Commercial Register, and
the updated file shows Allan Fosk as legal representative of NMM.™“° On 31 May 2004,
NMM registered with the Commercial Registry a power of attorney which incorporates
the minutes of a shareholders’ meeting of 27 January 2003 where Quiborax, Allan Fosk
and David Moscoso feature as the shareholders of NMM.”©° In addition, the notarized
version of this power of attorney bears a stamp of the Commercial Register dated 2
June 2004.7"

The Respondent maintains that the shareholders registry does not constitute the only
means of proving shareholder status** — an argument the Tribunal has already
accepted. Specifically, it alleges that the NMM shareholders registry is a purely
internal document that did not become known until 31 January 2005 and whose only

"authenticated" version was issued by Isaac Frenkel, a shareholder of Quiborax and

9,253

the Fosk family lawyer, on 27 January 200 Moreover, the shareholders registry

presents "various irregularities": blank spaces, missing information, and inconsistent

Exh. R-129, pp. 7-9.

Exh. R-130, pp. 2-4.

Exh. CD-27 shows that Omar Leon has a "Chilean passport"; Exh. CD-59 demonstrates that
Omar Leén has indeed acted on behalf of NMM. The Respondent has not otherwise denied the
Claimants’ allegation that Omar Leon was an employee of Quiborax.

Exh. CD-119.

Exh. CD-158 and CD-118.1. While it may be that Allan Fosk was not physically present in
Bolivia on 27 January 2003 as the minutes represent, the essential point is that there is a public
record, predating the dispute where Quiborax and Allan Fosk are mentioned as the
shareholders of NMM.

Exh. CD-120, p. 6.

Ou, $123; Reply, 1 97-99, 102-111.

OJ, 4122.

60

175.

176.

177.

entries.°

Finally, the Superintendencia's conclusion that Quiborax and Allan Fosk
were shareholders of NMM is wrong because its analysis was based exclusively on the

faulty shareholders registry.*°°

In the Tribunal's view, the probative value of the NMM shareholders registry is
equivocal. On the one hand, Bolivia's own Superintendencia concluded that the NUM
shareholders registry "complies with all the requirements provided for in Article 250 of
the Commercial Code." On the other hand, it is true that the NMM shareholders
registry is an intra-corporate document over whose content the Claimants had
unfettered control, at least until the onset of the criminal case. Furthermore, the
originals of this registry have never been produced and its whereabouts appear to be
unknown.**” Lastly, the shareholders registry has not been certified by an independent
third-party, but by Isaac Frenkel, a "minority shareholder of Quiborax and the Fosk
family lawyer" according to the Claimants’ own description.”**

Taking these considerations into account, the Tribunal will attach limited intrinsic
probative value to the NMM shareholders registry. At the same time, it considers that it
remains a piece of evidence that may serve to confirm or disprove the other evidence
on record. From this perspective, the Tribunal considers that the NMM shareholders
registry generally tallies with the Claimants’ account of events and evidence and, in
particular, with the May 2001 Contract, the 51/49 agreement, the checks issued to
Edsal Finance, Alvaro Ugalde, and David Moscoso, and the NMM share certificates.
On the whole, the Tribunal deems that the NMM's shareholders registry tends to
confirm the Claimants’ thesis.

Likewise, Bolivia disputes the veracity of the NMM share certificates, which were
subject to document inspection upon its request, on a number of grounds.”° Bolivia

Id., at J 124; Reply, § 100-101.

OJ, 4126.

Exh. CD-72, p. 3.

The Claimants have alleged that Bolivia is in possession of NMM shareholders registry (Tr.
299:8-14, 301:10-16); Respondent "dispute[d] that" allegation (Tr. 301:5-8). Whilst the record
would suggest that the shareholders registry is part of the Bolivian criminal case, it is ultimately
unnecessary to determine who currently holds the shareholders registry in order to decide the
issues before the Tribunal.

Rej., § 37(e). This does not mean that the Claimants were required to have the shareholders
registry certified by an independent third party, but only that the "in-house" certification of a
document over which they had full control did not bolster its probative value.

With respect to the share certificates, Bolivia also argued (i) that it was telling that the Claimants
had not submitted the original share certificates Nos. 1-7, and (ii) that it was similarly telling that
Quiborax and Allan Fosk had acquired the shares via new share certificates when they could
have acquired them by endorsement (OJ, {| 131-132). Since then, however, the Claimants

61

178.

179.

supports its allegation on the following grounds: (i) there is no evidence that the share
certificates were created before the dispute arose in June 2004; (ii) the share
certificates are purely internal documents”; (iii) the signature of Dolly Paredes does
not tally with her signature on other documents — a "sign of fraud"*®; (iv) oddly enough,
the share certificates were first endorsed, and then cancelled and reissued on the
same day*®; (v) finally, it is perplexing that Quiborax transferred two sets of shares
(267 and 13,103 shares) to David Moscoso for free, only for Mr. Moscoso to then

transfer the set of 267 shares back to Quiborax for a price of USD 9,985.

Upon the Respondent's request, the NMM share certificates were subject to inspection
by document experts in order to ascertain their authenticity and date. With respect to
the authenticity of the paper, Jean-Louis Clément, the Respondent's own document
expert, concluded that the "authenticity of the paper of the [NMM] share certificates is
unquestionable." In consonance with this conclusion, Albert Lyter II, the Claimants’
document expert, concluded that "[n]o evidence was found that the paper [of the share
certificates] had been altered, manipulated, erased or in any way fabricated among all
of the examined documents."2°

With respect to the ink entries on the share certificates, Mr. Clement deemed that the
signature of the secretary, Dolly Paredes, was not the result of the emulation of an
“authentic signature", a finding that tends to exclude the Respondent's forgery

7

hypothesis.”°” At the same time, he found that Dolly Paredes used "three different

pens" to sign share certificates Nos. 7 to 11 on the same day, "which would seem

268

unlikely. It should be noted that although the Respondent also had the share

 

have submitted share certificates Nos. 1-7, which show that Quiborax and Allan Fosk initially
acquired their share by endorsement. Thus, the Tribunal considers that this argument has
become moot.

OJ, § 133. Bolivia objected that the original share certificates had not been submitted (Reply,
118). Since then, however, the Claimants submitted the original share certificates of NMM
— except for share certificates Nos. 4 and 6. The Claimants explained that they did not submit
the originals of share certificates Nos. 4 and 6 because they did not "have possession, control
or custody" of these certificates (Claimants' letter to ICSID of 17 February 2011). Considering
that the Claimants produced the originals of the other nine share certificates, and that share
certificates Nos. 4 and 6 were issued in the name of Rio Grande and David Moscoso,
respectively, the Tribunal finds this explanation acceptable and Bolivia's objection moot.

Reply, § 117.

OJ, 4 134; Reply, 9 121.

Reply, § 119.

Id., at $120.

Clément, § 2.3 (Tribunal's translation).

Lyter ER, § 2.2, pp. 4-5.

Clément ER, § 3.2.1, p. 3.

Id., at § 3.3, p. 5.

62

180.

181.

certificates examined by handwriting expert Christine Jouishomme, her expert report
was not filed into the record.

Albert Lyter Ill in turn concluded that the "ink formulations" on the share certificates
“compare with a high degree of identity to standard ink formulations that were
commercially available at the dates appearing on the documents, i.e. 2001."°° Mr.
Lyter countered that Mr. Clément's assertion to the effect that it "would seem unlikely"
that the secretary would sign share certificates Nos. 7-11 on the same day using three
different pens, "is not based upon any scientific examinations, but on [his] personal

270
t.

assessmeni Finally, Linda James, the Claimants’ handwriting expert, concluded

with "the highest degree of confidence expressed by document examiners" that the
signatures of Fernando Rojas, Dolly Paredes, Gilka Salas and David Moscoso on the
NMM share certificates were authentic.?”'

With respect to the date on which the share certificates were created, Mr. Clément
concluded that "it is impossible to date them" because, being no more than 10 years
old at most, "they are too recent” to ascertain that information.?” For his part, Mr. Lyter
testified that there was no evidence that the NMM share certificates were not prepared
in 2001”, nor evidence suggesting they are inauthentic.’ Specifically, based on the
commercial availability of ink formulations and the degree of dryness of the ink on the
share certificates at the time of the examination®”, Mr. Lyter testified that the share
certificates could have been created anywhere between 2001 and 2006, but that they
were "probably" created in 2001:

[Mr. Bofill]: Mr. Silva Romero [Counsel for the Respondent] asked
you whether it was possible that these shareholder titles were
prepared in 2006 rather than in 2001, and your answer was that it was
possible but not probable. What do you mean by that?

Lyter ER, § 4.2, p. 11. On cross-examination, Mr. Lyter admitted that these ink formulations
were commercially available "at any point after" 2001, which would thus not exclude the
possibility that the share certificates could have been fabricated after the dispute arose in June
2004 (Tr. 475:1-7). This piece of evidence is thus only relevant if examined in context.

Id., at § 4.3, p. 12.

James ER, p. 42.

Clément ER, § 4.2, p. 6.

Tr. 479:13-16.

Id., at 487:13-16.

Since the ink formulations on the share certificates present a "high degree of identity" with
standard ink formulations commercially available in 2001, that appears to be the earliest time in
which the share certificates could have been created (Lyter ER, § 4.2, p. 11). Moreover, Mr.
Lyter testified that a "five-year time span" would be the appropriate span to determine the
dryness of the ink formulations on the NMM share certificates (Tr. 473:3-10). As the ink on the
share certificates was fully dry by the date of their examination on 21 March 2011, this would
mean that the share certificates could have been created at any time before 21 March 2006.

63

182.

183.

184.

[Mr. Lyter]: As an expert, we deal in probabilities [...] in asking the
question is it possible these documents were prepared in 2006, the
short answer is yes, that's possible [...] [bJut we deal in probabilities,
and the more appropriate question would be is it probable that these
documents were prepared in 2006? And my answer to that would be
No, it is not probable that they were done in 2006, based on all of the
examination results [...].

[Mr. Bofill]: Would this also be your answer if | ask you whether these
documents were prepared in any year after 2001?

[Mr. Lyter]: The answer would be yes, giving attention to the fact that

the documents state on their face that they were done in 2001 [...] the

inks, their formulas, their "dryness" [...] the pattern by which the

various authors used ink formulations from one document to the next

[...]" (emphasis added).?”*
Thus, the Tribunal is satisfied that the expert inspection of the NMM share certificates
has established (i) that the paper of the share certificates is authentic; (ii) that the
signatures of Fernando Rojas, Dolly Paredes, Gilka Salas and David Moscoso are
authentic with the highest degree of confidence expressed by document examiners; (iii)
that they were probably created in 2001 and that there is no evidence suggesting
otherwise; and (iv) that there is no evidence suggesting that the share certificates are
spurious, as the finding that Dolly Paredes used three different ink formulations to sign
the share certificates is insufficient to overcome the probative merits of the previous
evidence. In sum, the weight of the expert evidence suggests that the NMM share
certificates are authentic.

Accordingly, contrary to what Bolivia argues, the expert evidence suggests that the
NMM share certificates have probative value even though they are not public
documents, in the sense of documents available in a public registry or database. In
addition, as previously observed, Quiborax's transfer of shares to David Moscoso in
two sets and Mr. Moscoso's transfer back to Quiborax of one of the set of 267 shares
was consistent with the 51/49 agreement between them. Finally, although it may
appear unnecessary to issue new share certificate No. 7, only to then cancel it and re-
issue two new share certificates in its stead (new share certificates Nos. 10 and 11), it
is difficult to apprehend why this would be evidence of fraud, especially where all three
share certificates were issued in favour of Quiborax.

Furthermore, the Respondent claims that the minutes of the extraordinary
shareholders’ meeting of 17 August 2001, which would reflect the sale of Rio Grande's
shares in NMM to Quiborax, were fabricated for the following reasons*”’: (i) because
NMM's capital increase had not been approved by that date, it was "materially

Tr. 480:2-481:13.
Ou, 1143.

64

185.

186.

impossible" for Rio Grande to transfer its shares in NMM to Quiborax*”; (ii) unlike the
minutes where Rio Grande was accepted as a new shareholder, notarized within two
weeks from the date of their preparation®”, the 17 August 2001 minutes were only
notarized and registered in the Commercial Registry years later, once the Parties were
in dispute; (iii) and lastly, both the Superintendencia®®' and the document expert in

0283

the Bolivian criminal proceedings*’ found "serious irregularities in NMM's minute

book.

In the first place, as the Tribunal previously remarked, what is relevant for purposes of
this objection is whether Rio Grande transferred shares to Quiborax, not whether that
transfer was legally valid. In the second place, it is unclear to the Tribunal why having
the minutes of 17 August 2001 notarized after the dispute arose would signal fraud,
especially when the notarized copy itself does not purport to mislead in any way about
the date on which those minutes were actually notarized. Finally, whilst the
Superintendencia and the document expert in the Bolivian criminal proceedings found
that NMM had mishandled the minute books, because individual pages had been torn
out and glued, this is by far insufficient to prove fraud. All in all, the Tribunal is
unconvinced that the minutes of 17 August 2001 were fabricated.”°*

Similarly, the Respondent argues that the minutes of the ordinary shareholders’
meeting of 13 September 2001 were fabricated because”: (i) these minutes do not
tally with the minutes of 11 September 2001, which only lists Bolivian shareholders and
was registered with the Commercial Register in 2001”; (ii) the records of the Chilean
immigration authorities show that Allan Fosk was not in Bolivia on 13 September 2001
and thus could not have participated in that meeting*®’; (iii) Mr. Moscoso himself
confessed in the Bolivian criminal case that these minutes were fabricated*®; (iv) the
signature of Dolly Paredes would appear to be forged; (v) Allan Fosk signed on behalf

Id., at 9144.
Exh. CD-25.

Exhs. R-140 and R-141; OJ, 99 145-146.

Exhs. CD-72 and R-143; OJ, ¥ 147.

Exh. R-146.

OJ, 4147.

As Bolivia conceded, the Superintendencia declined to penalize NMM for the mishandling of its
minutes book, which would suggest that the irregularities committed were not so serious that
they could not be rectified (Exh. R-143, p. 7; OJ, J 147(b)).

OJ, 4148.

Id., at (9 150-153.

Id., at $154.

Exh. R-76; OJ, § 155.

65

187.

188.

189.

of Quiborax "S.A." when it should have read "Ltda."*®°; (vi) and finally, the document

expert in the Bolivian case concluded that the minutes of 13 September 2001 did not
tally with the document that was originally affixed to the minute book.”®°

The Tribunal initially notes that, while the 11 September 2001 minutes include Rio
Grande rather than Quiborax as shareholder, the purpose of that meeting was to
appoint the directors and trustees of NMM. Tellingly, the 11 September 2001 minutes

show that two out of the three directors appointed to serve on the board of directors

291 1,292

were directly related to Quiborax: Allan Fos! and Isaac Frenkel Likewise, the
substitute director, Carlos Shuffer, is also directly related to Quiborax.”*? The only
director who was not related to Quiborax was David Moscoso. This is consistent with
the Claimants' factual account and would suggest that the mention of Rio Grande as

shareholder was merely a mistake, not the product of a fraudulent scheme.

On the other hand, whilst Allan Fosk appears not to have been in Bolivia on 13
September 2001 according to the report of the Chilean immigration authorities, he was
in Bolivia before, on 6-7 September, and thereafter, on 1-3 October, according to that
same report.”* Mr. Fosk testified that "perhaps [that] wasn't the precise date [13
September], but at some point in that period was when all the documentation was
presented."*° Thus, although the minutes of 13 September were possibly misdated,
the Tribunal does not believe this indicates fraud. Moreover, handwriting expert Linda
James concluded that Dolly Paredes’ signature was "executed swiftly [...] which is a

0296

sign of genuineness"™~”, and that her signature on these minutes presented "common

patterns"*®”

to be authentic "with the highest degree of confidence expressed by document
298

with her other signatures on the NMM share certificates, which were found

examiners.

Similarly, the Tribunal accepts that the document expert in the Bolivian criminal
proceedings may be right in stating that some pages of NMM's minutes books were

Od, 99156, 158.
Id., at $157.

Allan Fosk is the "Chief Financial Officer of Quiborax" and part of one of the two families that
founded Quiborax (Mem., 20, 22).

Isaac Frenkel "is minority shareholder of Quiborax and the Fosk family lawyer" (Rej., 37(e)).
Carlos Shuffer is "Manager of the Agrochemical Division at Quiborax" (Shuffer WS, §[ 1).
Exh. R-20.

Tr. 222:4-7.

James ER, pp. 31, 33.

Id.

Id., at p. 42.

66

190.

191.

192.

torn and that the 13 September minutes were glued. Yet, he does not consider that
this in itself proves fraud. Nor does the Tribunal believe that the reference in the
minutes to Quiborax "S.A." as opposed to "Ltda." suggests fraud. All these apparent or
real deficiencies in the documents seem to reflect a somewhat careless but not
unusual handling of documents, rather than a deliberate scheme to perpetrate fraud.

In addition, it is true that David Moscoso confessed that the minutes of 13 September
were fabricated. However, considering the circumstances of this confession and the
fact that Mr. Moscoso did not appear as a witness in this arbitration for cross-
examination, the Tribunal considers that this confession carries little, if any, probative
weight, especially when the other elements on record so solidly support the Claimants’
account of events. All in all, the Tribunal is unconvinced that the minutes of 13
September 2001 were fabricated.

Finally, in its Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent asserted that "the appropriate
evidence" was the "endorsement of the NMM shares and the resulting payment"**: the
Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimants have submitted adequate evidence of both. On
the one hand, the NMM share certificates, which the weight of the expert evidence has
shown to be authentic, provide adequate proof of the endorsements to Quiborax and
Allan Fosk.*°° On the other hand, the checks issued to Edsal Finance, Alvaro Ugalde
and David Moscoso*”’, which match with the Claimants’ factual account and evidence,
constitute adequate proof of Quiborax's payment of the NMM shares.°°*

(v) Conclusion

On the basis of its review of the entire record, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’
account of facts is consistent and well-documented. Whilst there are some
documentary discrepancies — primarily the NNM's and Rio Grande's balance sheets of
2001 and 2003, respectively, and the 11 September 2001 minutes -, these do not
prove fraud nor suffice to overcome the plentiful evidence in support of the Claimants’
case. For these reasons, the Tribunal is persuaded that Quiborax acquired and Allan

OJ, 4123.

Exh. CD-105.

Exh. CD-116.

In the Reply, the Respondent also stated that the Claimants had failed to submit the
“fundamental document" on which their entire factual account is based: the share purchase
agreement between Rio Grande and Quiborax (Reply, § 78). This appears to be inconsistent
with its position in the Objections to Jurisdiction, where the Respondent advanced the
proposition that the "appropriate evidence" was the endorsements and the payments. Be this
as it may, the Tribunal believes that the May 2001 Contract (Exh. CD-104), the endorsements
(Exh. CD-105) and the payments (Exh. CD-116) provide adequate documentary proof for the
transfer of NMM shares from Rio Grande to Quiborax on 17 August 2001.

67

193.

194.

195.

196.

Fosk received, respectively, 13,636 shares (50.995%) and 1 share (0.005%) of NMM in
August and September of 2001, and that they did not engage in fraud or fabricate
evidence to gain access to ICSID arbitration.

1.3.2. Was NMM a Chilean national by reason of foreign control at the time the
dispute arose in June 2004?
The Tribunal must now address whether NMM, which was incorporated in Bolivia, was
a Chilean national at the time the dispute arose in June 2004. In accordance with
Article 25(1) of the Convention, ICSID tribunals have jurisdiction over investment
disputes between a Contracting State and "a national of another Contracting State."
Article 25(2) in turn provides that a "national of another Contracting State" includes:

"[A]ny juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting

State party to the dispute on that date [the date on which the parties

consented to submit the dispute to arbitration] and which, because of

foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as national

of another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”
The Parties agree that Article X(4) of the Treaty further specifies who is a "national of
another Contracting State" in the sense of Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention.

Article X(4) of the Treaty provides:
"For purposes of this Article, any legal person created in accordance
with the laws of one of the Contracting Parties, and whose shares are
majority-owned by investors of the other Contracting Party, shall be

regarded, in accordance with Article 25.2).b) of the [ICSID]
Convention, as a legal person of the other Contracting Party."

Hence, NMM shall be regarded as a Chilean national provided that it was majority-
owned by Chilean investors at the time the dispute arose and at the time the parties
consented to submit the dispute to arbitration. As the Tribunal previously concluded,
Chilean nationals Quiborax and Allan Fosk collectively acquired 51% of the shares of
NMM in August and September 2001 and still own these shares. Since a majority of
the shares in NMM was held by Chilean investors at all relevant times, NMM must be
deemed to be a Chilean national for jurisdictional purposes. Accordingly, NUM may
act as a claimant in this arbitration.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal has ratione personae jurisdiction over all three
Claimants: Quiborax, Allan Fosk and NMM.

68

197.

198.

199.

2. Second Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Ratione Materiae Jurisdiction Over
the Dispute

21 Bolivia's Position

2.1.1 The definition of "investment" under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

 

Convention
The Respondent submits that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the dispute because
the Claimants have not made an "investment" in Bolivia within the meaning of Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention.
The meaning of the term "investment" is to be found in the BIT and the ICSID
Convention.** Thus, the definition of "investment" is subject to a double-test. The
ICSID tribunals in Salini v. Morocco, Saba Fakes v. Turkey and Global Trading v.
Ukraine have all endorsed the double-test.° At any rate, "the ‘double test’ issue is a
false issue"*° because "there must be an objective definition of ‘investment"®” in the
field of international investment law. The rationale for an objective definition of
"investment" is rooted in the need for legal certainty: "[sJimply put, investors and [...]
States need to know what investment means."°% In Saba Fakes, GEA Group v.
Ukraine, Romak v. Uzbekistan and Alps Finance v. Slovak Republic, the tribunals
endorsed an objective definition of "investment."*?
In accordance with the Vienna Convention, this objective definition of "investment" is
composed of the following six elements: (i) a contribution in money or other assets; (ii)
duration; (iii) risk; (iv) a contribution to the economic development of the host State or
an operation made in order to develop an economic activity in the host State; (v) made
in accordance with the laws of the host State; and (vi) in good faith. All six elements
must be cumulatively met.*'° The elements of this objective definition derive from the
decisions of ICSID tribunals in Salini v. Morocco, Jan de Nul v. Arab Republic of Egypt
and Phoenix v. Czech Republic.>"'
Reply, § 5.
ROSS, p. 93.
Id., at pp. 94-96.
Tr. 78:7-8.
Id., at 78:5-6.
Id., at 78:13-14.
ROSS, pp. 100-104.
Id., at p. 109.

Id., at pp. 106-108.

69

200.

201.

202.

2.1.2 The Claimants have not made an "investment" within the meaning of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention

The Claimants have not met any of the six elements of the definition of investment. In
particular, the Claimants have failed to prove that (i) they have made a contribution in
money or assets, and that (ii) they have contributed to the economic development of
the host State or an operation to develop an economic activity in the host State. Since
the Respondent alleges that the Claimants did not make any contribution in Bolivia,
"the elements of duration and risk are indirectly also put into question."*"* Finally, the
Respondent also alleges that the Claimants have failed to comply with the laws of
Bolivia and that they have acted in bad faith.°"°

Specifically, the Claimants did not prove that they have made a contribution of money
or assets in the territory of Bolivia — an element which both Parties agree is part of the
objective definition of "investment."** The record is devoid of evidence that either
Quiborax or Allan Fosk paid for the NMM shares they allegedly own. Similarly, there is
no evidence that the Claimants contributed either know-how of the borate mining
industry or a commercial network. As a matter of fact, a "forensic analysis" of the
documents upon which the Claimants have relied shows that none of those documents
establish a contribution of money or assets.°"°

Additionally, the Claimants have not proven that they contributed to the economic
development of the area — an element which most ICSID tribunals recognize as part of

t."°'© The video evidence and the “forensic

the objective definition of "investmeni
analysis" show (i) that the Claimants made no investment in infrastructure and means
of production; (ii) that the workers had no employment contracts, were employed on a
temporary basis, often failed to receive salary payments, and used their own working
tools; (iii) that the methods of operation were rudimentary; and (iv) that there was no

contribution to the development of the community of Salar de Uyuni.°"”

Tr. 85:4-7.

Ou, § 4.1; Reply, § 6; Tr. 85:17-19.

At the hearing, Counsel for the Respondent stated that "it is common ground between the
Parties that a contribution in money or other assets is an element of the objective definition of
‘investment™ (Tr. 85:12-16).

Tr. 87:17-94:20.

OJ, 4229.

Id., at J 230; Reply, 99190-191; Tr. 100:10-105:9.

70

203.

204.

205.

2.2 The Claimants’ Position

2.2.1 Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention does not create a double-test
and, at any rate, its meaning is not the one Respondent alleges
The Claimants disagree with the Respondent's interpretation of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention, but argue that they meet the definition of "investment" in any event
under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

The Claimants posit that the "investment" test turns solely on the BIT. By contrast,
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention establishes no requirements "over and above"
those of the BIT — there is no additional or double test.°*"® In the overwhelming majority
of cases, the definition of "investment" in BITs will lie within the boundaries set by the
ICSID Convention.*'® Accordingly, the term "investment" in Article 25(1) provides at
most a minimum threshold to determine whether the definition of "investment" in the
BIT is "so off the chart" as to escape a common sense understanding of that term.*?°
In short, the definition of "investment" under the ICSID Convention defers to the BIT's
definition of that term.°7'

In the alternative, if the Tribunal considers that the ICSID Convention establishes an
additional test, the Claimants argue that this test consists of only three elements:
contribution in money or other assets, duration and risk.° Specifically, the
contribution to the economic development of the host State is not an element of the
definition of "investment" under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The recent
case-law and scholarly writings show that this element is increasingly omitted from the
Salini test.*° The decisions in Saba Fakes and LES! v. Algeria, for instance,
disregarded this requirement, while focusing on the other three elements of the Salini

test.

CM, § III(2).
Rej., 1174.
Id., at 19 165, 173.
CM, $109.
Rej., 1 186.
Id., at 19 177-178.
Id., at 19 181-182.

71

206.

207.

208.

209.

2.2.2 The Claimants have made an "investment" within the meaning of the
Treaty and of the ICSID Convention
In any event, even if Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention contains an independent
test, the Claimants argue that they have made an investment both under the BIT and
under the ICSID Convention.”

First, the Claimants have made an investment under the BIT. Under Article 1(2)(b) of
the Treaty, Quiborax's and Allan Fosk's shares in NMM constitute an "investment."
Likewise, under Article I(2)(e) of the Treaty, the mining concessions owned by NMM,
also constitute an investment.°% The Respondent does not dispute these conclusions
— rather, it disputes the premise that Quiborax and Allan Fosk own shares in NMM or
the mining concessions.’ Hence, Quiborax's and Allan Fosk's shares in NMM and
the mining concessions owned by NMM, are an investment within the meaning of the
BIT.528

Second. the Claimants have also made an "investment" under the ICSID Convention.
As an initial matter, the Claimants made a contribution of money and assets: they
purchased the initial seven mining concessions, subsequently obtained four additional
concessions, committed resources and personnel to exploit these concessions,
contributed their know-how of the borate mining industry and a global sales network.°”°
Furthermore, the Claimants’ investment also met the elements of duration and risk.
The Claimants exploited the mining concessions for three years and, had it not been
for Bolivia's intervention, they would have exploited them for a forty-year period. As
with any mining project, this project ran the risk of not being profitable.°°°

Finally, the Claimants’ investment also made a contribution to the development of the
Rio Grande area. It provided the area with an economic activity that resulted in the
creation of stable jobs with regular pay, the execution of local transportation contracts,
and the exploitation and exportation of natural resources.**' Even Respondent's video
evidence shows that NMM provided employment opportunities.° Further, the
Claimants purchased a granulation plant, which they would have installed had it not

CM, $122; Rej., ¢ 186.
CM, $94.

Id., at 1 95.

Ia.

CM, $115; Rej., ¥ 187-190.
CM, $9 116-117; Rej., $191.
CM, $119; Rej., 197.

CM, $119.

72

210.

211.

212.

been for Bolivia's intervention.**? NMM was also committed to establish good relations
with the local community; it for instance helped to renovate the village church.°* In
brief, the Claimants were committed to improve the standards of living of the workers
and their families.°°°

2.3 Analysis

Bolivia does not contest that the Claimants have made an "investment" within the
meaning of the BIT. Accordingly, the Tribunal must determine (i) whether Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention includes an investment test independent from, and thus
additional to, the investment test of the BIT (2.3.1); (ii) in the affirmative, what the
elements of the "investment" test of the ICSID Convention are (2.3.2); and finally, (iii)
whether the Claimants meet the elements of this test (2.3.3).

2.3.1 Does Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention include an investment test
independent from, and thus additional to, the investment test of the

Since it is not disputed that the Claimants made an "investment" within the meaning of
the BIT, the Tribunal must only ascertain whether Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
contains a definition of "investment" that is independent from and thus additional to the
definition of "investment" in the BIT. For the following three reasons, the Tribunal's
conclusion is that the ICSID Convention contains an objective definition of
"investment", which must be met regardless of whether that same test is also inherent
to the term "investment" used in the BIT or whether it is additional to the BIT definition.

First, as both Parties accept, the ICSID Convention must be construed in accordance
with the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The Claimants note that the
drafting history of the Convention shows that "[njo attempt was made to define the term
‘investment’."*° Yet, as the Respondent correctly points out, this does not mean that
this term has no meaning. Rather, in the Tribunal's view, it means that the Contracting
States to the ICSID Convention intended to give to the term "investment" an "ordinary

Rej., $197.
Id., at § 202.
Id., at § 203.
Id., at $166.

73

213.

214.

215.

meaning" as opposed to a "special meaning."**” This ordinary meaning is an objective
one — an observation that finds support in the Saba Fakes award.°*

Second, the Claimants’ own position implicitly accepts that the ICSID Convention
contains a definition of investment. The Claimants concede that ICSID tribunals must
review whether the definition of investment in the BIT is "so off the chart that [it] cannot
reasonably be considered an investment under Art. 25 of the Convention." Yet, to
ascertain whether the BIT's definition of investment is "off the chart", it is necessary to
determine what the chart is in the first place. The objective definition of investment in
Article 25(1) provides that chart.

Third, investor-state cases have indeed given substance and content to an objective
meaning of “investment”. Past awards have considered that this objective meaning was
independent from those contained in BITs. This is illustrated, for instance, by the
award in Global Trading v. Ukraine ("Global Trading"), where the tribunal made the
following statement:

"[Flor the Tribunal, it is now beyond argument that there are two
independent parameters that must both be satisfied [to establish that
there is an "investment"]: what the parties have given their consent to,
as the foundation for submission to arbitration, and what the
Convention establishes as the framework for the competence of any
tribunal set up under its provisions. The Tribunal need do no more
than refer in this connection to a long line of previous decisions
starting with Alcoa Minerals v. Jamaica in 1975 through Salini [...] v.
[...] Morocco (and the various subsequent cases in which tribunals
have discussed [...] the so called Salini test [...]), and culminating most
recently in Saba Fakes v. [...] Turkey’ (emphasis added).*“°

More recent decisions have considered that the objective meaning was inherent to the
term investment, irrespective of the application of the ICSID Convention. This inherent
meaning was addressed in the GEA v. Ukraine case in the following terms:

“However, it is not so much the term “investment” in the ICSID
Convention than the term “investment” per se that is often considered

"A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.”
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties ("VCLT"), Article 31(4). This "special meaning"
stands in contrast to the "ordinary meaning" referred to in Article 31(1) of the VCLT.

The Saba Fakes tribunal reached the following conclusion: "The Tribunal believes that an
objective definition of the notion of investment was contemplated within the framework of the
ICSID Convention [...]" (emphasis added), Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey (hereafter “Saba
Fakes”), Award, 14 July 2010, 4 108.

Rej., 9 173.

Global Trading Resource Corp. and Globex International, Inc. v. Ukraine, (hereafter “Global
Trading’), Award, 1 December 2010, § 43.

74

216.

217.

218.

219.

as having an objective meaning in itself, whether it is mentioned in the
ICSID Convention or in a BIT.”

The tribunal in Romak v. Uzbekistan, an arbitration conducted under the UNCITRAL
Rules in which the ICSID Convention had no application, also held in favour of an
objective meaning of the term investment:

"The term ‘investment’ has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored
when considering the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT... .. The
Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that the term 'investmer inder
the BIT has an inherent meaning (irrespective of whether the investor
resorts to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitral proceedings) entailing a
contribution that_extends over_a certain period of time and that
involves some tisk [...]. By their nature, asset types enumerated in
the BIT’s non-exhaustive list may exhibit these hallmarks. But if an
asset does not correspond to the inherent definition of ‘investment’,
the fact that it falls within one of the categories listed in Article 1 does
not transform it into an 'investment™ (emphasis added).*“*

  

Whether the objective test under the ICSID Convention is independent from and
additional to the definition found in the BIT, or whether the same objective test is
inherent to the term investment used in the BIT, the Tribunal must in any event review
the elements of the objective definition to ascertain the existence of an investment.
These elements are found in ICSID cases interpreting Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention. In sum, the Claimants must show that they have made an "investment"
under the objective definition developed in the framework of the ICSID Convention in
order to establish that the Tribunal has ratione materiae jurisdiction over the dispute.

2.3.2 What are the elements of the investment test of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention?

According to the Claimants, there are three elements to the definition of investment
under Article 25(1): a contribution of money or assets, risk and duration. According to
the Respondent, there are six elements: in addition to the three just referred to, a
contribution to the economic development of the host State or an operation made in
order to develop an economic activity in the host State, conformity to the laws of the
host State, and good faith.

The Tribunal agrees with the Parties that a contribution of money or assets (that is, a
commitment of resources), risk and duration are all three part of the ordinary definition
of investment. It understands risk to include the expectation of a commercial return.

GEA Group Aktiengesellschatt v. Ukraine (hereafter “GEA’), Award , 31 March 2011, § 141.

Romak S.A. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, Award, 9 November 2009, § 207. The Tribunal also
finds mention of an objective definition of investment existing equally under the ICSID
Convention and BITs in Abaclat and Others (formerly, Giovanna Beccara and Others) v. The
Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 4 August 2011, § 371.

75

220.

221.

222.

223.

By contrast, the Tribunal is of the view that the additional elements upon which the
Respondent relies are not part of such definition.

The Tribunal appreciates that the element of contribution to the development of the
host State is generally regarded as part of the well-known four-prong Salini test. Yet,
such contribution may well be the consequence of a successful investment; it does not
appear as a requirement. If the investment fails, it may end up having made no
contribution to the host State development. This does not mean that it is not an
investment. For this reason and others, tribunals have excluded this element from the
definition of investment. This evolution is illustrated by the following four decisions.

In July 2006, the tribunal in LES/ v. Algeria held that there was an investment within the
meaning of the ICSID Convention when the first three components of the Salini test
were met, namely, contribution of money or assets, duration and risk. It further stated
that it did not appear necessary to also meet the element of contribution to the
economic development of the country, "a requirement that is any event difficult to
establish and implicitly covered by the other elements reviewed."*“*

Similarly, in May 2008, the tribunal in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile ("Pey Casado") held
that the contribution to the development of the host State was not an element of the
definition of investment. The contribution to the economic development of the host
State was an expected consequence of an investment — and not the other way around:

“It is true that the Preamble to the ICSID Convention mentions
contribution to the economic development of the host State. However,
this reference is presented as a consequence and not as a condition
of the investment: by protecting investments, the Convention
facilitates the development of the host State. This does not mean that

the development of the host State becomes a constitutive element of

the concept of investment.” (emphasis added).

In April 2009, the tribunal in Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic adopted a similar view,
according to which what matters is the contribution to the economy of the host State, a
contribution subsumed in the other three elements of the Salini test:

"[T]he contribution of an international investment to the development
of the host State is impossible to ascertain. A less ambitious approach
should therefore be adopted, centered on the contribution of an
international investment to the economy of the host State, which is
indeed normally inherent in the mere concept of investment as shaped

LESI Spa et Astaldi S.p.A. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (hereafter “LESI),

Decision on Jurisdiction, 12 July 2006, § 72.

Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile (hereafter “Pey”),
Award, 8 May 2008, § 232.

76

224.

225.

226.

227.

by elements of _contribution/duration/risk, and should therefore in
principle be presumed” (emphasis in original).*°

Finally, in July 2010, the tribunal in Saba Fakes v. Turkey held in unequivocal terms
that the element of contribution to the economic development of the host State was not
part of the definition of investment pursuant to the ICSID Convention:

"[T]he present Tribunal considers that the criteria of (i) a contribution,
(ii) a certain duration, and (iii) an element of risk, are both [sic]
necessary and sufficient to define an investment within the framework
of the ICSID Convention [...]. The Tribunal is not convinced, on the
other hand, that a contribution to the host State's economic
development constitutes a_criterion of an _investment_within_the
framework _of the ICSID_ Convention [...] [W]hile the economic
development of a host State is one of the proclaimed objectives of the
ICSID Convention, this objective is not in and of itself an independent
criterion for the definition of an investment” (emphasis added).*“°

 

In line with this trend, the Tribunal considers that a contribution to the economic
development of the host State or an operation made in order to develop an economic
activity in the host State is not an element of the objective definition of investment.

Likewise, the Tribunal is of the view that neither conformity to the laws of the host State
nor respect of good faith are elements of the definition of investment. The Contracting
Parties to the BIT have limited the protections of the treaty to investments made in
accordance with the law of the host State. This limitation may be a bar to jurisdiction,
ie. to the procedural protections under the Treaty, or to the application of the
substantive treaty guarantees as a matter of merits. In addition, recourse to treaty
arbitration and substantive treaty protections may in certain circumstances breach the
prohibition of abuse of rights which is an emanation of the principle of good faith. That
does not mean that these elements are part of the definition of investment. An illegal
or bad faith investment remains an investment. It may not be a protected investment,
i.e. deserve protection in the sense that access to treaty arbitration and/or substantive
treaty guarantees may not be granted, but that is a different matter.

In sum, for the previous reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the objective definition of
investment under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention comprises the elements of
contribution of money or assets, risk and duration.

Phoenix Action Ltd. v. Czech Republic (hereafter “Phoenix”), Decision on Jurisdiction, 15 April
2009, 485.
Saba Fakes, at 4§ 110-111.

77

228.

229.

231.

2.3.3 Does the Claimants’ investment meet the objective test of Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention?

The Tribunal must examine whether the Claimants meet the definition of investment of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Claimants maintain that they meet all the
elements of this definition, including — despite not being part of the definition — the
element of contribution to the economic development of the host State; the Respondent
denies that the Claimants meet any of these elements. The Tribunal will address each
of these elements in turn.

First, the Respondent alleges that none of the Claimants has made a contribution of
money or assets. However, as the Tribunal previously concluded, the evidence shows
that Quiborax paid for 51% of the shares of NMM.**” Regardless of where payment
was made, this qualifies as a contribution of money because the object of the payment
and raison d'étre of the transaction — the mining concessions — were located in Bolivia.
In addition, whereas NMM did not strictly speaking "purchase" the original seven
mining concessions, as the Claimants have alleged®“®, the record shows that it did
issue 26,680 shares in exchange for them. Accordingly, Quiborax made a monetary
contribution and NMM a contribution of assets.

. The Respondent further argues that the Claimants did not make a contribution to obtain

the four additional mining concessions in 2002, since no such payment was required
under Bolivian law.*“° The Claimants, in turn, assert that these mining concessions are
"titles to property" for which "NMM paid a yearly license [...] in accordance with Article
10 of the Mining Code." The Tribunal finds evidence that NMM paid the
corresponding mining license fees for these four concessions, as shown in the title
deeds "Pococho"**", "La Negra"**; "Cancha I"*°? and "Cancha II."°5*

Apart from these initial contributions, Quiborax's financial statements for 2002-2004°°°
and NMM's financial statements for 2002-2003°° show that additional contributions

See supra, §§ 1.3.1(iii) and (iv), and J 192.

"Claimants purchased their initial seven mining concessions from Bolivian company [Rio
Grande]" (Rej., § 187).

“[T]he fact that NMM received these mining concessions does not mean that there was a
contribution in any manner" (Tr. 92:14-16).

Tr. 569:6-9.

Exh. CD-31.

Exh. CD-32.

Exh. CD-36.

Exh. CD-37.

Exh. NCI-31, NCI-32 and NCI-33.

78

232.

233.

234.

were made in order to operate the mining concessions. In the aggregate, the Tribunal
is satisfied that Quiborax's and NMM's original and subsequent contributions meet the
contribution requirement for the "investment" test of Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention.

By contrast, there is no evidence that Allan Fosk made a contribution of money or
assets. As the Claimants have readily conceded, Allan Fosk did not pay for his one
share but rather "received"®®’ it "in order to comply with the minimum three
shareholders requirement under Bolivian corporate law."*°® There is thus no evidence
of an original contribution. Nor is there evidence that he personally made a
subsequent contribution to exploit the mining concessions. In short, it is not
established that Mr. Fosk made any contribution whatsoever. While on one occasion
Mr. Fosk received dividends for his one share**, this only demonstrates that he
benefited from the investment, not that he made a contribution.

According to Bolivia, a distinction should be made between the objects of an
investment, "such as shares or concessions [...] and the action of investing."*° The
Tribunal agrees. While shares or other securities or title may be the legal
materialization of an investment, mere ownership of a share is, in and of itself,
insufficient to prove a contribution of money or assets. In the present case, the record
shows that Mr. Fosk received a share to comply with a formality under Bolivian
corporate law, and that at no point did he make a personal contribution to the
investment. In the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that Mr. Fosk does not hold an
investment under Article 25(1).

Second, Bolivia submits that, to the extent it has argued "that Claimants didn't do
anything in Bolivia, the elements of duration and risk are indirectly also put into
question."**' Yet, the Tribunal found that Quiborax and NMM did make a contribution
of money and assets. Thus, this indirect objection, contingent upon a finding that no
contribution was made, does not apply to them. At any rate, Quiborax's and NMM's
contributions did meet the elements of duration and risk. Quiborax's and NMM's
contributions and operations in Rio Grande ran from 2001 to June 2004. Had it not
been for the onset of the dispute, there is no reason to consider that these operations

 

Exh. NCI-53.

CM, 4 48, n. 70.

Id., at 34; see also Mem., § 63.
Exh. CD-149.

Tr. 79:1-8.

Id., at 85:4-7.

79

235.

236.

237.

364

would not have extended beyond that date. It is also apparent that these operations
were subject to risks, including market, financial and political risks. Furthermore, it is
not disputed that Quiborax and NMM made their contributions with the expectation of
receiving a commercial return. Conversely, the objection does apply to Allan Fosk, who
made no contribution. Nevertheless, since Allan Fosk has failed to meet the element of
contribution, it is unnecessary to examine whether he has also failed the investment
test of Article 25(1) on additional grounds.

Third, Bolivia claims that the Claimants did not meet the element of contribution to the
economic development of the host State or an operation made in order to develop an
economic activity in the host State. The Claimants maintain that the opposite is true.
As previously explained, the Tribunal considers that this element is not part of the
definition of "investment" under Article 25(1), but rather an aspiration informing the
system of international investment protection. In any event, the Tribunal deems that
Quiborax and NMM have met this aspiration in this case.

The evidence shows that the exploitation of the mining concessions generated a
growing level of economic activity that only came to an end with this dispute.
Specifically, NMM's sales of ulexite experienced a growth rate of 250% between 2002
and 2003*; this growth necessarily increases the economic activities that make those
sales possible in the first place — labour, transportation, logistics. Further, NMM sold
around 64,000 tons of ulexite to Quiborax in 2003 and 2004 combined.* The
Respondent's video evidence is insufficient to rebut evidence of this contribution.**
Thus, the Tribunal considers that Quiborax and NMM met the aspiration that their
investment should contribute to the economic development of Bolivia.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Quiborax and NMM made an investment in
the objective sense developed under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The same
is not true of Allan Fosk. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not have ratione materiae
jurisdiction over Allan Fosk's claim. Hence, the "Claimants" shall henceforth refer only
to Quiborax and NMM, to the exclusion of Mr. Fosk. On the other hand, in order for the

Exh. NCI-53; Navigant ER, § 73 n. 129.

Exh. NCI-62; Navigant ER, § 111 n. 155. This evidence shows that Quiborax's and NMM's
exploitation generated real economic activity, to the benefit of the Rio Grande area. In its Reply
on Jurisdiction, however, the Respondent noted that it was enough for the investor to
"potentially" contribute to the economic development of the host State (Reply, § 176). Since the
Tribunal considers that Quiborax's and NMM's investment as a matter of fact contributed to the
economic development of the host State, it is all the more clear that Quiborax and NMM met this.
lower standard.

Exh. R-169.

80

238.

239.

240.

Tribunal to conclusively ascertain whether or not it has ratione materiae jurisdiction
over Quiborax and NMM, it must examine Bolivia's next objection.

3. Third Objection: The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Because Claimants’
Alleged Investment Was Made in Breach of Bolivian Laws and Regulations

3.1. The Respondent's Position

According to Bolivia, the Tribunal has no ratione materiae jurisdiction because the
Claimants’ investment was made in breach of the Treaty's legality requirement.*° The
Treaty's scope is indeed limited to investments "made in accordance with the laws and
regulations"*®° of the host State. ICSID case law shows that the legality requirement is
an element of ratione materiae jurisdiction. Thus, if this requirement is not met, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the dispute, a proposition endorsed in Inceysa v. El
Salvador, Saba Fakes v. Turkey and Alasdair Ross Anderson v. Costa Rica.

Bolivia specifically submits that (i) the legality requirement covers any breach of
Bolivian law, regardless of its seriousness and regardless of when the breach is

committed; (ii) at any rate, the Claimants violated "fundamental provisions of Bolivian

laws and regulations, including tax and criminal laws"**”; and (iii) it is not estopped from

raising the illegality of the Claimants’ investment. Each of these submissions is
expanded below.

First, the legality requirements covers any breach of Bolivian law regardless of its

seriousness. The Treaty does not draw a distinction between serious and non-serious

368

breaches of the laws; it covers both alike. The very use of the terms "laws and

regulations" shows that the legality requirement covers the entire Bolivian legal order,
without regard to the significance of the rule breached.* This broad construction of
the legality requirement is consistent with the Treaty's broad definition of "investment."

The broader the definition of "investment", the greater is the need for investors to

comply with the legal order of the host State.°”

Ou, 19 194-195.

Article ll of the Treaty. By the same token, Article I(2) of the Treaty defines "investment" as
“any kind of assets or rights related to an investment so long as the latter has been made in
accordance with the laws and regulations" of the host State (Tribunal's translation). The legality
requirement is again reiterated in Article III(2) of the Treaty. Thus, the legality requirement is
included "in no less than three provisions of the Treaty" (Tr. 63:8-9).

ROSS, p. 80.

Reply, 1 199, 201-205.

Id.

Id., at $ 200.

81

241.

242.

243.

Additionally, the legality requirement covers any breach of Bolivian law regardless of
when the breach occurred, i.e. regardless of whether the breach is committed at the
time of the establishment of the investment or thereafter. Unlike the situation in Saba
Fakes, this Treaty requires that the investments "be effected" in conformity with the
legal order of the host State. This language covers breaches committed at the time of

the establishment of the investment and during its performance.*”'

In any event, the
Claimants breached Bolivian law at the time when they established their investment.
Specifically, on account of these breaches, Quiborax and Allan Fosk could not validly

become shareholders of NMM.°”

Second, regardless of whether the legality requirement covers only serious breaches,
the Claimants violated "fundamental provisions of Bolivian laws and regulations,
including tax and criminal laws."*”* The Respondent alleges that the transfer of NMM
shares from Rio Grande to Quiborax on 17 August 2001 "was in breach of Bolivian law
for no less than six reasons"*”*: (i) NMM made a capital increase without obtaining the
prior approval of the Commercial Registry in breach of the Commercial Code*”; (ii) the
Claimants committed fraud against Rio Grande's creditors, as Rio Grande received no
payment for the transfer®”*; (iii) if the transfer was a gift, Quiborax should have paid a
tax on gratuitous transfers and recorded the gift in a notarized document®”;; (iv) if the
transfer was not a gift, Quiborax and Allan Fosk should have paid the transfer tax°”;
(v) Quiborax failed to register a duly empowered legal representative®”’; and (vi) Rio
Grande failed to reduce its capital as required by the Commercial Code.**°

These six violations also apply to the transfer of NMM shares of 4 and 10 September
2001.8" In addition, Bolivia submits that the Claimants committed the following four
breaches of Bolivian law (the numbering continues that of the preceding paragraph):
(vii) Mr. Fosk misrepresented that he was in La Paz in the minutes of 27 January
Id., at ] 209.

Id., at 210.

ROSS, p. 80.

Tr. 66:4-6.

Od, 203; Tr. 66:7-67:3.

Ou, § 203; Tr. 67:4-15.

Reply, 206; Tr. 67:16:68:14.

Tr. 68:15-21.

Od, 203; Tr. 68:22-69:3.

Tr. 69:4-10.

Id., at 69:14-17.

82

244.

245.

246.

2003°*; (viii) the Claimants failed to pay the corporate income tax for foreign
beneficiaries**; (ix) the Claimants breached the rules concerning the registration of
mining concessions***; (x) they also breached the rules concerning the accuracy of

385

financial statements“"”, and (xi) the rules concerning the contents of the shareholders

registry.%°°

Third, Bolivia maintains that it is not estopped from objecting to the legality of the
Claimants' investment. The Bolivian authorities never accepted that the Claimants’
investment was legal. While the Superintendencia concluded that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk were shareholders of NMM, this conclusion was based on the shareholders
registry, not on a thorough analysis of the record. Moreover, the fact that the Parties
entered into settlement negotiations does not mean that Bolivia accepted the
Claimants' allegations. Contrary to what the Claimants allege, the decisions in
SwemBalt v. Latvia and Kardassopoulos v. Georgia do not support their position.

In sum, Bolivia submits that, because the Claimants’ investment "was tainted with
illegality under Bolivian laws and regulations"*®’, the Tribunal has no ratione materiae
jurisdiction over this dispute.

3.2. The Claimants’ Position

According to the Claimants, their investment was made "in accordance with the laws
and regulations" of Bolivia and the Respondent's allegations to the contrary are
unfounded.* The Claimants specifically submit that (i) the legality requirement has a
limited scope: it applies only to violations of the host State's fundamental principles or
investment regime, and only at the time the investment is established*®; (ii) they did
not breach the legality requirement because the alleged violations of Bolivian law either

390.
t

did not occur or fall outside the scope of this requirement™"; and (iii) the Respondent is

estopped from raising the illegality of the Claimants’ investment.**'

Id., at 529:16-22.

Od, § 203.

Id.

Id.

Id.

Tr. 70:4-5 and 8-9.
CM, § 123.

Id., at ¥ 125-131, 136-137; Rej., 4 205, 209-210, 214-220.
CM, $9 132-137; Rej., 4 104-124, 206.
CM, 99] 148-158; Rej., 4 222-229.

83

247.

248.

249.

First, with respect to the scope of the legality requirement, Bolivia has cited no
precedent or doctrine that supports its broad interpretation of the legality
requirement*”; on the contrary, the precedents on which it relies support a narrow
interpretation of this requirement.*® In sum, host States should not be able to invoke
the legality requirement as an excuse to avoid their international responsibility.°% With

respect to the burden of proof, any act which is alleged to be legally flawed remains

valid until it is voided by a court decision at the request of an interested party.*°°

On the substantive scope of the legality requirement, the tribunal in Saba Fakes v.
Turkey stated that it was "not convinced"** by the State's position "that any violation of
any of the host State's laws would result in the illegality of the investment [...] and

preclude such investment from"*’” BIT protection. In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the

tribunal held that it would be "inconsistent with the object and purpose of the Treaty"

0399

to deny protection to an investment on the basis of "minor errors or other formal

irregularities.“° Similarly, the tribunal in Desert Line v. Yemen held that the legality

requirement excludes "investments made in breach of fundamental principles of the

0401

host State's law. The decisions in Phoenix Action, World Duty Free, Inceysa,

Alasdair Ross Anderson and Fraport also support a limited reading of the legality

requirement. “©?

On the time-aspect of the legality requirement, the tribunal in Hamester v. Ghana

stated that a distinction had to be "drawn between (1) legality as at the initiation of the

investment ("made") and (2) legality during the performance of the investment"*?

(emphasis in the original). Pursuant to this distinction based on the Treaty language,
the Hamester tribunal held that the legality requirement only applied to the "initiation of

Rej., 205.
Id., at 4 209-210.

CM, 9 130-131.

Rej., 4.207.

Saba Fakes, at § 119.

Id.

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (hereafter “Tokios Tokelés"), Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004,
4 86.

Id.

CM, § 128.

Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (hereafter “Desert Line”), Award, 6 February
2008, § 104.

Rej, § 210, n. 321.

Gustav Hamester GmbH & Co. KG v. Republic of Ghana (hereafter “Hamester’), Award, 18
June 2010, § 127.

84

250.

251.

the investment."“* Likewise, the Saba Fakes tribunal held that the legality requirement
governed the "admission of the investment in the host State."“°° The same conclusion
should be reached in this case, as the Bolivia-Chile BIT employs the past tense in

connection with the legality requirement, i.e. investments "made" in accordance with

the laws and regulations of the host State.“

Second, the Claimants did not breach the legality requirement because the alleged
violations of Bolivian law either did not occur or fall outside the scope of this
requirement. In response to Bolivia's specific allegations“”’, the Claimants argue that:
(i) NMM was not required to obtain prior approval from the Commercial Registry to

make a capital increase, and the subsequent approval sufficed“; (ii) "[alll of the

"409

accusations of fraud are false""’”, including the allegation of fraud against Rio Grande's

creditors; (iii) the transfer of NMM shares from Rio Grande to Quiborax was not a gift

and thus no gift tax was due“"; (iv) there is no tax evasion as a result of these

transfers because the Commercial Registry itself - the Senarec — certified that the
“legal and tax requirements" of the transfer were met.*"'

The Claimants further maintain that (v) Quiborax had no obligation to register a legal

representative in Bolivia‘*’?; (vi) Mr. Fosk's signature of the minutes of 27 January 2003

on a date different than the one represented in the minutes "is normal corporate

practice"*"*; (vii) the Claimants paid the income tax for foreign beneficiaries*"*; (viii) the

belated registration of the mining concessions did not affect the validity of the transfer,

but only delayed its effects vis-a-vis third-parties“"®; (ix) there is no provision under

Bolivian law whereby errors in the financial statements are illegal*'®; (x) the

Id.

Saba Fakes, at § 119.

Rej., 99 217-218.

The Claimants did not specifically respond to Bolivia's allegation that they did not meet the
legality requirement because Rio Grande failed to reduce its capital, as would have been
required by the Commercial Code, following the transfer of NMM shares to Quiborax — an
allegation first made at the hearing (Tr. 69:4-10).

Tr. 544:5-17.

Id., at 113:17.

Rej., 99 123-124.

Tr. 542:8-12.

Rej., 99 111-118.

Tr. 560:18-19.

CM, 4 135; Rej., 99 121-122.

Rej., $9 104-110.

Id., at § 119-120.

85

252.

253.

254.

255.

shareholders registry complied with the requirements of Bolivian law, as the
Superintendencia concluded in its report dated 11 February 2005.*"”

On the other hand, if there has been any formal breach of Bolivian law, this only shows
the Claimants’ good faith.“"® Indeed, none of these breaches helped the Claimants to
secure the investment — as was the case in Plama, World Duty Free and Inceysa — or
made the investment more profitable.*'? Likewise, no attempt was made to cover up
these alleged breaches of Bolivian law: when the Claimants discovered, for instance,
that the minutes of 11 September 2001 — which wrongly listed Fernando Rojas, Dolly
Paredes and Gilka Salas as still being shareholders of NMM — had been incorporated
into other documents, the NMM Board of Directors took formal notice of the mistake
and issued new documents to rectify the mistake. “7°

Third, the Respondent is estopped from disputing the legality of Claimants’ investment.
As a matter of fact, the Respondent has engaged the Claimants in negotiations for
almost three years and, in the context of those negotiations, has had the opportunity to

examine the relevant documentation on multiple occasions.**'

At no point, however,
did Bolivia call into question the legality of the Claimants’ investment; as the
Superintendencia report shows, the opposite was the case.“” In these circumstances,
the Respondent is estopped from raising objections on the ground that the Claimants’
investment fails to meet the legality requirement. The decisions in Swembelt v. Latvia

and Kardassopoulos v. Georgia lend support to this conclusion. *“°

For these reasons, the Claimants submit that they met the legality requirement and that
the Tribunal has thus jurisdiction over this dispute.

3.3. Analysis

The Parties are in dispute as to whether the Claimants have met the Treaty's legality

requirement. Article Il of the Bolivia-Chile BIT limits its scope of application to

investments made "in accordance with the legal provisions” of the host State.‘**

Similarly, Article (2) of the Treaty defines "investment" as one that was made "in

Tr. 555:5-559:17.

CM, 99 138-147.

Id., at 9 140-141.

Id., at 9 142-143.

Id., at §§ 148-149, 152-153.

Id., at 4 154-155.

Id., at 4¥ 150-151; Rej., ¥ 228-229.
Exh. CL-1, Art. Il.

86

256.

257.

accordance with the laws and regulations"° of the host State. The definition of
investment is relevant to determine the scope of the Contracting Parties' —- and thus
Bolivia's — consent to arbitration under Article X of the Treaty. Hence, under the
Bolivia-Chile BIT, the legality requirement is relevant to determine both the Treaty's
scope of application and the scope of Bolivia's consent to arbitration.

To rule on Bolivia's jurisdictional objection, the Tribunal must determine (i) whether the
Respondent is estopped from contesting the legality of Claimants’ investment under the
Treaty; if the Respondent is not so estopped, the Tribunal must ascertain (ii) the
burden of proof concerning alleged violations of the legality requirement, (iii) the scope
of the legality requirement, and (iv) whether the Claimants have breached the legality

requirement.

3.3.1 Is Bolivia estopped from contesting the legality of Claimants’
investment under the Treaty on account of its previous conduct?

The Claimants allege that Bolivia is estopped from contesting the legality of their

investment on account of its previous conduct. The Tribunal is not convinced that this

is the case. As Bolivia's apposite reliance on Vieira v. Chile‘

suggests, the fact that
the Parties have entertained prolonged settlement discussions, extending well beyond
the initiation of this arbitration, does not mean by itself that Bolivia has accepted the
Claimants' jurisdictional allegations, at least not absent specific evidence to the
contrary. A different conclusion could have a chilling effect on the host State's
willingness to entertain settlement negotiations. In this case, neither the
Superintendencia report nor the remaining evidence shows that Bolivia accepted that
the Claimants’ investment complied with the legality requirement.“””

. Thus, the Tribunal is duty-bound to conclude that Bolivia is not estopped from

contesting the legality of the Claimants’ investment.

3.3.2 What party bears the burden of proof concerning alleged violations of
the legality requirement?

. While the Parties have not explicitly addressed this issue, the Tribunal considers that

the party alleging a breach of the legality requirement, i.e. the host State, bears the

Id., at Art. 1(2).

Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Vieira v. Republic of Chile (hereafter “Vieira”), Award, 21 August
2007, 200.

The Superintendencia report concluded that further inquiries and studies were necessary to
“structure the defense of the Bolivian State in the face of potential ICSID proceedings" (Exh.
CD-72, p. 6). Thus, by its own terms, the Superintendencia report was neither comprehensive
nor exhaustive.

87

260.

261.

262.

burden of proof. The contrary proposition would be unrealistic: the investor would have
to somehow prove that it has complied with the myriad laws and regulations of the host
State. Hence, the burden of proof must naturally rest with the party alleging a breach
of the legality requirement. This view is confirmed by the cases, doctrine, and
Respondent's own position.

In Desert Line, the tribunal held that the respondent had "not come close to satisfying
it] that the Claimant['s] investment [...] was inconsistent with Yemeni laws or
regulations."4° In Saba Fakes, the tribunal held that the respondent's allegation that
the investment was illegal could fall within the scope of the legality requirement "if

demonstrated."*°

And in Hamester, the tribunal held that the respondent did "not fully
discharge its burden of proof" regarding its allegation that the claimant's investment
was illegal.“°° Likewise, Zachary Douglas has written that the host State's allegation
that "the claimant has violated its law in the acquisition of its investment [...] must be
fatal" to jurisdiction "[i]f that allegation is substantiated before the investment treaty

tribunal."**"

In line with these authorities, the Respondent appeared to concede that, although the
Claimants bear the burden of proving the primordial jurisdictional facts, it bears the
burden of proving breaches of the legality requirement:

"The first comment on evidence [...] We say to you that we have
established, for instance, that, if any, the investment made _by
Claimants is illegal [...] but regarding the questions of the existence of
investors and the question of existence of an investment, this is
something that has to be established by Claimants" (emphasis
added).**

Contrary to what the Claimants assert, this does not mean that their investment can

only be declared to have breached the law "by court decision"***

, Le. by the decision of
a Bolivian court in this case. It is the Tribunal's duty to determine whether it has
jurisdiction over the dispute and, to that end, to examine whether the legality
requirement is met. But it does mean that the Respondent must prove to the
satisfaction of the Tribunal that the Claimants’ investment breached the legality

requirement.

Desert Line, at § 105.

Saba Fakes, at J 120.

Hamester, at J 132.

Z. Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims, Cambridge University Press 2009, p.
53, J 106.

Tr. 497:14-498:2.

Rej., 207.

88

263.

264.

265.

3.3.3 What is the scope of the legality requirement?

The Parties disagree about the scope of the legality requirement. The Claimants
advocate a narrow reading of this requirement limited to breaches of fundamental legal
principles or of the investment regime. The Respondent opposes an expansive
construction encompassing any breach of its legal order irrespective of its seriousness
or timing. The Tribunal is of the opinion that neither interpretation is entirely correct,
the interpretation of the Claimants being too narrow and that of the Respondent too
broad. The Claimants’ interpretation goes beyond the terms of the BIT, in an attempt to
further the investor's protection without due regard for the State's interests. By
contrast, the Respondent's expansive view neglects the investor's interests with the
result that an investment could be deprived of any treaty protection for any breach of
the host State's legal order — however slight —- committed at any time. This approach
would create deleterious incentives, as host States would be in a position to strip
investors of treaty protection by finding any minor breach at any time.

Neither view is consistent with the objectives of the BIT, the Preamble of which states
that the Parties "recogniz[e] the need to promote and protect foreign investments in
order to support the economic prosperity of both States" and "wish[] to strengthen the
economic cooperation to benefit both States."“* Accordingly, within the limits set by
the applicable treaty interpretation rules, the Tribunal favours a balanced interpretation
that takes account of the need to protect foreign investments, on the one hand, and of
the State's other responsibilities, on the other. Or in the words of the E/ Paso tribunal:

“This Tribunal considers that a balanced interpretation is needed,

taking into account both State sovereignty and the State's

responsibility to create an adapted and evolutionary framework for the

development of economic activities, and the necessity to protect
foreign investment and its continuing flow.”“°

Bearing this in mind, construction of the legality requirement calls for a line-drawing
exercise in which the Tribunal must determine what violations are covered by the
legality requirement. Or, differently stated, what violations of the legality requirement
exclude the investment from the scope of the Treaty and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Other tribunals have already grappled with the question of the scope of similarly- or
identically-worded legality requirements. The Tribunal will draw guidance from these
cases, which, while still in a relatively emerging state, already outline the contours of
the legality requirement.

Exh. CL-1 (Tribunal's translation).
EI Paso, at § 70.

89

266.

267.

268.

269.

The Tribunal considers that the BIT's legality requirement has both subject-matter and
temporal limitations. The subject-matter scope of the legality requirement is limited to
(i) non-trivial violations of the host State's legal order (Tokios Tokelés**®, LESI‘®’ and

Desert Line***)

; (ii) violations of the host State's foreign investment regime (Saba
Fakes“), and (iii) fraud — for instance, to secure the investment (Inceysa“°, Plama““",
Hamester“’) or profits (Fraport’’). Additionally, under this BIT, the temporal scope of
the legality requirement is limited to the establishment of the investment; it does not
extend to the subsequent performance. Indeed, the Treaty refers to the legality
requirement in the past tense by using the words investments "made" in accordance

with the laws and regulations of the host State and, in Spanish, "haya efectuado"*“*

(Fraport“®, Hamester“®, Saba Fakes“*’).

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the legality requirement has both subject-matter
and temporal limitations.

3.3.4 Did the Claimants breach the legality requirement?

The Tribunal will examine each of Bolivia's allegations that the Claimants breached the
legality requirement, taking into account the foregoing considerations regarding the
burden of proof and the limited scope of the legality requirement.

0448

First, Bolivia alleges that one of the "main illegalities""” is that NMM's capital increase

of August 2001 was made without the prior approval of the Commercial Registry, in
breach of Articles 343 and 131 of the Bolivian Commercial Code (the "Commercial
Code).“*° According to Respondent's expert, Prof. Salame, this results in the "absolute

Tokios Tokelés, at § 86.

LESI, at 4 83(iii).

Desert Line, at § 104.

Saba Fakes, at § 119.

Inceysa Vallisoletana_v. Republic of El Salvador (hereafter “Inceysa’), Award, 2 August 2006,
9 236-238.

Plama, at J§ 133-135.

Hamester, at (§ 129, 135.

Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of Philippines (hereafter “Fraport’),
Award, 16 August 2007, {| 396.

Art. I(2) and Art. Il (in Spanish "efectuadas").

Fraport, at § 345.

Hamester, at 127.

Saba Fakes, at § 119.

Tr. 528:5.

Id., at 66:7-67:3.

90

270.

271.

450

nullity"*°" of the NMM shares issued pursuant to said capital increase. The Tribunal is
not convinced that this is the case. Neither Article 343 nor 131 of the Commercial
Code provides that the Commercial Registry's approval of a capital increase must be
given "prior" to said increase — nor is there any authority in support of this
interpretation. Therefore, it does not appear that the Commercial Registry's prior

approval is an essential element for the validity of the capital increase.**'

On the contrary, the Commercial Registry provided authoritative confirmation that prior
approval is not essential: it approved NMM's capital increase on 28 August 2001
despite having full knowledge that NMM had increased its capital before obtaining its —
the Commercial Registry's — approval to do so.**? Indeed, Resolution No. 1174/2001
refers explicitly to the minutes of 3 August 2001 and to public deed 210/2001, both of
which plainly show that NMM had already increased its capital.““* Had the Commercial
Registry considered that prior approval was an essential requirement for the capital
increase, it would have refused NMM's request for approval. ***

455

Second, Bolivia alleges that another main illegality*’ is that the Claimants committed

fraud against Rio Grande's creditors, as Rio Grande received no payment for the
transfer of its shares in NUM. However, there is no evidence to support this allegation.

In its second Expert Report, Prof. Salame stated that this transfer "could"*°° amount to

wg 457

fraud to creditors its purpose was to avoid paying off Rio Grande's debts;

however, he noted that he did not have "sufficient information"*®* to determine whether
there was fraud under the facts of this case. No such evidence has, indeed, been
submitted. It is even a matter of speculation whether Rio Grande had creditors in the
first place.“°°

Id., at 341:12.

In light of this conclusion, there is no need to have recourse to Article 822 of the Commercial
Code and to Article 549 of the Civil Code, as Prof. Salame has argued (Tr. 341:14-342:8).

Exh. R-126.
Exhs. CD-25 and CD-110.

In accordance with Article 131 of the Commercial Code, the Commercial Registry had the power
to "approve or deny" the request for a capital increase. If the request is denied, the Commercial
Registry must provide reasons so that the applicant may correct any deficiencies.

Tr. 528:11-20.

Salame ER Il, 7 44 (4'" bullet point).

Id.

Id.

In its Second Report, Prof. Salame professed that he "ignor[ed]" whether Rio Grande "had

debts at the time of the events" (Tribunal's translation) (Salame ER II, ¢ 44 (4" bullet point).
Furthermore, at the hearing, Counsel for the Respondent stated that: "[T]here were apparently

91

272.

273.

274.

275.

Third, Bolivia alleges that, if the transfer was a gift, Quiborax should have paid the tax
on gratuitous transfer pursuant to Article 99 of Law No. 843, and recorded the gift in a
notarized document.*® Yet, as the Tribunal previously concluded, Quiborax did not
receive the NMM shares gratuitously but rather for a fee.“*' Since the condition upon
which the Respondent's allegation is predicated is not met, the Tribunal finds no
illegality here.

Fourth, Bolivia argues in the alternative that, if the transfer was nota gift, Quiborax and
Allan Fosk should have paid the transaction tax. However, the point is moot with
respect to Allan Fosk, over whom the Tribunal has already concluded that it has no
jurisdiction, and there is no evidence that Quiborax was subject to this tax. At the
hearing, the Respondent relied on Article 72 of Law No. 843, which provides that
certain economic activities and gratuitous transfers are "subject to the [transaction] tax
[...] under the conditions provided for in the following Articles.“ But no evidence was
submitted that the transfer of NMM shares to Quiborax met those "conditions" and was
subject to the transaction tax. Thus, the Respondent has not substantiated this
allegation.

Fifth, the Respondent alleges that Quiborax failed to register a duly empowered legal
representative to act in Bolivia, in breach of Article 420 of the Commercial Code. The
Respondent's argument is that this failure rendered the transfer of the shares invalid.
However, as Respondent's own legal expert acknowledged, Quiborax was not required
to register a legal representative to acquire shares in Bolivia.“ Whether Quiborax
was, on the other hand, required to register a legal representative in order to exercise
its rights as a shareholder is a question that lies outside the temporal scope of the
legality requirement, as this is a question which concerns a period of time subsequent
to that in which the investment was made. Thus, the Tribunal finds no relevant illegality
here.

Sixth, the Respondent alleges that Rio Grande failed to reduce its capital following the
transfer of the NMM shares in breach of Article 354 of the Commercial Code.***

 

concerns about liabilities of Rio Grande. That's why apparently they [the Claimants] did not
want to buy shares in Rio Grande" (emphasis added)(Tr. 528:15-18).

Tr. 67:16-68:14; ROSS, pp. 85-87.

See supra, §§ 1.3.1(iii) and (iv), and Tribunal's conclusion at J 192.

Salame ER I, Annex 22, Art. 72.

On the issue of whether Quiborax was required to be registered with the Commercial Registry,
Prof. Salame "agree[d] that the answer was in the negative" (Salame ER II, § 66).

Tr. 69:4-10; Salame ER II, {44 (3rd bullet point).

92

276.

277.

278.

279.

However, any such breach would have been Rio Grande's breach, not the Claimants’.
Hence, no breach of the legality requirement is found here.

As a result, none of the six reasons the Respondent has advanced shows that the
transfer of NMM shares from Rio Grande to Quiborax on 17 August 2001 was in
breach of Bolivian law. By the same token, none of these reasons shows that the
transfers of NMM shares dated 4 and 10 September 2001 were in breach of Bolivian
law. The Tribunal will examine the Respondent's additional illegality allegations.

Seventh, the Respondent alleges that Mr. Fosk misrepresented that he was in La Paz
in the minutes of 27 January 2003. The Respondent has not explained what rule this
misrepresentation would have breached. In addition, any such breach would lie
outside the temporal scope of the legality requirement, as it would have been
committed after the investment was established. Lastly, this allegation is moot
because the Tribunal already concluded that it has no jurisdiction over Allan Fosk.

Eighth, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants failed to pay the corporate income
tax for foreign beneficiaries. However, the evidence disproves this allegation. As a
matter of fact, the evidence shows that NMM first declared dividends on 3 December
2003*°, and subsequently paid the applicable corporate income tax for foreign
beneficiaries — Quiborax and Allan Fosk — upon distribution of those dividends in
2004.*°° Therefore, the evidence negates any allegation of illegality in this respect.

Ninth, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants breached the rules concerning the
registration of mining concessions. Yet, the Claimants did register the mining
concessions with the Mining Registry and the Real Property Registry in December
2001“°’, and there is no evidence that pre-transfer registration is required. On the
contrary, the Tribunal agrees with Claimants' legal expert, Prof. Rosenkrantz, that,

pursuant to Article 823 of the Commercial Code*®,

; registration of the mining
concessions is not required for the validity of the transfer, but only to ensure its third-
party effects, i.e. that third parties have notice of the transfer.* In other words, failure
to register the transfer in advance breaches no rule, but merely deprives the transfer of

third-party effects as long as it is not effected. Accordingly, no illegality is found here.

Exh. CD-118.2.
Exhs. CD-149 and CD-150, attaching the completed F-54 tax forms.
Salame ER I, 4 68.

In line with Prof. Rosenkrantz's evidence, Prof. Salame also declared that Article 823 of the
Commercial Code governs the issue of the third-party effects of registration (Salame ER |,
63).

Tr. 430:20:431:1, 434:2-5.

93

280.

281.

282.

283.

Tenth, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants breached the rules concerning the
accuracy of Rio Grande's and NMM's financial statements. The Respondent has failed
to explain what provision of Bolivian law the Claimants would have breached in this
regard, and thus to substantiate this allegation. In addition, the Claimants were not
responsible for the financial statements of Rio Grande, and thus for any mistake
contained therein. Finally, while the Claimants admitted that NMM's financial statement
for 2001 contained a mistake*”°, the evidence suggests that this mistake was not
deliberate but rather the product of inadvertence. Hence, the Tribunal deems that, to
the extent that such mistake had still constituted a breach of Bolivian law, it would have
been a trivial one and thus outside the subject-matter scope of the legality requirement.

Eleventh and lastly, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants would have breached
rules concerning the contents of the shareholders’ registry. The Respondent has
alleged for instance that, in addition to the secretary, NMM's chairman should also
have signed each entry in the shareholders’ registry. On the basis of Article 9 of the
NMM bylaws*”', the Tribunal believes that only the secretary's signature was required.
More importantly, however, the Tribunal believes that, even if the Claimants had
breached a rule concerning the handling of the shareholders’ registry, an admittedly
internal document with scant intrinsic probative value, any such breach would have
been trivial and thus beyond the subject matter scope of the legality requirement.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Bolivia has not established that
the Claimants breached the legality requirement. Accordingly, the Tribunal has ratione
materiae jurisdiction over the Claimants’ investment.

OBJECTION TO ADMISSIBILITY

In addition to the jurisdictional objections, the Respondent also objects to the
admissibility of the Claimants' claims on the ground that Quiborax and Allan Fosk
concealed their participation in NMM, which it submits it is an abuse of nationality
contrary to the principle of good faith. The Claimants deny that Quiborax and Allan
Fosk concealed their condition of shareholders in NMM prior to the revocation of the
mining concessions. The positions of the Parties are expanded upon below.

Id., at 538:13-18.

Exh. R-12, Article 9. The Tribunal does not consider that Article 46 of NMM's bylaws provides
otherwise.

94

284.

285.

286.

287.

1. The Respondent's Position

Even if the Tribunal found par impossible that it has jurisdiction over the Claimants’
claims, these claims are nonetheless inadmissible because the Claimants breached
the principle of good faith in two different ways. First, the Claimants engaged in an
abuse of nationality because they concealed that NMM's controlling shareholders —
Quiborax and Allan Fosk — were Chilean. Second, the Claimants engaged in an abuse
of process because they fabricated the conditions to establish ICSID jurisdiction. Since
both abuses are contrary to the principle of good faith, the Claimants’ claims are
inadmissible.*”

In connection with the first argument, the Claimants had a duty under international law
to disclose the Chilean nationality of NMM's shareholders.“ Nevertheless, the
Claimants concealed Quiborax's and Allan Fosk's controlling participation in NMM.
The newspaper articles upon which the Claimants rely do not disprove the allegations
of concealment because these articles merely refer to "connections" between Quiborax
and NMM not to shares or participation in the company. Notably, the absence of any
evidence from the public registries that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were shareholders of
NMM confirms that the Claimants concealed their nationality.“

Because the Claimants concealed their nationality, they have lost the ability to rely on
the Treaty for three reasons. First, international tribunals have consistently held that,
when nationality is a requirement to bring an international claim, abuse of such
nationality leads to the inadmissibility of the claims (Flegenheimer v. The Italian
Republic). Second, ICSID tribunals have acknowledged that concealing one's
nationality is contrary to good faith (Desert Line v. Yemen). Third, because of
Claimants' concealment, the Respondent was unable to adapt its conduct to the
disciplines of the Treaty (Aucoven v. Venezuela, Saluka v. Czech Republic and
Burlington v. Ecuador).‘”°

Second, the claims are inadmissible because Claimants engaged in an abuse of
process. On the one hand, the Claimants fabricated evidence in order to be able to
invoke the protections of the Treaty. These actions constitute fraud to the Treaty. On
the other hand, the Claimants abused the ICSID system by concealing the participation
of Quiborax and Allan Fosk in NMM, by revealing this participation only after the

Ou, 19 231-237.

Reply, 9 238-246.

Id., at (9 232-237.

Ou, 19 238-252; Reply, 19 243-244.

95

288.

289.

290.

dispute arose, and by failing to show that they made any contribution whatsoever in
NMM. In brief, the Claimants abused the system of ICSID arbitration.“ As a result,
the claims must be declared inadmissible.

2. The Claimants’ Position

Contrary to the Respondent's allegations, the Claimants had no international law
obligation to inform the Respondent that NMM shareholders Quiborax and Allan Fosk
were Chilean. In any event, the evidence shows that the Claimants did not conceal the
Chilean nationality of NMM's majority shareholders. Remarkably, the Respondent's
assertion is directly contrary to the theory that led to David Moscoso's criminal
conviction in Bolivia.*”” Moreover, the Claimants have not fabricated the conditions to
gain access to ICSID arbitration.*”* It therefore follows that the claims are admissible.

First, the Claimants had no obligation under international law to inform Bolivia that

Quiborax and Allan Fosk were Chilean nationals.*””

The Claimants acquired their
investments through a series of private transactions. As such, the Respondent's
approval or intervention was not required and the Claimants had "no occasion or

obligation"?

to inform the Respondent of the nationality of NMM's majority
shareholders. The Aucoven and Saluka cases upon which the Respondent relies are
inapposite because in those cases the investment depended on conditions set by the

host State. This is not the case here.

At any rate, the facts show that the Claimants did not conceal the Chilean nationality of
NMM's majority shareholders. It was widely known that Chilean nationals held a
participation in NMM, as attested by numerous newspaper articles published in the
Bolivian press. The Claimants further registered their investment in Chile, both with the
Central Bank and with the Internal Revenue Service. Lastly, far from being unknown,
the Chilean involvement was well known as Bolivia expropriated the Claimants’
investment precisely because NMM had Chilean shareholders.“*' Therefore, the cases

OJ, 49 253-271.

CM, 9 168, 180. The Claimants state that Mr. Moscoso's conviction was based on the theory
that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were not shareholders of NMM and that they had fabricated
evidence to create the opposite impression; by contrast, Respondent's allegation of
concealment is based on the polar opposite factual premise: that Quiborax and Allan Fosk were
shareholders of NMM.

Id., at 1 167-168.
Rej., 1 65.

Id., at 1 66.

CM, $9 169-171.

96

291.

292.

293.

294.

on which the Respondent relies (Flegenheimer, Desert Line) are inapposite because
482

the Claimants did not conceal their nationality.
Second, the Claimants did no fabricate the conditions to gain access to international
investment arbitration. The Claimants could only have fabricated the conditions to gain
access to ICSID jurisdiction by acting in connivance with the Chilean Central Bank, the
Chilean tax authorities, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Bolivian public notaries, attorneys
and administrative personnel of Rojas law firm, Quiborax's employees, Rio Grande, the
Ugalde brothers, and David Moscoso. This is just implausible.“ No less implausible
is Respondent's strategy to call into question and find fault with any document showing
that Quiborax and Allan Fosk are shareholders of NMM, e.g. the NMM's shareholders
registry, the NMM share certificates and the minutes of 17 August and 13 September
2001.*%

3. Analysis

The Tribunal must determine whether the Claimants’ claims are inadmissible on the
alleged ground that they breached the principle of good faith by committing an abuse of
nationality and an abuse of process.

First, Bolivia alleges that Claimants engaged in an abuse of nationality because they
breached their international law obligation to disclose the Chilean nationality of NMM's

majority shareholders, Quiborax and Allan Fosk. In support of this allegation, it relies

485

on Flegenheimer v. The Italian Republic’, a decision on which both Parties have

focused, and where the Italy-United States Conciliation Commission stated:

"In international jurisprudence one finds decisions [...] allow[ing] a
Respondent State to object to the admissibility of a legal action
directed against it by the national State of the allegedly injured party,

when the latter has neglected to indicate his true nationality, or has
concealed it, or has invoked another nationality at the time the fact

giving rise to the dispute occurred [...]" (emphasis added).
The Tribunal is not convinced that this statement supports the proposition that an
investor has a positive obligation to inform the host State of its nationality before — and
thus regardless of whether — a dispute arises. It supports the view that an investor
should not misrepresent its nationality ("neglect[] to indicate his true nationality") or

Id., at (9 174-176.

Rej., 138.

CM, 9 181-193.

Albert Flegenheimer v. The Italian Republic, Decision, 20 September 1958, pp. 378-379.
Id., at p. 378.

97

295.

take active steps to hide it ("conceall] it"). This does not mean that the investor has a
positive duty to advise the host State of its nationality. In addition, the statement
focuses on "the time [when] the fact giving rise to the dispute occurred.”*®”

The Respondent's reliance on Burlington v. Ecuador is likewise inapposite. In
Burlington, the tribunal held that, once a dispute arises, the specificities of the Treaty
required the investor to inform the host State of any allegations of Treaty breach before
submitting the dispute to international arbitration, in order to afford the State an
opportunity to take remedial action to avoid potential international responsibility.“
This holding presupposed a "dispute" between the parties.“®° Bolivia's allegation that
the investor should as a matter of principle inform the host State of its nationality even
before a dispute arises, and regardless of the specific wording of the Treaty, finds no
support in the considerably narrower Burlington holding. Moreover, the Claimants in
this case did make allegations of Treaty breach as soon as the dispute arose, thereby
affording Bolivia an opportunity to take remedial action and avoid potential international

responsibility.*°°

. At any rate, there is no evidence that the Claimants concealed Quiborax's or Allan

Fosk's participation in NMM. As previously noted, the Claimants have submitted
evidence predating the origin of the dispute from Bolivia's Commercial Register. This
publicly-available record includes a file showing Allan Fosk as the legal representative
of NMM‘“*", and minutes of a shareholders’ meeting featuring Quiborax, Allan Fosk and
David Moscoso as shareholders of NVM.“ Furthermore, the Bolivian press articles of
June 2004 suggest a degree of public awareness of the close connection between

Quiborax and NMM, as shown by the references to "Chilean capital", "Chilean

shareholders" and "Chilean partners."*%°

Id.

Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction, 2 June 2010, 9§
335, 338.

Id., at $331.

Allan Fosk's letter to Bolivia's President (Exh. CD-58).

Exh. CD-119.

Exhs. CD-158 and CD-118.1.

The Bolivian press articles referred to the relationship between NMM and Quiborax or Chile in
the following terms: the “alliance between company [NMM] and Chilean company [Quiborax]";
"[NMM] has Chilean capital"; "the representative of [NMM] is Chilean Allan Henry Isaac Fosk
Kaplun, whilst the board of directors was appointed in a meeting carried out in the offices of
Chilean corporation [Quiborax]"; "Chilean company Non Metallic"; NMM is a Bolivian
corporation "even though it has Chilean minority shareholders related to the company
Quiborax"; NMM operates with "Chilean and Bolivian partners" (Exh. CD-148).

98

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

Second, Bolivia alleges that the Claimants engaged in an abuse of process because
they fabricated the conditions to establish ICSID jurisdiction. In Section V(C)(1), the
Tribunal already concluded that the Claimants did not fabricate evidence or engage in
fraud for the purpose of gaining access to ICSID arbitration. Since Bolivia relies on the
same facts and evidence to support its allegation in the context of this objection, the
analysis of Section V(C)(1) applies here as well. Thus, in conformity with the its earlier
conclusion, the Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimants did not abuse the ICSID
investment arbitration system.

In conclusion, the Tribunal holds that the Claimants did not engage in either an abuse
of nationality or an abuse of process. Accordingly, the Claimants did not breach the
principle of good faith and their claims are thus admissible.

THE REQUEST FOR A DECLARATORY JUDGMENT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 37 OF THE
ARTICLES ON STATE RESPONSIBILITY

1. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants request the Tribunal to formally declare, pursuant to Article 37 of the
Articles on State Responsibility (the "Articles"), that "Respondent's conduct in the
present arbitration violates its obligations under the [ICSID Convention] as well as its
general obligation under international law to arbitrate fairly and in good faith."“ This is
a permissible form of satisfaction under Article 37 of the Articles, and one that also lies
within the Tribunal's inherent powers.

The request is based on the following facts: (i) the Respondent's failure to suspend the
criminal case in Bolivia; (ii) the Respondent's use of the criminal case to its own
advantage in this arbitration; (iii) the Respondent's refusal to pay its share of the
arbitration costs; and (iv) the Respondent's false accusations that the Claimants
engaged in fraud.‘°°

The Respondent has committed an internationally wrongful act within the meaning of
Article 2 of the Articles. That provision requires that (i) the act be attributable to the
State, and (ii) the act constitute a breach of an international obligation of the State.
Both elements are met in this case. First, the acts of the Respondent in this arbitration
are attributable to the State of Bolivia. Second, Bolivia has breached its international
obligations under the ICSID Convention and its obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good

CDu, 91.
Id., at § Il.

99

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

faith.“°° Thus, the Claimants are entitled to full reparation for the injury caused under
Articles 31 and 34 of the Articles.

Full reparation shall take the form of either restitution, compensation or satisfaction.
However, restitution and compensation are not appropriate remedies in this case.
Rather, the proper remedy is satisfaction in the form of a declaration that Bolivia's
conduct in this arbitration constitutes an internationally wrongful act. As a result of this
declaration, the Respondent would have to cease its unlawful conduct.**” At the same
time, because the arbitration is still ongoing, amidst other circumstances, the Claimants
“accept that it is for the Tribunal to determine whether it shall decide on Claimants’
request for a declaratory judgment as part of its Decision on Jurisdiction, or as part of
its final Award."4°°

In sum, the Claimants request the Tribunal to declare that "Respondent's conduct in
the present arbitration is in breach of its international obligations under the ICSID
Convention and its duty to arbitrate fairly and in good faith."*°°

2. The Respondent's Position

Bolivia argues that the Claimants' request for a declaration under Article 37 of the
Articles is premature. The Tribunal cannot entertain the Claimants’ request "before an
award on the merits."©° In addition, because the Tribunal only granted the Claimants
leave to make submissions under Article 37 of the Articles, any request for relief
exceeding the scope of Article 37 is inadmissible.°'

Furthermore, even if the Tribunal entertained the Claimants' request at this juncture, it
should conclude that (i) it lacks the power to grant the punitive relief requested by the
Claimants, and (ii) relief under Article 37 is not available to investors.°

At any rate, the Claimants' request is unsupported by the evidence. Specifically, the
Claimants have failed to demonstrate that the criminal proceedings in Bolivia somehow
breached Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, prevented the Claimants from accessing
potential witnesses or were unlawfully used by Bolivia to produce evidence for this

Id., at $9 63-65.
Id., at $] 66-90.
Id., at $91.

Id., at $92.
RDy, 4.21.

Id., at 99 24-28.
Id., at § 3.

100

307.

308.

arbitration. Neither did they substantiate that Bolivia's non-payment of part of the
advance on arbitration costs breaches the ICSID Convention and that Bolivia's
jurisdictional objections breach its duty of good faith.°°°

In sum, the Claimants' request (i) is premature and (ii) inadmissible to the extent that it
exceeds the scope of satisfaction under Article 37 of the Articles. In the alternative, (iii)
the Tribunal does not have the power to grant this punitive relief, and (iv) investors
have no access to satisfaction under Article 37 of the Articles In the further alternative,
(v) the evidence fails to support the Claimants’ request, and (vi) Bolivia has not
breached any international obligation, nor caused any damage to the Claimant that

would not be compensable though monetary relief.5™*

3. Analysis

The Claimants accept that "it is for the Tribunal to determine whether it shall decide on
Claimants' request for a declaratory judgment as part of its Decision on Jurisdiction, or
as part of its final Award."°°° The Respondent in turn maintains that entertaining this

request "before an award on the merits"®°°

would be premature. Since this arbitration
will proceed to the merits phase, and taking into account the Parties' positions on the
matter, the Tribunal finds that it would indeed be more appropriate to entertain the
Claimants' request for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Article 37 of the Articles in

the final award.

Id., at § 4.
Id., at $157.
CDu, 491.
RDy, 921.

101

VI. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

309. For the reasons set forth above, the Arbitral Tribunal:

A. On jurisdiction:

1. Declares that it has jurisdiction over the claims of Quiborax
and NMM;

2. Declares that it has no jurisdiction over Allan Fosk's claims;
B. On admissibility:

1. Declares that the witness statement of Ricardo Ramos is
admissible;

2. Declares that Bolivia's objections to jurisdiction and the
evidence arising from the Bolivian criminal proceedings are
admissible;

3. Declares that the claims of Quiborax and NMM are
admissible;

C. On further procedural steps:

1. Will take the necessary steps for the continuation of the
proceedings toward the merits phase by way of a
procedural order to be issued after consultation with the
Parties;

2. Defers consideration of the Claimants' request for a
declaratory judgment pursuant to Article 37 of the Articles
on State Responsibility for subsequent adjudication;

3. Reserves the decision on costs for subsequent decision.

102

rn “Bi fe Stem. .

Hon. Marc Lalonde Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 3 bmde 2otz Date: as Trfest QOola

 

 
     

Prof. Gabrielle
President of the Tribunal

0) Aygul WIL

