 

 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID CASE No. ARB/11/13

Rafat Ali Rizvi
(Claimant)

ve

Republic of Indonesia
(Respondent)

APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT AND STAY OF ENFORCEMENT
OF AWARD ON JURISDICTION

11 November 2013

 

 

IL.

Il.

IV.

VI.

VII.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

Introd 1
Purpose of the Application 1
Factual and Procedural Background ..............0.0.0 ccc eee neeeeteee tens teeeeeeeees 2

The Tribunal’s Reasoning in its Award

 

Grounds for the Annulment of the Award ......0.......0cccccceesseeseeseeeneeeeneeneeeee 8
Stay of Enforcement of the AWard .0............ ccc cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeneees 19
Prayer for Relief. 20

 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

In this Application:

“Application” means this application for the annulment of the Award;

“Award” means the Award on Jurisdiction dated 16 July 2013;

“Bank Indonesia” is the Central Bank of the Republic of Indonesia;

“BIT” means the 1997 Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia for

the Promotion and Protection of Investments;

“BKPM” means Badan Koordinasi Penanaman Modal — Indonesia Investment
Coordinating Board;

“Centre” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States;

“Central Bank” means the Central Bank of the Republic of Indonesia;
“Claimant” means Rafat Ali Rizvi;
“Chinkara/FGAH” means First Gulf Asia Holding, formerly Chinkara Capital Ltd;

“Decision on Bifurcation” means the Decision on Bifurcation issued by the Tribunal
under Rule 41(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules on 22 June 2012;

“ICSID” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States;

“ICSID Convention” means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States;

“Party” or “Parties” means Rafat Ali Rizvi and/or the Republic of Indonesia;

“Preliminary Objections” means Preliminary Objections filed by the Respondent on 18
October 2011 pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules;

“Respondent” means the Republic of Indonesia.

APPLICATION BY RAFAT ALI RIZVI FOR THE ANNULMENT
OF THE AWARD ON JURISDICTION DATED 16 JULY 2013

Il.

Introduction

Rafat Ali Rizvi (the “Claimant”) respectfully files with the Secretary-General of
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (hereinafter “ICSID” or the “Centre”) this application
for annulment and stay of enforcement of the Award on Jurisdiction dated 16 July
2013 (the “Application”) in the case of Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia
(Case No. ARB/11/13).

Enclosed with this original are five copies of the Application, together with its

accompanying Exhibits and Legal Authorities.

Purpose of the Application

Pursuant to Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”)
and Rule 50 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Claimant applies for the
annulment of the Award on Jurisdiction dated 16 July 2013 (the “Award”).

This Application is filed on 11 November 2013. In accordance with
Administrative and Financial Regulation 16 and the Schedule of Fees effective 1
January 2013, the non-refundable application fee of US$25,000 has been

transferred to the Centre by the Claimant.!
This Application is based on the ground that

(a) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, pursuant to Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention;

(b) there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure,
pursuant to Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention; and

(c) the Award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based, pursuant to
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

' A copy of the CHAPS transfer receipt is attached as Exhibit CA-1.

Ill.

In addition, pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Claimant requests that the enforcement of the Award
be stayed provisionally until the ad hoc Committee that is formed to hear this

Application shall have the opportunity to rule on the Application.

Factual and Procedural Background

On 5 April 2011, the Claimant, a British national, filed a Request for Arbitration
(the “Request”) with the Centre against the Republic of Indonesia (the
“Respondent’”). The Claimant’s claims were brought under the 1997 Agreement
between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia for the Promotion and

Protection of Investments (the “BIT”).

The Request was registered on 19 May 2011 as ICSID Case No. ARB/11/13 by
the Secretary-General of ICSID, who notified the Parties pursuant to Article 36(3)
of the ICSID Convention.

On 18 October 2011, the Respondent filed Preliminary Objections pursuant to
Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules on the basis that the Claimant’s claims
manifestly failed for lack of jurisdiction and merit because the Claimant’s alleged

investments did not fall within the scope of Article 2(1) of the BIT.

The Respondent made a separate application for security for costs. The Tribunal
established a schedule for the Parties’ submissions on the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections under Rule 41(5) on 27 October 2011, and informed the
Parties on the same day that the Respondent’s application for security for costs
would not be addressed until after the disposition of the Respondent’s Rule 41(5)

application.

The Claimant filed his Response to the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections on
30 November 2011. The Respondent filed its Rebuttal to the Claimant’s Response

on 9 January 2012, and the Claimant filed his Rejoinder on 30 January 2012.

The hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections pursuant to Rule 41(5)

was held on 20 and 21 February 2012. During the hearing the Respondent stated

2

that it intended to file objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under Rule
41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, if the Tribunal found against it in its Rule
41(5S) application.

13. The Tribunal’s 4 April 2012 Decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections under Rule 41(5) rejected the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections.
According to the Tribunal, it was not “manifest” that the Claimant’s alleged
investment did not fall within the scope of the BIT. The Tribunal reserved all

other issues.”

14. On 18 April 2012, the Respondent reiterated its intention to file objections in
relation to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, and requested the bifurcation of the proceedings pursuant to Rule 41(3) of

the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

15. The Tribunal issued its Decision on the Respondent’s Application for Security for

Costs on 8 May 2012, dismissing that application.

16. The Claimant filed observations on the Respondent’s request to address its
objections as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a preliminary question on 18 May
2012. The Respondent filed a Reply to the Claimant’s observations on 28 May
2012, to which the Claimant filed a Rejoinder on 8 June 2012.

17. The Tribunal issued a Decision on Bifurcation under Rule 41(3) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules on 22 June 2012 (“Decision on Bifurcation”). The Tribunal
decided to hear objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a preliminary question.
It consequently suspended the proceeding on the merits. In its Decision on
Bifurcation, the Tribunal ordered that the Respondent’s Rule 41(1) application
would be “strictly limited to the objection described in paragraph 9.” Paragraph 9
stated that the “Claimant’s investment is excluded from coverage by the BIT due

to its failure to meet the requirements of its Article 2(1).” The Tribunal

> Exhibit CA-2: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Decision on the
Respondent's Objection Under Rule 41(5), 4 April 2012, para. 93.

20.

21.

22.

emphasized that it would “not entertain any legal argument, nor consider any

evidence, that relates to any other matter” 3

The Respondent filed Objections to Jurisdiction Pursuant to Rule 41(1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules on 30 August 2012, on the basis that the Claimant’s
investment in the banking sector does not fall within the scope of the BIT, as it
was not “granted admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital Investment
Law No. I of 1967 or any law amending or replacing if’ pursuant to Article 2(1)
of the BIT.*

The Claimant filed his Response to the Respondent’s Rule 41(1) Objections to
Jurisdiction on 1 November 2012, and on 22 November 2012 the Respondent
filed its Reply to the Claimant’s Response. The Claimant filed his Rejoinder on
13 December 2012, to which he filed a further Addendum on 18 December 2012.

On 19 December 2012, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to call upon the
Claimant to disclose the full corporate records of Chinkara/FGAH. The Tribunal
rejected the Respondent’s request in a letter dated 28 December 2012, and asked
the Claimant to update his description of his investment to take into account facts

that had emerged in the proceedings before the Tribunal.

After the Claimant updated the description of his investment, the Respondent
stressed that it was imperative to investigate the precise nature of the Claimant’s
investment during the jurisdictional phase of the proceedings. The Respondent
noted that the question whether the investment was made in the territory of

Indonesia was incorporated into the jurisdictional phase.

The Tribunal on 17 January 2013 informed the parties that the issues for
determination at the jurisdictional stage were limited to “whether the investment

as stated by the Claimant was ‘granted admission in accordance with the Foreign

3 Exhibit CA-3: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Decision on Bifurcation
under Rule 41(3), 22 June 2012, paras. 9, 28.

* Exhibit CA-4: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Objections to Jurisdiction
Pursuant to Rule 41(1), 30 Aug 2012, para. I.

23.

24.

Iv.

25.

26.

Capital Investment Law No. 1 of 1967 or any law amending or replacing it. ms

The Tribunal explained that “if the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction does not
succeed at this stage, the question of proof of an investment and the implications
of investment through a company incorporated in a third State” would be carried

with the merits.°

The hearing on the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction pursuant to Article

41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules was held on 22 through 24 January 2013.

In its Award, the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction
pursuant to Rule 41(1) and determined that neither it nor the Centre has
jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims. The Tribunal ordered the costs of the
Centre to be allocated equally between the Parties and for each Party to bear its

own costs and legal representation.

The Tribunal’s Reasoning in its Award

In its Award, the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection that
the Claimant’s investment was not “granted admission in accordance with the
Foreign Capital Investment Law No 1. of 1967”, as required by Article 2(1) of the
BIT and that it therefore does not fall within the scope of the BIT.’ This result

was reached in breach of Article 52.

The Tribunals’ narrow scope of inquiry at the jurisdictional stage is important to
understanding the Claimant’s detailed grounds for annulment. Its focus was on
whether the investment was granted admission in accordance with the Foreign

Capital Investment Law stemmed from BIT Article 2(1), which provides

“(1) This Agreement shall only apply to investments by nationals or
companies of the United Kingdom in the territory of the Republic of
Indonesia which have been granted admission in accordance with the
Foreign Capital Investment Law No. I of 1967 or any law amending or
replacing it.”

5 Exhibit CA-S: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Award on Jurisdiction, 16
July 2013, para. 31.

° Ibid.

7 Exhibit CA-5: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Award on Jurisdiction, 16
July 2013.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

The Tribunal viewed that its inquiry was limited “to a question of law, that is, the
meaning of BIT Article 2(1),” which was distinct from evidence bearing on the
merits of the claim. The evidence to be considered in the jurisdictional phase was
limited to “evidence regarding the question whether the Claimant complied with
provisions of Indonesian law in respect to admission of his investment.”*> No
mention was made to the subjective awareness of the Government of Indonesia as

having any bearing on compliance with Indonesian law.

Moreover, the Tribunal stated that its narrow inquiry prohibited entertaining any

legal argument or “‘consider[ing] any evidence that relates to any other matter.”

The Tribunal structured its inquiry in two steps. First, the Tribunal was to
interpret the phrase, “granted admission in accordance with the Foreign
Investment Law No. I of 1967 or any law amending or replacing it.” Second, the
Tribunal would consider whether, “in fact” “Claimant’s investment was ...

‘granted admission.” Again, the Tribunal did not make any mention of any
requirement that the Government of Indonesia was subjectively aware that the
Claimant was making an investment, or the role that the Claimant played in the

investment.

The first step of the inquiry required deciding between the Parties’ competing
interpretations of the phrase “granted admission in accordance with the Foreign

Capital Investment Law No. 1 of 1967 or any law amending or replacing it"

In deciding on the matter, the Tribunal rejected a Claimant-proffered
interpretation that any investment that was not contrary to the Foreign Capital

Investment Law would suffice.'!

The Tribunal also rejected the Respondent’s contention that only a specific

process—one administered by Badan Koordinasi Penanaman Modal (Indonesia

® Award, para. 33.

° Tbid., para. 34.

© Tbid., para. 52.

"| Tbid., paras. 54-74.

33.

34.

35.

Investment Coordinating Board or “BKPM’’)—constitutes the sole and exclusive
process to be “granted admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital
Investment Law No. | of 1967.” The Tribunal preferred instead the Claimant’s
contention that the admission process to which his investment was subjected by
the central bank of the Republic of Indonesia (“Bank Indonesia” or “Central

Bank’) was capable of satisfying the requirement of Article 2(1) of the BIT.”

The Tribunal then went on to the second step. Namely, it considered whether, on
the evidence before it in the proceedings, the Claimant’s investment could be said
to have been granted admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital
Investment Law No. 1 of 1967, as required by Article 2(1) of the BIT.'? The
inquiry was “whether the Claimant’s stated investment was ‘granted admission’

through the regulatory steps taken by Bank Indonesia.”
The Tribunal set out what steps it considered were required by its interpretation:

“Claimant does not rely on Bank Indonesia procedures that are particular
to foreign investors or that are formally denominated as admission
procedures. Thus, the question before the Tribunal is whether, taken as a
whole, the regulatory steps taken by Bank Indonesia comprised a de facto
grant of admission of Claimant’s stated investment. Unlike Claimant’s
primary interpretation, Claimant’s secondary interpretation means that
the Tribunal must closely examine the facts on which Claimant relies. The
steps in the de facto admission procedure on which Claimant relies (see
para. 147) are: the approval of Chinkara’s share purchases in Pikko and
Danpac; the approval of the Bank Century merger and the ‘fit and proper’
test to which Claimant was subjected.”'*

In finding that the Claimant’s investment did not satisfy this test, the Tribunal
held that “the evidence before the Tribunal establishes that Bank Indonesia took
the three regulatory steps on which the Claimant relies” but that the “Claimant
has not established that Bank Indonesia took these three steps in awareness of
Claimant’s shareholding in the investment’. On that basis, the Tribunal

concluded that “it [had] insufficient evidence before it that the Claimant’s

” See ibid., paras. 73-107, 136-139.
'S Tbid., paras. 143-198.
4 Tbid., para. 182.

36.

37.

38.

39.

' Tbid.,

investment was ‘granted admission in accordance with’ the [Foreign Capital
Investment Law]”.'> The “awareness” requirement has no basis in the Tribunal’s

own stated scheme.

Therefore, although the Tribunal agreed with the Claimant that Bank Indonesia (i)
was capable of granting admission to his investment in accordance with the
Foreign Capital Investment Law No. 1 of 1967; and (ii) took the three regulatory
steps on which the Claimant relies as evidence that his investment was granted
admission by Bank Indonesia, it nonetheless declined jurisdiction to the
Claimant’s claims on the basis that the Claimant had not provided sufficient
evidence to establish Bank Indonesia’s state of mind at the time these regulatory

steps were taken.

For the reasons set out in detail in the paragraphs that follow, the Claimant
considers that, in so determining, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers;
failed to state the reasons on which the Award was based; and disregarded a
fundamental rule of procedure. The Claimant seeks the annulment of the Award

on those bases.

Grounds for the Annulment of the Award

In this section, in accordance with Rule 50(1)(c)(ii) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Claimant sets out the detailed grounds upon which his Application for

annulment of the Award is based.

A. That the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in determining that it does

not have jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under the BIT

An arbitral tribunal derives its powers from the arbitration agreement entered into
by the parties - in this case the UK-Indonesia BIT. Where, as here, the arbitration
agreement provides for ICSID arbitration, the ICSID Convention is incorporated
by reference into the parties’ agreement. As a result, the scope and limit of the
Tribunal’s powers are to be found in the ICSID Convention and any relevant

provisions in the BIT.

para. 196,

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

According to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, any excess of powers by
a tribunal must be “manifest”. The ordinary meaning of manifest is “clear” or
“evident”. It follows therefore that the requirement that a tribunal’s excess of
powers be “manifest” does not necessarily constitute a requirement that such

excess be of a serious or grave nature.

In The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Professor Schreuer explains that “the
word [manifest] relates not to the seriousness of the excess or the fundamental
nature of the rule that has been violated but rather to the cognitive process that
makes it apparent. An excess of powers is manifest if it can be discerned with

little effort and without deeper analysis”. ‘6

This approach to the requirement that a tribunal’s excess of power be manifest
was approved in annulment decisions in Wena Hotels v. Egypt”, CDC v.

Seychelles!® and Repsol v. Petroecuador."”

One often-cited example of a manifest excess of powers occurs when a tribunal
exceeds its jurisdiction in respect of the dispute, or any aspect of the dispute,

before it.

Jurisdiction is defined at Article 25(1) of the Convention as extending “to any
legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
[...] and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute
consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their

consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally”.

Article 26 of the Convention provides that “/cJonsent of the parties to arbitration

under this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such

arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy.” Accordingly, it is not within

‘© Exhibit CLAA-1: Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Second Edition, Article 52, para.

135.

Exhibit CLAA-2: Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on
Annulment, 5 February 2002, para. 25.

'8 Exhibit CLAA-3: CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles (Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on
Annulment, 29 June 2005, para. 41.

° Exhibit CLAA-4: Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petrédleos del Ecuador (“Petroecuador”)
(Case No. ARB/O1/10), Decision on Annulment, 8 January 2007, para. 36.

46.

47.

48.

the powers of the tribunal either (i) to refuse to decide a dispute or any part of a
dispute which is the subject of the arbitration agreement between the parties; or
(ii) to exceed its jurisdiction in deciding a matter which is not the subject of the

issue to be determined by the tribunal.
This principle was confirmed by the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi I:

“It is settled [...] that an ICSID tribunal commits an excess of powers not
only if it exercises a jurisdiction which it does not have under the relevant
agreement or treaty and the ICSID Convention, read together, but also if
it fails to exercise a jurisdiction which it possesses under those
instruments. One might qualify this by saying that it is only where the
failure to exercise a jurisdiction is clearly capable of making a difference
to the result that it can be considered a manifest excess of power. Subject
to that qualification, however, the failure by a tribunal to exercise a
jurisdiction given it by the ICSID Convention and a BIT, in circumstances
where the outcome of the inquiry is affected as a result, amounts in the
Committee’s view to a manifest excess of powers within the meaning of
Article 52(1)(b).””°
This principle was underlined by the tribunal in Soufraki v. UAE. In that case, the
tribunal held that “/t/he manifest and consequential non-exercise of one’s full
powers conferred or recognized in a tribunal’s constituent instrument such as the
ICSID Convention and the relevant BIT, is as much a disregard of the power as

the overstepping of the limits of that power”?!

In determining that it does not have jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s claims
against the Respondent arising out of his investment in Bank Century, in its
Award the Tribunal stated that the scope of its enquiry was limited to “a question
of law, that is, the meaning of BIT Article 2(1), with particular attention to the
meaning of the phrase ‘granted admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital
Investment Law No. I of 1967 or any law amending it or replacing it”. The
Tribunal further noted that “any evidence regarding the question whether the

Claimant complied with provisions of Indonesian law in respect to admission of

20 Exhibit CLAA-5: Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic
(Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, para. 86.

2! Exhibit CLAA-6: Houssein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (Case No. ARB/02/07), Decision
on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 43 (emphasis in original).

10

49.

50.

51.

his investment is distinct from the evidence relating to the merits of the Claimant’s

wn 1922
claims.

The limited scope of the Tribunal’s enquiry at this stage, upon which the Claimant
relied in the presentation of his case in response to the Respondent’s Rule 41(1)
Application, was set out in the Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation dated 22 June
2012 and reiterated at paragraphs 33 to 35 of its Award. In that Decision, the
Tribunal held that the Respondent’s Rule 41(1) Application would be “strictly
limited to the objection described in paragraph 9” which states that the
“Claimant’s investment is excluded from coverage by the BIT due to its failure to
meet the requirements of its Article 2(1)” and that it would “not entertain any

legal argument, nor consider any evidence, that relates to any other matter”.

In its Award, having considered the interpretation of the meaning of “granted
admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital Investment Law No. 1 of 1967
or any law amending or replacing it’ and determined that the Claimant’s
investment was capable of meeting that requirement, the Tribunal held that it did
not have sufficient evidence before it as to the admission of the Claimant’s
investment by the Respondent’s Central Bank to find that the Claimant’s
investment was “granted admission in accordance with [the Foreign Capital

Investment Law No. I of 1967 or any law amending or replacing ing”?

In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal made a determination as to the extent of
the admission procedure carried out by the Respondent. But the Tribunal made a
dispositive issue out of the importance of the Respondent Central Bank’s
awareness of the Claimant’s position as shareholder in Bank Century at the time
the admission procedure was undertaken. This directly contradicts the Tribunal’s

own stated, limited scope of its enquiry, which required assessing only “any

> Award, para. 33.

23 Exhibit CA-3: Rafat Ali Rizvi v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No. ARB/11/13), Decision on Bifurcation
under Rule 41(3), 22 June 2012, paras. 9, 28.

* Award, para. 198.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Ibi

 

evidence regarding the question whether the Claimant complied with provisions

of Indonesian law in respect to admission of his investment’.”> (Emphasis added).

In so doing, the Tribunal exceeded its remit to determine the question of whether
the Claimant’s investment was granted admission in accordance with Article 2(1)

of the BIT.

Having set such a limited scope of enquiry in its Decision on Bifurcation, it was a
manifest excess of powers for the Tribunal to make a dispositive question out of
the extent to which the Respondent was aware of the Claimant’s shareholding in
Bank Century when considering admitting his investment into the Republic of
Indonesia. In short, the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction by setting up an
inquiry, and then making the dispositive issue one that was not part of its inquiry.
Such an excess of jurisdiction constitutes a manifest excess of the Tribunal’s

powers for the purposes of Article 52(1)(b).

B. That the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in misdirecting itself as to

the law and the relevant question to be determined as a matter of fact

As part of its limited enquiry into the meaning of Article 2(1) of the BIT, the
Tribunal was required to, and did, determine the meaning of the phrase “admitted
in accordance with the Foreign Capital Investment Law No. I of 1967 or any law

amending or replacing it”.
Favouring the Claimant’s arguments on the matter, the Tribunal concluded that:

“by referring to investments ‘granted admission in accordance with’ the
FCIL, BIT Article 2(1) potentially can embrace not only investments
granted admission by the BKPM or pursuant to authority delegated by
BKPM, but also investments granted admission pursuant to conditions
imposed by Indonesia with respect to sectors that are open to investment
but not governed by the BKPM procedures. For the banking sector, such
conditions of admission would be administered by Bank Indonesia’’.**

, para. 33.

°6 Thid., para. 139.

56.

57.

58.

59.

2 Ti

 

Having found that the meaning of Article 2(1) of the BIT is such that the
Claimant’s investment in the banking sector was capable of admission in
accordance with the relevant law and was therefore, at least in theory, entitled to
BIT protection, the Tribunal turned to the question of whether the Claimant’s

investment was, in fact, so admitted.

At this point, following on from its finding as to the Respondent’s ability to
impose admission requirements on investments such as the Claimant’s in the
banking sector, the Tribunal observed that the “Claimant does not rely on Bank
Indonesia procedures that are particular to foreign investors or that are formally

denominated as admission procedures” and concluded, on that basis, that the
“question before the Tribunal is whether, taken as a whole, the regulatory steps
taken by Bank Indonesia comprised a de facto grant of admission of Claimant’s

stated investment.””?

However, in answering this question, the Tribunal wrongly considered as relevant
Bank Indonesia’s knowledge of the Claimant’s shareholding in the investment at
the time of its admission. Although the Tribunal held that “the evidence before
[it] establishes that Bank Indonesia took the three regulatory steps on which
Claimant relies [...] Claimant has not established that Bank Indonesia took these
three steps in awareness of Claimant’s shareholding in the investment. That is an
important deficiency in his contention that Bank Indonesia’s approvals, which
apply equally to foreign and local investors, amount to a grant of admission of his

stated investment”.*

With respect, there is absolutely no basis in law or fact for this conclusion.
Having found, as a matter of Indonesian law, that Bank Indonesia is empowered
to admit investments such as the Claimant’s in accordance with the Foreign
Capital Investment Law, in circumstances where Bank Indonesia’s approvals
process draws no distinction between local and foreign investments in the banking

sector, such that there is effectively no admissions procedure specific to foreign

, para, 182.

°8 Thid., para. 196.

60.

61.

62.

(as opposed to local) investments in the banking sector, that is a matter for the
policymakers in the Indonesian banking sector. It is not open to the Tribunal to
deny the Claimant’s investment the protection of the BIT on the basis of a
hypothetical admissions process (i.e., one that would take into account whether

the individual vetted was foreign or domestic), applicable to foreign investments.

The effect of the Tribunal’s approach to this question is to elevate whatever
admission requirements the Respondent’s banking sector imposes upon foreign
investments and to deny the Claimant’s investment BIT protection on the basis
that the Claimant’s investment has not complied with such a hypothetical
elevated admissions process. The net effect of this process is to deny BIT
protection to foreign investments such as the Claimant’s on the basis of
admissions processes which the Respondent itself was not concerned to impose.
This is not right as a matter of Indonesian or international law and does not give
effect to the intention and purpose of the BIT which is to create and encourage a
favourable environment for foreign investment as between the Respondent and

the United Kingdom and their respective investors.

This is particularly true in circumstances where the Tribunal has found as a matter
of fact that Bank Indonesia approved the acquisition of shares in the pre-merger
banks by Chinkara, a foreign legal entity, without imposing any specific
admission process on Chinkara’s investment despite being afforded the

opportunity to do so, had it so wished.

It is clear that a manifest excess of powers can occur on a question of merits.” In
the circumstances, it is self-evident that the Tribunal has erred in its Award, as a
matter of both law and fact. This constitutes a manifest excess of the Tribunal’s
powers and the Claimant contends that the Tribunal’s finding on this point in its

Award must therefore be annulled.

C. That the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which the Award was based

» Exhibit CLAA-7: MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (Case No. ARB/O1/7),
Decision on Annulment, 21 March 2007, para. 44.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention provides that an ICSID award must state
the reasons on which it is based. The rationale for this requirement was noted by

the ad hoc Committee in Wena Hotels v. Egypt:

“This requirement is based on the Tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let the
parties know, the factual and legal premises leading the Tribunal to its
decision.”*
In Luccheti v. Peru, the ad hoc Committee held that the requirement of reasons
“aims at ensuring the parties’ right to ascertain whether or to what extent the
tribunal’s findings are sufficiently based on the law and on a proper evaluation of

relevant facts.”*!

In its leading decision on annulment for failure to state reasons under Article
52(1)(e), the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi I said that “annulment under Article
52(1)(e) should only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the
failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a particular point essentially
lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary
to the tribunal's decision”.

In concluding that it did not have sufficient evidence before it to determine that
the Claimant’s investment had been admitted in accordance with the Foreign
Capital Investment Law No. 1 of 1967, as required by Article 2(1) of the BIT, as
explained in section B above, the Tribunal made no reference to the specific

admission criteria by which it considered the Claimant to be bound.

In reaching its decision, the Tribunal first held that “the question before [it] is
whether, taken as a whole, the regulatory steps taken by Bank Indonesia
comprised a de facto grant of admission of Claimant’s investment”. The Tribunal
went on to recognize that the steps upon which the Claimant relied as constituting

the de facto admission process were “the approval of Chinkara’s share purchases

* Exhibit CLAA-2: Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on
Annulment, 5 February 2002, para. 79.

* Exhibit CLAA-8, Lucchetti v. Peru (Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 September 2007,
para. 98.

* Exhibit CLAA-5: Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic
(Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, para. 65.

15

68.

69.

70.

in Pikko and Danpac; the approval of the Bank Century merger and the ‘fit and
proper’ test to which Claimant was subjected. Claimant emphasizes that Bank
Indonesia was aware of his ultimate ownership of the Pre-Merger Banks and
Bank Century at the time of the steps in what he regards as a de facto admission

process”.

Having laid out the parameters for its analysis of the question before it, the
Tribunal went on to determine that “the question is whether Bank Indonesia was
aware of his shareholding when it took the regulatory steps on which Claimant
relies”. On that basis alone, the Tribunal concluded that “Claimant has not
established that Bank Indonesia took these three steps in awareness of Claimant’s

”4 and therefore that it had insufficient evidence

shareholding in the investment
before it that the Claimant’s investment was granted admission in accordance with

the Foreign Capital Investment Law.

In reaching its conclusion in this regard, the Tribunal failed to state any reasons (i)
why it considered the Respondent Central Bank’s state of awareness to be
relevant to the question of whether the Claimant’s investment had complied with
the applicable admission process; (ii) why, absent any specific identifiable
admission process relevant to his investment, the regulatory steps with which it
found the Claimant had complied to the Respondent’s satisfaction were not
sufficient to constitute admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital
Investment Law for the purposes of the BIT; and (iii) why it considered the

evidence before it to be insufficient.

In the circumstances, in relation to the key question of whether the Claimant’s
investment was granted admission in accordance with the Foreign Capital
Investment Law, the Tribunal has failed to explain the rationale for its decision
and it is impossible to reconstruct the Tribunal’s reasoning in reaching its

conclusion.

% Award, para. 182.
™ Tbid., paras. 194 & 196.

71.

72.

723.

74.

Indeed, the Tribunal’s putative review of the documentary and witness evidence
makes matters less clear.*> For example, on the one hand, the Tribunal states that
the evidence is not in dispute that the Claimant passed a vetting process.*° But
then the Tribunal seeks to impose on the evidence a construct: that passing the
vetting process as a “President Commissioner” of a bank somehow would differ

from the vetting process imposed on a shareholder in the claimed investment.”

The Tribunal, upon reviewing this evidence, concludes that there is an “attenuated
link” between the vetting process (which all parties agree the Claimant passed)
and the asserted “de facto admission of [the Claimant’s investment vehicle’s]

A . 9938
investment in the pre-merger banks.

The Tribunal does not explain why this
“attenuated link” matters, or why any different test would have made any

difference either.

In accordance with the test laid down in Vivendi J therefore, the Claimant
considers that the Tribunal’s rationale in reaching its decision on jurisdiction is
incomplete as expressed. On that basis, the Claimant contends that the Award
fails to state the reasons upon which it is based and respectfully requests that the

Award be annulled in accordance with Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

D. That the Tribunal disregarded a fundamental rule of procedure in reversing
the burden of proof on jurisdiction

The object and purpose of the power to annul an award under ICSID Convention
Article 52(1)(d) is control of the integrity of the arbitral procedure.*? To merit
annulment the departure from the rule is serious; and the rule concerned must be
1°

fundamental.” This can occur when the burden of proof on an issue is reversed.‘!

 

8 Thid., para. 188.
*® Exhibit CLAA-9: Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (Case

No. ARB/03/25), Decision on Annulment, 23 December 2010, para. 18

 

xhibit CLAA-6: Soufraki v.

UAE (Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 23.
“ Exhibit CLAA-10: Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Guinea (Case No. ARB/84/4),
Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, para. 4.06 (““[T]he text of Article 52(1)(d) makes clear that not
every departure from a rule of procedure justifies annulment; it requires that the departure be a serious one
and that the rule of be fund in order to a ground for annulment”); Exhibit

17

75. Although the burden of proof on jurisdiction lies on the Claimant, that burden is
to make a prima facie showing, i.e. some evidence that suggests the jurisdictional
requirements are met.” After such a showing has been made, the burden of proof

falls on the Respondent, as proponent of the Objections to Jurisdiction.

76. As described in Section V.A. above, having delimited its inquiry to assessing only
“any evidence regarding the question whether the Claimant complied with
provisions of Indonesian law in respect to admission of his investment,” the
Tribunal then disposed of the inquiry based on Respondent Central Bank’s
awareness (or lack thereof) of the Claimant’s position as shareholder in Bank
Century at the time the admission procedure was undertaken. By refusing to
adhere to the inquiry that the Tribunal itself set out, the Tribunal required the
Claimant to prove an additional element: that the Respondent was aware that the
Claimant was being vetted in his role as a shareholder, instead of vetted as a
President Commissioner of a bank.’ This reversed the burden, requiring claimant

to make more than a prima facie showing of jurisdiction.

77. Indeed, the Tribunal intimated that being vetted as a shareholder versus as a
President Commissioner might matter. But the Tribunal never explained why
such a difference might matter. In this way, by requiring Claimant to prove an
element that Claimant was unaware it had to prove, Claimant was also denied the

ability to make the case it had to meet.

 

CLAA-9: Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (Case No.
ARB/03/25), Decision on Annulment, 23 December 2010, para. 180; Exhibit CLAA-2: Wena Hotels
Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, para.

58.
“! Exhibit CLAA-I 1: Kléckner v. Cameroon, Resubmitted Case (Case No. ARB/8 1/2), Decision on
Annulment, 17 May 1990, 14 ICSID Rep. 102, para. 6.80.
* E.g., Exhibit CLAA-12: Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision
on Jurisdiction, 28 June 1999, paras. V, VI (tribunal refused to convert a preliminary jurisdictional dispute,
requiring claimant to make only a prima facie showing), 41 Int’l Legal Materials 890 (2002).
3

Award, paras. 185-186.

VI.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the Claimant requests that the enforcement of the Award be
stayed until such time as the Tribunal has determined the outcome of this

Application.

This request for a stay of enforcement of the Award pending the outcome of the
ad hoc Committee’s decision on this Application is made so as to avoid further
irreparable harm to the Claimant, which would occur should the Respondent be

permitted to continue with its enforcement action in several jurisdictions.

Although the Award does not place any positive obligations on the Parties, with
the exception of a requirement that each Party bears its own costs of the
proceedings, as a result of correspondence sent by the Respondent to the Centre
following issue of the Award, the Claimant has reason to believe that the
Respondent intends to enforce the Award, to the extent possible, in Indonesia,

commencing with its registration.

Thereafter, the Claimant is concerned that the Respondent will use the registered
and enforceable Award to generate further negative publicity surrounding the
Claimant’s role in the bailout of Bank Century and to advance its position in

various jurisdictions in relation to the seizure of assets belonging to the Claimant.

The Claimant has already suffered, and continues to suffer, significant on-going
moral, reputational and financial harm as a result of the Respondent’s actions in
expropriating his investment and publicly pursuing him through the Indonesian
Courts as a scapegoat for its own government’s corrupt and unlawful actions in
nationalizing Bank Century. The Claimant has reason to believe that the

Respondent intends to use the Award to harm further the Claimant in this regard.

VU. Prayer for Relief

83. The Claimant requests:

(a) that pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 50 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Award issued in this case be annulled; and

(b) that pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, the enforcement of the Award be stayed until the

ad hoc Committee rules on the annulment thereof; and

(c) that pursuant to Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Secretary-
General notify the parties of the provisional stay of the Award; and

(d) pursuant to Articles 61(2) and 52(4), an order that the Respondent pay the
Claimant’s costs of this annulment proceeding, together with the Centre’s

costs.

Respectfully submitted this 11" day of November 2013
GEORGE BURN, TIMOTHY TYLER and LOUISE WOODS

VINSON & ELKINS R.L.L.P.

A CMe,

VV neenr

20

