INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
RAIFFEISEN BANK INTERNATIONAL AG AND RAIFFEISENBANK AUSTRIA D.D.
Claimants
and
REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/17/34

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
STANIMIR ALEXANDROV

 

Chairman of the Administrative Council
Dr. Jim Yong Kim

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Alex B. Kaplan

Date: May 17, 2018

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Franz T. Schwarz

Mr. Gary B. Born

Mr. Charlie Caher

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP

49 Park Lane

London W1K 1PS

United Kingdom

and

Ms. Danielle Morris

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP

1875 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20006

United States of America

and

Mr. Nikolaus Vavrovsky
Vavrovsky Heine Marth
Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Fleischmarkt 1

1010 Vienna

Republic of Austria

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Jozo Juréevié and

Ms. Ines Videni¢ Desovié
Office of the Attorney General
Gajeva 30a

10000 Zagreb

Republic of Croatia

and

Mr. Robert Volterra
Mr. Graham Coop
Ms. Jessica Pineda
Mr. Govert Coppens
Volterra Fietta

8 Mortimer Street
Fitzroy Place
London W1T 3JJ
United Kingdom

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
Il. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS. 2
A. The Respondent’s Proposal 2
(1) The Relevant Legal Standard
(2) Dr. Alexandrov’s Repeat Appointments in Cases against Croatia Establish an

 

Absence of Impartiality and Independence...

(3) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations Establish an
Absence of Impartiality and Independence...

 

(4) Dr. Alexandrov’s History of Appointments with Claimants’ Counsel Establish an
Absence of Impartiality and Independence

 

(5) Dr. Alexandrov’s Relationship with The Brattle Group Establish an Absence of
Impartiality and Independence

 

B. The Claimants’ Response 10

 

i

Respondent Has Artificially Lowered the Relevant Standar

3

The Multiple Appointments at Issue Do Not Establish an Absence of Impartiality
or Independence 11

(3) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations Does Not Establish
an Absence of Impartiality or Independence...

 

(4) The Purported History of Appointments Between Dr. Alexandrov and
WilmerHale Does Not Establish an Absence of Impartiality or Independence.... 17

(5) The Engagement of the Brattle Group in the UniCredit Arbitration Does Not
Establish an Absence of Impartiality or Independence

 

 

C. Respondent’s Further Observations

 

 

 

 

(1) Respondent Agrees that a Lack of Impartiality or Independence Must Be
Manifest
19
(2) Neither the Claimants nor Dr. Alexandrov Deny the Facts Underlying
Respondent’s Proposal 20
(3) It Is Significant that Dr. Alexandrov Chose Not to Submit Observations ............. 21
Ill. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN 22
A. Timeliness 22

 

B. The Applicable Legal Standard 23

Cc. Merits 25

(1) Multiple Appointments by Other Claimants in ICSID Cases and in ICSID Cases
Against Croatia 25

 

(2) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations

(3) The Alleged History of Appointments between Dr. Alexandrov and WilmerHale...

 

 

 

27

(4) The Potential Expert Testimony of The Brattle Group in UniCredit. .27

(5) Conclusion 28

IV. DECISION 29

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On September 1, 2017, Raiffeisen Bank International AG and Raiffeisenbank Austria d.d.
(“Claimants”) submitted a Request for Arbitration to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) against the Republic of

Croatia (“Croatia” or “Respondent”).

On September 15, 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“ICSID Convention”).

The Tribunal is composed of Professor Lucy Reed, a national of the United States of
America, President, appointed by the agreement of the Parties; Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov, a
national of the Republic of Bulgaria, appointed by the Claimants; and Mr. Lazar Tomov, a

national of the Republic of Bulgaria, appointed by the Respondent.

On February 15, 2018, the Secretary-General notified the parties that all three arbitrators
had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have
been constituted on that date in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure
for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”). Mr. Alex B. Kaplan, ICSID Legal

Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On February 28, 2018, the Respondent proposed the disqualification of Dr. Stanimir
Alexandrov, in accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 9 (the “Proposal”). On that date, the Centre informed the parties that the proceeding

will be suspended until the Proposal is decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6).

The Parties were also informed that the Proposal will be decided by the other Members of
the Tribunal in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration

Rule 9(4).

A procedural calendar was established for the Parties’ submissions on the Proposal. In
compliance with that procedural calendar, the Claimants submitted their Response on the

Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Dr. Alexandrov on March 8, 2018 (the “Response’”).

On March 12, 2018, ICSID informed the Parties that Dr. Alexandrov will not be submitting
observations on the Parties’ submissions to date related to the Respondent’s Proposal and
that, in accordance with the procedural calendar established for the Proposal, the Parties

may file any further observations related to the Proposal.

On March 21, 2018, the Respondent filed Further Observations to the Claimants’ Response
of March 8, 2018 (the “Further Observations”), and the Claimants sent email
correspondence to the Secretariat indicating that they have no further observations on

the Proposal.

By letter of April 6, 2018, Mr. Lazar Tomov informed the Centre that, for reasons explained
in his letter, he could not decide the Proposal, recusing himself. A copy of Mr. Tomov’s
letter was transmitted to the Parties on that same date indicating that the proposal would
be decided by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council (the “Chairman”). No

comments were received from the Parties on this issue.

PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

THE RESPONDENT'S PROPOSAL
(dd) The Relevant Legal Standard

According to the Respondent, Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention regulate the
disqualification of arbitrators in ICSID proceedings. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention
establishes the right of a party to propose the disqualification of any member of a tribunal
onthe basis of “any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by” Article 14(1)
of the ICSID Convention. Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, which states that a tribunal

member must possess high moral character and have recognized competence in the fields

of law, commerce, industry or finance, has been widely interpreted as encompassing the

requirement that members of tribunals need to be both independent and impartial.*

Respondent has interpreted ICSID jurisprudence in the following way. “Impartiality refers
to the absence of bias or a predisposition towards one party” and “independence relates
to the absence of external control, in particular of relations with a party that might
influence an arbitrator’s decision.” In this regard, independence and impartiality “protect
parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to the

merits of the case.”?

Further, the Respondent argues that the applicable legal standard for disqualification in
ICSID proceedings is “an objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of evidence
by a third party.” The term “manifest” in Article 57 of the ICSID Convention means
“evident” or “obvious” in that it “relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of

[independence and impartiality] can be perceived.”>

As a result, the Respondent states that Article 57 of the ICSID Convention requires that an
arbitrator be disqualified where a reasonably informed third party would conclude that
there are justifiable doubts (not certainties or even likelihoods, but doubts) about the
challenged tribunal member’s ability to exercise independent and impartial judgment or
that there is an appearance (not certainty or even likelihood but appearance) of

dependency or bias arising from the circumstances of a given case.*

In addition, the Respondent notes that numerous ICSID tribunals have referred to the IBA
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”). The IBA

Guidelines are regarded as “instructive” and “useful references.”®

2 Proposal para. 16.

2 Proposal para. 17.

2 Proposal para. 18.

4 Proposal para. 19.

5 Proposal paras. 20-22.

(2) Dr. Alexandrov’s Repeat Appointments in Cases against Croatia Establish an
Absence of Impartiality and Independence

16. The Respondent asserts that Dr. Alexandrov has served as claimant’s appointee in 35 cases
out of the total 38 known investment treaty arbitrations in which he has sat as an
arbitrator. He was the president of the tribunal in two cases, both of which were decided
in favor of the claimants, and he was appointed once by a respondent more than a decade

ago.®

17. | Other claimants (and not the Claimants in this case) have appointed Dr. Alexandrov in four
ongoing investment treaty arbitrations against Croatia in addition to this proceeding. They

are:

*¢ Georg Gavrilovié and Gavrilovié d.o.o. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No.

ARB/12/39) (“Gavrilovic”);

¢ B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/15/5);

e Amlyn Holding B.V. v. Republic of Croatia (\CSID Case No. ARB/16/28); and

e Addiko Bank AG and Addiko Bank d.d. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No
ARB/17/37) (“Addiko” or “Addiko v. Croatia”).”

18. The Respondent indicated that Dr. Alexandrov declined to accept the appointment in
Addiko. \n doing so, he included a message to be transmitted to the Parties via ICSID that
expressly disavowed the concerns raised by the Respondent related to multiple

appointments against Croatia prior to ICSID seeking his appointment in that case. Thus, in

Proposal paras. 35, 48.

” Proposal para. 27.

the Respondent’s view, even though Dr. Alexandrov declined the appointment, he

indicated his willingness to sit as an arbitrator in future ICSID cases against Croatia.®

19. According to the Respondent, Croatia has faced ten ICSID arbitrations to date, nine of
which are pending. Dr. Alexandrov has been nominated by the claimants in half of these
cases, and he is presently acting as the claimant-appointed arbitrator in 45 percent of the
ongoing ICSID claims. As a result, the Respondent contends that Dr. Alexandrov possesses
significant and unique influence over the Respondent’s financial situation and
international reputation which no single arbitrator should possess. Further, the
Respondent argues that where an arbitrator is repeatedly appointed by claimants in cases
against the same respondent, the arbitrator is highly likely to be negatively predisposed
against that respondent’s arguments or incentivized to be so predisposed — even

subconsciously — in order to secure further appointments by claimants.?

20. In addition, the Respondent argues that Dr. Alexandrov’s repeat appointments in cases
against Croatia is concerning in light of his changed professional circumstances.
Dr. Alexandrov left the partnership of Sidley Austin LLP to become an independent
arbitrator in September 2017. As a result, in the Respondent’s view, Dr. Alexandrov’s
income is dependent on his own revenue generation and the main source of that revenue

is arbitral appointments by claimants in investment treaty arbitrations. !°

21. The Respondent states that repeat appointments, such as the ones described above, “lead
to the conclusion that it is manifest that the arbitrator cannot be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment as required by the Convention.” The criteria for deciding whether
repeat appointments pose a threat to the arbitrator’s impartiality and independence are
qualitative rather than quantitative. In essence, the assessment of the risk underlying

repeat appointments does not translate into a mere computation of how many such

® Proposal para. 28.
° Proposal paras. 30-32.

2 Proposal para. 35.

22.

24.

25.

appointments have taken place over a specified number of years. Rather, it entails a much

broader analysis of the overall circumstances of a challenged arbitrator’s profile.

Moreover, the Respondent believes that the problem with repeat appointments rests in
the fact that “the prospect of continued and regular appointment, with the attendant
financial benefits, might create a relationship of dependence or otherwise influence the
arbitrator’s judgment.” The risk is particularly heightened where repeat appointments
represent a major source of the arbitrator’s income, thus implying financial dependence,

as is the case with Dr. Alexandrov.??

In addition, the Respondent asserts that serial appointments of the same arbitrator by
different claimants in cases against the same respondent party can be likened to multiple
appointments of an arbitrator by a claimant or its counsel under Section 3.1.3 of the IBA
Guidelines. Section 3.1.3 provides that an arbitrator falls within the Orange List if he or she
has “within the past three years, been appointed as arbitrator on two or more occasions

by one of the parties.” 3

Thus, the Respondent concludes that Dr. Alexandrov is, put simply, already perceived as a

professional anti-Croatia claimant arbitrator.*4

(3) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations Establish an
Absence of Impartiality and Independence

The Respondent states that one of the disputes in which Dr. Alexandrov is sitting,
Gavrilovic, is similar to the present proceeding in that it is also based on the Austria-Croatia
BIT. Although that arbitration is significantly more advanced than the present proceeding,

it is likely that arguments relating to the compatibility of Austria-Croatia BIT with the law

11 Proposal para. 47.

2 Proposal para. 48.

3 Proposal para. 49.

+4 Proposal para. 49.

26.

27.

28.

29.

of the European Union will be central to both the present arbitration and the Gavrilovic

proceeding.*>

In the Respondent’s view, this means that when the issue is put before the Tribunal in the
present case, Dr. Alexandrov will already have been privy to third party and tribunal
members’ views. Further, he will already have formed his own views and taken decisions
on the issue in Gavrilovic before having the opportunity to hear the Parties’ views in the

instant case.1¢

According to the Respondent, participation in related or similar investment treaty
arbitrations “is an important consideration in the assessment of [an arbitrator’s] perceived
impartiality” since the arbitrator will likely have “obtained documents or information in
one arbitration that are relevant to the dispute to be determined in another arbitration.”
As a result, Dr. Alexandrov’s “objectivity and open-mindedness with regard to the facts

and issues to be decided in the present arbitration are tainted.” 1”

The Respondent further notes that this problem is highlighted in Section 3.1.5 of the IBA
Guidelines. Specifically, Section 3.1.5 provides that an arbitrator falls in the Orange list if
he or she “currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in an

arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate of the parties.” 18

 

(4) Dr. Al drov’s History of Appoii with Clai Counsel ish an
Absence of Impartiality and Independence

According to the Respondent, Dr. Alexandrov and the Claimants’ counsel, WilmerHale,
have developed a special relationship as the record of appointments between them is

extensive.1° The Respondent uses the term “cross-appointments” to refer to

5 Proposal para. 51.

26 Proposal para. 34.

27 Proposal para. 51.

38 Proposal para. 51.

29 Proposal para. 38.

30.

31.

appointments of Dr. Alexandrov as arbitrator by WilmerHale and appointments of Mr.

Gary Born, a partner at WilmerHale, as arbitrator, by Dr. Alexandrov, as counsel.

In addition to WilmerHale’s appointment of Dr. Alexandrov in the instant case, the cross-

appointments at issue are as follows:

Dr. Alexandrov is co-counsel with Sidley Austin LLP in a commercial case where
Mr. Gary Born, partner at WilmerHale and counsel to the Claimants, serves as the

arbitrator appointed by Dr. Alexandrov’s client.

Dr. Alexandrov was appointed by WilmerHale as the claimant’s co-arbitrator in

J&P-AVAX S.A. v. Lebanese Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/29).

Mr. Gary Born was appointed as an arbitrator in Philip Morris Brand Sarl
(Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A. (Switzerland) and Abal Hermanos S.A.
(Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7). Though the
respondent prevailed in that case, Mr. Born issued a dissenting opinion in favor of

the claimants.

WilmerHale nominated Dr. Alexandrov as the claimant’s arbitrator in Addiko.

WilmerHale appointed Dr. Alexandrov as the claimant’s arbitrator in an
investment treaty arbitration GRAND EXPRESS Non-Public Joint Stock Company v.
Republic of Belarus (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/18/1) (“Grand Express”).

Dr. Alexandrov did not disclose the appointment in this case.2°

The Respondent states that these cross-appointments clearly point to an ongoing and
consistent professional relationship between Dr. Alexandrov and counsel for the Claimants
in this case that is inappropriate. As a result of this ongoing relationship, Dr. Alexandrov

will be motivated — consciously or unconsciously — to prejudge the present case in a

20 Proposal paras. 39-40.

we
»

manner favorable to the Claimants and WilmerHale. Such doubts give rise to an

appearance of dependence or bias.?+

(5) Dr. Alexandrov’s Relationship with The Brattle Group Establish an Absence of
Impartiality and Independence

The Respondent believes that Dr. Alexandrov also lacks impartial judgment against the
Respondent because The Brattle Group, a firm of financial consultants, is involved in at
least one of the current investment treaty cases against the Respondent arising out of its
financial sector. The claimants in UniCredit Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d. v.
Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/31) (“UniCredit” or “Unicredit v. Croatia”), an
arbitration also brought under the Austria-Croatia BIT and relating to the same facts as the
present case, have retained The Brattle Group as experts according to information in the

public domain.?2

According to the Respondent, Dr. Alexandrov has a long-standing and publicly-recognized
relationship with The Brattle Group, as he has retained their services to deliver expert

testimony in multiple treaty arbitrations while working as a partner at Sidley Austin LLP.?3

As a result, the Respondent argues that Dr. Alexandrov will be predisposed toward
arguments and evidence put forward by the Claimants, knowing that The Brattle Group
has recently given expert evidence on behalf of claimants in respect of an arbitration under

the same BIT with an identical factual basis.”

Further, the Respondent notes it is not the first party to an investment arbitration to
comment on the impropriety of Dr. Alexandrov’s long-standing relationship with The
Brattle Group. His independence and impartiality were also questioned in three prior cases

on the basis of his relationship with The Brattle Group. They are:

21 Proposal para. 41.

2 Proposal para. 42.

23 Proposal para. 43.

24 Proposal para. 43.

e SolEs Badajoz GmbH v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/38), in which
Dr. Alexandrov resigned. According to the Respondent, this resignation is a clear
indication of the legitimacy of its concerns about Dr. Alexandrov’s ongoing use of
The Brattle Group in two cases in which he acted as counsel and his 15-year

relationship with The Brattle Group;

e  Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (\CSID Case
No. ARB 12/1) in which the respondent twice proposed Dr. Alexandrov’s

disqualification due to the claimant’s engagement of The Brattle Group; and

e  Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.da.r.I. v. Kingdom of
Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36), in which Dr. Alexandrov’s failure to disclose his
relationship with The Brattle Group is raised as a ground for annulment of that

award.?°

In conclusion, the Respondent argues that viewed together and independently, the facts
set out above demonstrate that the Respondent has met the legal standard for the

disqualification of Dr. Alexandrov in this case.7®

THE CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE
(dd) Respondent Has Artificially Lowered the Relevant Standard

The Claimants agree with the Respondent that Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention
requires both independence and impartiality. The Claimants also agree that the standard
for disqualification under Article 57 is “an objective standard based on a reasonable
evaluation of evidence by a third party.” However, the Respondent has failed to properly
appreciate the import of the requirement that any lack of independence or impartiality be
“manifest.” The Respondent’s own legal authorities make clear that the correct standard

is significantly higher. Contrary to the Respondent’s position, mere doubts or an

25 Proposal para. 44.

26 Proposal para. 53.

40.

appearance of bias are insufficient to satisfy the test under Article 57 of a “manifest” lack

of independence.”

The Claimants refer to the decision in OPIC, an authority also relied on bythe Respondent,

wherein the unchallenged arbitrators cautioned that there

exists a relatively high burden for those seeking to challenge ICSID
arbitrators. The Convention’s requirement that the lack of
independence be “manifest” necessitates that this lack be clearly
and objectively established. Accordingly, it is not sufficient to show
an appearance of a lack of impartiality and independence.”®

The Claimants state that respected commentators have equally underlined the heavy
burden a party must satisfy to disqualify an arbitrator under Article 57. As such, to succeed
on its challenge, the Respondent must establish facts that make it “obvious and highly
probable” that Dr. Alexandrov cannot be relied upon to exercise independent and
impartial judgment in this case. Although the Claimants agree that sources such as the IBA
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration may be useful as part of this
analysis, they cannot change the underlying legal standard required by the ICSID

Convention.??

(2) The Multiple Appointments at Issue Do Not Establish an Absence of
Impartiality or Independence

a. The Proposal’s Factual Premise of an Unduly Claimant-Friendly Arbitrator Is
Flawed

The Respondent attempts to imply a lack of impartiality and independence by noting, inter
alia, the number of cases in which Dr. Alexandrov has been appointed by Claimants. Yet
the Respondent asserts elsewhere in its Proposal that “[t]he criteria for deciding whether

repeat appointments pose a threat to the arbitrator’s impartiality and independence are

27 Response paras. 3-5.
28 Response para. 6 (citing OPIC Karimum Corp. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14),
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands (May 5, 2011), at para. 45) (“OPIC’).

29 Response para. 8.

Al.

42.

43.

qualitative rather than quantitative.” As such, the Respondent’s reference to a number of
appointments by other claimants is the sort of speculation tribunals have routinely

rejected in the context of challenges.*°

According to the Claimants, it is a fact of the investment arbitration system that some
arbitrators accept more appointments from claimants, others from respondent States, and
yet others as presiding arbitrator. This is reflected in the Respondent’s own appointment
practice. The Respondent has appointed Professor Brigitte Stern in several of its pending
ICSID cases. According to her ICSID CV, Professor Stern has sat as a respondent’s co-
arbitrator 55 times, presiding or sole arbitrator only three times, and as a claimant’s co-
arbitrator just once — in a case filed in 2004. Christopher Thomas (also appointed by
Croatia) has never sat in an ICSID arbitration other than as a respondent’s co-arbitrator,
which he has done 18 times. The Respondent had no hesitation to appoint these eminent

arbitrators in several cases, which reveals its present complaint is frivolous.34

In addition, the Claimants assert that the Respondent seeks to infer that Dr. Alexandrov’s
recent decision to become a sole practitioner demonstrates an inappropriate disposition
towards investors. The Respondent asserts that Dr. Alexandrov “is now entirely and
directly financially dependent on his own revenue generation and ... the main source of his
income derives from sitting as claimant-appointed co-arbitrator in investment treaty

arbitrations.” 32

The Claimants reply that the Respondent has failed to identify any particular respect in
which Dr. Alexandrov’s impartiality or independence in this case would be affected by
virtue of the fact that he now works solely as an arbitrator in a multitude of entirely
unrelated matters. Indeed, in addition to this case, Dr. Alexandrov is currently sitting as
arbitrator in 20 pending ICSID cases, having been appointed by various counsel against a

variety of respondents, not including arbitrations under other arbitral rules. If anything,

2 Response para. 12.

3 Response para. 14.

» Response para. 15.

44.

4S.

46.

this compels the opposite inference: because Dr. Alexandrov has been appointed in a wide
range of matters involving a multitude of parties and sectors, he is not dependent on any
single case or matter. This only underscores his ability to exercise free and independent

judgment.??

b. The Factual Premise of an “Anti-Croatia” Arbitrator Is Equally Flawed

The Respondent notes that Dr. Alexandrov has been appointed in four arbitrations
involving Croatia and asserts that “a reasonably informed third party would conclude” that
Dr. Alexandrov’s appointment in four arbitrations against Croatia would appear to be

“more than random coincidence.” 34

The Claimants agree that Dr. Alexandrov is currently sitting in three other ongoing
investment arbitrations against Croatia (in addition to the present case). But in the
Claimants’ view, the other three cases have nothing to do with the present arbitration, or
with each other: the factual basis for each claim is different. Indeed, the claimants in all
four cases are different, and they are all represented by different counsel. In reality,
Dr. Alexandrov appears to have been independently appointed by different parties and
their lawyers in cases that happen to involve Croatia as a respondent. This is not surprising
given Dr. Alexandrov’s unique background as a renowned investment law specialist with
personal roots in the CEE region. Thus, Dr. Alexandrov also sits, or has recently sat, in cases

involving Hungary, Romania, the Czech Republic, and Serbia.?°

In the absence of any real factual concern, the Respondent speculates that “[w]here an
arbitrator is repeatedly appointed by claimants against the same respondent, that
arbitrator is highly likely to be negatively predisposed against that respondent’s arguments
or incentivized to be so predisposed — even subconsciously — in order to secure further

appointments by claimants.” As discussed above, it is the Claimants’ position that the

3 Response para. 16.

» Response para. 17.

%5 Response para. 18.

47.

48.

49.

50.

speculative postulation of some likelihood of bias is insufficient to satisfy the test of a

manifest lack of impartiality orindependence.*°

With all four cases still pending, the Claimants argue that there is in any event no basis to
suggest that Dr. Alexandrov has a consistent history of deciding against Croatia. And the

Respondent’s theory that Dr. Alexandrov seeks to build an “anti- Croatia” “cottage
industry” is belied by the fact that Dr. Alexandrov recently declined his nomination in the

Addiko v. Croatia matter.3”

Finally, the Claimants argue that the Respondent’s complaint about Dr. Alexandrov is also
not credible in light of Croatia’s own appointment practice. As mentioned above, Croatia,
as respondent, appointed Professor Stern as its co-arbitrator in at least four ongoing
investment arbitrations. Apparently, the Respondent is content to have the same
arbitrator sit in “45 percent of the ongoing ICSID arbitrations against the Respondent” as

long as it is an arbitrator of the Respondent’s own choosing.?®

(3) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations Does Not
Establish an Absence of Impartiality or Independence

The Respondent complains that Dr. Alexandrov is also sitting in Gavrilovic, in which “it is
highly likely that ... identical arguments relating to the compatibility of the intra-EU Austria-
Croatia BIT with European Union (“EU”) law will have been raised. This issue is one of those
that are likely to be central to the present arbitration.” The Claimants argue that the
Respondent’s own legal authorities, among others, undercut its position and make clear
that consideration of the same legal issue in multiple arbitrations is not a sufficient basis

for a challenge.?°

First, in Electrabel v. Hungary, for example, the unchallenged tribunal members were

tasked with determining whether Professor Stern should be disqualified due to the factual

36 Response para. 19.

*7 Response para. 21.

38 Response para. 22.

29 Response para. 28.

51.

52.

53.

and legal similarities that case and between AES v. Hungary” (to which she had previously
been appointed). They rejected the challenge, explaining that “[i]nvestment and even
commercial arbitration would become unworkable if an arbitrator were automatically
disqualified on the ground only that he or she was exposed to similar legal or factual issues

in concurrent or consecutive arbitrations.”4+

Second, the decision in Caratube v. Kazakhstan, on which the Respondent relies, is
unavailing. There, the claimants challenged Kazakhstan’s co-arbitrator, Mr. Bruno Boesch,
on the basis that he had previously served in the same role in Ruby Roz v. Kazakhstan*2,
an UNCITRAL arbitration that was brought by a company owned by the brother-in-law of
the owner of Caratube. Caratube and Ruby Roz were therefore not connected by an
abstract question of law, but by a significant overlap in the underlying factual matrix,
involving the same government measures vis-a-vis two entities in the same group of

companies.‘

The unchallenged members of the Caratube tribunal upheld the challenge. In reaching
their conclusion, the unchallenged tribunal members pointed to the close relation
between the claimants in the two arbitrations and the fact that many of the same
individuals who submitted witness statements in Ruby Roz were expected to submit

witness statements in Caratube.**

Third, the Claimants note that the Respondent had no hesitation in appointing Mr. Milos
Olik in UniCredit v. Croatia and Addiko v. Croatia — even though both cases concerned the
same government measure. Presumably the same legal issue regarding the validity of

intra-EU BITs will also be raised in both arbitrations, which arise under the Austria-Croatia

*0 AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft. v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22) (“AES v.
Hungary’).

41 Response para. 30 (citing Electrabel S.A. v. Hungary, (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19), Decision on the Claimant's
Proposal to Disqualify a Member of the Tribunal (February 25, 2008) (“Electrabel v. Hungary”).

#2 Ruby Roz Agricol v. The Re public of Kazakhstan (“Ruby Roz” or “Ruby Roz v. Kazakhstan”), UNCITRAL.

43 Response para. 33 (citing Caratube).

“4 Response para. 34.

BIT, and where Volterra Fietta acts as counsel for the Respondent. The UniCredit case is
significantly more advanced, as the ICSID website indicates that the Respondent has

already filed its objections to jurisdiction in that case.*°

54. Importantly, the unchallenged members of the Caratube v. Kazakhstan tribunal

distinguished cases where any factual overlap is “of a general and impersonal character”:

[T]here is a need immediately to stress that the situation where an
arbitrator has possible prior knowledge of facts relevant to the
outcome of the dispute must be carefully distinguished from the
situation where an arbitrator has possible prior exposure to legal
issues that would be equally relevant in that regard.*°

55. The same rationale applied in ickale, where a challenge was rejected because the
overlapping issue between the cases was a legal issue and there was no significant overlap

of facts.47

56. In sum, the Claimants argue that a challenge based on multiple appointments can be
sustained only when these multiple cases suffer from a significant overlap of facts that are
specific to the merits and the parties involved. It is insufficient that a similar, or even the
same, legal issue arises in two cases (which involves facts only of a general and impersonal
character). Here, there is no factual overlap of the kind described in Caratube: this
arbitration and Gavrilovic concern different claimants; different measures; and entirely
different sets of facts underlying the respective claims. That a similar legal issue may or
may not arise in both cases does not establish a manifest lack of impartiality or

independence.*®

45 Response para. 39.
46 Response para. 35 (quoting Caratube).

47 Response para. 37 (citing ickale insaat Limited Sirketi v. Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/24), Decision on
Claimant's Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands (July 11, 2014) (“ickale”)).

48 Response para. 38.

(4) The Purported History of Appointments Between Dr. Alexandrov and
WilmerHale Does Not Establish an Absence of Impartiality or Independence

57. The Respondent’s assertions that there is an “extensive” “history of reciprocal
appointments” between Dr. Alexandrov and WilmerHale have no basis in reality. When
acting as counsel, Dr. Alexandrov appointed Gary Born only twice. Two appointments,
occurring over the course of eight years, hardly constitutes an extensive history of
appointments. Other than the present case, Dr. Alexandrov has only been appointed twice
by WilmerHale (and never before by the Claimants). None of these appointments rise to
the level of requiring disclosure under the IBA Guidelines, nor do they fall afoul of the

standard under Article 57.4°

58. The Claimants believe that the Respondent tries to make much of the fact that
Dr. Alexandrov “has chosen not to disclose” his recent appointment by the claimant in
Grand Express, for whom WilmerHale acts as co-counsel. But there was no reason for
Dr. Alexandrov to do so since at no time had Dr. Alexandrov been appointed in more than
three arbitrations in the last three years by WilmerHale, which is the disclosure standard

in the IBA Guidelines.°°

59. In any event, the Claimant emphasizes that the only authority the Respondent cites for its
argument of supposedly problematic “[c]ross-appointments” does not support its claim
here. In SGS, the claimant challenged Christopher Thomas, Pakistan’s co-arbitrator, on the
basis that his firm was acting as counsel on behalf of Mexico in an ongoing investment
arbitration presided over by Jan Paulsson, Pakistan’s counsel in SGS. The unchallenged

tribunal members rejected the challenge:

Such an inference is, so far as we can see, bereft of any basis in the
facts of this proceeding; what we have here is simply a supposition,
a speculation merely. It is commonplace knowledge that in the
universe of international commercial arbitration, the community of
active arbitrators and the community of active litigators are both
small and that, not infrequently, the two communities may overlap,

#9 Response paras. 40-41.

5° Response para. 43.

60.

61.

sequentially if not simultaneously. It is widely accepted that such
overlap is not, by itself, sufficient ground for disqualifying an
arbitrator. Something more must be shown if a challenge is to
succeed. In the instant case, that ‘something more’ has not been
shown by the Claimant.**

In the Claimants’ view, this reasoning is directly applicable here.°?

(5) The Engagement of the Brattle Group in the UniCredit Arbitration Does Not
Establish an Absence of Impartiality or Independence

The Claimants argue that equally spurious are the Respondent’s assertions that
Dr. Alexandrov’s ability to exercise independent judgment in this case is somehow
impaired by UniCredit Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d.’s decision to instruct

The Brattle Group as their experts in UniCredit v. Croatia.?

Respondents in certain other investment arbitrations have challenged Dr. Alexandrov on
the basis of his previous engagements of The Brattle Group when acting as counsel. To the
best of the Claimants’ knowledge, however, none of those challenges has been upheld.
The mere existence of a challenge (much less an unsuccessful one) can hardly be used as
objective evidence of Dr. Alexandrov’s lack of impartiality or independence. In any event,
the Claimants ague that it is non-sensical to suggest that the use of The Brattle Group by
different claimants, represented by different counsel, in an arbitration in which
Dr. Alexandrov is not even serving as arbitrator could have any impact on Dr. Alexandrov’s
ability to be impartial and independent in this arbitration. The Claimants can confirm, in
any event, that they have no intention of instructing The Brattle Group as experts in this

case.>4

51 Response para. 44 (citing SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/13), Decision on Claimant's Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator (December 19, 2002) para. 26 (emphasis added)
(“SGS” or “SGS v. Pakistan”).

52 Response para. 45.

53 Response para. 46.

54 Response para. 47.

62.

64.

In conclusion, the Claimants argue that each of the Respondent’s grounds for the
disqualification of Dr. Alexandrov is baseless and that the cumulation of these grounds is
not greater than its constituent parts. In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent fares no
better by combining its individually unpersuasive grounds for disqualification. The
Claimants cite to Electrabel v. Hungary in which the unchallenged arbitrators stated, “Two
or more factors which do not satisfy the test required under Article 57, cannot by mere
‘combination’ meet that test.” A multiple of zero is still nil, and the Respondent’s Proposal
must be dismissed, and the Respondent should be ordered to reimburse the costs the

Claimants incurred on a full indemnity basis.°>

RESPONDENT'S FURTHER OBSERVATIONS

Respondent submitted further observations on its proposal following correspondence
from ICSID communicating Dr. Alexandrov’s decision not to submit observations on the
proposal. In its further observations, the Respondent discussed the bases for its proposal
and addressed three points which are discussed further below. They are (i) further
comments on the relevant legal standard; (ii) the Claimants’ supposed agreement with the
facts underlying the proposal; and (iii) the Respondent’s view on the effect of

Dr. Alexandrov’s decision not to submit observations on the proposal.

(dd) Respondent Agrees that a Lack of Impartiality or Independence Must Be
Manifest

Contrary to the Claimants’ assertion, the Respondent has explicitly acknowledged that the
relevant legal standard requires that the alleged lack of independence or impartiality be
manifest, meaning “evident” or “obvious”. The Respondent submits that its proposal
meets this threshold particularly in this instance where the Claimants and Dr. Alexandrov

do not refute its factual basis.°©

55 Response para. 48.

56 Further Observations para. 5.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Further, the facts put forward by the Respondent must be considered as a whole, and it
would be illogical and deceptive to consider each fact supporting the Respondent’s

proposal in isolation.°”

According to the Respondent, the Claimants themselves rely on multiple legal authorities
which support the view that all facts must be considered as a whole, when assessing
whether a member of a tribunal can exercise independent and impartial judgment. By way
of example, in Tidewater and in Alpha Projektholding, the unchallenged tribunal members
took a holistic approach to the facts submitted in support of the Disqualification Proposal.
The other tribunal members in these cases noted that a particular factual assertion should
be viewed “in combination with other factors” and that certain factors can be “sufficient
in conjunction with [other] facts or circumstances to tip the balance” in favor of

disqualification.*®

(2) Neither the Claimants nor Dr. Alexandrov Deny the Facts Underlying
Respondent’s Proposal

The Respondent further argues that the Claimants do not challenge the accuracy of the
factual evidence underlying the Respondent’s proposal, because they cannot.°? According

to the Respondent, there is no factual dispute with the Claimants on the following:

First, the Claimants do not dispute that Dr. Alexandrov has been repeatedly appointed by
claimants in investment treaty arbitrations. In particular, the Respondent highlighted that

Dr. Alexandrov has served as claimant-appointed co-arbitrator in “[36] cases out of the

57 Further Observations para. 9.

58 Further Observations para. 11 (citing Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5), Decision on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern,
Arbitrator (December 23, 2010) (“Tidewater”); Alpha Projektholding GmbH v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/16),
Decision on Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator Dr. Yoram Turbowicz (March 19, 2010) (“Alpha
Projektholding”)).

59 Further Observations para. 17.

20

69.

70.

71.

72.

total [39] known investment treaty arbitrations in which he sat as an arbitrator.” The

Claimants do not challenge this statement. ©

Second, the Claimants do not dispute that Dr. Alexandrov has been repeatedly appointed
in investment treaty arbitrations against the Republic of Croatia. In its Disqualification
Proposal, the Respondent confirmed that Dr. Alexandrov had been nominated in five out
of ten investment treaty arbitrations against the Respondent as the claimants’ co-

arbitrator.®

Third, the Claimants do not dispute that there have been extensive cross-appointments
between WilmerHale and Dr. Alexandrov. In this regard, the Claimants acknowledge that
Dr. Alexandrov has appointed Gary Born on two occasions and that WilmerHale has

nominated Dr. Alexandrov on four occasions.

Fourth, the Claimants do not dispute that Dr. Alexandrov has recently been nominated in
a fourth case by WilmerHale in Grand Express. In addition, the Claimants do not deny that
Dr. Alexandrov failed to disclose this new appointment to the Tribunal and the Parties

despite his clear obligation to do so.

Last, the Claimants do not dispute that Dr. Alexandrov has been repeatedly challenged in
multiple investment treaty arbitrations on account of his previous engagements with The

Brattle Group, nor that The Brattle Group is involved in the related proceeding UniCredit.®4

(3) It Is Significant that Dr. Alexandrov Chose Not to Submit Observations

Dr. Alexandrov has declined to submit any observations on the Respondent’s

Disqualification Proposal. In the Respondent’s view, this indicates that Dr. Alexandrov has

© Further Observations para. 18 (the tally having been updated by the Respondent in its Further Observations due
toa recent appointment).

1 Further Observations para. 19.

® Further Observations para. 20

®3 Further Observations para. 21.

® Further Observations para. 22.

21

74.

75.

76.

77.

chosen not to challenge any of the facts to be found or conclusions to be reached in the
Respondent’s Proposal. Further, the Respondent observes that Dr. Alexandrov has also

chosen not to affirm his independence or impartiality.

DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN

The Chairman has considered the Parties’ submissions, summarized above, and decides as

follows.

TIMELINESS

Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to
Article 57 of the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before
the proceeding is declared closed, file its proposal with the
Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.

The ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify a number of days within which a proposal

for disqualification must be filed. Accordingly, the timeliness of a proposal must be

determined on a case by case basis.©©

In this case, the Respondent filed the Proposal 13 days after the constitution of the
Tribunal, which was the Respondent's first opportunity to propose the disqualification of
an arbitrator pursuant to Chapter V of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9. The

Claimants do not contest the timeliness of the proposal. In the circumstances, the

5 Further Observations paras. 48-52.

6 See BSG Resources Limited, BSG Resources (Guinea) Limited and BSG Resources (Guinea) SARL v. Republic of Guinea
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/22), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify All Members of the Arbitral Tribunal (December
28, 2016) para. 60 (“BSG”); Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on
the Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia (December 13, 2013) para. 73 (“Burlington”);
ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30) Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal
(May 5, 2014) para. 39 (“Conoco”); Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision on
the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal (February 4, 2014) para. 68 (“Abaclat”).

22

Chairman considers that this disqualification proposal was promptly filed for the purposes

of Arbitration Rule 9(1).

B. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARD

78. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any

member of a tribunal. It reads as follows:

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,
propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV.

79. A majority of decisions have concluded that the word “manifest” in Article 57 of the
Convention means “evident” or “obvious,”®” and that it relates to the ease with which the

alleged lack of the required qualities can be perceived.

80. The disqualification proposal alleges that Dr. Alexandrov manifestly lacks the qualities

required by Article 14(1). Article 14(1) provides:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.

81. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to “independent

judgment,” and the French version to “toute garantie d’indépendance dans I’exercice de

®7 E.g., BSG para. 53, Burlington para. 68 n.83; Abaclat para. 71 n.25; Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify José Maria
Alonso (November 12, 2013) para. 61 n.43 (“Blue Bank”); Repsol, S.A. and Repsol Butano, S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Arbitrators Francisco Orrego Vicufia and
Claus von Wobeser (December 13, 2013) para. 73 n.58 (“Repsol”); Conoco para. 39.

68 C, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Second Edition (2d Ed. 2009), page 1202 paras. 134-154.

23

82.

83.

84.

85.

leurs fonctions” (guaranteed independence in exercising their functions), the Spanish
version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of judgment). Given that all three
versions are equally authentic, it is accepted that arbitrators must be both impartial and

independent.

Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence
is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and impartiality both
“protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to

the merits of the case.”7°

Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of actual dependence
or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence or bias.” All
relevant facts shall be taken into account in establishing the appearance of dependence or

bias.”

The legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator is an “objective
standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third party.” As a
consequence, the subjective belief of the party requesting the disqualification is not

enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention.”?

The Parties have referred to IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration in their arguments. While these rules or guidelines may serve as useful
references, the Chairman is bound by the standard set forth in the ICSID Convention.
Accordingly, this decision is made in accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID

Convention.

© The parties agree on this point at Application paras. 16-17; Response para. 4; see also BSG para. 56; Burlington
para. 65, Abaclat para. 74, Blue Bank para. 58, Repsol para. 70, Conoco para. 50.

70 BSG para. 57; Burlington para. 66; Abaclat para. 75; Blue Bank para. 59; Repsol para. 71; Conoco para. 51.

71 BSG para. 57; Burlington para. 66; Abaclat para. 76; Blue Bank para. 59; Repsol para. 71; Conoco para. 52.
® Tidewater para. 40; Alpha Projektholding GmbH para. 64.
3 Burlington para. 67; Abaclat para. 77; Blue Bank para. 60; Repsol para. 72; Conoco para. 53.

24

86.

87.

88.

Merits

For the reasons set out below, the Chairman rejects the Respondent’s Proposal. The
grounds alleged for the disqualification of Dr. Alexandrov do not meet the required

standard, either individually or taken cumulatively.

(dd) Multiple Appointments by Other Claimants in ICSID Cases and in ICSID Cases
Against Croatia

The first ground of the Respondent’s proposal concerns Dr. Alexandrov’s multiple
appointments by claimants generally and by other claimants in cases against Croatia in
particular. The Chairman notes that the Parties do not dispute the tally of cases in which
Dr. Alexandrov has been appointed by claimants or appointed by claimants in cases against
Croatia.“ Nor do they dispute that the criteria for disqualification due to multiple
appointments are “qualitative rather than quantitative.””> Therefore, the Respondent’s
position is that the number of appointments caused “an increased likelihood that an
arbitrator will be at the very least unconsciously biased in favour of the appointing party”

on whom Dr. Alexandrov relies for professional income.’®

The decisions in Tidewater and Vivendi | are instructive in this regard. In Tidewater, the
unchallenged arbitrators stated that “multiple appointments as arbitrator by the same
party in unrelated cases are neutral, since in each case the arbitrator exercises the same
independent function.””” The Chairman finds that the same principle applies in this case
to multiple appointments by different claimants, even if they are in cases against the same
respondent. In Vivendi I, the unchallenged arbitrators stated that a finding that a lack of

impartiality or independence is manifest “must exclude reliance on speculative

74 Proposal paras. 27, 35; see Response para. 7.

75 Proposal para.48; see Response para. 12.

7 Proposal para.36.

7” Tidewater para. 60.

25

89.

90.

91.

92.

assumptions or arguments” and that “the circumstances actually established . . . must

negate or place in clear doubt the appearance of impartiality.” 7°

The Chairman finds that the Respondent has not submitted any evidence of
Dr. Alexandrov’s bias beyond allegations of unconscious bias nor has the Respondent
submitted evidence of financial dependence. The Respondent’s allegations of unconscious
bias and financial dependence are the kind of speculative assumptions or arguments that
would not lead a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of Dr. Alexandrov’s
appointments by claimants to conclude that the alleged lack of impartiality or
independence is manifest. As a result, the Chairman rejects the Respondent’s Proposal

based on this ground.

(2) Consideration of the Same Legal Issue in Multiple Arbitrations

Second, the Respondent proposes Dr. Alexandrov’s disqualification because he may
consider the same legal issues in this case and in Gavrilovic, another ICSID case against

Croatia under the same BIT.

The Chairman agrees that where a proposal for disqualification rests on consideration of
the same legal issue in multiple arbitrations, the mere exposure of an arbitrator to the
same legal issue in multiple arbitrations is insufficient to disqualify that arbitrator.’? There
must be an additional—significant—overlap of facts that are specific to the merits and the

parties involved, as was the case in Caratube.®°

Aside from the possibility that the same legal issue may arise in both Gavrilovic and this
case, and that the cases arise out of the same BIT, there is no similarity between the two

cases let alone a significant overlap in facts and parties.*? Thus, there is no basis for a third

78 Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/3,
Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Committee (October 3, 2001) para. 25 (“Vivendi |”).

79 See, e.g., ickale paras. 119-120.

® Caratube paras. 78, 84, 86, 90 (upholding a proposal to disqualify due to a significant overlap in the underlying
facts with another case).

8 Response para. 38; Further Observations para. 38.

26

94.

95.

96.

party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the facts alleged to conclude that

Dr. Alexandrov manifestly lacks impartiality and independence on this ground.

(3) The Alleged History of Appointments between Dr. Alexandrov and WilmerHale

Third, it is not contested that as counsel Dr. Alexandrov appointed Gary Born twice in other
arbitration proceedings. It is also not contested that WilmerHale has proposed
Dr. Alexandrov to act as an arbitrator in this case and three others, J&P-AVAX S.A. and
Grand Express in which he accepted the appointment and Addiko in which he declined the

appointment.®?

Both Parties rely on the decision on the proposal for disqualification filed in SGS v.

Pakistan, which states in relevant part,

It is commonplace knowledge that in the universe of international
commercial arbitration, the community of active arbitrators and
the community of active litigators are both small and that, not
infrequently, the two communities may overlap, sequentially if not
simultaneously. It is widely accepted that such an overlap is not, by
itself, sufficient ground for disqualifying an arbitrator. Something
more must be shown if a challenge is to succeed.®?

The Chairman is persuaded that without “something more”, this tally of “cross-
appointments” would not by itself demonstrate to a third party undertaking a reasonable
evaluation of the evidence that Dr. Alexandrov manifestly lacks the qualities required
under Article 14(1). The Respondent has not proffered any other evidence of
Dr. Alexandrov’s bias in favor of WilmerHale. Thus, the Respondent’s Proposal is rejected

on this ground.

(4) The Potential Expert Testimony of The Brattle Group in UniCredit

The last ground of the Respondent’s proposal relates to the purported use of The Brattle

Group, with whom Dr. Alexandrov allegedly has a longstanding professional relationship,

®2 Proposal paras. 39-40; Response paras. 41-43.
8 $GS para. 25.

27

97.

98.

by the claimants in UniCredit, another ICSID case against Croatia involving the same state
measure and BIT. According to the Respondent, “[I]t is within the public domain that the
Brattle Group is to provide expert testimony on quantum” in UniCredit.*4 But it is noted
that the Respondent does not cite to or exhibit the referenced information in the public

domain.

In this case, the Claimants have not retained The Brattle Group, and Dr. Alexandrov should
not be privy to The Brattle Group’s expert testimony in UniCredit because he is not an
arbitrator in that proceeding. On these facts, there is no basis for a third party undertaking
a reasonable evaluation of these facts to conclude that Dr. Alexandrov manifestly lacks the
qualities required under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention because the claimants in

UniCredit purportedly retained The Brattle Group.

(5) Conclusion

In sum, the Chairman finds that a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the
facts alleged and the Parties’ arguments on each ground would not conclude that they
evidence a manifest lack of the qualities required under Article 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention. Nor does the Chairman find that the cumulation of the facts alleged and the
Parties’ arguments lead to such a conclusion. Accordingly, the Respondent’s Proposal must

be rejected.

® Proposal at para. 43.

28

Iv. DECISION

99. Having considered all the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the Parties on each
ground and cumulatively, and for the reasons stated above, the Chairman rejects the

Respondent's Proposal to Disqualify Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov.

 

29

