INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
RAIFFEISEN BANK INTERNATIONAL AG AND RAIFFEISENBANK AUSTRIA D.D.

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/17/34

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS

 

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Lucy Reed, President of the Tribunal
Professor Stanimir Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Mr. Lazar Tomov, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Alex B. Kaplan

30 September 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Repr ing Raiffeisen Bank International
AG and Raiffeisenbank Austria d.d.:

Mr. Franz T. Schwarz

Mr. Gary B. Born

Mr. Daniel Costelloe

Ms. Yoanna Schuch

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
49 Park Lane

London WIK 1PS

United Kingdom

and

Ms. Danielle Morris

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
1875 Pennsylvania Ave., NW

Washington, D.C. 20006

United States of America

and

Mr. Nikolaus Vavrovsky
Vavrovsky Heine Marth
Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Fleischmarkt 1

1010 Vienna

Republic of Austria

Repi ing the Republic of Croatia:
Mr. Jozo Juréevié

Ms. Jelena Dragiéevié

Office of the Attorney General
Gajeva 30a

10000 Zagreb

Republic of Croatia

and

Mr. Robert Volterra
Mr. Graham Coop
Mr. Govert Coppens
Volterra Fietta

8 Mortimer Street
Fitzroy Place
London WIT 3JJ
United Kingdom

VIL.

. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION BY MAJORITY ...

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES ...0..c.cecececeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeseeeseeeeeeeeneneeaeaeaeeeeeenenenees 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF 1.0.0... ccceeeseessseseseeeseseeeseeeseeseneeaeaeeaeenenenees 17
KEY TREATY PROVISIONS AND DATES 1.0... .ccceeeeeeeeseseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaeeeaeenenenees 17
. KEY TREATY PROVISIONS 18
. TIMELINE OF KEY DATES 21
BURDEN OF PROOF ON JURISDICTION. ........cecceeesseseseseeeeeeseeeeeseeeeseneeeeeeneneeees 22
. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 22
. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION .......scssssssceseseseesesesceeescseeeecsceeaceeeeeacaeeesacaeeeeass 22
INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE 11(2) OF THE AUSTRIA-CROATIA BIT.............. 23
. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 23
(1) Article 11(2) as a Conflict Clause .....c.ccecseeceseeseseeseseeeseeesecssecessssesseseseeeeeeaees 23
(2) Alternative Conflict Rules 25
(3) The Meaning of “incompatible” under Article 11(2) of the BIT... eects 27
(4) The Import of “in force at any given time”... eeceseeeeseeseseeeseeseseeseseeetseeetseeaeeeeeees 30
. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION .......scssssssceseseseesesesceeescseeeecsceeaceeeeeacaeeesacaeeeeass 34
(1) Preliminary Observation: 34
(2) Article 11(2) as a Conflict Clause...........

 

(3) The Meaning of “incompatible” under Article 11(2) of the BIT... eects 35

 

(4) The Import of “in force at any given time”,

WHETHER ARTICLE 9 OF THE BIT IS INCOMPATIBLE WITH

 

 

ARTICLES 276 AND 344 OF THE TFEU ..0.0.....ccccccccceseeseeeseeeeeeeeeseseseseseeesneneteneeeeeenes 40
. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 40
(1) The Achmea Jud and its Effect 40
(2) Incompatibility with Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU ........ccsecseeseeeeseeeseeneeeeees 56
(3) The 15 January 2019 Declaration and the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty............. 59

 

(1) The EU Acquis on 15 September 2017 and the Effect of the Achmea Judgment....... 66
(2) Incompatibility with Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU ........ccsecseeseeeeseeeseeneeeeees 68

ii

VIII.

XI.

. THE DISSENTING VIEW

(3) Article 46 of the VCLT
(4) The 15 January 2019 Declaration and the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty.............

 

 

WHETHER THE BIT IS INCOMPATIBLE WITH THE ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
PROVISIONS OF THE EU ACQUIS.....ccscscssescssesssseessseessssessssessstessseessseessseessseeesseensseeness
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

(1) Compatibility with the EU Treaties 2.0.0... ccccsesseseeseseeseseeeseeneseeesesseieetseeeeeeeeees
(2) Compatibility with the GATS

 

. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION .......c.cccscsssseseseseseeeeeeseseseseseeeseeteteeeteneneeeeneaeaeee

(1) Compatibility with the EU Treaties 2.0.0... ccccsesseseeseseeseseeeseeneseeesesseieetseeeeeeeeees
(2) Compatibility with the GATS
THE MONETARY GOLD PRINCIPLE ..0....cscscececcesesesseseeeeseseseeeeeseeeeesneeeseeaeaeseasensnenees
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

 

. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION .......c.cccscsssseseseseseeeeeeseseseseseeeseeteteeeteneneeeeneaeaeee

COSTS
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

(1) The Respondent’s Costs
(2) The Claimants’ Costs

 

 

. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION .......c.cccscsssseseseseseeeeeeseseseseseeeseeteteeeteneneeeeneaeaeee

DECISION

 

iii

72
73
75

76
76
76
80
83
83
85
85
85
87
87
87
87
88
90
90

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINED TERMS

 

Achmea Arbitration

26 October 2010 Award on Jurisdiction,
Arbitrability and Suspension in Achmea
(formerly Eureko) v. Slovak Republic, PCA
Case No. 2008-13

 

Achmea Judgment

6 March 2018 Judgment of the Court of Justice
of the European Union in Slowakische
Republik v. Achmea BV, Case C-284/16
(RLM-31)

 

Achmea Wathelet Opinion

19 September 2017 Opinion of Advocate
General Wathelet in Slowakische Republik v.
Achmea BV, Case C-284/16 (CLM-177)

 

Acquis

European Union acquis communautaire

 

Addiko Decision

12 June 2020 Decision on Croatia’s
Jurisdictional Objection Related to the Alleged
Incompatibility of the BIT with the EU Acquis
in Addiko Bank AG & Addiko Bank d.d. v.
Republic of Croatia, 1CSID Case

No. ARB/17/37 (CLM-250)

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (2006)

 

Association Agreement

Stabilisation and Association Agreement
between the European Communities and their
Member States, on the one part, and the
Republic of Croatia, on the other part,
concluded in Luxembourg on 29 October
2001, which entered into force on 1 February
2005 (CLM-218)

 

Austria-Croatia BIT or BIT

Agreement between the Republic of Austria
and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments, which entered
into force on 1 November 1999 (C-4)

 

CETA

Comprehensive Economic and Trade
Agreement (Canada and the European Union)

 

 

CJEU

 

Court of Justice of the European Union

 

 

 

C-{#]

Claimants’ Factual Exhibit

 

CLM-[#]

Claimants’ Legal Authority

 

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
dated 31 May 2019

 

Claimants’ Rejoinder

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated
11 October 2019

 

United Nations Conference on the Law of

 

 

 

 

 

Conference Treaties

Croatia The Republic of Croatia

EC European Commission

ECT Energy Charter Treaty

EU European Union

EU Treaties Treaty on the European Union and Treaty on

the Functioning of the European Union

 

15 January 2019 Declaration

Declaration of the Representatives of the
Governments of the Member States on the
Legal Consequences of the Judgment of the
Court of Justice in Achmea and on Investment
Protection in the European Union (RLM-60)

 

World Trade Organization General Agreement

 

 

 

 

GATS on Trade in Services (RLM-33)
Hearin: Hearing on Preliminary Objections held from
e 4-6 November 2019

ICJ International Court of Justice
Convention on the Settlement of Investment

ICSID Convention Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States, which entered into force on 14
October 1966

ICSID International Centre for Settlement of

Investment Disputes

 

 

ILC

 

United Nations International Law Commission

 

 

 

Preliminary Objections

Croatia’s Preliminary Objections to
Jurisdiction and Request to Suspend the
Proceedings on the Merits dated 30 November
2018

 

 

 

R-[#] Respondent’s Factual Exhibit
RBI Raiffeisen Bank International AG
RBHR Raiffeisenbank Austria d.d.

 

Respondent’s Memorial

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
14 February 2019

 

Respondent’s Reply

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction dated
9 August 2019

 

RLM-[#]

Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

Termination Treaty

Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral
Investment Treaties between Member States of
the European Union dated 29 May 2020
(RLM-173)

 

TEU

Treaty on the European Union

 

TFEU

Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union

 

Tr. Day X, [page:line (speaker)]

Transcript of the Hearing

 

Tribunal

Arbitral tribunal constituted on 15 February
2018

 

UniCredit Decision

12 October 2018 Decision on the Respondent’s
Article 9 Objection to Jurisdiction in UniCredit
Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d. v.
Republic of Croatia, 1CSID Case

No. ARB/16/31 (CLM-210)

 

 

UniCredit Reconsideration Decision

 

24 March 2020 Decision on the Respondent’s
Application for Reversal of the Article 9
Decision and Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility in UniCredit Bank Austria AG
and Zagrebacka Banka d.d. v. Republic of
Croatia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/16/31
(CLM-251)

 

vi

 

 

VCLT

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(CLM-129)

 

 

WTO

 

World Trade Organization

 

 

IL. INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

1. This arbitration involves a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) on the basis of the Agreement between the Republic of
Austria and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, which
entered into force on 1 November 1999 (the Austria-Croatia BIT or the BIT) and the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the ICSID Convention).

2. The Claimants are Raiffeisen Bank International AG (RBI), a company organized under
the laws of the Republic of Austria (Austria), and Raiffeisenbank Austria d.d. (RBHR), a
company organized under the laws of the Republic of Croatia and 100 percent indirectly

owned by RBI (together, Raiffeisen).'
3. The Respondent is the Republic of Croatia (Croatia).

4. According to Raiffeisen, RBI became the first foreign bank to operate in Croatia when it
established RBHR in 1994, leading to investments of approximately EUR 400 million in
Croatia.” This dispute concerns RBHR’s issuance of loans denominated in Swiss Francs to
Croatian consumers and businesses starting in 2004, and legislation enacted in Croatia in
September 2015 converting the denomination of those loans into Euros. The Claimants
allege that, with this conversion, Croatia breached the fair and equitable treatment
obligations owed under the Austria-~Croatia BIT, causing damages of approximately

EUR 64.5 million (before interest).>
5. The merits of Raiffeisen’s claims are not now before the Tribunal.

6. The Tribunal has bifurcated the Respondent’s preliminary objections for separate
consideration (the Preliminary Objections). The main issue in this Preliminary Objection

phase is whether, as Croatia contends, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction of this dispute under

' Request for Arbitration, para 13.
? Request for Arbitration, para 2.

> Claimants’ Memorial, Sections V and VI.

the ICSID arbitration clause in Article 9 of the Austria-Croatia BIT by operation of
Article 11(2) of the BIT because Article 9 and substantive protections of the BIT are
incompatible with the European Union acquis communautaire (the EU and the acquis).
Article 11(2) of the Austria-Croatia BIT provides in full:

The Contracting Parties are not bound by the present Agreement

insofar as it is incompatible with the legal acquis of the European
Union (EU) in force at any given time.*

Much of the Parties’ focus, and hence the Tribunal’s focus, is on the direct and indirect
import of the 6 March 2018 Judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union (the
CJEU) in the highly-publicized intra-EU BIT case of Slowakische Republik v. Achmea
BV. (the Achmea Judgment) on the proper application of Article 11(2) of the Austria-
Croatia BIT.

For the reasons set forth below, the Tribunal, by a majority, dismisses Croatia’s Preliminary
Objections and determines that it has jurisdiction to proceed to consider the merits of

Raiffeisen’s claims.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 1 September 2017, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration of the same date from RBI
and RBHR against Croatia, together with Exhibits C-1 to C-76 and Legal Authorities
CLM-1 to CLM-27.

On 15 September 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the
Parties of the registration. Rule 6(2) of the ICSID Institution Rules provides that an ICSID
arbitration “shall be deemed to have been instituted on the registration of the request.” In

the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute

4 Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Croatia for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, which entered into force on 1 November 1999 (the BIT) (C-4).

> Slowakische Republik v. Achmea B.V., Case C-284/16, Judgment of the Court, 6 March 2018 (the Achmea
Judgment) (RLM-31).

an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of ICSID Rules of

Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

In the absence of an agreement between the Parties on the method of constituting the
Tribunal, the Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the formula set forth in

Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal is composed of Ms. Lucy Reed, a national of the United States of America
and (as of appointment) a Professor on the Law Faculty of the National University of
Singapore, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Professor Stanimir
Alexandrov, a national of the Republic of Bulgaria, appointed by the Claimants; and

Mr. Lazar Tomoy, a national of the Republic of Bulgaria, appointed by the Respondent.

On 15 February 2018, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the ICSID Arbitration Rules), notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and, therefore, the Tribunal
was deemed to have been constituted on that date. Mr. Alex B. Kaplan, ICSID Legal

Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 28 February 2018, pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9, Croatia filed a proposal for disqualification of Professor Alexandrov
(the Disqualification Proposal), together with Exhibits R-1 to R-12 and Legal Authorities
RLM-1 to RLM-17. The proceeding was suspended in accordance with ICSID Arbitration
Rule 9(6).

By ICSID letter of 2 March 2018, the Tribunal set out a procedural calendar and invited
the Parties and Professor Alexandrov to make submissions concerning the Disqualification

Proposal.

On 8 March 2018, in response to the Tribunal’s invitation, RBI and RBHR filed their
Response to the Disqualification Proposal, together with Exhibits C-77 to C-83 and Legal
Authorities CLM-28 to CLM-36.

20.

21.

22.

By letter of 12 March 2019, ICSID informed the Parties that Professor Alexandrov would
not be submitting observations on the Parties’ submissions related to the Disqualification
Proposal, and Ms. Reed and Mr. Tomov invited the Parties to file any further observations

in connection with the Disqualification Proposal simultaneously by 20 March 2018.

On 20 March 2018, Croatia filed its Further Observations on the Disqualification Proposal,
together with Exhibit R-13 and Legal Authorities RLM-18 and RLM-19. On the same date,

RBI and RBHR informed the Tribunal that they would not submit further observations.

On 6 April 2018, ICSID transmitted to the Parties Mr. Tomov’s letter recusing himself from
participating in the decision on the Disqualification Proposal and explained that, in the
circumstances, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council would make the

decision.

On 17 May 2018, the Chairman of the Administrative Council issued his decision rejecting
the Disqualification Proposal. The proceeding was then resumed pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rule 9(6).

On 14 June 2018, Mr. Tomov updated his disclosure statement to reflect that, among other
things, he was serving as co-counsel for the Republic of Bulgaria in a number of investment
arbitrations in which Bulgaria had raised or intended to raise jurisdictional objections on
the basis of the Achmea Judgment. Mr. Tomov explained that his responsibilities as co-
counsel in those cases did not relate to Achmea issues, and he believed that this role did

not affect his independence and impartiality as an arbitrator in this case.

The Respondent did not raise any concerns with Mr. Tomov’s updated disclosure. By letter
dated 22 June 2018, the Claimants stated that they would not object to Mr. Tomov’s
continuing to serve as arbitrator. Anticipating that Croatia would raise jurisdictional

defenses based on the Achmea Judgment, the Claimants stated:

... the Claimants take particular note of Mr. Tomov’s assurances that
his responsibility as co-counsel [for Bulgaria] does not affect his
independence and impartiality. The Claimants also take note of his
assurances that he has no involvement in Bulgaria’s decision to make
this objection or in the preparation of Bulgaria’s written and oral
pleadings related to it.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

The Claimants assume that should any of these circumstances change,
Mr. Tomov will promptly inform the parties.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the

Parties by teleconference on 25 June 2018.

Following the first session, on 19 July 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
recording the agreement of the Parties on various procedural matters. Procedural Order
No. 1 provides that, among other things, the applicable ICSID Arbitration Rules are those
in effect from 10 April 2006, the procedural language is English, and the place of
proceeding is Washington, D.C. Procedural Order No. | also sets out a schedule for the

Preliminary Objections phase of the proceeding.

On 14 September 2018, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, RBI and RBHR filed
their Memorial on the Merits, together with the Damages Assessment Report of Dr. Manuel
A. Abdala of Compass Lexicon (with Exhibits MA-1 to MA-52), Exhibits C-84 to C-236,
and Legal Authorities CLM-37 to CLM 128.

On 22 November 2018, the European Commission (the EC) filed an Application for Leave
to Intervene as a Non-Disputing Party (the EC’s Application) pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 37(2).

On 30 November 2018, Croatia filed its Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction and Request
to Suspend the Proceedings on the Merits, together with Exhibits R-14 to R-18 and Legal
Authorities RLM-20 to RLM-53.

By ICSID letter of 3 December 2018, the Tribunal invited the Parties to file any
observations on the EC’s Application by 14 December 2018.

On 14 December 2018, RBI and RBHR filed their Response to Croatia’s Preliminary
Objections (the Claimants’ Response), together with Exhibits C-237 to C-239 and Legal
Authorities CLM-129 to CLM-161. In their Response, the Claimants referred to a
12 October 2018 Decision on Jurisdiction in UniCredit Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka
Banka d.d. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/16/31) (the UniCredit Decision),

involving the Austria-Croatia BIT.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Also on 14 December 2018, the Parties filed their observations on the EC’s Application.
Raiffeisen’s observations included Exhibits C-240 and C-241 and Legal Authorities
CLM-162 to CLM-165. Croatia’s observations included Legal Authorities RLM-54 to
RLM-S9.

On 18 December 2018, the Tribunal invited Croatia to provide a copy of the UniCredit

Decision for the record.

On the same date, 18 December 2018, Croatia informed the Tribunal that the Claimants
apparently had obtained a copy of the UniCredit Decision “in violation of the procedures
of that case” and that Croatia could not “properly produce the UniCredit Decision in this
present proceeding.” Croatia requested that any references to the UniCredit Decision be
struck from Raiffeisen’s Response or, in the alternative, that the Tribunal give no weight to

Raiffeisen’s description of the UniCredit Decision in its ruling.

By email dated 19 December 2018, the Claimants objected to Croatia’s refusal to provide
a copy of the UniCredit Decision on grounds, among others, that Croatia had failed to
identify the specific procedures in the UniCredit arbitration that would bar sharing the
UniCredit Decision with the Tribunal or to assert that Croatia was under a confidentiality
order preventing the same. Raiffeisen requested the Tribunal to draw adverse inferences as

a result of Croatia’s failure to produce the UniCredit Decision.

On 21 December 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning Croatia’s
Preliminary Objections. The Tribunal ordered as follows in paragraph 73 of Procedural

Order No. 2:

a

2

the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections—that (i) the BIT is not incompatible with the
EU acquis and (ii) the Claimants do not qualify as “investors” and hold qualifying

“investments” under the BIT—were bifurcated for preliminary resolution;

b

the Claimants’ request to proceed with the bifurcated preliminary issues without

suspension of the proceedings on the merits was denied;

35.

36.

c) the Parties were ordered to consult to attempt to agree on the length of the hearing on
the Preliminary Objections and to identify possible hearing dates, with the Claimants’

request for an accelerated timetable deemed denied;

d

the Claimants’ request that the Respondent be ordered to raise all preliminary
objections, whether going to jurisdiction, competence, or admissibility, for inclusion in

the bifurcated Preliminary Objections phase was granted;

e

2

by 7 January 2019, the Respondent was either to provide to the Tribunal and the
Claimants a copy of the UniCredit Decision on a confidential basis or to provide

information as to the specific procedures preventing this step;

f) the Respondent’s requests either to strike all references to the UniCredit Decision from
the Claimants’ Response or to give no weight to those references were denied as

premature, with leave to reapply; and

g) the Claimants’ request for adverse inferences in relation to the import of the UniCredit

Decision was denied as premature, with leave to reapply.

On 31 December 2018, the Parties informed the Tribunal that Croatia had agreed to provide
the Claimants and the Tribunal with a copy of the UniCredit Decision on a confidential
basis, and that the Parties had also agreed that the UniCredit Decision and Procedural Order
No. 2 could be shared on a confidential basis with tribunals in other arbitration proceedings

involving Croatia.

On the same date, 31 December 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 granting
the EC’s Application in part. In specific:

a) the EC was invited to file a written submission limited to the legal consequences for

this arbitration of the Achmea Judgment by 14 January 2019;

b) the Parties were invited to include observations on the EC’s submission in their

respective memorials on jurisdiction;

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

¢

2

absent the Parties’ agreement, the EC would not have access to the record or any

documents pertaining to this arbitration;

d

the Tribunal reserved its decision on further procedural steps, if any;

e

2

the Tribunal reserved any decision on the allocation of costs and fees related to the EC’s

submissions; and

f) Procedural Order No. 3 was to be communicated to the EC, which should not

communicate it to third parties or make use of it outside this arbitration.

On 7 January 2019, pursuant to paragraph 73(e) of Procedural Order No. 2, and after having
received from the UniCredit tribunal the decision on the confidentiality of the UniCredit
Decision, Croatia provided the UniCredit “Decision on the Respondent’s Article 9

Objection to Jurisdiction” dated 12 October 2018 to the Tribunal and the Claimants.

On 11 January 2019, Croatia requested an exception to the order in paragraph 73(d) of
Procedural Order No. 2, specifically with regard to its intended objection based on the
alleged illegality under Croatian law of certain of Raiffeisen’s investments (the I/legality

Objection).

On 14 January 2019, the EC filed an Amicus Curiae Brief in this arbitration, including
Annexes EC-1 to EC-30.

On 15 January 2019, RBI and RBHR filed observations on Croatia’s request of 11 January
2019 concerning the Illegality Objection, asking the Tribunal either to join all of Croatia’s
jurisdictional objections to the merits or to maintain its order in paragraph 73(d) of
Procedural Order No. 2 and include the legality Objection in the Preliminary Objections
phase.

By correspondence from ICSID on 28 January 2019, the Tribunal invited the EC to
resubmit its Amicus Curiae Brief, which contained erroneous references to the Poland-
Slovak Republic BIT, with corrected references to this arbitration and to include a redline

reflecting the corrections.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

Also on 28 January 2019, the Tribunal invited Croatia to submit by 1 February 2019 further
observations on Raiffeisen’s observations of 15 January 2019 concerning the Illegality

Objection.

On | February 2019, Croatia filed a response to the Claimants’ observations of 15 January

2019, together with Legal Authorities RLM-60 to RLM-62.

On 7 February 2019, in Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal issued its decision on the
scope of the Preliminary Objections addressed in Croatia’s request of 11 January 2019,

ordering as follows:

a

2

the Respondent would be allowed to raise its Illegality Objection in the merits phase,

should the arbitration proceed past the bifurcated preliminary phase;

b

the Claimants’ request that the Tribunal join the Illegality Objection to the merits phase
or, in the alternative, include the Illegality Objection in the Preliminary Objections

phase was denied;

¢

2

the issue of costs was reserved; and

d

pursuant to paragraph 73(c) of Procedural Order No. 2, the Parties were to return to
their consultations to attempt to agree on the length of the hearing for the Preliminary

Objections, and to revert to the Tribunal on the same by 15 February 2019.

On 14 February 2019, Croatia filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction (the Respondent's
Memorial), together with the Legal Opinion of Professor Paul Craig (Hon QC) (with Legal
Authorities PC-1 to PC-60) (the Craig Opinion), Exhibits R-19 to R-25, and Legal
Authorities RLM-63 to RLM-109.

On 15 February 2019, the Parties informed the Tribunal that the Parties had agreed on a
three-day hearing for the Preliminary Objections from 4-6 November 2019, but they had
been unable to agree on an accelerated timetable. By ICSID’s correspondence of
27 February 2019, the Tribunal confirmed that it had reserved the 4-6 November 2019

hearing dates.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

On 6 March 2019, the EC submitted a revised version of its Amicus Curiae Brief, correcting

ministerial errors.

On 29 March 2019, pursuant to the procedural timetable at Annex B of Procedural Order
No. 1, each side requested the Tribunal to rule on contested document requests and

submitted a Redfern Schedule for this purpose.

On 5 April 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 setting out its decisions on
the contested document requests in the Parties’ respective Redfern Schedules. The Tribunal
further ordered that “[i]f a Party wishes to claim privilege for certain documents whose
production is ordered, it must prepare a Privilege Log setting out the necessary details for

each document,” to be submitted by 26 April 2019.

On | May 2019, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 5, Croatia submitted a Privilege Log
listing 48 documents for which it claimed privilege from production, accompanied by

Legal Authorities RLM-110 to RLM-112.

There followed an extensive exchange of positions on Croatia’s assertions of privilege,
with leave of the Tribunal. Raiffeisen submitted comments, including Legal Authority
CLM-166, on 8 May 2019; Croatia replied on 14 May 2019, submitting Legal Authority
RLM-113; and Raiffeisen submitted additional comments on 17 May 2019.

On 20 May 2018, in Procedural Order No. 6, the Tribunal denied each of the Respondent’s
privilege claims and ordered Croatia to produce the 48 documents listed in its Privilege
Log by 24 May 2019. The Tribunal also granted the Claimants an extension of time until

31 May 2019 to file their counter-memorial on preliminary objections.

On 24 May 2019, the Respondent’s counsel informed the Tribunal that Croatia could not
comply with Procedural Order No. 6 to produce the 48 documents listed in the Privilege

Log pending receipt of express written permission from the EC to do so.

On 28 May 2019, the Tribunal directed the Respondent’s counsel to provide copies by 30

May 2019 of: (a) the authorities on which they relied in support of the asserted requirement

55.

56.

57.

for express written permission from the EC to produce each of the 48 documents at issue,

and; (b) the letters they had sent to the EC seeking such permission.

On 31 May 2019, RBI and RBHR filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (the
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial), together with the Legal Opinion of Sir Francis Jacobs
KCMG, QC (with Legal authorities FJ-1 to FJ-42) (the Jacobs Opinion), the Witness
Statement of Mr. Robert Kaukal (with Exhibits RK-1 to RK-6), Exhibits C-242 to C-252,
and Legal Authorities CLM-167 to CLM-217.

By letter dated 30 May 2019, the Respondent provided copies of unanswered emails sent

to the EC concerning the 48 withheld documents and stated as follows (footnotes omitted):

In accordance with the Tribunal’s direction of 28 May 2019, the
Respondent confirms that the authorities on which it relies in support
of the requirement for express written permission from the European
Commission to produce the 48 documents listed in the Respondent's
Privilege Log filed on 1 May 2019 are those set out in the Privilege Log
and in subsequent correspondence. That is, each of the 48 documents
listed in the Respondents Privilege Log qualify as diplomatic archives,
documents or official correspondence which are inviolable under
Articles 24 and 27 of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations (to which both the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of
Austria are parties), as well as under customary international law. The
inviolability of diplomatic archives, documents and official
correspondence is a cornerstone of the efficient performance of the
functions of diplomatic missions, as set out in the Preamble to the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and as confirmed by the
widespread practice of both States and the European Union itself.

On 4 June 2019, on invitation by the Tribunal, Raiffeisen submitted comments on Croatia’s
submission of 30 May 2019 concerning the allegedly privileged 48 documents. In addition
to describing Croatia’s unanswered emails to the EC as containing no support for the

assertion that EC permission was necessary for production, the Claimants stated:

[T]he Respondent offers no legal basis whatsoever for its entirely new
claim (not raised previously with its Privilege Log or in its letter of
14 May 2019) that the European Commission's consent is required to
allow the Respondent to produce the 48 documents listed in its
Privilege Log, as directed by the Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 6.
In fact, instead of addressing the alleged consent requirement, the
Respondent merely repeats the baseless arguments invoking the Vienna
C ion on Dipl ic Relati z y inte: ional law and

11

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

Protocol No. 7 to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
that it had previously presented and that the Tribunal had already
rejected as a purported legal basis for privilege in Procedural Order
No. 6.

By ICSID letter of 9 June 2019, the Tribunal stated that it could not find in the Respondent’s
30 May 2019 submission any support for its claim of privilege against production based on
the alleged requirement of express written permission from the EC. Under these
circumstances, the Tribunal re-confirmed Procedural Order No. 6 and directed Croatia to
produce the 48 documents listed in the Privilege Log by 21 June 2019. The Tribunal also
invited the Parties’ counsel to consult on a special purpose confidentiality undertaking, if

that should be agreed to be helpful.

On 21 June 2019, Croatia again informed the Tribunal that it could not, without permission
of the EC, produce the 48 documents. Croatia also reported that it was continuing efforts
to obtain the EC’s permission and would update the Tribunal on any further developments.

On 28 June 2019, Raiffeisen again objected to Croatia’s position.

On 9 August 2019, Croatia filed its Reply on Jurisdiction (the Respondent’s Reply),
together with the Second Legal Opinion of Professor Craig (with Legal Authorities PC-61
to PC-65) (the Second Craig Opinion), Exhibits R-26 to R-28, and Legal Authorities
RLM-114 to RLM-126.

The Tribunal here notes that, based on the Witness Statement of Mr. Robert Kaukal and
Raiffeisen corporate documents exhibited with the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, the
Respondent in its Reply stated that it would not maintain its Preliminary Objections that
RBI and RBHR do not qualify as “investors” and did not make qualifying “investments”

under the Austria-Croatia BIT.°

On 11 October 2019, RBI and RBHR filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (the Claimants’
Rejoinder), together with the Second Legal Opinion of Sir Francis (with Legal Authority
FJ-43) (the Second Jacobs Opinion), Exhibits C-253 to C-254, and Legal Authorities
CLM-218 to CLM-241.

® Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction (the Respondent’s Reply), para 4.

12

63.

64.

65.

66.

On 21 October 2019, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational

meeting with the Parties by telephone conference.

On 24 October 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 concerning organization

of the hearing.

On 31 October 2019, Croatia filed Exhibits R-29 and R-30 and, on 4 November 2019,
Legal Authorities RLM-127 to RLM-137.

The Hearing on Preliminary Objections was held in Washington, D.C. from 4-6 November

2019 (the Hearing). The following persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:
Professor Lucy Reed

Professor Stanimir Alexandrov

Mr. Lazar Tomov

ICSID Secretariat:
Mr. Alex Kaplan

For the Claimants:
Counsel
Mr. Gary Born
Mr. Franz Schwarz
Mr. Naboth van den Broek
Ms. Danielle Morris
Mr. Daniel Costelloe
Mr. Nikolaus Vavrovsky
Mr. Florian Stefan

Parties
Mr. Christian Michal
Mr. Werner Mérth

For the Respondent:
Counsel
Mr. Robert G. Volterra
Mr. Graham Coop
Ms. Angela Ha
Mr. Govert Coppens
Ms. Patricija Biskupi¢é

Court Reporter:
Ms. Dawn K. Larson

President
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
Vavrovsky Heine Marth Rechtsanwiilte

Vavrovsky Heine Marth Rechtsanwiilte

Raiffeisen Bank International AG
Raiffeisen Bank International AG

Volterra Fietta
Volterra Fietta
Volterra Fietta
Volterra Fietta
Volterra Fietta

B&B Reporters

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants:

Experts
Sir Francis Jacobs KCMG, QC Fountain Court Chambers/King’s College London
Mr. Alexander Milner Fountain Court Chambers

On behalf of the Respondent:
Expert
Professor Paul Craig (Hon QC) University of Oxford, Faculty of Law

On 15 November 2019, the Parties submitted the agreed versions of the hearing transcript.

On 20 December 2019, Croatia filed its Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction, together with
Legal Authorities RLM-138 to RLM-165 (the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief).

On 7 January 2020, the Tribunal Secretary transmitted to the Parties Ms. Reed’s updated
Disclosure Statement of 6 January 2020, set out below. The Parties made no comments.

I write to inform you that my appointments as Professor on the Law

Faculty and Director of the Centre for International Law at the

National University of Singapore ended on 31 December 2019. Going
forward, I will work only as an independent arbitrator.

Effective today (6 January 2020) I have become a member of
Arbitration Chambers, which has now opened an office in New York (in
addition to Hong Kong and London). All members of Arbitration
Chambers are independent arbitrators who operate entirely separately
from one another. Members have no financial interest in the chambers,
and Arbitration Chambers takes the necessary steps to maintain
confidentiality and data security.

I bring this to your attention for the sake of good order. My new
affiliation has no effect on my ongoing independence and impartiality.

On 6 February 2020, RBI and RBHR filed their Post-Hearing Brief, together with Legal
Authorities CLM-242 to CLM-249 (the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief).

On 6 March 2020, the Claimants’ submitted their Submissions on Costs and the Respondent

submitted its Statement on Costs.

On 8 June 2020, the Tribunal Secretary transmitted to the Parties Ms. Reed’s Further

Disclosure of 6 June 2020, set out below. The Parties made no comments.

74.

75.

76.

I write to disclose that, following the passing of VV Veeder QC, I have
been appointed as Presiding Arbitrator in the Ad Hoc arbitration of
Strabag SE, Raiffeisen Centrobank AG and Syrena Immobilien Holding
AG v Republic of Poland (Ad Hoc/15/1) (Strabag v Poland),
administered by ICSID. The co-arbitrators who appointed me are
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg and Professor Stephan Schill, who
replaced Professor Dr Karl-Heinz Boecksteigel.

I do not consider that this appointment raises any actual or apparent
conflict with the instant case of Raiffeisen v Croatia. Although the
Strabag v Poland arbitration is not public, I am able to disclose that
the relevant treaty is the Austria-Poland BIT and the Tribunal issued
its Partial Award on jurisdictional objections in early March 2020.
There is no overlap between the arbitrators or the counsel in Strabag
v Poland and the instant case.

On 11 June 2020, Raiffeisen requested that the 24 March 2020 Decision on the
Respondent’s Application for Reversal of the Article 9 Decision and Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility in UniCredit Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d.
vy. Republic of Croatia ICSID Case No. ARB/16/31) (the UniCredit Reconsideration
Decision) be admitted into the record. The Claimants explained that Croatia had disclosed
the UniCredit Reconsideration Decision on the basis that it could be used in the present
arbitration and had confirmed that redactions had been made in accordance with the

confidentiality restrictions to which Croatia is subject in the UniCredit arbitration.

On 17 June 2020, with Croatia’s consent, Raiffeisen requested that the 12 June 2020
Decision on Croatia’s Jurisdictional Objection Related to the Alleged Incompatibility of
the BIT with the EU Acquis in Addiko Bank AG & Addiko Bank d.d. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/37) (the Addiko Decision) be entered into the record.’ On
18 June 2020, with the Tribunal’s approval, the Addiko Decision was admitted into the
record as Legal Authority CLM-250.

On 24 June 2020, with the Tribunal’s approval, the redacted UniCredit Reconsideration

Decision was entered into the record as Legal Authority CLM-251.

7 Addiko Bank AG & Addiko Bank d.d. v. Republic of Croatia (\CSID Case No. ARB/17/37) (the Addiko Decision).

15

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

Also on 24 June 2020, the Tribunal invited the Parties to simultaneously submit 10-page
observations on the UniCredit Reconsideration Decision and the Addiko Decision, as well

as updates to their costs submissions.

On 29 June 2020, Croatia requested leave to introduce into the record the 29 May 2020
Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral Investment Treaties between Member States of
the European Union (the Termination Treaty) and to comment briefly thereon. The

Tribunal invited Raiffeisen to submit any observations on Croatia’s request by 6 July 2020.

On 6 July 2020, Croatia filed its Observations on the Rulings in Addiko Bank AG & Addiko
Bank d.d. v. Republic of Croatia, (CSID Case No. ARB/17/37 and UniCredit Bank Austria
AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d. v. Republic of Croatia, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/31 (the
Respondent’s Observations on Addiko and UniCredit), together with Legal Authorities
CLM-166 to CLM-172, and its Updated Statement of Costs (the Respondent’s Statement
of Costs).

Also on 6 July 2020, RBI and RBHR filed: (a) their Submission on New Authorities (the
Claimants’ Observations on Addiko and UniCredit), together with their Supplemental
Submission on Costs (the Claimants’ Submission on Costs); and (b) their opposition to

admitting the Termination Treaty into the record.

On 8 July 2020, the Tribunal admitted the Termination Treaty into the record “for
appropriate consideration,” and invited the Parties to submit 10-page observations on the

Termination Treaty by 15 July 2020.

On 9 July 2020, the Termination Treaty was entered into the record as Legal Authority
RLM-173.

On 15 July 2020, the Respondent filed its Observations on the Agreement for the
Termination of Bilateral Investment Treaties Between the Member States of the European
Union (the Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty), and the Claimants
filed their Submission on the Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral Investment
Treaties Between the Member States of the European Union (the Claimants’ Observations

on the Termination Treaty).

Ill. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

84. In its last submission, the Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, Croatia

requests that the Tribunal issue an Award:

a. declaring that it lacks jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims;

b. ordering the Claimants to pay all of the Respondents costs and fees
incurred in this arbitration, including the Tribunal’s and ICSID’s
fees and expenses, and all reasonable legal fees and expenses
incurred by the Respondent (including, but not limited to, the fees
and expenses of legal counsel and experts); and

c. ordering any other relief the Tribunal determines to be
appropriate.*

85. In their last submission, the Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, RBI and

RBHR request the Tribunal to issue a decision:

a. dismissing all of Croatia’s preliminary objections;

b. directing Croatia to pay all of RBI's and RBHR‘°s costs associated
with responding to Croatia’s preliminary objections, including
attorneys’ fees;

c. directing the European Commission to pay all of RBI's and RBHRs
costs associated with responding to the European Commission’
Amicus Curiae Brief, including attorneys’ fees;

d. directing Croatia and the European Commission to pay pre-award
and post-award interest on all sums due; and

e. granting such additional and other relief as may be just.°
IV. KEY TREATY PROVISIONS AND DATES

86. The Tribunal sets out below certain key treaty provisions and a timeline of key dates, to
assist in organizing and understanding the Parties’ positions in this Preliminary Objections

phase.

8 Respondent’s Observations on the Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral Investment Treaties Between the
Member States of the European Union (the Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty), para 22.

° Claimants’ Submission on the Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral Investment Treaties Between the Member
States of the European Union (the Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty), para 18.

17

A.

87.

10

BIT (C-4).

KEY TREATY PROVISIONS
The Austria-Croatia BIT: '°

Article 2: Promotion and Protection of Investments

(1) Each Contracting Party shall in its territory, promote, as far as

possible, investments of investors of the other Contracting Party,
admit such investments in accordance with its legislation and in
any case accord such investments fair and equitable treatment. ...

Article 9: Settlement of Investment Disputes

(1) Any dispute arising out of an investment, between a Contracting

Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party shall, as far
as possible, be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

(2) If a dispute according to paragraph 1 of this Article cannot be

settled within three months of a written notification of sufficiently
detailed claims, the dispute shall upon the request of the
Contracting Party or of the investor of the other Contracting Party
be subject to the following procedures:

(a) to conciliation or arbitration by the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, opened for signature in
Washington on 18 March 1965. In case of arbitration, each
Contracting Party, by this Agreement irrevocably consents in
advance, even in the absence of an individual arbitral
agreement between the Contracting Party and the investor, to
submit any such dispute to this Centre. This consent implies the
renunciation of the requirement that the internal administrative
or juridical remedies should be exhausted ...

Article 11: Application of the Agreement

(2) The Contracting Parties are not bound by the present Agreement

insofar as it is incompatible with the legal acquis of the European
Union (EU) in force at any given time.

(3) In case of uncertainties concerning the effects of paragraph 2 of

this Article the Contracting Parties will enter a dialogue.

Article 12: Entry into Force and Duration

(3) In respect of investments made prior to the date of termination of
the present Agreement the provisions of Article | to 11 of the present
Agreement shall continue to be effective for a further period of 10
years from the date of termination of the present Agreement.

88. The ICSID Convention:

Article 25(1)

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State ... and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute
consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given
their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

89. The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the VCLT):'!

Article 31: General Rule of Interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall
comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and
annexes:

(a) Any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between
all the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty ...

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) Any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions ...

90. The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (the TFEU):'*

Article 18

Within the scope of application of the Treaties, and without prejudice
to any special provisions contained therein, any discrimination on
grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.

"| Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the VCLT) (CLM-129).
'? Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (the TFEU) (RLM-30).

19

The European Parliament and the Council, acting in accordance with
the ordinary legislative procedure, may adopt rules designed to
prohibit such discrimination.

Article 49

Within the framework of the provisions set out below, restrictions on
the freedom of establishment of nationals of a Member State in the
territory of another Member State shall be prohibited. Such prohibition
shall also apply to restrictions on the setting-up of agencies, branches
or subsidiaries by nationals of any Member State established in the
territory of any Member State.

Freedom of establishment shall include the right to take up and pursue
activities of self-employed persons and to set up and manage
undertakings, in particular companies or firms within the meaning of
the second paragraph of Article 54, under the conditions laid down for
its nationals by the law of the country where such establishment is
effected, subject to the provisions of the Chapter relating to capital.

Article 63

1. Within the framework of the provisions set out in this Chapter, all
restrictions on the movement of capital between Member States and
between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited.

2. Within the framework of the provisions set out in this Chapter, all
restrictions on payments between Member States and between
Member States and third countries shall be prohibited.

Article 267

The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction to
give preliminary rulings concerning:

(a) the interpretation of the Treaties;

(b) the validity and interpretation of acts of the institutions, bodies,
offices or agencies of the Union;

Where such a question is raised before any court or tribunal of a
Member State, that court or tribunal may, if it considers that a decision
on the question is necessary to enable it to give a judgement, request
the Court to give a ruling thereon.

Where any such question is raised in a case pending before a court or
tribunal of a Member State against whose decisions there is no judicial
remedy under national law, that court or tribunal shall bring the matter
before the Court.

20

If such a question is raised in a case pending before a court or tribunal
of a Member State with regard to a person in custody, the Court of
Justice of the European Union shall act with the minimum of delay.

Article 344

Member States undertake not to submit a dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of the Treaties to any method of settlement
other than those provided for therein.

B. TIMELINE OF KEY DATES

 

Date

Event

 

1 November 1999

Austria-Croatia BIT enters into force

 

1 July 2013

Croatia accedes to the EU

 

18 September 2015

Croatian Parliament adopts the
Conversion Law, converting RBHR
Swiss Franc loans into Euro loans

 

3 March 2016

German Bundesgerichtshof makes its
preliminary reference to the CJEU in
the Achmea Arbitration

 

15 September 2017

ICSID registers Raiffeisen’s Request
for Arbitration

 

19 September 2017

Opinion of Advocate General Wathelet
in Slowakische Republik v. Achmea BV,
Case C-284/16

 

6 March 2018

CJEU issues the Achmea Judgment

 

12 October 2018

UniCredit Decision

 

15 January 2019

Declaration of the Representatives of
the Governments of the Member States
on the Legal Consequences of the
Judgment of the Court of Justice in
Achmea and on Investment Protection
in the European Union (the 15 January
2019 Declaration)

 

24 March 2020

 

UniCredit Reconsideration Decision

 

 

21

 

 

29 May 2020 EU Termination Treaty

 

12 June 2020 Addiko Decision

 

 

 

 

Vv. BURDEN OF PROOF ON JURISDICTION
A. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

91. The Respondent argues that, based on accepted international practice, the Claimants bear
the burden of proving the Tribunal’s jurisdiction of their claims. In support, Croatia relies

upon decisions of the ICSID tribunals in Abaclat v. Argentina and Tulip v. Turkey."

92. The Claimants disagree, citing the Judgment of the International Court of Justice (the ICJ)
in the Fisheries Jurisdiction case in support of their argument that neither side bears the
legal burden of proving jurisdiction. The Claimants state, “each party bears the burden of

proving the facts on which it relies, and the tribunal then considers these facts and the

parties’ legal arguments in deciding for itself whether jurisdiction exists.”'*

B. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION

93. The Tribunal finds that, although each side bears the burden to prove the factual allegations
and legal arguments it has advanced in relation to jurisdiction, neither Raiffeisen nor the

Respondent bears the legal burden of proving jurisdiction here. As to the reasons, the

'3 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction (the Respondent’s Memorial), paras 5-6, citing Abaclat and others v.
Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 4 August 2011 (Abaclat
v, Argentina) (RLM-63), para 678; and Tulip Real Estate Investment and Development Netherlands B.V. v. Republic
of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28, Decision on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issue, 5 March 2013 (Tulip v. Turkey)
(RLM-64), para 48.

'4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial), paras 123-125 citing Fisheries
Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada), Judgment, 4 December 1998, [1998] ICJ Reports 432 (Fisheries Jurisdiction)
(CLM-193), paras 36-38. See also Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 126-129, wherein the Claimants cite three
investment arbitration cases: Muhammet Cap and Sehil Insaat Endustri ve Ticaret Ltd. Sti. v. Turkmenistan, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/12/6, Decision on Respondent's Objection to Jurisdiction, 13 February 2015 (CLM-201), paras 65-66,
119; WNC Factoring Ltd. v. Czech Republic, PCA Case No. 2014-34, Award, 22 February 2017 (CLM-160), paras
293, 310; and UniCredit Bank Austria AG and Zagrebacka Banka d.d. v. Republic of Croatia, (CSID Case No.
ARB/16/31, Decision on the Respondent's Article 9 Objection to Jurisdiction, 12 October 2018 (the UniCredit
Decision) (CLM-210), para 89.

 

22

Tribunal can do no better than quote the reasoning of the ICJ in the Fisheries Jurisdiction

Judgment: '°

The Court points out that the establishment or otherwise of jurisdiction
is not a matter for the parties but for the Court itself. Although a party
seeking to assert a fact must bear the burden of proving it, this has no
relevance for the establishment of the Court's jurisdiction, which is a
“question of law to be resolved in the light of the relevant facts.”

That being so, there is no burden of proof to be discharged in the matter
of jurisdiction. Rather, it is for the Court to determine from all the facts
and taking into account all the arguments advanced by the Parties,
“whether the force of the arguments militating in favour of jurisdiction
is preponderant, and to ‘ascertain whether an intention on the part of
the Parties exists to confer jurisdiction on it.’”

94. The issue of jurisdiction here turns on the interpretation and application of the relevant
articles of the Austria-Croatia BIT in the circumstances presented. This is properly the legal

task of the Tribunal.

VI. INTERPRETATION OF ARTICLE 11(2) OF THE AUSTRIA-CROATIA BIT
A. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
qd) Article 11(2) as a Conflict Clause

95. The Respondent’s main argument is that Article 11(2) is a specific conflict clause that
directs the Tribunal to give precedence to the EU acquis over the BIT. The Respondent

states:

Like any treaty, an intra-EU treaty has no self-standing legal basis
under public international law independently from the legal effect
given to it by the consent of its two contracting parties. If both
contracting parties to an intra-EU treaty agree in the EU Treaties that
the latter will take precedence over the former, there is no basis under
public international law for a tribunal established under the bilateral
treaty to ignore such a conflict rule.'®

'S Fisheries Jurisdiction, paras 37-38 (citations omitted).

'© Respondent's Reply, para 21.

23

96.

97.

98.

Croatia asserts that, as a consequence, the Tribunal “can safely disregard as inapposite the
entire smokescreen of case law presented by the Claimants dealing with whether the EU
Treaties take precedence over bilateral investment treaties or the [ECT] pursuant to the
VCLT or the residual rules of public international law.”'’ Croatia describes Article 11(2)
as “sav[ing] this Tribunal from having to consider the residual rules in Article 30 of the
VCLT,”!® and argues that the cases cited by Raiffeisen, most of which are based on analyses

of incompatibility under Article 30(3) of the VCLT, are unhelpful.'”

The Claimants’ primary position is that text of Article 11(2) of the BIT refers to
incompatibility, and, therefore, Article 11(2) requires the same test of compatibility
between treaties as Article 30(3) of the VCLT. Accordingly, the cases analyzing
Article 30(3) of the VCLT, or which otherwise apply a test of compatibility, remain relevant

and persuasive in interpreting Article 11(2) of the BIT.?°

Croatia implicitly concedes this,
says Raiffeisen, by invoking Article 30(3) of the VCLT as an alternative argument in the
context of the import of the Achmea Judgment and the 15 January 2019 Declaration
(discussed in Section VI.A(2)a below) and accepting that an Article 30(3) analysis would

lead to the same result as direct application of Article 11(2).7!

RBI and RBHR find little utility in Croatia’s attempt to differentiate Article 11(2) of the
BIT from Article 30(3) of the VCLT on the basis that Article 11(2) refers not just to
conflicting treaty norms but also expressly to the EU acquis. This is because the additional
sources of the EU acquis cited by Croatia (discussed in Section VII.A(3) below) are
irrelevant in the context of this case: the Achmea Judgment does not address ICSID
arbitration and in any event cannot retroactively deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction, and
neither the 15 January 2019 Declaration nor the General Agreement on Trade and Services

(the GATS) is part of the EU acquis.”

'7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 17.

'8 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 26.

'9 Respondent’s Memorial, para 26. See also Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 41.

20 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (the Claimants’ Rejoinder), para 18.

2! Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 70.

22 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 71. See also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 39.

24

99.

100.

101.

(2) Alternative Conflict Rules
a. Article 30 of the VCLT

Should the Tribunal not accept Article 11(2) of the BIT as the controlling /ex specialis
conflict clause, Croatia argues in the alternative that the residual conflict rules in Article 30
of VCLT lead to the same result — lack of jurisdiction.?* Croatia relies on Article 30(2),
which stipulates that “[w]Jhen a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be
considered as incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other treaty
prevail,” and Article 30(3), which specifies that “the earlier treaty applies only to the extent
its provisions are compatible ... .”** In this respect, as discussed below, Croatia denies that
the relevant treaties must share the same subject matter; rather, it is sufficient if the earlier
treaty and later treaty cannot be applied simultaneously without breach of one or the other.”>
In the instant case, because the Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction under Article 9 of the
BIT would lead to Croatia and Austria violating their obligations under the TFEU, the BIT
and the TFEU are necessarily incompatible under Article 30(3) of the VCLT.’®

b. Conflict Clauses in EU Treaties

Even if Article 11(2) of the BIT does not preclude the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the
Respondent argues in the alternative that Article 4(3) of Treaty on the European Union (the
TEU, and, together with the TFEU, the EU Treaties) contains a dovetailing conflict clause
giving the EU Treaties primacy over other intra-EU treaties, including the Austria-Croatia

BIT.”

The Claimants respond that the “‘principle’ of ‘primacy of EU law’ on which Croatia relies

is not a principle of international law at all,” but an internal EU doctrine developed in CIEU

23 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 31, 34.
24 VCLT (CLM-129), Article 30.

25 Respondent’s Memorial, para 131.

26 Respondent’s Memorial, para 32.

27 Respondent’s Memorial, para 54.

25

102.

103.

jurisprudence.** The Claimants do not accept that Article 4(3) of the TEU is a dovetailing
conflict clause.” The general recitation that EU Member States “shall take any appropriate
measure ... to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations arising out of the Treaties or resulting
from the acts of the institutions of the Union” and “facilitate the achievement of the Union’s
tasks and refrain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the Union’s
objectives” cannot automatically trump other specific treaty obligations. RBI and RBHR
emphasize that “[nJowhere does [Article 4(3) of the TEU] refer to the primacy of EU law

or provide that in the event of a conflict, EU law will take priority.”*°

Croatia also relies on Declaration 17 of the 2009 Treaty of Lisbon for the proposition that
EU law has primacy and takes precedence over intra-EU BITs.*! Declaration 17 provides
in full:

The Conference [of EU Member States] recalls that, in accordance with

well settled case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the

Treaties and the law adopted by the Union on the basis of the Treaties

have primacy over the law of Member States, under the conditions laid
down by the said case law.”

The Respondent characterizes Declaration 17 as “an agreement relating to the TEU and
TFEU that was made between all the contracting parties in connection with the conclusion
of those [T]reaties,” which confirms the “comerstone principle” of the primacy enshrined
in the EU acquis.** Croatia contends that Declaration 17 is not limited to Member State
domestic law, but expressly ties the principle of EU law primacy to CJEU case law.™
Invoking Article 31(2)(a) of the VCLT, Croatia argues that Declaration 17 “must be
included in the interpretation of the TEU and TFEU.”*5

28 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 176.

2° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 180.

*° Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 55.

3! Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 25.
*? Treaty of Lisbon, Declaration 17 (RLM-73).

33 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 124-125.

+4 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 25.

35 Respondent’s Memorial, para 125.

26

104.

105.

106.

107.

The Claimants disagree. They contend that the principle of the primacy of EU law set out
in Declaration 17—which expressly refers to “primacy over the law of Member States”—
concerns the primacy of EU law over domestic law, not over extraneous treaties that exist
and operate outside EU law.** Given that Declaration 17 accompanied the 2009 Treaty of
Lisbon, which amended the EU Treaties already in force, the Claimants highlight that it
cannot accurately be said that Declaration 17 was made in connection with the
“conclusion” of the EU Treaties.*’ In any event, say the Claimants, there is no basis for
extending the principle of EU law primacy to the level of general international law.** Even
if there were, the primacy principle would not alter the substantially similar legal analysis
under Article 11(2) of the BIT or Article 30(3) of the VCLT,*° because Croatia would still
need to meet the test of incompatibility and “[i]f there is no incompatibility, there is nothing

in relation to which the primacy of EU law can operate.”

In its Amicus Curiae Brief, the EC takes the position that EU law prevails over all possible
conflict rules applicable to Article 9 of the BIT and, because Article 9 is incompatible with
EU law, the Tribunal must decline jurisdiction. *! In the alternative, relying on Article 30
and 59 of the VCLT, the EC argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the Austria-

Croatia BIT has been impliedly terminated.”

(3) The Meaning of “incompatible” under Article 11(2) of the BIT

The Parties firmly disagree as to the methodology for determining whether the BIT is
incompatible or compatible with the EU acquis for the purposes of Article 11(2).

The Claimants’ main position is that the test of incompatibility has a threshold requirement,

based on Articles 30(3) and 59 of the VCLT, namely that the treaties to be compared have

56 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 56; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 177.

37 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 110; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 57; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 178.

38 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 111.

>? Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 58.

40 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 112.

41 Amicus Curiae Brief of the European Commission (the EC Amicus Brief), Section 4.

® EC Amicus Brief, Section 3.

27

the same subject matter.*? Only if that threshold requirement is met should the Tribunal
proceed to determine the incompatibility of the relevant treaties, here the Austria-Croatia

BIT and the EU Treaties.

108. RBI and RBHR contend that because the BIT and the EU Treaties do not address the same
subject matter, the threshold requirement is not met and thus the treaties are not
incompatible. Therefore, Article 9 of the BIT, the investor-state arbitration clause, remains
applicable. The Claimants emphasize that many investment treaty tribunals have
consistently found that intra-EU BITs and the Energy Charter Treaty (the ECT) do not have

the same subject matter as the EU Treaties.

109. Croatia charges Raiffeisen with applying the wrong test for incompatibility under
Article 30 of the VCLT. Contending that it is not a necessary first step to examine the
sameness of subject matter, Croatia urges the Tribunal to proceed directly to test whether
the relevant treaty obligations in the earlier and later treaties can “be complied with
simultaneously” without a state party breaching one of the treaties.*° The tribunals in the
cases cited by the Claimants, which found that intra~-EU BITs and the ECT do not have the
same subject matter as the EU Treaties, did not take into account that “two treaties can be
incompatible without both treaties having substantially the same provisions.” In particular,
the Respondent relies on the reports of the International Law Commission (the ILC)
forming the travaux of the VCLT to support its claim that Article 30 of the VCLT does not

require the sameness of subject matter in measuring incompatibility.”

110. The Claimants respond that the VCLT travaux go beyond the ILC reports and include all
the material of the United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties (the Conference)
from 1968 to 1969, as the Conference essentially used the ILC Draft Articles (and the ILC

reports) as the basis for negotiating the final text of the VCLT.** The Conference adopted

43 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 24

44 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 67; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 25; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 31.
45 Respondent’s Memorial, para 32.

46 Respondent’s Memorial, para 132.

47 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 134-135.

48 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 62.

28

the version of what would become Article 30, which included reference to sameness of
subject matter, and the negotiators made clear that the sameness of subject matter

requirement should be construed strictly.”

111. In reply, Croatia refers back to another ILC report to show that the ILC considered the
subject matter criterion to be only an exercise in labelling and categorizing treaties, and
that the criterion seems “already fulfilled if two different rules or sets of rules are invoked
in regard to the same matter, or if, in other words, as a result of interpretation, the relevant
treaties seem to point to different directions in their application by a party.”*° Engaging in
the exercise of labelling and categorizing treaties would necessarily mean that the EU
Treaties could not conflict with a treaty in any of the areas they regulate, leading to the
absurd result that the EU Treaties could be incompatible only with other treaties

establishing other regional economic integration organizations.*!

112. RBI and RBHR do not accept that subject matter is merely a labelling exercise. The
Claimants contend that “[s]ameness of subject-matter is a textual requirement ... and any
difficulties associated with identifying subject-matter, or the practice of concluding treaties
that might span one or more subject-matters, does not render this textual requirement

meaningless,” and that incompatibility depends on treaty content instead. **

113. The Tribunal pauses to note that the Parties ultimately agreed, in effect, that the test of
incompatibility is whether the obligations in the two relevant treaties are such that

compliance with one obligation would put a state in non-compliance with the other.**

4° Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 63.

*° Respondent’s Reply, para 25, citing ILC, Fragmentation of International Law: Difficulties Arising from the
Diversification and Expansion of International Law, in Report of the Study Group of the International Law
Commission (A/CN.4/L.682) dated 13 April 2006 (the ILC Fragmentation Report) (RLM-100), paras 21-23.

5! Respondent’s Reply, para 26.
*2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 22.
53 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 48; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 18-19; Respondent’s Post-Hearing

Brief, para 39; Tr. 72:17-20 (Volterra).

29

(4) The Import of “in force at any given time”

114. The Parties also disagree on how to interpret the phrase “in force at any given time” in
Article 11(2) of the BIT, invoking arguments that they essentially reprise in connection
with the retroactive applicability of the Achmea Judgment (discussed at Section VII.A(1)c

below).

115. Raiffeisen’s position is that the phrase “in force at any given time” cannot mean in force
“at any time in the past, present or future.”*4 The phrase must instead refer to a specific
moment in time as relevant to a particular issue, thus calling upon applicable rules of
international law, including, most importantly, the critical date doctrine.** In this case, for
purposes of Article 9 of the BIT, the critical date is when an irrevocable agreement to
arbitrate was formed, which was 15 September 2017, the date on which ICSID registered

the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration.*
116. The Claimants emphasize the importance of the words “in force” in Article 11(2):

The words “in force,” which immediately follow the words “legal
acquis of the European Union (EU),” can only refer to the acquis as a
body of law as it stood — was “in force” — at a given point in time.
Article 11(2) refers to the state of the acquis “in force” at a point in
time — which is also the only logical and natural reading: one can
assess compatibility only against a concrete state of law, not against a
fluid and indeterminate notion of legal rules that are ever subject to
subsequent change and so can never be captured at the point in time
when jurisdiction is established.*’

 

117. According to Raiffeisen, this interpretation properly accounts for the necessarily evolving

nature of the EU acquis:

The acquis is by its nature and in its context something that changes
from time to time. When Article 11(2) refers to the acquis “in force at
any given time,” it refers to the body of EU law that is in force at that
time — the given time — not at some future (or past) time. The term

*4 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 201.
+5 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 43, 202. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 88.
%6 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 85.

57 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 199.

30

118.

119.

120.

“acquis” does not refer to a future body of law, let alone a future body
of law capable of producing retroactive legal effects.**

The Claimants emphasize that the tribunals in both Addiko and UniCredit reached the
conclusion that analysis of compatibility requires an assessment of the evolving acquis
actually in force on the critical date.* The Addiko tribunal placed particular emphasis on
the phrase “in force at any given time,” noting that the “latter point about a ‘given time’
qualifies the former point about the scope of the relevant acquis (that it be the acquis then
‘in force’),” and so requires that “the temporal inquiry must be into the state of the acquis
itself (i.e., what elements were or were not in force as part of the acquis, as of a particular

date).”°

The Respondent rejects as “untenable” the Claimants’ suggestion that “a snapshot in time
is possible” to apply Article 11(2).°! To the extent the phrase “at any given time” is relevant,
says Croatia, “the language is extensive, not restrictive:”

To the extent that the Contracting Parties intended these words to add

anything to the meaning of Article 11(2), they manifestly intended to

give Article 11(2) as broad an application in time as possible. In the

words of Sir Francis, the Claimants’ legal expert at the Hearing, the

term “at any given time” is “not always a very precise formula.” Sir

Francis confirmed that “it could be the date on which the judgment

was given. It could be some other date which would be relevant for the

purposes of these proceedings.”

The Respondent contends that “in force at any given time” is a “commonly used phrase”
which, when read in accordance with its ordinary meaning, “makes it clear that this
language is used ex abundanti cautela to ensure the broadest possible application of the
EU acquis.” This interpretation, says Croatia, accords with the purpose of Article 11(2)
to subordinate the BIT to the acquis, while the Addiko tribunal’s “freeze-frame approach”

reflects “an anachronistic misconception of the EU acquis now authoritatively confirmed

58 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 87.
*? Claimants’ Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, paras 4-9.
© Claimants’ Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, paras 6-7, citing Addiko Decision, para 215 (CLM-250).

6! Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 54, citing Tr. Day 3, 765:4-8 (Schwarz).

© Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 57, citing Tr. Day 2, 467:3-8 (Sir Francis).

63

Respondent’s Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, para 19.

31

121.

122.

123.

124.

to be incorrect” that would “perversely lead” the Contracting Parties to violate the acquis

“and entirely deprive Article 11(2) of its purpose.”

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s interpretation, which the Claimants say depends
entirely on reading the words “at any given time” to constitute an embedded conditionality:

Croatia argues precisely that any event, regardless of when it occurs —

such as the CJEU s judgment in Achmea or the 15 January Declaration

— that purports to clarify the legal position at the critical date is

capable of triggering Article 11(2) and depriving the Tribunal of

jurisdiction. Croatia seems to admit as such when it says that the

reference to the acquis “‘at any given time’ precisely accommodates

the present situation in which the CJEU has ... divined, clarified and
confirmed the law as it stood at the critical date.”°

The Claimants emphasize that the Respondent has given its irrevocable consent to ICSID
arbitration in Article 9(2)(a) of the Austria-Croatia BIT, and has agreed under Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention not to “withdraw its consent unilaterally.”°° According to the
Claimants, Croatia’s proposed interpretation of Article 11(2) is inconsistent with these

undertakings.

Croatia charges the Claimants with misrepresenting its position, which “does not depend
on the terms ‘at any given time’ in Article 11(2)” nor “on Article 11(2) of the BIT being
read as if it constitutes an ‘embedded conditionality’ in the sense that it can be triggered

after an agreement to arbitrate has been established.”*

Croatia further contends that the Claimants “confuse the irrevocable nature of a Party’s

consent to arbitration with the limits of that consent,”

arguing that because its consent to
arbitration has always been subject to the requirement of compatibility with the EU acquis

as per Article 11(2) of the BIT, this consent no longer existed as of 1 July 2013, when

&4 Respondent’s Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, para 19.

65 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 207, citing Respondent’s Memorial, paras 47, 81 and Respondent’s Post-
Hearing Brief, para 56.

6 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 187-193. See also Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 130-142.

°7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 30.

68

Respondent's Reply, para 46.

32

125.

126.

Croatia acceded to the EU. Croatia therefore insists that “vitiation [of consent] has never

been the issue.” In the words of Croatia’s counsel at the Hearing:

As I have submitted previously, the scope of Austria and Croatia’s
mutual offers in the BIT of ICSID Arbitration were explicitly limited by
agreement to circumstances where ICSID Arbitration, under the BIT,
was compatible with the EU acquis. Thus, from the moment that
Croatia acceded to the EU on I July 2013, ICSID Arbitration, by an
Austria[{n] investor against Croatia under the BIT, and a Croatian
investor against Austria under the BIT, was no longer compatible with
the EU acquis, and, therefore, no irrevocable consent to ICSID
Arbitration could have been created or could have existed under the
BIT.”

The Claimants assert that there is little difference between impermissible revocation or
withdrawal of consent to arbitration, on the one hand, and Croatia’s assertion that a
purported condition can be triggered by post-consent events, on the other hand. The
Claimants reject the Respondent’s attempt to characterize Article 11(2) as somehow being
a “condition precedent” to consent.’! According to Raiffeisen, “[tJhe critical element in
both contexts is that once consent is perfected, it cannot subsequently be altered or
negated.””* RBI and RBHR add:

The implication of Croatia's position is that any decision or award by

the Tribunal would eternally be susceptible to challenge. Croatia could

arguably even claim restitution of any moneys paid pursuant to a

pecuniary obligation under a final award, if at some undetermined

point its “conditional” consent may retroactively no longer amount to

consent. This would be an absurd result that completely undermines
notions of legal certainty.”

The Claimants conclude that, ultimately, their interpretation of Article 11(2) is the only
interpretation that is consistent with: first, the irrevocable consent extended by Croatia in
Article 9 of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention; second, the treaty

interpretation principle of effectiveness, and; third, the object and purpose of the BIT to

© Respondent’s Reply, paras 46-48.
1 Tr. Day 1, 60:9-20 (Volterra).
7! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 184-186, 189.

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 138; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 80.

® Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 83.

33

promote and protect investment through protection of legal certainty.” It is also the only
interpretation, the Claimants say, that “recognizes the changing content of EU law, rather
than freezing the content of the acquis as it stood on the date the [BIT] entered into force
—while at the same time safeguarding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction once the proceedings have

been initiated and consent has been crystallized.””*

B. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION
qd) Preliminary Observations

127. | The Parties have presented the Tribunal with the difficult task of interpreting Articles 9 and
11(2) of the Austria-Croatia BIT to determine jurisdiction, with related consideration of the
ICSID Convention and the EU Treaties in the wake of the high-profile Achmea Judgment.
As found above, neither side carries the burden of proof. It falls squarely on the Tribunal
to apply the international law rules and principles of treaty interpretation to assess whether

or not it has jurisdiction.

128. There can be no question of the Tribunal’s power to determine its own jurisdiction pursuant
to Article 9 of the BIT and Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention. Where jurisdiction is
found, the Tribunal has not only the right but also the affirmative responsibility to exercise
that jurisdiction. It follows that the Tribunal has the power and responsibility to interpret

Article 11(2) of the BIT, which is at the very core of the jurisdictional dispute.

129. Inso doing, the Tribunal underscores that it has carefully considered the exhaustive written
and oral submissions of the Parties and their legal experts on the myriad of issues the Parties
have chosen to present in this arbitration. In this Decision, the Tribunal addresses what it
considers to be the necessary dispositive issues. The absence of an explicit discussion of a

particular issue does not mean that the Tribunal did not give that issue due consideration.

7 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 89-96. See also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 200 et seq.

7 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 210.

34

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

The Tribunal has benefitted in particular from the Parties’ observations on the UniCredit
and Addiko Decisions, and from those decisions themselves, but without compromising its

responsibility to interpret Article 11(2) of the BIT independently.

(2) Article 11(2) as a Conflict Clause

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that Article 11(2) is a /ex specialis conflict clause.
It is undisputed that the Article 11(2) text is unique and does not appear in the ECT or in
the other intra-EU BITs underlying the series of jurisdiction decisions cited by the Parties.”
To date, only the UniCredit and Addiko ICSID tribunals have interpreted Article 11(2), both

holding in favor of jurisdiction.

In light of this finding, the Tribunal need not address the Parties’ extensive arguments based
on the residual conflict rules in Articles 30 and 59 of the VCLT and on the application of
the primacy of the EU Treaties to resolve conflicts. The conflict rule applicable in this case

is Article 11(2) of the BIT.

Consequently, the Tribunal also need not decide the vigorously disputed issue of whether
interpretation of treaty incompatibility under Article 30 of the VCLT requires a finding that

the relevant two treaties have the same subject matter.

(3) The Meaning of “incompatible” under Article 11(2) of the BIT

As noted, the Parties effectively agree that the test of incompatibility is whether the
obligations in the two treaties are such that compliance with one obligation would put a
state in non-compliance with another.’’ The Tribunal adopts this test and applies it below

in its analysis of incompatibility under Article 11(2) of the BIT.

As noted above, the Parties disagree as to whether the proper application of Article 11(2)

includes a threshold requirement, namely that the treaties to be compared have the same

7© Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras 1, 15.

77 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 48; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 18-19; Respondent’s Post-Hearing
Brief, para 39; Tr. Day 1, 72:17-20 (Volterra).

35

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

subject matter. Regardless of whether such a requirement exists under Articles 30 and 59
of the VCLT, the Tribunal cannot accept the Claimants’ argument that the same prerequisite
would apply in the context of Article 11(2) of the BIT. That position is not supported by
the text of Article 11(2); unlike Articles 30 and 59 of the VCLT, it contains no reference to

treaties “relating to the same subject-matter.”

(4) The Import of “in force at any given time”
At this juncture, the text of Article 11(2) of the BIT merits repeating:

The Contracting Parties are not bound by the present Agreement
insofar as it is incompatible with the legal acquis of the European
Union (EU) in force at any given time.”

In broad brush, Article 11(2) is a negotiated conflict clause reflecting the agreement of
Austria and Croatia that the EU Treaties will prevail over the BIT. The consequence of any
incompatibility between the treaties is that Austria and Croatia will not be bound by the

incompatible provisions in the BIT.

There is one express qualification to this EU law primacy, however. This is the temporal
qualification: incompatibility of the BIT is tested against the EU acquis “in force at any

given time.”

The Tribunal notes the Respondent’s assertion that the phrase “in force at any given time”
is a “commonly used phrase” used by Austria and Croatia “ex abundanti cautela to ensure

v7!

the broadest possible application of the EU acquis.”” Croatia offers no support for this

assertion, and the Tribunal is not aware that the phrase is commonly used in treaties.

Regardless, the Tribunal finds it helpful to break down this temporal clause into two parts
for interpretation: first, the words describing the EU acquis as “at any given time” and,

second, the immediately preceding two words “in force.”

78 BIT (C-4), Article 11.

79 Respondent’s Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, para 19.

36

141. The Tribunal considers that, whether looking to ordinary meaning in context under
Article 31 of the VCLT or to the critical date doctrine under international law, the words
“at any given time” cannot reasonably mean “at any time whatsoever.” The words “at any
given time” must refer to the specific point in time that is relevant to the issue in dispute.
The issue in dispute here is the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or, more accurately, whether the
Parties have effectively and irrevocably consented to ICSID arbitration for purposes of

Article 9 of the BIT, the ICSID arbitration provision.

142. The Parties agree, and it is trite law, that a state’s standing future consent to arbitration in
a BIT is perfected upon the investor’s effective initiation of an arbitration. Pursuant to
Rule 6 of the ICSID Institution Rules, an ICSID arbitration is “deemed to have been
instituted” under the ICSID Convention on the date the Secretary-General registers the

request for arbitration.

143. In the present case, Croatia provided its standing future consent to ICSID arbitration as of
1 November 1999, the date the Austria-Croatia BIT entered into force. RBI and RBHR
consented to ICSID arbitration and engaged Croatia’s consent on 15 September 2017, the
date the ICSID Secretary-General registered their Request for Arbitration. Accordingly, as
recognized by the Parties, the critical date against which to measure jurisdiction for

purposes of Article 9 of the BIT is 15 September 2017.*°

144. The interpretive inquiry does not stop here. The text in Article 11(2) of the BIT goes beyond
areference to the EU acquis “at any given time.” The full operative phrase in Article 11(2)
covers the acquis “in force at any given time” (emphasis added). In the face of this full
operative phrase “in force at any given time,” the Tribunal finds the critical interpretive
question to be whether Article 9 of the BIT was incompatible with the EU acquis in force

as at the ICSID registration date of 15 September 2017.

145. The Tribunal pauses to address the assertion in the Introduction to the Respondent’s Post-

Hearing Brief:

89 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 195; Respondent’s Memorial, para 93 note 103; Respondent’s Reply, para 52;
Tr. Day 1, 119:6-10 (Coop).

37

146.

147.

Article 11(2) means what it says: neither Austria nor the Respondent is

bound by anything in the BIT insofey as it is incompatible with the EU

acquis. Nothing more; nothing less
This assertion is not correct. There is more in Article 11(2) — the temporal qualification.
Article 11(2) says that neither Austria nor Croatia is bound by BIT provisions that are

incompatible with the EU acquis “in force at any given time.”

The temporal qualification requires interpretation, along with the rest of the text of
Article 11(2). In this regard, the Tribunal finds persuasive the Addiko tribunal’s
interpretation of the temporal phrase, that “the latter point about a ‘given time’ qualifies

the former point about the scope of the relevant acquis (that it be the acquis then ‘in

982

force’).”** In their Observations on UniCredit and Addiko, the Claimants note that the

Addiko tribunal “underscored the distinction between the actual wording of Article 11(2)
and the interpretation that might result “if the phrase ‘at any given time’ were to qualify

the reference to incompatibility, rather than the reference to the acquis,” in this way:

The question in that case might be whether the acquis, as it has evolved
in toto by the date of the Tribunals assessment, compels a finding of
incompatibility such as to release the Parties from obligations
otherwise imposed by the BIT. By contrast, under the actual placement
of the phrase “at any given time” (referring to “the legal acquis ... in
force at any given time”), the temporal inquiry must be into the state
of the acquis itself (i.e., what elements were or were not in force as part
of the acquis, as of a particular date).*

 

  

Returning to the touchstone of the VCLT, the Tribunal finds that Raiffeisen’s interpretation
is consistent with the words “in force at any given time” used in Article 11(2), when read
“in their context and in the light of [the treaty’s] object and purpose.”** The object and
purpose of the BIT is the promotion and protection of investments of parties such as

Raiffeisen made in the territory of Croatia.*° In the words of Raiffeisen, “[c]reating and

51 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 2.

82 4ddiko Decision (CLM-250), para 215.

83 Claimants’ Observations on UniCredit and Addiko, para 7, citing Addiko Decision (CLM-250), para 215 (emphasis
in original).

84 VCLT (CLM-129), Article 31(3).

85 BIT (C-4), Preamble.

38

maintaining legal certainty is part of what it means to promote and protect investment.”*°

The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s charge that the Claimants have made “a
generic incantation” of such principles to “create consent where none has ever
crystallized.”*” Croatia’s interpretation of Article 11(2) is patently inconsistent with the
fundamental international law principles of legal certainty and good faith. Although the EU
acquis, like all bodies of law, must and does evolve over time, it is critically important for
those subjected to the law, to be able to know the law in force at any given time. This is
particularly the case for purposes of fixing jurisdiction for resolution of compliance

disputes.

148. Finally, in similar vein, the Tribunal cannot accept Croatia’s position, repeated at the
Hearing, that compatibility with the acquis under Article 11(2) is a condition precedent or
precondition to Croatia’s consent to arbitration under Article 9.** As stated by the tribunal

in UniCredit:

Article 9 can be reconciled fully with Article 11 if the “at any given
time” language of Article 11 means that incompatibility with the EU
acquis is measured for purposes of Article 9 at the time the request for
arbitration is submitted and the States consent becomes operative. ...

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the only conditionality that
Article 11(2) of the BIT could bring to bear on Article 9 would be if, at
the time a claim is submitted, there is demonstrated inconsistency
between the irrevocable offer made by the Respondent for arbitration
and the EU acquis by virtue of decisions or conduct that has occurred
prior to that date.

149.  Croatia’s argument is also inconsistent with Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which
provides: “When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.” As the tribunal in Ampal v. Egypt rightly concluded:

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is very clear. The jurisdiction of
the Centre is to be assessed at the time that jurisdiction is invoked,

86 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 214.
87 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 12.

‘Sty. Day 1, 53:7-10 (Volterra); Tr. Day 1, 63:3-15 (Volterra); Tr. Day 3, 667:1-3 (Volterra); Tr. Day 3, 669:19-22
(Volterra).

®° UniCredit Decision (CLM-210), paras 120, 124.

39

which is when the investor s Request for Arbitration is registered by the
Centre. When jurisdiction has crystallized, “no Party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally,” says plainly Article 25(1).

As the Egypt-US Treaty and its Protocol must be read in the light of the
ICSID Convention, the Tribunal finds that there cannot be an
embedded conditionality in the Treaty which could be triggered afier
the submission of the dispute to arbitration.”
150. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the analysis of incompatibility under Article 11(2)
must take into account the EU acquis as it was in force as at the ICSID registration date of

15 September 2017.

VII. WHETHER ARTICLE 9 OF THE BIT IS INCOMPATIBLE WITH ARTICLES 276
AND 344 OF THE TFEU

A. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
qd) The Achmea Judgment and its Effect
a. Whether the Achmea Judgment is Binding in this Proceeding

151. According to the Respondent, the CJEU in its Achmea Judgment decided that for EU
Member States to create courts or tribunals insulated from the EU legal regime and review
by the CJEU is violative of Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU. Croatia relies specifically
on the CJEU’s holding that:

Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be interpreted as precluding a
provision in an international agreement concluded between Member
States, such as Article 8 of the [Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT],
under which an investor from one of those Member States may, in the
event of a dispute concerning investments in the other Member State,
bring proceedings against the latter Member State before an arbitral
tribunal whose jurisdiction that Member State has undertaken to
accept.”!

°° Ampal-American Israel Corp. and others v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/I1, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 1 February 2016 (Ampal v. Egypt) (CLM-179), paras 168-169.

°! Achmea Judgment (RLM-31), para 62.

40

152. Noting the agreement of the Parties’ legal experts—Professor Craig for the Respondent and
Sir Francis for the Claimants—that CJEU judgments conclusively and bindingly interpret
the EU Treaties and the other norms of the EU acquis, the Respondent contends that this
agreement “should suffice for the Tribunal to conclude that Article 9 of the BIT does not

992,

bind the Respondent and consequently to decline jurisdiction.

153. Croatia describes this arbitration as the realization of the CJEU’s fears concerning the risks

that intra-EU BITs pose to the autonomy of the EU legal order:

First, there is the risk that an arbitral tribunal established under intra-
EU BITs may misinterpret an EU Member States obligations under the
EU Treaties and render a binding award that is incompatible with the
respondent State’ international legal obligations under the EU
Treaties. Second, there is the risk that the case law of such tribunals
may snowball into a body of perceived authority on the international
legal obligations under the EU Treaties that is used to contravene even
the binding interpretations of the CJEU itself.
Croatia accordingly urges the Tribunal to disregard the intra-EU BIT tribunal decisions

cited by Raiffeisen and to abide by the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment instead.

154. In contrast, the Claimants urge the Tribunal to exercise its power and responsibility to be
the judge of its own jurisdiction by interpreting the instruments creating this jurisdiction.”
They rely on Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention, which provides that a tribunal “shall

be the judge of its own competence.”?°

155. According to Raiffeisen, the CJEU interprets the EU acquis for internal EU purposes, not
for international tribunals in extraneous proceedings not governed by the EU or its
institutions. In sum, for the further reason that the CJEU has not determined the

compatibility of the Austria-Croatia BIT with the EU Treaties, the Claimants take the

°? Respondent’s Reply, paras 66-67.
%3 Respondent’s Reply, para 78
°4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 159-160; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 36-37.

°5 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 36.

41

156.

157.

158.

position that the Tribunal owes no deference to the positions taken by the CJEU or the

EC.%

In its Amicus Curiae Brief, the EC accepts that this Tribunal has competence to rule on its
own jurisdiction, including “to analyse possible obstacles to the validity of the offer to
arbitrate, and the existence and validity of consent to arbitrate.”°’ The EC goes on to argue
that the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment is an authoritative interpretation of EU law which binds
the Tribunal in this intra-EU arbitration. Under the “broad scope of application” of the
Achmea Judgment, Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU “preclude any intra-EU investment

arbitration”**

and, as a “legal consequence,” the offers of Croatia and Austria “to enter into
investment arbitration [are] no longer valid since the accession of Croatia to the European

Union ... on 1 July 2013.”

Again, the Claimants disagree. Even if the Achmea Judgment were to have binding effect,
say the Claimants, the paucity of the reasoning leaves the Achmea Judgment unpersuasive
and would justify the Tribunal’s adopting a narrow interpretation of the Judgment.'°° RBI

and RBHR describe the Achmea Judgment as

remarkably terse and superficial in its reasoning and does not engage
in any reasoned, detailed analysis of important countervailing
principles of EU law (such as legal certainty, proportionality, or the
protection of existing and fundamental rights). Further, it all but
ignores the much more comprehensive and careful reasoning of the
Advocate General, who reached the opposite conclusion.'°!

The Claimants emphasize the interpretive inconsistencies they perceive in the Achmea
Judgment. The CJEU rejected the analysis in Advocate General Wathelet’s opinion (the
Achmea Wathelet Opinion) that: (a) Article 344 of the TFEU only applies to disputes

between EU Member States, and not between private parties and a Member State; and (b)

°© Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 104.

°7 EC Amicus Brief, para 14.

°8 EC Amicus Brief, Section 1 (emphasis in original).

°° EC Amicus Brief, para 3.

100 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 125; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 170-172.

101

Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 105.

42

159.

160.

161.

Article 267 of the TFEU, which provides for preliminary references on questions of EU
law from EU national courts to the CJEU, cannot be read to prohibit submission of a dispute
to a court or tribunal to which that provision does not apply, meaning courts or tribunals
that are not EU national courts. However, if the CJEU’s rejection of this analysis by
Advocate General Wathelet is correct, then the Achmea Judgment should equally prohibit
submission of disputes by EU Member States to any forum other than EU national courts;
yet the CJEU has expressly allowed intra-EU commercial arbitration. Additionally, the
CJEU did not distinguish intra-EU investment arbitration from extra-EU investment
arbitration or court proceedings, all of which could equally potentially raise questions of
EU law.'

In response, the Respondent asserts that the Claimants’ “subjective and unfounded
criticism of the Achmea Judgment as ‘terse and superficial in its reasoning’ demonstrates
their lack of understanding of longstanding CJEU case law and the principles of the EU
acquis that underpin the relevant provisions of the EU Treaties.”'°* Croatia insists that the

Achmea Judgment is by definition binding:

Whether or not the Claimants find the Achmea Judgment convincing is
irrelevant. The interpretation of Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU by
the CJEU is binding on both Contracting Parties to the BIT as a matter
of public international law.'*

b. The Scope of Application of the Achmea Judgment

The Parties also disagree as to the scope of application of the Achmea Judgment, including

whether it applies to ICSID arbitration.

The Respondent takes the position that “[i]t is evident that the decision of the ECJ [in
Achmeal] applies to all investor-State arbitration clauses in intra-EU BITs. Its ruling [is] in

no way qualified or limited.” !°>

102 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 155-157.

103 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 64.

104 Respondent’s Reply, para 72.

10s

Respondent’s Memorial, para 78.

4B

162. The Claimants consider this position to rest on “unjustifiably broad readings” of the
Achmea Judgment.'°° They put substantial emphasis on the fact that the CJEU in the

dispositif of the Judgment specifically referred to

a provision in an international agreement concluded between Member
States, such as Article 8 of the [BIT], under which an investor from one
of those Member States may, in the event of a dispute concerning
investments in the other Member State, bring proceedings against the
latter Member State before an arbitral tribunal whose jurisdiction that
Member State has undertaken to accept.'""

163. The Claimants recount that the German Bundesgerichtshof framed the original inquiry to
the CJEU to be whether “Article 344 TFEU preclude[s] the application of a provision ina
bilateral investment protection agreement between Member States of the European Union
(a so-called intra-EU BIT),” but the CJEU itself added the qualifying term “such as” in its
Judgment.'”* In other words, according to Raiffeisen, the CJEU chose to narrow the scope
of the Judgment from one concerning the arbitration clause in any intra-EU BIT to one
concerning the arbitration clause in an intra-EU BIT “such as” Article 8 of the Netherlands-
Slovak Republic BIT, which includes a choice of EU law clause. The Claimants
differentiate the Austria-Croatia BIT:

The Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT affirmatively mandated the
application of the EU Treaties and EU law to investor-State disputes.
The Austria-Croatia BIT, in contrast, contains no such provision.
Instead, the parties have chosen the specialized regime of the BIT itself
and other rules of international law to govern their investment
disputes. At most, EU law will have to be considered as a factual
predicate, which according to the CJEU itself does not create any

incompatibility.

164. Therefore, argue the Claimants, the Achmea Judgment should be applied only to other

arbitration clauses that have the same characteristics as Article 8 of the Netherlands-

106 CJaimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 161; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 65, 100, 109-110.
107 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 162, citing Achmea Judgment (RLM-31) (emphasis added by the Claimants).
108 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 119-124; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 101-105.

109 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 9, 95.

44

165.

166.

Slovakia BIT, most importantly an express EU choice of law provision.!!° The Claimants

emphasize that the Austria-Croatia BIT does not contain such an applicable law provision:

Instead, the Austria-Croatia BIT prescribes a special body of
international law rules applicable to investment disputes, and limits the
Tribunals jurisdiction under Article 9 of the [BIT] to the resolution of
those disputes pursuant to the terms of the Treaty. The Austria-Croatia
BIT therefore neither requires, nor indeed permits, application of
national law to resolve investment disputes; rather, such disputes are
to be resolved exclusively by reference to the Austria-Croatia BIT’s
international standards regarding expropriation, fair and equitable
treatment and discrimination."

 

The Claimants see no relevance to Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, which is a default
choice of law rule triggered if the parties have not chosen the law applicable to their
dispute. Here, say the Claimants, the Parties have made that choice by virtue of the BIT’s
self-contained international regime, which has no choice-of-law provision like Article 8(6)
of the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT. Although RBI and RBHR admit that investor-
state tribunals may need to consider the content of national or EU law as a matter of fact,

this is not the same as applying EU law as the governing law of the dispute. |!”

The Claimants urge the Tribunal to consider the reasoning of the Eskosol v. Italy tribunal,
which, as described by Raiffeisen, accepted that applying EU law “as an accessory relevant
not in its own right but only as a predicate question, analogous to a factual finding, for the
application of international law standards” is consistent with Article 344 of the TFEU.'%
The Eskosol tribunal referred to the Opinion of the Council Legal Services in the CIEU
case Commission v. Ireland:

[I]t is not sufficient, in order to establish a breach of Article 344 TFEU,

that an arbitration tribunal takes account of EU law as a criterion for

interpreting a provision not forming part of EU law. There could be
an infringement of Article 344 TFEU only if the subject-matter of the

"10 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 123.

‘1! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 124.

‘2 CJaimants’ Rejoinder, paras 149-156; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 142.

‘3 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 142, 162, citing Eskosol S.p.A. in liquidazione vy. Italian Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/15/50, Decision on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection
Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes, 7 May 2019 (Eskosol v. Italy) (CLM-192),
para 123.

45

167.

168.

decision of the arbitration tribunal were the interpretation and
application of provisions of EU law themselves.'\4

At the end of the day, say the Claimants, they make their claims under the international
standards of protection in the Austria-Croatia BIT, and not under EU law:

Although the Tribunal may need to consider the Croatian courts’

deficiencies in applying Croatian consumer protection law, which

incorporates EU law in certain respects, to decide the Claimants’ fair

and equitable treatment claim, any such consideration of EU law would
be as a matter of fact.'

The Respondent strongly disagrees with Raiffeisen’s arguments on several fronts. First, as
conceded by Raiffeisen’s legal expert Sir Francis at the Hearing, the CJEU often uses the
phrase “such as” in the dispositifs of its judgments.''® Second, the CJEU expressly set out
specific criteria of what is precluded in its dispositif in the Achmea Judgment:

Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be interpreted as_precluding a

provision in an international agreement concluded between Member

States, such as Article 8 of the [Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT],

under which an investor from one of those Member States may, in the

event of a dispute concerning investments in the other Member State.

bring proceedings against the latter Member State before an arbitral
tribunal _whose jurisdiction that Member State has_undertaken_to
accept.'""

Accordingly, says Croatia, it would be “entirely illogical” to assume that the CJEU meant
to include by implication all the characteristics of Article 8 of the Netherlands-Slovak
Republic BIT, including irrelevant criteria such as the number of arbitrators, and the
Claimants “have failed to give any remotely plausible reason why the CJEU, having
explicitly included multiple essential characteristics of general application” in the

dispositif, should be understood to have done so.''*

‘4 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 131 and Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 162, citing Eskosol v. Italy (CLM-192),
para 123 (emphasis in original).

"15 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 157.

"16 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 101, citing Tr. Day 2, 484:12-16 (Sir Francis).
"17 Respondent’s Memorial, citing Achmea Judgment (RLM-31), page 11 (emphasis added by the Respondent).

Ls

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras 102-103.

46

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

Thus, says Croatia, the only logical reading is that the CJEU referred to Article 8 of the
Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT in the dispositif as merely an example of a provision
possessing the relevant treaty characteristics. '!? As a matter of grammar, the use of commas
to demarcate the relative clause “such as Article 8 of the [Netherlands-Slovak Republic
BIT]” further shows the scope of the CJEU’s ruling in Achmea; the clause does not a limit

or narrow that scope.!7°

Third, as for the choice of law clause in the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT in Achmea,
Croatia posits that the relevant question is not “whether a specific tribunal must in concreto
interpret or apply EU law in the particular dispute before it,” but rather whether the
underlying arbitration clause is compatible with the EU acquis

whether, in abstracto, there is a possibility that a tribunal established

under that same BIT “may” be allowed, or required, to interpret or

apply points of EU law. If so, then the arbitration clause in that BIT is

incompatible with the EU acquis, in particular with — at the very least

— Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU and with the principles of the
autonomy of the EU legal order and mutual trust.'*!

Fourth, in any event, the Respondent argues that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention
operates to include EU law as the applicable law of ICSID disputes, thereby making this
arbitration similar to the Achmea Arbitration, in which Article 8(6) of the Netherlands-

Slovak Republic BIT stipulated application of the state party’s domestic law and EU law.

Finally, even if the words “such as” were to be interpreted as limiting application of the
Achmea Judgment only to intra-EU BITs with the same characteristics as the BIT before
the CJEU, Croatia argues that Article 9 of the Austria-Croatia BIT “mirrors exactly” the
language in Article 8(6) of the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT.'??

Turning to ICSID arbitration in particular, RBI and RBHR argue that the ICSID system is

more akin to the investor-state dispute settlement mechanism in the Comprehensive

"19 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 104.

!20 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 104. See also Respondent's Reply, paras 99-100.

'21 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 79.

'22 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras 106-107.

47

174.

Economic and Trade Agreement (the CETA), a mechanism which the CJEU (following the
Opinion of Advocate General Bot!”

Arbitration and held to be compatible with EU law in Opinion 1/17 (the CETA Opinion).'*4

) distinguished from that involved in the Achmea

According to Raiffeisen, as with the CETA mechanism, this Tribunal is to “assess the
content of EU law only insofar as necessary to determine a question of international
investment law — but not for the purposes of determining or regulating EU law as such.”!?5
Further, “like the CETA investment court, this Tribunal will only assess EU law, like a fact,
in order to determine if a substantive standard under the BIT or customary international

law was breached.”!?°

RBI and RBHR go on to describe allegedly material differences between ICSID arbitration
and the bilateral ad hoc UNCITRAL arbitration in the Achmea Arbitration, which, as
recognized by the OperaFund v. Spain tribunal, militate against applying the Achmea
Judgment to ICSID arbitration.'?’ According to Raiffeisen, when a state participates in
ICSID arbitration proceedings pursuant to a BIT, the state is complying with its obligations
under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention. Failure to comply would undermine the
ICSID Convention by allowing state parties effectively to withdraw their irrevocable
consent to arbitration under Article 25 “in the absence of an authoritative determination
under general international law of the BIT’s status.”'!?* The Claimants urge the Tribunal not
to presume that the CJEU intended in its Achmea Judgment to place EU Member States in
violation of their obligations under the ICSID Convention and international law, especially
as the EU Treaties themselves: (a) require the EU to contribute to the strict observance and

development of international law, and (b) stipulate that rights and obligations arising under

'23 Opinion of Advocate General Bot dated 29 January 2019, ECLI:EU:C:2019:72 (FJ-35).

'24 Opinion 1/17 of the Court dated 30 April 2019, ECLI:EU:C:2019:341 (the CETA Opinion) (FJ-36); Jacobs
Opinion, paras 32-37; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 133; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 97, 158-160, 168.

'25 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 130

!26 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 160.

'27 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 134, citing OperaFund Eco-Invest SICAV PLC and Schwab Holding AG v. Kingdom of
Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/36, Award, 6 September 2019 (CLM-233), paras 383-387.

128

Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 135-136.

48

175.

176.

177.

treaties with third states are not to be affected by provisions of the EU Treaties. !?° The
Claimants conclude that the Achmea Judgment cannot be read to extend to ICSID

arbitrations.

The Respondent takes a different view. In response to the Claimants’ CETA argument,
Croatia argues that the CETA Opinion is inapposite because it interprets an agreement
between the EU itself and non-EU Member States. Moreover, “CETA expressly precludes
challenges to general legislation enacted for the purpose of social and consumer protection

— the very claims brought in Addiko and in the present case.” '*°

The Respondent charges the Claimants with seeking “to create a false equivalence between
tribunals under this BIT and the CETA Tribunal in an attempt to establish that the CIEU
retreated from its position in the Achmea Judgment ... .”'>! Croatia argues that Raiffeisen
cannot credibly group together ICSID tribunals and the CETA Tribunal and then
distinguish them from the Achmea tribunal on grounds that they merely “assess the content
of EU law” only as a matter of fact:

The untenable nature of the Claimants’ position is demonstrated once

more by its internal contradictions. It is impossible for any tribunal

established under Article 9 of the BIT to “assess the content of EU law”

as amere fact while being free to disregard CJEU case law, an essential

part of EU law, at any rate without giving rise to precisely the risk of a

failure to apply or misapplication of EU law which is incompatible with
the EU acquis.‘

Going beyond Raiffeisen’s CETA argument, Croatia pursues a different line of argument
to show that the reasoning in the Achmea Judgment applies beyond intra~7EU UNCITRAL
arbitrations to intra-EU ICSID arbitrations. Croatia states that the CJEU’s primary concern
was the effect of intra-EU investment arbitration on the autonomy of the EU legal order
and on the mutual trust and cooperation among Member States, which are protected by the

referral mechanism that allows EU national courts to refer questions of EU law to the CJEU

!29 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 168-174; Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 134-140; Claimants’ Post-Hearing
Brief, paras 117-122.
130 Respondent’s Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, para 17.

‘5! Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 139.

'32 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para 141.

49

178.

179.

180.

for binding determination. The ICSID system, which, unlike the UNCITRAL regime, is
subject to no supervision by national courts at all, risks splintering EU law by allowing
tribunals to apply their own interpretations of EU law without any potential reference to
the CJEU, thus threatening the autonomy of the EU legal order.'** As for mutual trust and
sincere cooperation, the CJEU found in the Achmea Judgment that this requires trust
between Member States in their respective national legal systems, as well as ensuring that
the CJEU referral mechanism is not jeopardized by carve-outs of certain dispute categories
from the national courts and thus from the CJEU. Intra-EU ICSID arbitration is such a

carve-out, and hence violates the EU principles of mutual trust and sincere cooperation.'**

The Respondent contends that even Advocate General Wathelet, on whose Opinion the
Claimants rely, rejected the use of ICSID arbitration clauses in intra-EU BITs as
incompatible with the EU Treaties. '*5 Croatia states that the Achmea Wathelet Opinion, in
paragraphs 252-253, “contrasts UNCITRAL arbitration with ICSID arbitration and rejects
the latter as incompatible since it lacks any possibility of review by the national courts of

the EU Member States.” !*°

The Claimants reject this contention, charging Croatia with quoting misleadingly from the
Achmea Wathelet Opinion. The words attributed to the Advocate General actually were
from a section in his Opinion in which he was setting out the EC’s position. According to
RBI and RBHR, paragraphs 252-253 of the Opinion are inconclusive because Advocate
General Wathelet did not specifically address ICSID arbitration, and his Opinion is

supportive overall of all forms of investor-state arbitration. '°7

c. The Temporal Application of the Achmea Judgment

The Parties disagree on whether the Achmea Judgment applies retroactively and even on

whether the concept of retroactivity applies.

'33 Respondent’s Reply, paras 101-102.

'54 Respondent’s Reply, paras 103-105.

'35 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 126.
136 Respondent’s Reply, paras 175, citing Achmea Wathelet Opinion (CLM-177), paras 252-253.

137

Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 141-144.

50

181.

182.

183.

The Respondent bases its position on the allegedly settled law that CJEU interpretations of
the EU acquis have an ab initio effect, clarifying and defining where necessary “the
meaning and scope of that rule as it must be or ought to have been understood and applied
from the time of its coming into force” and consequently affecting even legal relationships
that arose before the specific judgment ruling on the request for interpretation. '**
According to Croatia, rather than raising a question of retroactive application, this means
that Article 9 of the Austria-Croatia BIT has been incompatible with the EU acquis since
the date of Croatia’s accession to the EU on | July 2013. This is especially so, because the
“ab initio or ex tunc effect of the CJEU’s interpretation is itself a principle of the EU acquis

and thus equally integrated into the BIT through Article 11(2) of the BIT.”!°

In essence, Croatia argues that the Achmea Judgment did not change the EU acquis to
render it incompatible with intra-EU BITs retroactively; the Achmea Judgment merely
clarified and confirmed the effect of Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU, '*° thereby
providing the Tribunal with the benefit of “an authentic interpretation of the TFEU in the
specific context of intra-EU BITs.”!*! In other words, the EU acquis has always been
incompatible with intra-EU BITs, and

the legal basis for this latter incompatibility is not the Achmea

Judgment as such but Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU. The Achmea

Judgment, like any exercise in statutory interpretation, merely clarified

the already existing obligations under these provisions in the specific
context of intra-EU investment treaties. '”

Croatia explains that the CJEU exceptionally may expressly limit the ex tunc effects of its

preliminary rulings on past transactions in the interests of legal certainty. However, such

138 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 87-88, citing Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Denkavit Italiana S.rL.,
CJEU Case 61/79, Judgment, 27 March 1980 (CLM-132), para 16 and Angel Barreira Pérez v. Instituto Nacional de
la Seguridad Social (INSS) and Tesoreria General de la Seguridad Social (TGSS), CVEU Case C-347/00, Judgment,
3 October 2002 (RLM-84), para 44, See also Craig Opinion, paras 62-63.

139 Respondent’s Reply, para 88.

'40 Respondent’s Reply, para 50.

'4l Respondent’s Reply, para 55.

'#2 Respondent's Reply, para 60.

Sl

184.

185.

186.

limitations “will always be laid down in the ruling itself’! and the CJEU included no

such limitation in the Achmea Judgment.“

The Claimants’ position is that, even accepting an ex func principle in EU law, the principle
should not apply to the Achmea Judgment. As explained by the Claimants’ legal expert
Sir Francis, the CJEU typically limits the ex twnc effect of its rulings to extend the
protection afforded by the EU Treaties to individuals against Member States, and so it
would make little sense not to limit the ex tunc effect of the Achmea Judgment, which does
not protect individuals but instead deprives individual investors of the protections afforded
by BITs.'*° Further, the ex unc effect of CJEU judgments must be balanced against other
principles of EU law, including the principles of legal certainty, proportionality and the
protection of fundamental rights. Sir Francis describes Achmea as a case where “the general
principles of EU law ... would be furthered by limiting the temporal effects of the

judgment, rather than applying it ex tunc.”'“°

In this context, the Claimants acknowledge that the investor in the Achmea Arbitration did
not comply with the EU First Occasion Rule, which requires a party to request non-
retroactivity of a judgment the first time the CJEU considers the relevant issue. This is not
surprising, say the Claimants, because First Occasion Rule requests are typically made by
EU Member States to limit the economic impact of CJEU judgments by barring historical
claims. In comparison, a private party such as the Achmea investor would not anticipate,
post-judgment, being made a defendant in similar claims.'*’ Given this different situation,

application of the First Occasion Rule would not further the principle of legal certainty.'**

Despite the ex tunc nomenclature, the Claimants contend that Croatia is effectively

arguing—without convincing support—for retroactive application of the Achmea

'43 Respondent’s Reply, para 90, citing A. Dashwood et al., Wyatt and Dashwood’ European Union Law (6" ed.,
2011) (excerpts) (RLM-117), page 229 (emphasis added by the Respondent).

'44 Respondent’s Reply, para 91.

'45 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 189-190, citing Jacobs Opinion, paras 57-60; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 167,
citing Jacobs Opinion, para 65 and Second Jacobs Opinion, paras 8, 11.

'46 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 193-194, citing, inter alia, Jacobs Opinion, para 61.

'47 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 191.

148

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 193.

52

187.

188.

189.

Judgment in violation of international law principles, in particular the critical date doctrine.
According to Raiffeisen:

It is an elementary principle of international adjudication that

jurisdiction is determined by reference to the law in force at the date

on which proceedings are instituted — the “critical date” — and that,
once established, it is unaffected by subsequent events.‘

The Claimants contend that the critical date doctrine must trump any applicable ex tunc
effect for the Achmea Judgment under EU or international law.'*° In support, they cite the
UniCredit Decision:

Even if there is ex tunc application of an EU judgment by virtue of a

subsequent interpretation, that application is by virtue of a subsequent
event — the time of the EU judgment.'*!

The Claimants present two policy reasons underlying the critical date rule. First, it would
be unacceptable for jurisdiction to cease to exist as the result of a subsequent event, because
this would cause an unwarranted difference in the treatment of applications depending on
the speed with which courts are able to examine the cases brought before them. Second, a
respondent could deliberately place itself beyond a court’s jurisdiction by bringing about
an event resulting in non-fulfilment of jurisdictional requirements, for example, by

denouncing a treaty. '*?

In the instant case, the Claimants identify the critical date for jurisdiction to be
15 September 2017, when the ICSID Secretary-General registered Raiffeisen’s Request for
Arbitration. Croatia’s consent to arbitration under Article 9 of the Austria-Croatia BIT was
perfected on that date. As the CJEU did not issue the Achmea Judgment until 6 March

2018, that Judgment had no effect on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.'*3

'49 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 177.

'50 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 184.

'S! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 187, citing UniCredit Decision (CLM-210), para 123.

'S2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 178, citing Application of the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 18 November 2008, [2008] ICJ 412
(CLM-136), para 80. See also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 248.

'S3 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 181.

53

190. The Respondent accuses the Claimants of misrepresenting the critical date doctrine.
Croatia asserts that “the relevant test for the purposes of the critical date doctrine is whether
the post-critical date acts by a party to the dispute are the ‘normal continuation of prior
acts’ and are not undertaken to improve a party’s position in an ongoing dispute,” and
denies that it took any unilateral acts contrived to defeat the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.'™
Indeed, says Croatia, it obviously could not have manipulated the CJEU, an independent
judicial body that does not take instructions from the EU, let alone one EU Member State,

into deciding the Achmea case in its favor.'*°

191. The Claimants respond that the critical date doctrine is not limited to unilateral acts by a
respondent, citing the ICJ decisions in the Arrest Warrant and Lockerbie cases.'*° They
also disagree with Croatia’s assertion that the Singapore Court of Appeal, in the case of
Sanum Investments v. Laos, recognized a spectrum of interpretations of the critical date
doctrine. '*’ The Claimants describe that decision as adopting the same understanding of
the critical date doctrine that they advocate here: evidence post-dating the institution of
proceedings is incapable of affecting a court or tribunal’s jurisdiction, as determined at the

date on which proceedings are instituted.'**

192. Croatia objects further to the Claimants’ interpretation of the critical date doctrine on
grounds that “[t]he Claimants can no more ask the Tribunal to disregard the Achmea
Judgment merely because it postdates the commencement of this case any more than the
Respondent can ask the Tribunal to ignore the UniCredit Decision merely because it was

rendered last year.”'*? In response, RBI and RBHR clarify that they “rely on decisions

'S4 Respondent’s Reply, paras 137-138, citing Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan
(Indonesia/Malaysia), Judgment, 17 December 2002, [2002] ICJ 625 (RLM-121), para 135.

'55 Respondent’s Reply, paras 149-151.

!56 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 195, citing Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
Belgium), Judgment, 14 February 2002, [2002] ICJ 3 (Arrest Warrant) (CLM-183), paras 23-24, 26; Questions of
Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya v. United States; Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections, Judgments,
27 February 1998, [1998] ICJ 9 and 115 (Lockerbie) (CLM-204 and CLM-205), paras 37-38.

'57 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 197, citing Sanum Investments Limited v. Government of the Lao Peoples Democratic
Republic, [2016] SGCA 57, Judgment, 29 September 2016 (Sanum Investments v, Laos) (CLM-208).

'58 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 194-197

'S9 Respondent's Reply, para 144.

54

193.

194.

subsequent to the Achmea judgment, including the decision in UniCredit, not as
‘subsequent events’ capable of affecting jurisdiction but as authorities on the effects, or

absence thereof, of the subsequent event itself, i.e., the CJEU’s judgment in Achmea.”'®

Separately, the Claimants charge the Respondent with seeking a retroactive invalidation of
its irrevocable consent to arbitrate. In response, Croatia reiterates its argument that no
“irrevocable” arbitration agreement between Croatia and Raiffeisen could have come into
existence.'®! Rather, upon Croatia’s accession to the EU on 1 July 2013, Article 11(2) of
the Austria-Croatia BIT (by then, between two EU Member States) took effect to limit
Croatia’s consent to arbitrate to the extent of incompatibility with the EU acquis,
162

specifically the substantive treatment standards and the Article 9 arbitration clause.

According to Croatia, Article 11(2)

has always made it expressly clear that the BIT did not bind the
Contracting Parties to anything contained therein ... to the extent that
it was incompatible with the EU acquis in force at any given time. Since
the BIT is incompatible with the EU acquis, which has been in force
between the Contracting Parties to the BIT from the moment when
Croatia joined the EU on I July 2013, both the investor-State
arbitration clause and the substantive treatment provisions of the BIT
have since this date been incompatible with the EU acquis.'°

To the extent the Claimants rely on the fact that the Achmea Judgment followed registration
of the Request for Arbitration with ICSID on 15 September 2017, Croatia notes that the
Achmea case was pending with the CJEU before the registration date.'°! The Claimants
consider that fact of little significance, because “if Achmea were to have any import, the

only legally relevant point in time is when the Court rendered judgment in that case.”!*

160 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 170.

16

' Respondent’s Reply, paras 59, 83-87.

162 Respondent’s Reply, paras 59-60; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 63.

'63 Respondent’s Reply, para 47.

164 Respondent’s Reply, para 53.

165

Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 168.

55

195.

196.

197.

166

(2) Incompatibility with Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU

Croatia’s position is that “the BIT has been incompatible with the EU acquis since 1 July
2013, the date when the EU acquis entered into force for the Respondent and the BIT
became an intra-EU BIT.” '® The incompatibility is that, as decided in the Achmea
Judgment, Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU, respectively, preclude EU Member States
from contracting out of the CJEU preliminary reference procedure and the exclusive CIEU
competence within the EU legal order, as Austria and Croatia have done in the BIT.'°’ With
its Achmea Judgment in March 2018, says Croatia, the CJEU “divined, clarified and

confirmed the law as it stood at the critical date.”'®*

The Claimants deny that the EU acquis—as in force in 2017—recognized any
incompatibility between intra-EU BITs and EU law. They rely on the Bundesgerichtshof’s
2016 Achmea preliminary reference to the CJEU and the Achmea Wathelet Opinion, both
of which considered intra-EU BITs to be compatible with EU law.'® In response to
criticism from Croatia, RBI and RBHR clarify that their argument is not that the Achmea
Wathelet Opinion was itself part of the acquis at the critical date, but that it is “a persuasive

and well-reasoned analysis of the acquis as it stood on 15 September 2017.”!7°

The Parties offer different views as to whether Austria and Croatia considered the BIT to
be incompatible with the EU acquis when Croatia acceded to the EU in 2013. Croatia, for
its part, relies on a note verbale sent to Austria in 2011, in anticipation of accession, in
which Croatia expressly raised the issue of denouncing the BIT as part of its obligation to

bring its treaties into full alignment with the EU acquis.'!

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para 30.

'67 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras 59-60.

168 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 56.

169 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 169.

"7 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 59.

'l Respondent’s Reply, paras 162-164, citing Note Verbale of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and European
Integration of the Republic of Croatia to the Embassy of the Republic of Austria in Zagreb, No. 1594/11, dated
28 March 2011 (R-26). See also Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras 120-121.

56

198.

199.

For the Claimants, however, the exchange of notes verbales shows merely that Croatia
requested Austria’s views on termination of the BIT and Austria did not agree to

termination.!”

Furthermore, other treaties signed in the run-up to Croatia’s accession and,
most importantly, the accession treaty itself, indicated no concerns regarding the
compatibility of Croatia’s intra-EU BITs with EU law. The 2011 EU-Croatia Treaty of
Accession obliged Croatia to “withdraw from any free trade agreements with third
countries, including the Central European Free Trade Agreement as amended,” but did not
impose any similar obligations regarding intra-EU BITs.'’? The Claimants emphasize that
the 2005 Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and
their Member States, on the one part, and the Republic of Croatia, on the other part (the
Association Agreement), which was concluded as part of Croatia’s early candidacy for EU
membership, affirmatively encouraged Croatia to enter into BITs with EU Member States
as a means of establishing a favorable climate for private investment.” This demonstrates,
says Raiffeisen, that the parties to the Association Agreement did not consider intra~EU
BITs to be incompatible with the acquis, but rather “an element that would help prepare
Croatia for its accession to the EU.”!”> Finally, RBI and RBHR note that both Croatia and

Austria continue to affirm that the BIT remains in force.”

The Respondent rejects Raiffeisen’s reliance on the Association Agreement on grounds that
Article 85 of the Agreement does not address potential compatibility of intra-EU BITs with
the EU acquis. Instead, says Croatia, the EU’s encouragement to Croatia to enter into
investment treaties with EU Member States “in no way implies that such investment

treaties would remain compatible with the EU acquis once they had become intra~-EU

'2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 62-65, citing, inter alia, Record of consultations held with Austrian representatives on
13 September 2011in the Ministry of Economy, Labour and Entrepreneurship (R-27). See also Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras 51-52.

"3 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 59-61, citing, inter alia, Act Concerning the Conditions of Accession, appended to the
Treaty of Accession (OJ L 112, 24/04/2012) (RLM-32), Article 6(9).

'4 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 45-47, citing Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European
Communities and their Member States, on the one part, and the Republic of Croatia, on the other part, concluded in
Luxembourg on 29 October 2001, entered into force on 1 February 2005 (OJ L 26, 28/01/2002) (the Association
Agreement) (CLM-218).

"5 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 47.

176

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 27; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para 61.

57

BITs.”!7’ Croatia highlights the concession of Raiffeisen’s legal expert Sir Francis that

there were “no precise assurances” of compatibility and that Article 85 of the Association

Agreement only “comes very close to an assurance.””!7®

200. The Claimants put particular emphasis on a 14 February 2018 meeting, called by Croatia
in connection with Article 11(3) of the BIT, which calls for a dialogue to discuss
“uncertainties concerning the effects of [Article 11(2)].” The Minutes of that meeting
record what the Claimants describe as Austria’s unequivocal views on the compatibility —

before the Achmea Judgment — of the BIT and EU law:

Austria reiterate[s] its previously expressed position that it considers
BITs valid and that it does not deem them incompatible with EU law.
Austria follows this position diligently also in the infringement
proceedings brought against it by the European Commission. Austria
considers that BITs fulfil their function and give additional assurances
to investors. Austria points out that even DG FISMA admits that BITs
provide useful additional protection [for investors].

Austria interprets Article 11(2) of the Agreement in [a — sic] way that
incompatibility with the EU law only affects such individual provisions.
Still Austria contends incompatibility with the EU law should be
determined by the CJEU, even in case of individual provisions. In any
event, individual provisions’ incompatibility should not result in the
whole BIT invalidity. Further, incompatibly should have effect as of the
time when it is established, that is without retroactive effect.

Austria considers that arbitral tribunals could lack competence should
the CJEU decide that the dispute resolution provision is incompatible
with the EU law. If so, Austria considers that such decision would not
change the dispute resolution provision and would have no impact on
the pending proceedings.

Austria and Croatia concluded this meeting by stating once the CJEU
decides on the Achmea dispute further steps may be discussed.'”

'77 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 116.
"8 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 118, citing Tr. Day 2, 517:18—518:5 (Sir Francis).

"79 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 203, 215 citing Minutes of the meeting with the Austrian representatives
regarding the interpretation of Article 11 paragraph 2 and 3 of the Agreement on the promotion and protection of
investment concluded with Austria (English translation from Croatian) (the February 2018 Minutes) (C-243).

58

201.

202.

203.

204.

(3) The 15 January 2019 Declaration and the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty

In their submissions before the Hearing and their Post-Hearing Briefs, the Parties addressed
the import of the 15 January 2019 Declaration. They subsequently added observations on
the related 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty (discussed below).

a. The 15 January 2019 Declaration

The Respondent argues that the 15 January 2019 Declaration, signed by all 28 EU Member
States, confirms that Article 9 of the BIT is incompatible with the EU acquis, on the basis
of the text:

[A] investor-State arbitration clauses contained in bilateral

investment treaties concluded between Member States are contrary to

Union law and thus inapplicable ... An arbitral tribunal established on

the basis of investor-State arbitration clauses lacks jurisdiction, due to

a lack of a valid offer to arbitrate by the Member State party to the
underlying bilateral investment Treaty.'*°

Croatia then asserts that the Declaration is part of the EU acquis as one of the “declarations
and resolutions adopted by the Union” and, by virtue of Article 11(2) of the BIT, the
Tribunal is bound to apply it.'*' Additionally, Croatia describes the 15 January 2019
Declaration as the result of a dialogue between Austria and Croatia as per Article 11(3) of
the BIT, which clarifies any uncertainty arising from the effects of Article 11(2) and should
be respected by the Tribunal.'*? Croatia also argues that the Declaration constitutes a
subsequent agreement between Austria and Croatia as to the authoritative and binding

interpretation of both the TFEU and the BIT, as per Article 31(3)(a) of the VCLT.

Raiffeisen’s first argument in response, as a procedural matter, is that the Tribunal should
draw adverse inferences on the issue of the 15 January 2019 Declaration based on Croatia’s

refusal to comply with the Tribunal’s order to produce the documents listed in its Privilege

180 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 36-37, citing Declaration of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member
States on the Legal Consequences of the Judgment of the Court of Justice in Achmea and on Investment Protection in
the European Union (the 15 January 2019 Declaration) (RLM-60), page 1.

'8 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 46-47.

'82 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 49-50.

59

205.

206.

207.

Log.'* The Claimants contend that these documents, all of which appear to relate to the
Declaration, could have been relevant to show differing positions among EU Member
States on the issue of the incompatibility of intra-EU investment treaty arbitration with EU
law. Or, say the Claimants, the documents could have evidenced EC pressure on the
Member States to induce them to sign the Declaration, which would be relevant to rebut
Croatia’s claim that nothing prevented the EU Member States that originally argued for

compatibility from refusing to sign the Declaration or qualifying their signatures.

RBI and RBHR offer several responses to Croatia’s substantive arguments on the import
of the 15 January 2019 Declaration. First, they argue that—as found by the Addiko and
UniCredit tribunals and agreed by the Respondent’s legal expert, Professor Craig—the
Declaration is not part of the EU acquis, because it was not adopted by the European Union
itself and instead is described as “Declaration of the Representatives of the Governments

of the Member States.”!**

Second, the Declaration cannot be deemed to be an authoritative interpretation of EU law,
because only the CJEU is empowered to interpret the EU Treaties. In the opinion of
Raiffeisen’s legal expert, Sir Francis:

Moreover, even if the Member States could be taken to represent the

EU for these purposes, they would not have the power to issue any

authoritative interpretation of the EU Treaties or to alter or extend the

meaning of a judgment of the CJEU. The CJEU is the supreme

authority within the EU with regard to the interpretation of the Treaties,

and its interpretations are authoritative and binding on the Member
States and the EU institutions.'*°

Third, the Declaration cannot evidence an EU level dialogue between Austria and Croatia
concerning interpretation of Article 11(2) of the BIT for purposes of Article 11(3) of the
BIT, as the Declaration makes no reference to the BIT.!*° In this connection, the Claimants

emphasize that the EU has threatened infringement proceedings against any Member State

'83 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 175-181; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 263-267.

'84 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 261, citing Tr. Day 2, 417:21-418:7 (Craig); Claimants’ Observations on
Addiko and UniCredit, para 29; Craig Opinion, para 160(a).

'85 Jacobs Opinion, para 75. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 183; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 269.

186

Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 186; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 272-273.

60

208.

209.

unwilling to make a public commitment in favor of terminating intra~-EU BITs by signing
the Declaration, thereby bringing into question whether the Declaration can be considered
the result of a “dialogue.” '*’ Finally, in similar vein, the Claimants argue that the
Declaration is not relevant to a treaty interpretation exercise under Article 31(3)(a) of the
VCLT, given that it is not an agreement regarding interpretation of the Austria-Croatia BIT

and the provisions of the BIT.'**

The Claimants also charge Croatia with misapplying the Singapore Court of Appeal
Judgment in Sanum Investments v. Laos in connection with its argument that the 15 January
2019 Declaration supports retroactive modification of the BIT.'* In that case, the
Singapore Court of Appeal refused to allow Laos to modify the geographical scope of the
application of the Laos-China BIT retroactively by producing notes verbales with China
that post-dated commencement of the arbitration.'°° In comparison—and, according to
Raiffeisen, wrongly—Croatia characterizes the Declaration as a “normal continuation of
diplomatic relations between the EU Member States” that was not undertaken to improve
its position in the instant case and, indeed, Croatia could not have prevailed upon the other

27 Member State to sign the Declaration to improve its position in the instant case.!!

b. The 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty

In its Observations on the Termination Treaty, the Respondent takes the position that,
despite Austria’s not being a signatory, the May 2020 Termination Treaty confirms the
“consensus view of all EU Member States” that Article 9(2) of the BIT has been

192

incompatible with the EU acquis since Croatia acceded to the EU on 1 July 2013.'”* Croatia
contends that the Preamble of the Termination Treaty makes this “abundantly clear” in

providing as follows:

'87 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 204.

'88 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 184-185; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 271.

'89 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 276.

190 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 189, citing Sanum Investments v. Laos (CLM-208), para 104.

'9! Respondent’s Reply, para 138.

'2 Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, paras 2, 11.

61

210.

211.

212.

193

Investor-State arbitration clauses in bilateral investment treaties
between the Member States of the European Union (intra-EU bilateral
investment treaties) are contrary to the EU Treaties and, as a result of
this incompatibility, cannot be applied after the date on which the last
of the parties to an intra-EU bilateral investment treaty became a
Member State of the European Union.'*

With the same concept incorporated in Article 4 of the Termination Treaty, Croatia
contends that the Treaty “reflects the same consensus view of all EU Member States” as to
incompatibility in the 15 January 2019 Declaration, which Austria signed.'** Austria
cannot resile from this earlier position, says Croatia, by refusing to sign the Termination
Treaty. To meet Raiffeisen’s objection on this point, Croatia offers clarification, for the
avoidance of doubt, that it is not submitting that the Termination Treaty “creates direct legal
effects for Austria as a non-party, in the sense of the Termination Treaty itself serving as

the source of new obligations or rights for Austria.”!°°

The Respondent relies on the alleged fact that, when declining to sign the Termination
Treaty, Austria simultaneously affirmed its intention to implement the Achmea Judgment
and terminate its intra-EU BITs.'°° In support of this allegation, Croatia refers to ongoing
bilateral discussions with Austria reported in “diplomatic documents that the Respondent

is constrained from disclosing as a matter of international law.”!°”

In sharp contrast, in their Observations on the Termination Treaty, the Claimants note
Austria’s specific decision not to become a party and assert that the Termination Treaty “is
therefore entirely irrelevant for the status of the [Austria-Croatia BIT] and immaterial to
the Respondent’s preliminary objections to jurisdiction.” !** In support of this position, RBI

and RBHR rely on Articles 34 and 35 of the VCLT, which reflect the “fundamental

Agreement for the Termination of Bilateral Investment Treaties between Member States of the European Union

dated 29 May 2020 (the Termination Treaty) (RLM-173).

'94 Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 7.

'95 Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 10.

'96 Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 16.

'57 Respondent’s Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 17.

198

Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 3.

62

213.

214.

215.

principle of international law” that a treaty does not create obligations for a third state

without its consent and express acceptance of treaty obligations in writing. !°°

Even if the Termination Treaty did reflect a near-consensus view of the EU Member States,
RBI and RBHR contend that the Treaty would still not form part of the EU acquis. This is
because, without Austria, Ireland, Sweden and Finland as signatories, the Termination
Treaty “is consequently not an international agreement ‘concluded by the Union’ or ‘by
the member states among themselves within the sphere of the Union’s activities’ so as to

form part of the acquis within the EU’s own definition of that term.”?

RBI and RBHR deny that Austria’s signature of the 15 January 2019 Declaration has any
relevance, because that signature “does not change the fact that Austria specifically chose
not to become a party to the Termination Treaty, which is a separate legal instrument

concluded well over a year later.”?°!

Finally, the Claimants charge that Croatia’s attempt to rely on asserted bilateral Croatia-
Austria discussions “— while failing to substantiate their content or even their existence —
is particularly disingenuous in light of its past refusal to produce documents related to
‘discussions among EU Member States’ on these issues in breach of the Tribunal’s
Procedural Order No. 6.”7° Even if there were such bilateral discussions, the Claimants
contend that they would not circumvent the VCLT Article 34 principle that treaties do not
create obligations or rights for third states without their consent. Moreover, by operation
of the critical date doctrine, even if Austria and Croatia were to agree to terminate the BIT
and even to terminate the sunset provision in Article 12(3), such termination “would not,
according to fundamental principles of international law and adjudication, in any way

affect this Tribunal’s jurisdiction or the Claimants’ rights under the [BIT].”?°

'99 Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 5.

200 Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 10, citing EC, “European Neighbourhood Policy and

Enlargement Negotiatio1

lossary” (C-239) (emphasis added by the Claimants).

 

20! Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 11.

202

203

Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 13.

Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 17.

63

216.

217.

218.

219.

204

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION BY MAJORITY

This section contains the views of the majority of the Tribunal, formed by Arbitrators Reed

and Alexandrov. Arbitrator Tomov’s dissenting views appear in Section VIL.C below.

Having carefully considered the Parties’ extensive submissions, the Tribunal sets out in this
section its analysis of whether the ICSID arbitration clause in Article 9 of the Austria-
Croatia BIT is incompatible with the EU acquis in force on 15 September 2017. The
Tribunal begins with the necessary temporal inquiry into the state of the EU acquis on that

date and the central question of what role, if any, the Achmea Judgment plays.

This inquiry does not, in the Tribunal’s view, require interpretation or application of the
acquis. Instead, it requires the Tribunal to take account of the relevant acquis, as a
necessary component of the comparative analysis mandated in Article 11(2) of the BIT.
The Tribunal likens its role, in this respect, to that of the anticipated CETA Tribunal, which
was vetted as compliant with Article 344 of the TFEU in the CETA Opinion relied upon by

Raiffeisen. In the words of that Opinion:

[T]he CETA Tribunal, when it is called upon to examine the compliance
with the CETA of the measure that is challenged by an investor and that
has been adopted by the investment host State or by the Union, will
inevitably have to undertake, on the basis of the information and
arguments presented to it by that investor and by that State or by the
Union, an examination of the effect of that measure. That examination
may, on occasion, require that the domestic law of the respondent
Party be taken into account. However, as is stated unequivocally in
Article 8.31.2 of the CETA, that examination cannot be classified as
equivalent to an interpretation, by the CETA Tribunal, of that
domestic law, but consists, on the contrary, of that domestic law being
taken into account as a matter of fact, while that Tribunal is, in that
regard, obliged to follow the prevailing interpretation given to that
domestic law by the courts or authorities of that Party, and those courts
and those authorities are not, it may be added, bound by the meaning
given to their domestic law by that Tribunal.”

 

The Tribunal wishes to underscore specifically its understanding of its role vis-a-vis the

CJEU and the Achmea Judgment. There is no doubt, and the Parties do not dispute, that

CETA Opinion (FJ-36), para 131 (emphasis added).

64

220.

221.

EU law creates a legal order with special characteristics. This is recognized in the Achmea
Judgment itself:

[T]he autonomy of EU law with respect both to the law of the Member

States and to international law is justified by the essential

characteristics of the EU and its law, relating in particular to the

constitutional structure of the EU and the very nature of that law. EU

law is characterised by the fact that it stems from an independent

source of law, the Treaties, by its primacy over the laws of the Member

States, and by the direct effect of a whole series of provisions which are
applicable to their nationals and to the Member States themselves.

The CJEU operates on the level of the EU legal order, and its judgments are binding within
the bounds of that order. In contrast, international arbitration tribunals constituted under
investment treaties operate on the level of the international legal order. Investor-state
tribunals have confirmed this principle many times over, for example, in Electrabel v.
Hungary and RREEF vy. Spain.?° This Tribunal operates on the plane of the international
legal order, with authority from the instruments pursuant to which it was constituted,
specifically the Austria-Croatia BIT and the ICSID Convention. In assessing questions of
its jurisdiction, the Tribunal is bound to apply those instruments in accordance with

international law.

The Tribunal will need to assess the effect of the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment for the purpose
of Article 11(2) of the BIT. This does not mean, however, that the Tribunal must defer or
should defer—or even responsibly could defer—to the Achmea Judgment as to the
interpretation or application of the BIT. Just as this Tribunal is not empowered to issue
authoritative interpretations of EU law, which properly lies within the legal prerogative of
the CJEU, the CJEU is not empowered to issue authoritative interpretations of provisions

in the Austria-Croatia BIT, whether directly or indirectly.

205 4chmea Judgment (RLM-31), para 33.

206 Electrabel S.A. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Award, 25 November 2015 (Electrabel v. Hungary)
(CLM-68), para 4.112; RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux

Sar

 

v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 June 2016 (RREEF v. Spain)

(CLM-157), para 75.

65

222.

223.

224.

225.

qd) The EU Acquis on 15 September 2017 and the Effect of the Achmea Judgment

To set the stage, it is helpful to review the scope of the EU acquis communautaire. The
Parties agree that the acquis includes, among other things: (a) the content, principles and
political objectives of the TEU and TFEU; (b) legislation adopted by the EU in application
of the EU Treaties; (c) the case law of the CJEU; (d) declarations and resolutions adopted
by the EU; and (e) international agreements concluded by the EU that are binding on it and
on its Member States.”°’ The Parties also agree that opinions of the CJEU Advocates
General are part of the acquis, unless and until they are rejected by the CJEU or otherwise

found incompatible with primary elements of the acquis including the EU Treaties.”

The Parties further agree that the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment has formed part of the EU
acquis at least since 6 March 2018 when it was rendered. However, as summarized above,
the Parties disagree with respect to the retroactive effect, as per the Claimants, or the ex

tunc effect, as per the Respondent, of the Achmea Judgment before 6 March 2018.

In summary, RBI and RBHR rely on the critical date doctrine in international law to argue
that the Achmea Judgment did not become part of the acquis until after the Parties’ consent
to arbitration was perfected by ICSID registration of their Request for Arbitration on
15 September 2017. Thereafter, that consent became irrevocable under the ICSID

Convention and so the Achmea Judgment can have no effect on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

In contrast, Croatia’s position is that the CJEU in its judgments declares the content of EU
law by way of authoritative interpretation as to how EU law was always meant to be
understood, with ex tunc effect. To put the argument in two steps for this proceeding: first,
the 6 March 2018 Achmea Judgment obviously was not part of the acquis as of
15 September 2017; but, second, the CJEU’s interpretation has legal effect ex tunc as of
15 September 2017 and, as relevant to this case, back to July 2013 when Croatia acceded
to the EU and the EU legal order.

207 EC, “European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations: Glossary” (C-239); EUR-Lex, Glossary —
Acquis (R-14), available at: http://eur-lex.europa.cu/summary/glossary/acquis. html,

208

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 53; Second Craig Opinion, para 51.

66

226.

227.

228.

The Tribunal finds dispositive the first step in Croatia’s argument, namely the
acknowledgement that the Achmea Judgment was not part of the acquis as of 15 September
2017. Put simply, the then-future Achmea Judgment could not have been in force within

the meaning of Article 11(2) of the BIT as of 15 September 2017.

The Tribunal fully understands the second step in Croatia’s argument—that Articles 267
and 344 of the TFEU were part of the acquis in force on 15 September 2017, as was the
principle that CJEU interpretations of the EU Treaties have ex tunc effect, and so the
CJEU’s interpretation of Articles 267 and 344 in Achmea must be effective on that date.
The Tribunal readily accepts that a CJEU interpretation of the EU Treaties forms part of
the acquis once formally rendered, but that interpretation—even assuming that it has the
ex tunc effect under EU law that Croatia ascribes to the Achmea Judgment—cannot be in
force before it is rendered and comes into existence. An interpretation by the CJEU cannot
be in force with binding effect on unknowing parties. Neither states nor investors can fairly
be expected to guess what definitive interpretations of EU law may come from the CJEU

in the future.

Here, it is important to recall that the Claimants commenced this arbitration on
15 September 2017 based on the express statement in Article 9(2) of the BIT that Croatia
had “irrevocably consent[ed] in advance” to ICSID arbitration. At that point, even with the
public debate that preceded the Achmea Judgment on 6 March 2018, no one could say
which way that judgment would go. As discussed in detail below, the record reflects that,
at that given time, neither Austria nor Croatia understood Article 9 of the BIT to be
definitively incompatible with the acquis. Nor did Advocate General Wathelet. Nor did the
EU institutions responsible for the 2005 Association Agreement and the 2013 Treaty of
Accession. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds persuasive the analysis of the Addiko tribunal:

[T]he BIT must be read as a whole, including not only its Article 11(2)

reference to the acquis “in force at any given time” (which recognizes

that the acquis evolves and that the state of the acquis at a particular

critical date is important), but also its Article 9 commitment to the

irrevocability of Austria and Croatia’s advance offer of consent to

arbitrate. Both of these provisions moreover must be read in light of the

general principles of international law which are inherently part of the
applicable law of the BIT. In these circumstances, the Tribunal is

67

229.

230.

231.

232.

unable to accept that, whatever EU law may provide regarding the ex
tunc or ex nunc effect of the Achmea Judgment, Article 11(2) of the BIT
mandates that this judgment be applied to international effect contrary
to the basic propositions of both Article 9 of the same BIT and the
generally accepted principles [in Articles 46 and 69] of the VCLT
regarding good faith reliance on treaty validity prior to the invocation
of invalidity, so long as the grounds for invalidity were not already
manifest at the time of such reliance.?”

Croatia may wish to avoid pleading “retroactive application” of the Achmea Judgment, but
the Claimants are correct in stating that “Croatia effectively requests the Tribunal to apply
the purported acquis as it stands now [post-Achmea Judgment], with the benefit of
hindsight.”?'° Irrespective of whether the Achmea Judgment has an ex tunc effect under EU
law, Croatia’s approach must be rejected based on the text of Article 11(2) of the BIT, read

together with Article 9(2) and as a matter of international law.

In sum, the Tribunal finds that the Achmea Judgment, which post-dates the registration of
the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, cannot factor into the analysis of incompatibility

under Article 11(2) of the BIT.

In light of this finding, the Tribunal need not address the Parties’ arguments concerning the
binding nature of the Achmea Judgment itself in this proceeding, whether the Achmea
Judgment applies to ICSID arbitration, or whether the CJEU’s determinations covering BIT
provisions “such as” Article 8(6) of the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT apply to different

choice of law provisions (or lack thereof).

(2) Incompatibility with Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU

On Croatia’s case, the Achmea Judgment per se is not necessary to prove that Article 9 of
the BIT was already incompatible with Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU upon Croatia’s
accession to the EU in 2013 and, therefore as at 15 September 2017, leaving Croatia unable
validly to consent to ICSID (or UNCITRAL) arbitration with Raiffeisen. The Tribunal now

turns to this question of inherent incompatibility under Article 11(2) of the BIT.

209 4ddiko Decision (CLM-250), para 279 (footnotes omitted). The Tribunal discusses Article 46 of the VCLT further
in Section VII.B(3).

210

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 11.

68

233.

234.

235.

236.

2

As noted above, the Parties agree that the test for incompatibility is whether the obligations
in the two treaties are such that compliance with one obligation would put a state in non-
compliance with another. Applied in the present case, the question is whether Croatia, by
consenting to ICSID arbitration of investment disputes with investors of Austria, was in
non-compliance with Articles 276 and 344 of the EU acquis in force on 15 September

2017.

The Tribunal considers that the relevant state of the EU acquis in force on that date is clear

from the record of this arbitration.

Most notably, in the long run-up to Croatia’s accession to the EU, the 2005 Association
Agreement unequivocally encouraged Croatia to expand its BITs with EU Member States.
The text of Article 85 of that Agreement, entitled “Investment promotion and protection,”
merits quoting:

1. Cooperation between the Parties shall be aimed at establishing a

favourable climate for private investment, both domestic and
foreign.

2. The particular aim of cooperation shall be:

— for Croatia to improve a legal framework which favours and
protects investment;

— the conclusion, where appropriate, with Member States of
bilateral agreements for the promotion and protection of
investment;

- . - 2
— the improvement of investment protection.?"!

This encouragement necessarily covered the full scope of investment treaties, including

international arbitration clauses as well as substantive protections.

The Tribunal considers that this requirement, a treaty obligation imposed by the EU and its
then-Member States on Croatia in 2005, carries substantial weight in applying Article 11(2)
of the BIT. The purpose of the Association Agreement was to provide a transition period,

during which Croatia had to adopt and implement the EU acquis. The EU Member States,

Association Agreement (CLM-218), Article 85 (emphasis added).

69

237.

238.

239.

212

at that time, evidently understood expansion of BITs with EU Member States to be part of
Croatia’s adoption and implementation of the acquis. The Tribunal cannot accept Croatia’s
argument that, in effect, Croatia should have understood that any BITs it entered into with
EU Member States with the encouragement of the Association Agreement would
immediately become incompatible with the acquis upon Croatia’s successful accession in
2013. As Sir Francis testified at the Hearing, Article 85 “comes very close to an assurance”

of compatibility.?!”

In addition, although the subsequent 2013 Treaty of Accession is silent on the point of intra-
EU BITs, the Tribunal cannot agree with the Respondent that silence signifies an about-
face on the compatibility of BITs and the acquis at the time. By definition, the EU had by
2013 accepted that Croatia had adopted and implemented the acquis (subject to negotiated
grace periods in certain fields) and hence further encouragement to enter into BITs with
EU Member States was no longer necessary. Furthermore, the Treaty of Accession
expressly required Croatia to withdraw from certain treaties, but not from the BITs that

would become intra-EU BITs on accession.

The Tribunal considers the conclusion to be inescapable that intra-EU BITs, including their
arbitration provisions, were reasonably understood in (at least) September 2017 to be
compatible with the acquis, as would be the 1999 Austria-~Croatia BIT once Croatia
acceded to the EU in 2013 and the BIT became an intra-EU BIT. With this background, the
Tribunal cannot accept that Croatia was in breach of the EU acquis on 15 September 2017
as a consequence of the Claimants’ accepting its standing consent to arbitrate in Article 9
of the BIT. Thus, there was no incompatibility within the meaning of Article 11(2) on that

date.

The record contains no support for a different conclusion. To the contrary, as late as
February 2018, it was clear that Austria and Croatia did not agree that the BIT was
incompatible with the acquis then in force. At a meeting on 14 February 2018 called by
Croatia to discuss “multiple ambiguities” concerning Article 11(2) of the Austria-Croatia

BIT, Austria expressed the view that the BIT was compatible with the acquis as at the

> Tr, Day 2, 519:16-18 (Sir Francis).

70

240.

241.

242.

time. 73 As emphasized by Raiffeisen, the Meeting Minutes unambiguously record
Austria’s position that “it considers BITs valid and that it does not deem them incompatible
with the EU law,” and should the CJEU find intra-EU treaty arbitration incompatible with
EU law, “such decision would not change the dispute resolution provision and would have

no impact on the pending proceedings.”?!*

The Tribunal finds it significant that Austria expressed these views with full knowledge
that the CJEU judgment in Achmea—whichever way it might go on the compatibility
question—was imminent. The Tribunal also finds it significant that the context for these
views was a meeting called by Croatia expressly in connection with Article 11(3) of the
BIT. To recall, Article 11(3) provides:

In case of uncertainties concerning the effects of paragraph 2 of this

Article the Contracting Parties will enter a dialogue.?'>
The Tribunal considers it apparent, from the Minutes of the 14 February 2018 bilateral
meeting, that Austria perceived no “uncertainties” to be resolved, at least before the CIEU
rendered the Achmea Judgment. Further, for Austria’s part, if the CJEU were to find
incompatibility in Achmea, that finding would apply only prospectively and not affect
existing proceedings, such as this arbitration. Even assuming that Croatia’s views—which
are not recorded—were directly contrary, the Minutes do not reflect any agreement by the
Croatian and Austrian representatives that arbitration under Article 9 of the BIT was
incompatible with the EU acquis then in force, for purposes of triggering Article 11(2) of
the BIT.

Although the Minutes recorded that after the CJEU’s Achmea decision “further steps may
be discussed,” the Tribunal finds no evidence in the record of such further bilateral
discussions having taken place. Instead, there is strong evidence that Austria maintained
its views and, although a signatory to the 15 January 2019 Declaration, ultimately declined

in May 2020 to support the Termination Treaty and terminate the Austria-Croatia BIT.

213 February 2018 Minutes (C-243).
214 February 2018 Minutes (C-243).

215

BIT (C-4), Article 11.

71

243.

244.

245.

246.

216

Another indicator of the acquis in force at the critical date of 15 September 2017 is the
Achmea Wathelet Opinion itself, issued only four days later on 19 September 2017. The
opinion of Advocate General Wathelet was that intra-EU BITs were compatible with EU
law, as also suggested in the preliminary reference from the German Bundesgerichtshof to
the CJEU that prompted the CJEU Achmea case. The Tribunal agrees with Raiffeisen that
the Opinion is a persuasive analysis of the acquis as it stood in September 2017, although
the CJEU in the Achmea Judgment in March 2018 made contrary rulings on compatibility

that now form part of the acquis.

In sum, in applying Article 11(2) of the Austria-Croatia BIT, the Tribunal finds that
Article 9 of the BIT was not incompatible with TFEU Articles 276 and 344 of the EU
acquis in force as at 15 September 2017, when ICSID registered the Claimants’ Request
for Arbitration. Absent such incompatibility, Croatia’s standing consent to arbitrate in the
1999 BIT was valid and binding, and the Claimants’ acceptance of that offer perfected the

consent required by the ICSID Convention.

(3) Article 46 of the VCLT

The Tribunal finds support for its conclusion in the principle set forth in Article 46 of the

VCLT, which provides:

1. A State may not invoke the fact that its consent to be bound by a
treaty has been expressed in violation of a provision of its internal
law di 1p to conclude treaties as invalid its
consent unless that violation was manifest and concerned a rule of
its internal law of fundamental importance.

2. A violation is manifest if it would be objectively evident to any State
conducting itself in the matter in accordance with normal practice
and in good faith.?'®

The general rule in Article 46 applies to the issue of binding consent to arbitration under
Article 9 of the BIT. Insofar as Croatia argues that, due to inherent incompatibility with the
acquis and operation of Article 11(2), it was never bound by Article 9, any such

incompatibility certainly was not “manifest” or “objectively evident.”

VCLT (CLM-129), Article 46.

72

247.

248.

249.

250.

That any incompatibility between the acquis and arbitration clauses in intra-EU BITs was
anything but “manifest” or “objectively evident” is apparent from the broader context and
evolution of views on the issue. Prior to the Achmea Judgment, the compatibility question
was the subject of considerable debate. The position of the EC itself evolved substantially.
At the initial stages of EU enlargement in Central and Eastern Europe, the purported
incompatibility between intra-EU treaty arbitration clauses and EU law was not raised and,
instead, Croatia and other countries were led to expand their intra-EU BITs. Subsequently,
the EC directed Member States to take steps to terminate intra~-EU BITs on their own terms,
without any suggestion that those treaties were subject to automatic cessation or
termination. It was only later that the EC took the position that intra~-EU BITs had already
ceased to apply on grounds of incompatibility with EU law, a position to which Advocate

General Wathelet did not ascribe.

Viewed in the round, the Tribunal considers that the evolution in the EC’s position and the
contrary Achmea Wathelet Opinion, as well as the views expressed by Austria on the eve
of the CJEU’s Achmea decision, are a perfect illustration that, up until the Achmea
Judgment, the question of the compatibility of intra-EU treaty arbitration clauses with EU
law was, at a minimum, an open, complex and disputed question on the plane of EU law.
Accordingly, to recall the wording of Article 46 of the VCLT, it could not have been
“objectively evident to any State conducting itself in the matter in accordance with normal
practice and good faith” that the CJEU would ultimately come down on the side of

incompatibility.

(4) The 15 January 2019 Declaration and the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty

One issue remaining is the import of the subsequent events of the 15 January 2019

Declaration and the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty.

In the 15 January 2019 Declaration, 22 EU Member States—including Austria and

Croatia—joined the statement that

all investor-State arbitration clauses contained in bilateral investment
treaties concluded between Member States are contrary to Union law
and thus inapplicable ... An arbitral tribunal established on the basis

73

251.

252.

of investor-State arbitration clauses lacks jurisdiction, due to a lack of
a valid offer to arbitrate by the Member State party to the underlying
bilateral investment Treaty."

In light of its interpretation of Article 11(2) of the BIT, the Declaration does not change the
Tribunal’s conclusion that it has jurisdiction under Article 9. The Tribunal cannot accept
the Respondent’s panoply of arguments based on the Declaration. First, the Parties’ legal
experts agree that the Declaration, which was not adopted by the EU itself but by certain
Member States, is not a part of the acquis.?'* The Tribunal notes the EC’s definition of the
acquis as including “declarations and resolutions adopted by the Union.”?'’ Second, even
if it were, the Declaration was not part of the acquis in force in September 2017 when
Croatia consented to arbitration, and so is irrelevant to demonstrate incompatibility for
purposes of Article 11(2) of the BIT. Third, insofar as Croatia describes the Declaration as
an authoritative interpretation of Articles 267 and 334 of the TFEU with effect in
September 2017, only the CJEU is empowered to issue such an interpretation and, in any
event, the title itself identifies the Declaration as a statement on the “legal consequences”
of the Achmea Judgment. Fourth, that Austria and Croatia signed the Declaration cannot
transform the multilateral process leading to the Declaration into either, first, a bilateral
dialogue under Article 11(3) of the BIT concerning “uncertainties concerning the effects
of” Article 11(2) or, second, a “subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the [BIT] treaty or the application of its provisions” for purposes of

Article 31(3)(a) of the VCLT.

Nor does the 29 May 2020 Termination Treaty change the Tribunal’s conclusion that it has
jurisdiction. The Termination Treaty, at least when in force, certainly does form part of the
EU acquis. The Tribunal recognizes the clarity of purpose in the Preamble: “Investor-State
arbitration clauses in [intra-EU BITs] are contrary to the EU Treaties and, as a result of this
incompatibility, cannot be applied after the date on which the last of the parties” became

an EU Member State.

717 15 January 2019 Declaration (RLM-60), page 1.
218 Jacobs Opinion, para 74; Tr. Day 2, 417:21-418:7 (Schwarz, Craig).

219

EC, “European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations: Glossary” (C-239).

14

253.

254.

255.

256.

220

However, the Tribunal must also recognize that Austria, despite having signed the
15 January 2019 Declaration, is not a signatory to the Termination Treaty and the Austria-
Croatia BIT is not included in the Annex of terminated intra-EU BITs. Even assuming the
Termination Treaty has ex tunc effect in the EU legal order, the Tribunal agrees with
Raiffeisen that—without Austria consenting to its terms—the Treaty is irrelevant to this

dispute, as a matter of international law under Articles 34 and 35 of the VCLT.”°

Given the Tribunal’s determination that neither the 15 January 2019 Declaration nor the
Termination Treaty supports Croatia’s Preliminary Objections, there is no need to rule on
Raiffeisen’s request that the Tribunal draw adverse inferences from Croatia’s refusal to

produce EC background documents in violation of Procedural Order No. 6.

THE DISSENTING VIEW

Arbitrator Tomov does not agree with the conclusion of the majority of the Tribunal in

Section VII.B above.

Arbitrator Tomov considers that, pursuant to Article 11(2) of the Austria-~Croatia BIT,
Austria and Croatia have agreed that if the BIT or any part of it is incompatible with the
EU acquis in force in any given time, they are not bound by it. The term EU acquis is
shorthand for the EU legal system as a whole. Consequently, Austria and Croatia have
agreed that incompatibility is to be determined not only by reference to the elements of the
EU legal system taken separately and in isolation, but also by reference to its rules
governing which court has the power to interpret authoritatively the meaning of these
elements, and the temporal and personal scope of the court’s decisions. In other words, in
Article 11(2) of the BIT, Austria and Croatia have agreed that the rules of the EU legal
system will govern the temporal effect and the relevance of the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment
for assessing the content of the EU acquis in force on 15 September 2017, the moment in

time when the Claimants filed their Request for Arbitration.

Claimants’ Observations on the Termination Treaty, para 5.

75

257.

258.

VII.

259.

EU law, as developed in the record, does not support the exclusion of the Achmea
Judgment. In addition, neither the critical date doctrine nor Article 46 of the VCLT
mandates another interpretation of Article 11(2) of the Austria-Croatia BIT or negates in
full or in part the clear agreement between Austria and Croatia expressed in Article 11(2)
and/or the legal consequences under EU law. The first, according to the Nottebohm case,
has a residual nature.??! The second does not apply because, according to the ILC
Fragmentation Report, in the case of incompatibility between treaties, the incompatible

222

treaty is not invalid but simply inapplicable.

Even if the Achmea Judgment were not considered a part of the EU acquis in force on
15 September 2017, the acts and documents on which the majority bases its decision—the
position of the EU Commission in regard to intra-EU BITs over the years, the 2005
Association Agreement, the 2013 Treaty of Accession, and the Achmea Wathelet
Opinion—do not support the conclusion that, at that moment in time, the arbitration clauses
in intra~-EU BITs were reasonably understood to be compatible with Article 267 and
Article 344 of the TFEU. On the contrary, when the compatibility of Article 9 of the
Austria-Croatia BIT with Article 267 and Article 344 of the TFEU is analyzed in the light
of the previous decisions of the CJEU, on which the Achmea Judgment is based, the

opposite conclusion is predictable and likely.

WHETHER THE BIT IS INCOMPATIBLE WITH THE ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
PROVISIONS OF THE EU ACQUIS

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
qd) Compatibility with the EU Treaties

In addition to its main arguments of incompatibility between Article 9 of the BIT and
Articles 276 and 344 of the TFEU, on grounds of precluding the CJEU’s exclusive role in

the EU legal order, the Respondent contends that Article 9 and the substantive protections

221 Nottebohm Case (Lichtenstein y. Guatemala), Preliminary Objection, Judgment, 18 November 1953,
[1953] ICJ 111 (Nottebohm) (CLM-202), pp 119, 121.

222 11 C Fragmentation Report (RLM-100), paras 320, 333, 340.

76

260.

261.

in the BIT are also incompatible with the EU acquis key principles of mutual trust and non-
discrimination. °° The relevant acquis provisions, all indisputably in force as at
15 September 2017, are Articles 18, 49 and 63 of the TFEU. In brief, Article 18 of the
TFEU prohibits “any discrimination on the grounds of nationality;” Article 49, “restrictions
on the freedom of establishment of nationals of a Member State in the territory of another
Member State;” and Article 63(1), “all restrictions on the movement of capital between

Member States and between Member States and third countries.” °° Professor Craig
describes these rules as “form[ing] the cornerstone of the single market, which is the

economic core of the EU.”?*5

It is Croatia’s position that, by providing investors from Austria and Croatia with dispute
resolution and substantive protections not available to nationals of other EU Member
States, Article 9 and fair and equitable treatment (FET) and other substantive protections
in the BIT have the effect of discriminating against nationals of other EU Member States
on grounds of nationality, thus disturbing the level playing field in terms of freedom of
establishment and movement of capital between EU Member States.??° Such unequal

treatment violates, and is not compatible with, the acquis.

In their primary argument in response, RBI and RBHR describe Croatia’s arguments as
mere assertions, offering little basis to distinguish the long line of treaty arbitration
decisions finding BIT investor-state arbitration and substantive investment provisions to
be compatible with EU law.’ In support, the Claimants list some 30 decisions, starting
with Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic in March 2007 through Watkins Holding v. Spain in
January 2020,”** including the decisions of the Addiko and UniCredit tribunals.”? Drawing

223 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 6.
224 Respondent’s Memorial, para 94, citing TFEU (RLM-30).

225 Craig Opinion, para 9.
226 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 94-95, 100-102.
227 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 76-78, 100-105.

228 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 77 note 93, citing, inter alia, Eastern Sugar B.V. v. Czech Republic, SCC Case
No. 008/2004, Partial Award, 27 March 2007 (Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic) (CLM-143), paras 142-181; Watkins
Holding S.d.rl. and others v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/15/44, Award, 21 January 2020 (Watkins
Holding v. Spain) (CLM-244), paras 180-226.

229

Claimants’ Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, para 30.

77

262.

263.

264.

on that line of cases, the Claimants insist that there is no incompatibility, because the
Austria-Croatia BIT only requires that Croatia not treat investors from other EU Member
States and third states more favorably than it treats Austrian investors; the BIT does not
require Croatia to treat non-Austrian investors less favorably than Austrian investors.?*° In
what the Claimants label a “complete response” to the Respondent’s argument, they cite
Sir Francis’ first Opinion:

In practice, the combined effect of the BIT and EU law is that Croatia

is required to treat investors from all EU Member States as favourably

as it treats investors from Austria — and therefore as favourably as it

treats investors from any non-Member State. I can see nothing

problematic about that. There would only be a conflict between the BIT

and EU law if the BIT required Croatia to treat Austrian investors more

favourably than investors from other Member States, but it does not do
that.?3!

The Respondent describes the Claimants’ position as “fail[ing] on the ordinary meaning of
discrimination,” because “[e]xpressly granting an advantage only to one group amounts as

much to discrimination as expressly depriving another group.”??

RBI and RBHR retort that, even if this were so, the remedy for such discrimination would
be for Croatia to extend the same treatment it provides to Austrian investors to investors
from other EU Member States, citing Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic among other
decisions.”** This remedy, according to Raiffeisen, is preferable to allowing Croatia to rely

on its own alleged wrong and escape substantive liability under the Austria-Croatia BIT.°™*

Croatia describes as “inconsequential” the fact that the BIT does not prohibit it from
extending that advantage to nationals of other EU Member States “by means of

hypothetical future treaties.”?** In Croatia’s words:

230 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 80; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 79.

23! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 80, citing Jacobs Opinion, para 83 (emphasis in original).

232 Respondent’s Reply, para 181.

233 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 41, citing, inter alia, Eastern Sugar y. Czech Republic (CLM-143), para 170.

234 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 42.

235

Respondent's Reply, para 182.

78

265.

266.

267.

This does not detract from the indisputable fact that, in direct violation
of the EU acquis, the BIT creates advantages (both procedural and in
terms of substantive treatment standards) for investors of one other EU
Member State that it does not extend to investors from other EU
Member States. The Claimants’ position merely means that extant
discrimination could hypothetically be removed.”*®

The Parties agree there is no direct relevance to the CJEU’s Achmea Judgment on this issue,
as the Judgment is silent as to discrimination. Croatia acknowledges that “there is no

equally specific guidance on this point from the CJEU.”?5”

The Claimants do rely on the Achmea Wathelet Opinion, which, in light of the silence on
discrimination in the Achmea Judgment, they say still stands as part of the relevant acquis.
Although Advocate General Wathelet addresses the investor-state arbitration provision in
the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT, the Claimants consider that his opinion is equally
applicable to substantive protections in BITs.** That opinion is that BITs are not

incompatible with EU law on the basis of discrimination:

[T]he fact that the reciprocal rights and obligations created by the BIT
apply only to investors from one of the two Contracting Member States
is a consequence inherent in the bilateral nature of BITs. It follows that
a non-Netherlands investor is not in the same situation as a
Netherlands investor so far as an investment made in Slovakia is
concerned.

[An investor-state dispute settlement] mechanism such as that
established by Article 8 of the BIT, which confers on Netherlands
investors the right to have recourse to international arbitration against
the Slovak Republic, does not constitute discrimination on the ground
of nationality, prohibited by Article 18 TFEU.**

As contended by the Claimants, treaties are not discriminatory under EU law simply
because they afford certain treatment only on a bilateral basis. In support, RBI and RBHR

cite the CJEU double taxation treaty case of D. v. Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst (the D

236 Respondent’s Reply, para 182.

237 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 6.

238 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 34.

239

Achmea Wathelet Opinion (CLM-177), paras 75, 82.

79

268.

269.

270.

271.

Case), which was also cited in the Achmea Wathelet Opinion in the context of compatibility

of arbitration provisions.“

Croatia argues in response that the D Case is not analogous, because EU Member States
have specifically retained competence over direct taxation under Article 65(1)(a) of the
TFEU and therefore have leeway to conclude bilateral double taxation treaties, whereas the

EU regime has competence to govern intra-EU commerce and movement of capital.”4!

The Claimants do not accept this distinction. They highlight that the CJEU did not base its

242

decision in the D Case on individual Member State competence in taxation, *” and

Advocate General Wathelet had already rejected a similar argument made by the EC."
RBI and RBHR further clarify that they

never suggested that it was the mere bilateral character of tax treaties

that rendered them analogous for present purposes to BITs. Rather, it

is the fact that the nationals of the parties to the treaty are, by virtue of
the treaty, in a different situation from other EU nationals.**

Finally, as with arbitration provisions in BITs, RBI and RBHR observe that many
investment treaty tribunals have found that the TFEU does not contain substantive
equivalents of the FET and other substantive protections in the relevant applicable BIT,

leading to decisions that the two treaties are not incompatible.”

(2) Compatibility with the GATS

The Respondent argues that the GATS is part of the EU acquis, as an international

agreement concluded by the EU and entered into by the Member States among themselves

240 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 81-86; Achmea Wathelet Opinion (CLM-177), paras 73-75.

24! Respondent’s Reply, paras 186-188.

242

? Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 37.

243 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 39.

244 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 40.

245

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 87; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 41.

80

272.

273.

274.

246

within the sphere of the EU’s activities.*“° Consequently, incompatibility with the GATS

would also constitute incompatibility with the EU acquis.

The Claimants do not accept that the GATS is part of the EU acquis. In support, the
Claimants cite CJEU decisions that consistently leave out the World Trade Organization
(WTO) Agreements from the rules referred to when reviewing the legality of measures
taken within the EU. The CJEU has explained that the WTO Agreements afford WTO
Members significant flexibility in implementing WTO rules (for example, by allowing a
Member to choose to pay compensation instead of withdrawing a WTO-inconsistent
measure), a flexibility that the Claimants describe as allowing a Member to decide for itself
whether even to comply with the rules or, put a different way, rendering the WTO rules
“not binding enough.””*” 4 fortiori, say the Claimants, the GATS suffers from the same

implications and, like other WTO Agreements, is not considered part of the EU acquis.***

The Respondent brushes aside Raiffeisen’s argument, distinguishing the question of
whether the CJEU deems the WTO Agreements to have direct effect such that they can be
relied on by individuals in EU courts from the question of whether the BIT is incompatible
with the EU acquis. Further, the CJEU has held that EU Member States that fail to adopt
measures necessary to implement an international agreement concluded by the EU have
breached their EU law obligations, which confirms that international agreements

concluded by the EU, such as the GATS, are part of the EU acquis.”

The Claimants describe as inapposite the Respondent’s argument that the question of the
WTO Agreements not having direct effect as distinct from the question of whether the BIT
is incompatible with the EU acquis. After all, in order to answer the question of

compatibility with the EU acquis, one must first identify the content of that acquis.

246 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 103-104, 106.

247 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 200. See also Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para 232.

248 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 226-233.

249

Respondent's Reply, para 192.

81

275.

276.

277.

278.

Proceeding on the basis that the GATS is part of the EU acquis, Croatia alleges that the
Austria-Croatia BIT is incompatible with the acquis because it is incompatible with
Article II(1) of the GATS, an anti-discrimination clause, which provides:

With respect to any measure covered by this Agreement, each Member

shall accord immediately and unconditionally to services and service

suppliers of any other Member treatment no less favourable than that
it accords to like services and service suppliers of any other country?

Croatia identifies three relevant requirements in Article II(1) of the GATS: (a) the measure
at issue must be a “measure covered” by the GATS; (b) the relevant services or service
suppliers must be “like;” and (c) the WTO Member must accord “no less favourable

treatment” to the service or service suppliers of another WTO Member.

Croatia next contends that the BIT meets all three requirements. As to the first, given the
broad definition of “affecting trade and services” found in WTO Appellate Body cases, the
BIT qualifies as a measure affecting trade in services covered by the GATS.”*! Second, as
the purpose of the BIT to privilege investors supplying services with protections not
available to third state investors that supply the same type of services, the requirement of

“likeness” is met.?*

As to the third requirement, given that the substantive protections in
the BIT are extended only to investors of Austria and Croatia, there necessarily is less

favorable treatment of investors of other WTO Members.”

The Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s arguments on the Article II(1) requirements.
In particular, as to the third, RBI and RBHR reiterate that the BIT does not require Croatia
to accord a certain level of treatment to investors not from Austria, and it would be fully
consistent with the BIT for Croatia to accord fair and equitable treatment to investors from
all other states or to treat investors from all other states no less favorably than it treats

Croatian investors.?**

250 Respondent’s Memorial, para 107, citing General Agreement on Trade and Services (the GATS) (RLM-33),
Article II(1).

25! Respondent’s Memorial, paras 110-112; Respondent’s Reply, paras 195-196.

252 Respondent’s Memorial, para 113.

253 Respondent’s Memorial, para 114.

254 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 239-242.

82

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

In further support of its position, Croatia notes that seven WTO Members have taken the
express step of exempting their BITs from the GATS most-favored-nation obligations, thus
implying that investment treaties do fall within the scope of Article II. Austria and Croatia
not having so exempted their BIT from Article II, the BIT must be incompatible with the
GATS.?5

Raiffeisen’s response is that adopting this argument would have “seismic implications” for
international trade and investment, given that most GATS Members, including the United
States, Japan, China and the EU itself, have not scheduled exemptions for themselves, and
that WTO Members have more than 3,000 BITs in place. In any case, the exemption
situation actually undermines Croatia’s argument, because the effect of the exemptions is
simply to reserve the right to impose domestic measures implementing international
investment agreements, and not the right to enter into the investment agreements

themselves.?*°

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION
qd) Compatibility with the EU Treaties

The Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s arguments that Article 9 and the substantive
protections in the BIT are incompatible with the anti-discrimination provisions in

Articles 18, 49 and 63 of the TFEU, as part of the acquis in force as at 15 September 2017.

The Tribunal finds it clear that Article 9 of the BIT operates to make ICSID or UNCITRAL
arbitration available to qualified Croatian and Austrian investors, without affecting the
dispute resolution avenues available—whether the same as, or different and perceived as
more or less favorable than ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitration—to investors from other EU

Member States.

The Tribunal finds it similarly clear that the substantive provisions of the BIT, including

the FET protection provided in Article 2(1), do not require Croatia to treat Austrian

255 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 115-118.

256

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 222-224.

83

284.

285.

investors more favorably than investors from other EU Member States. The Tribunal is
persuaded by Sir Francis’ opinion that “the combined effect of the BIT and EU law is that
Croatia is required to treat investors from all EU Member States as favourably as it treats
investors from Austria — and therefore as favourably as it treats investors from any non-

Member State,” which is not problematic.*”

In coming to this conclusion on discrimination, the Tribunal aligns with the Addiko and
UniCredit tribunals in noting the absence of any CJEU interpretation of the TFEU “as
barring the procedural or substantive provisions of intra-EU BITS on discrimination
grounds.”?°* The CJEU in its Achmea Judgment did not touch on discrimination issues. It
follows that, as argued by Raiffeisen, “the only standing interpretation on the issue in the
EU acquis” is the Achmea Opinion of Advocate General Wathelet, who found the
procedural and substantive provisions of intra-EU BITs compatible with the non-
discrimination provisions in the TFEU.?° Like the Addiko tribunal, this Tribunal must
accept that the Achmea Wathelet Opinion concerning discrimination

still stands as part of the acquis, unless the Tribunal were prepared to

declare that Opinion fundamentally wrong as a matter of EU law (i.e.

as incorrectly interpreting the TFEU). But this would be fundamentally

inconsistent with Croatia’s argument that the Tribunal should not

second-guess the prevailing interpretations of the acquis that were
provided by the competent EU bodies.?

Advocate General Wathelet in his Achmea Opinion rejected the charge that intra-EU BITs
are incompatible with Articles 18, 267 and 344 of the TFEU because they provide
preferential treatment to nationals of the contracting states and thereby discriminate against

other EU nationals.”°' His opinion, writ large, was that the FET and other substantive

257 Jacobs Opinion, para 83.
258 4ddiko Decision (CLM-250), para 301; UniCredit Reconsideration Decision (CLM-251), para 234.

259 Claimants’ Observations on Addiko and UniCredit, paras 30-33, citing Addiko Decision (CLM-250), para 301 and
UniCredit Reconsideration Decision (CLM-251), para 235.

260 4ddiko Decision (CLM-250), para 301.

261

Achmea Wathelet Opinion (CLM-177), para 180.

84

286.

287.

288.

289.

protections in the Netherlands-Slovak Republic BIT—which are generally found in BITs—

exceed the scope of protection in the TEU and TFEU.”

(2) Compatibility with the GATS

The Respondent did not pursue its incompatibility arguments based on the GATS at the
Hearing or in its Post-Hearing Brief. Based on the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal, like the

tribunal in Addiko, is not convinced that the GATS is part of the EU acquis.?”

Assuming for the sake of argument that the GATS is part of the acquis for purposes of
Article 11(2) of the BIT, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the two treaties are
not incompatible given that the BIT does not require Austria and Croatia to provide less
favorable “investment incentives or restrictions” to other WTO members than they provide
to each other. It is compelling that a contrary interpretation would leave all WTO Member

States that are parties to BITs in violation of the GATS.

THE MONETARY GOLD PRINCIPLE
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

The Respondent makes the additional argument that, if the Tribunal were to find
jurisdiction in this dispute, it would “condemn the Republic of Austria to incurring
responsibility under the EU acquis as much as it would trigger responsibility for the
Respondent” as the other Contracting State to the BIT, and thereby run afoul of the

264

Monetary Gold principle.

As summarized by Croatia, the Monetary Gold principle, as set out by the ICJ in the

eponymous case, bars jurisdiction where the legal interests of a third state not before the

262 4chmea Wathelet Opinion (CLM-177), paras 179-228.
263 4ddiko Decision (CLM-250), para 305.

264

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 162.

85

290.

291.

292.

293.

Court would form the very subject matter of the Court’s decision. The purpose is to prevent

determination of the third state’s legal obligations without that state’s consent.*”

The Claimants contend that the Monetary Gold principle is inapplicable for several reasons.

First, only Croatia has ever invoked the Monetary Gold principle in investor-state

266 According to Raiffeisen, the fact that none of the other state

arbitration cases.
respondents in the more than 24 cases challenging jurisdiction in intra-EU investment
arbitrations has raised the principle “demonstrates that in reality the principle does not

apply in these disputes.”?°”

Second, RBI and RBHR argue that the Monetary Gold principle is not engaged just because
a tribunal must address a question affecting the legal interests of the relevant third state.
The ICJ has found that even the “simultaneous determination of responsibility” of a third
state is insufficient to trigger the Monetary Gold principle. What instead is required, say
the Claimants, is that the ICJ would have to rule “as a prerequisite” to its decision on the
lawfulness of the third state’s conduct without that state’s consent to the Court’s
jurisdiction. Given that Croatia’s argument here is premised on the supposition that, if
the Tribunal finds jurisdiction, it “would, at the same time, inevitably condemn Austria to
incurring responsibility under the EU acquis as much as it would trigger responsibility for

the Respondent,” the present case would not trigger the Monetary Gold principle. >”

Third, RBI and RBHR point out that the ICJ, in limiting the scope of the Monetary Gold
principle, has underscored that its decisions are binding only on the parties before it, thus

safeguarding the rights of third states. The same would hold true of any jurisdiction

265 Respondent’s Memorial, paras 160-162, citing, inter alia, Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943 (Italy v.
France, United Kingdom and United States of America), Judgement, 15 June 1954, ICJ Reports 19 (Monetary Gold)
(RLM-108), para 45.

266 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras 247-248.

267 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 205.

268 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras 207-215, citing East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), Judgment, 30 June 1995, [1995]
ICJ 90 (RLM-109), paras 28, 35.

269

Respondent's Reply, paras 241-242.

86

294.

295.

296.

297.

298.

decision made by this Tribunal, which would have binding force only between Raiffeisen

and Croatia, thereby not endangering Austria’s international rights and obligations.””

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION

Having considered the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal finds that the Monetary Gold

principle is not engaged in this case.

As reflected in the reasoning above, there is no need for the Tribunal to rule on any aspect
of Austria’s conduct as a prerequisite to finding jurisdiction. A decision by the Tribunal that
it has jurisdiction—or, for that matter, that it does not—may indirectly affect the legal
interests of Austria (or its nationals) as well as those of Croatia, but no issue of Austrian
state responsibility under the EU acquis or the BIT is involved. Croatia is the state whose

legal responsibility is being invoked.

To echo the words of the Addiko tribunal, “Austria’s procedural and substantive rights thus
will remain entirely unaffected by this Decision and by whatever ruling the Tribunal

eventually renders on other issues as between [the Claimants] and Croatia.”?”!

In sum, the BIT remains fully in force and valid under the applicable international law of
treaties. The Tribunal is validly seized with jurisdiction under the BIT and must proceed to

decide the substantive disputes before it.

COSTS
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
qd) The Respondent’s Costs

In its Statement of Costs, first submitted on 6 March 2010 and updated on 6 July 2020, the
Respondent seeks an award of its full costs of arbitration in connection with its Preliminary

Objections, including all legal fees, expenses and other costs in the combined amount of

279 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 216.

211

Addiko Decision (CLM-250), para 307.

87

299.

300.

272

HRK 20,000.00, EUR 2,371,183.45 and GBP 17,435.60. These costs, which do not include
Tribunal and ICSID fees, break down as follows:

 

Item Amount (HRK) Amount (EUR) Amount (GBP)

 

Legal fees and

2,358,215.09
expenses

 

Fees and expenses

of EU law expert 17,435.60

 

Fees and expenses
of other experts
(prior to suspension
on the merits)

12,968.36

 

Additional client

20,000
costs

 

Tribunal and ICSID
fees

 

 

SUBTOTAL 20,000 2,371,183.45 17,435.60

 

 

 

 

 

The Respondent determined not to maintain its objections that the Claimants were not
qualified investors that had made qualified investments under the BIT. However, Croatia
reserved its rights in relation to costs, on grounds that the Claimants had failed to provide
the necessary evidence until their Counter-Memorial, despite having had two earlier
opportunities to do so when filing their Memorial on the Merits and their Response to
Croatia’s Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction and Request to Suspend the Proceedings

on the Merits.?”

(2) The Claimants’ Costs

In their Submission on Costs dated 6 March 2020, the Claimants seek their full costs of
arbitration, including all legal fees, expenses and other costs incurred in connection with

the Preliminary Objections. Based on tables of the total hours and fees for each attorney

Respondent’s Reply, para 4.

88

and law firm employee and other costs by category, the total amount in the Claimants’

Submission on Costs is EUR 1,743,177.58, >” broken down as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Item Amount (EUR)
Legal fees 1,248,086.70
Expert fees 142,670.31
‘omen fee and advance 273,000.00 (USD 300,000.00)
Travel 71,502.93
Document printing 4,002.51
Outside services 2,122.54
Research/publications 1,006.10
After-hours support 786.49
TOTAL 1,743,177.58

 

 

 

 

301. In their Supplemental Submission on Costs dated 6 July 2020, the Claimants seek an
additional amount of EUR 8,518.00 in legal fees for preparation of the Observations on
Addiko and UniCredit. This brings Raiffeisen’s total costs claim to EUR 1,751,695.58, plus
pre- and post-award interest at 2.54% (RBHR’s opportunity cost of capital) compounded

annually.

302. The Claimants submit that these total costs are reasonable and proportionate in light of the
nature and complexity of the Preliminary Objections. The Claimants further note that they
have entered into a success fee arrangement with WilmerHale providing for an uplift on
the hourly rates paid, and reserve the right to claim reimbursement of their costs in line

with this agreement at the end of this arbitration.

273

 

The Tribunal has identified an arithmetic error in the sum of the Claimants’ claimed costs. The sum total is EUR 1,743,177.58
and not EUR 1,743,117.58 as stated in paragraphs 3 and 10 of the Claimants’ Statement of Costs dated 6 March 2020.

89

303.

XI.

304.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISION

The Tribunal has unanimously determined that the Respondent shall pay the Claimants
their full costs of arbitration for this Preliminary Objections phase, on the ground that the
Claimants have prevailed in full in their defenses to the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections. The Claimants claim EUR 1,751,695.58 in costs. However, this sum includes
the ICSID registration fee and the total amount of Claimants’ advance payments to date,
the latter of which is not fully expended. The Secretariat has advised the Tribunal that the
expended amount of the Claimants’ advance payments is 277,493.74 as of the date of this
Decision. Thus, the Respondent shall pay the Claimants EUR 1,478,695.58 (amounting to
the sum of Claimants’ claimed costs, EUR 1,751,695.58, minus the ICSID registration fee
and the total amount of the Claimants’ advances to ICSID, EUR 273,000) and USD
277,493.74. If the Respondent does not pay the interim decision on costs to the Claimants
within three months of the date of this Decision, the Tribunal will include interest on

appropriate terms in the Award.

DECISION
For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal:

qd) Denies by majority the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction based on incompatibility of the Austria-Croatia BIT with the EU

acquis;

(2) Decides unanimously that the Respondent shall pay the Claimants their full
arbitration costs of EUR 1,478,695.58 and USD 277,493.74 for this phase of the
proceedings, subject to interest on appropriate terms should the Respondent not pay

the interim decision on costs within three months of the date of this Decision; and

(3) Directs unanimously that this arbitration will now move forward for consideration
of the remaining issues, on a procedural schedule to be determined by the Tribunal

in consultation with the Parties.

90

The Tribunal:

Gl LS

Professor Stanimir Alexandrov Mr. Lazar Tomov
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(Dissenting in part)

 

Luu Coed

Ms. Lucy Reed
Presiding Arbitrator

Date: 30 September 2020

91

