INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
In the Matter of the Arbitration between

RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (RDC)
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23

DECISION ON CLAIMANT’S REQUEST
FOR
SUPPLEMENTATION AND RECTIFICATION OF AWARD

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Honorable Stuart E. Eizenstat, Arbitrator
Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL
Natali Sequeira

REPRESENTING THE CLAIMANT:

Mr. C. Allen Foster
Mr. Kevin E. Stern
Ms. Ruth Espey-Romero
Greenberg Traurig, LLP

Mr. Juan Pablo Carrasco de Groote
Diaz-Duran & Asociados Central-Law

Ms. Regina K. Vargo
Greenberg Traurig, LLP

DaTE OF DISPATCH: January 18, 2013

REPRESENTING THE RESPONDENT:

Mr. Larry Mark Robles Guibert
Attorney General of the Republic of Guatemala

Mr. Sergio de la Torre
Minister of Economy of the Republic of Guatemala

Ms. Maria Luisa Flores
Vice Minister of Trade and Commercial Integration
of the Republic of Guatemala

Mr. Marvin Gustavo Lau Lopez
Under Secretary General of the Office of the President

Mr. Carlos Samayoa Flores
Administrator of Ferrocarriles de Guatemala

Mr. Whitney Debevoise
Ms. Margarita R. Sanchez,
Arnold & Porter LLP

I Procedure

1. On August 10, 2012, Claimant filed a “Request for Supplementation
and Rectification of Award” under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention (the
“Request”). The Secretary-General registered the Request on August 20, 2012.

2. On August 23, 2012, the Tribunal fixed the following time-limits for
exchange of submissions by the parties: September 12, 2012 for Respondent to
file its observations on the Request and 13 days each for Claimant and
Respondent to file their respective reply and rejoinder. Claimant filed its Reply on
September 25 and Respondent its Rejoinder on October 8, 2012.

3. Pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.2, on November 9, 2012, the
Tribunal invited the non-disputing Parties to submit observations, if any,
regarding the interpretation of the Agreement by November 16, 2012. No
observations were filed.

4. On November 15, 2012, The Tribunal invited the Parties to submit
by November 27, 2012, any observations they may have on the following issues:

“The weight, if any, to be given by the Tribunal to the fact that funds from
real estate rents have been accumulating in the hands of Claimant since
September 2006 and may have generated further income for the
Claimant;

Whether in the consideration of discounting the real estate rents any
weight should be given to the decision of the Tribunal to award compound
interest on damages as from September 2006.”

5. Both Parties filed their observations on November 27, 2012.

6. On November 28, 2012, Respondent objected to Claimant’s
submission of new materials not in the record together with its observations. On
the same day the Tribunal invited the Claimant's observations on Respondent’s
objection. Claimant filed its observations on November 29, 2012.

7. The Tribunal deliberated by teleconference on several occasions.

I. Summary of the parties’ arguments
1. The Request

8. Claimant argues that it claimed and it is entitled to recover a
reasonable rate of return on its investment up to the date of Respondent's breach
and that the Tribunal failed to address this claim. According to Claimant, the legal
authorities and “the damages experts presented by both parties are in agreement
that inclusion of a reasonable rate of return on the amounts invested is
necessary to put Claimant back in the same position it would have been absent
Respondent's breach.” (para. 5). Claimant submits that the Tribunal should apply
to the sunk investment costs the same rate as applied by the Tribunal to
calculate the NPV of the future income stream of FVG’s existing leases. In
addition, Claimant submits that, “Regardless of what rate of return the Tribunal
ultimately chooses to apply, the rate should compounded for the same reasons
the Tribunal awarded compound pre-award interest from the date of Lesivo.”
(para. 15)

9. Claimant also points out that the Tribunal made two arithmetical
errors. First, it miscalculated the net present value (“NPV”) of FVG’s existing real
estate leases when applying the discount rate. Second, the Tribunal also erred
by not applying the same discount rate to determine the NPV of FVG’s existing
real estate leases to the actual rent amount received by FVG since the date of
Lesivo.

10. As to the first rectification request, Claimant explains how by
applying the discount rate used by the Tribunal the NPV of existing leases
amounts to $6,818,865 of which $5,591,469.30 represents the 82% ownership of
FVG held by Claimant.

11. As regards the second rectification request, Claimant notes that the
Tribunal required FVG’s projected real estate income to be discounted but it did
not require that the actual set-off income be similarly discounted.

12. Claimant requests the following relief:

a. That the Tribunal supplement the Award to include, as additional
compensation to Claimant, a reasonable rate of return, compounded
annually, on Claimant's awarded sunk investment costs of $6,576,861,
calculated from the dates of investment to the date of Lesivo (August 25,
2006);

b. That the Tribunal rectify and amend paragraphs 277 and 283(2) of
the Award by correcting its calculation of the NPV of FVG’s existing real
estate leases measured over their remaining life as of the date of Lesivo,
so that Claimant is awarded $5,591,469.30 (or 82% of $6,818,865) rather
than $3,379,450.93 (i.e., 82% of $4,121 ,281.62); and

c. That the Tribunal rectify and amend the Award to require that the
actual rents received by FVG since the date of Lesivo be discounted and
valued as of the date of Lesivo at a discount rate of 17.36% before this
amount is deducted from the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases.”
(para.26)

2. Respondent’s Observations

13. | Respondent considers that Claimant misapplies the legal standard
and misconstrues the scope of the procedure under Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention. According to Respondent, “Article 49(2) is not designed to afford a
substantive review or reconsideration of the decision, or to permit the parties to
reargue questions already addressed and resolved by the Tribunal.” (para. 8)
Respondent observes that a threshold issue concerns what is a “question” under
Article 49(2) the Convention and Arbitration Rule 49(1). Respondent notes that
“ICSID jurisprudence has consistently recognized that tribunals are not obliged to
opine directly on every argument put forward by the parties, provided they
address the essential issues in the case.” (para. 12)

14. According to Respondent, “The real questions before the Tribunal
on damages were whether Claimant proved that: (1) it suffered quantifiable,
compensable damages; (2) whatever damages it suffered were proximately
caused by the Lesivo Declaration; and (3) quantum.” (para. 14) It is the view of
Respondent that the Tribunal addressed all three.

15. Respondent argues that Claimant is attempting to resurrect the
argument that the net capital contribution (“NCC”) approach is appropriate in this
case. Respondent explains that this approach requires updating historical
investments by a theoretical rate of return and refers to the Tribunal’s finding that

the losses incurred by Claimant in 2000-2006 were not attributable to Lesivo.
Respondent concludes that “[i]mplicitly, therefore, the Tribunal was ruling that no
updating of Claimant's investment was required.” (para. 20)

16. According to Respondent, “The Tribunal correctly grounded its
award on known quantities, including the actual negative return after eight years
of operation, a negative return not attributable to Respondent’s violations of
CAFTA. Accordingly, the Tribunal accepted the view of Guatemala’s expert on
FVG’s losses, namely, that it is inappropriate to update the value of an
investment using a theoretical rate of return when a business has been in
operation for a considerable time after the date of the investment and there is an
observable track record. Respondent concludes: “There was no omission of a
question or failure to consider Claimant's arguments. The Tribunal considered
them and Claimant lost. Claimant cannot now reargue the issue.” (para. 24) In
support of this conclusion Respondent also refers to the Tribunal’s finding that,
given FVG’s losses, the claim of lost profits was speculative, and that, since the
only lost profits granted by the Tribunal were the NPV of existing real estate
leases, there was no need to amortize Claimant's lost investment in order to
avoid double counting. (para. 25)

17. Respondent alleges the use of new material as a basis for the
Request to supplement the Award. According to Respondent, “Claimant presents
new evidence and proposes three distinct methodologies resulting in additional
damages of $14,199,805, $5,894,578 or $3,086,856. In essence, Claimant is
asking the Tribunal to revise its reasoning and increase the damages awarded.”
(para. 26) Claimant adds that the Tribunal would exceed its powers if it were to
rule “on matters not pleaded by the parties and material not in the record before it
closed.” (para. 28)

18. Respondent agrees with Claimant that to supplement an ICSID
award is discretionary but disagrees on Claimant's proposed application of Article
49(2). According to Respondent, “When a Tribunal declines either explicitly or
implicitly to adopt a party’s argument, it does not thereby open the door to Article
49(2) supplementation.” (para. 29) In the view of Respondent, “Even if [it]

succeeds in showing that the Tribunal failed to answer the alleged question —
which it has not, this alone would be insufficient to support a supplemental
decision, absent proof that the Tribunal simply failed to address quantum. No
such proof exists in this case as it is clear that the Tribunal paid extraordinary
attention to quantum in the Award. (para. 29, emphasis in the original)

19. As to the rectification requested, Respondent disputes that the
Tribunal had made any clerical, arithmetical or similar error that is susceptible of
rectification. Respondent refers to the fact that Claimant invited the Tribunal to
use the model designed by Claimant's expert and, therefore, “Claimant can
hardly complain now that the Tribunal made an erroneous calculation.” (para. 34)
Respondent adds: “A reasonable estimate of such costs [the costs associated
with revenues] produces numbers in the neighborhood reached by the Tribunal.
The key point, however, is that the purpose of a rectification proceeding is not to
reproduce accurately every cell of an Excel model. The Tribunal had available to
it the tools it needed and cannot now be said to have engaged in a mathematical
error.” (para. 34)

20. On the second alleged error, Respondent argues that it is in fact
the result of Claimant’s own legal theory that rents collected post-Lesivo
constituted mitigation of damages and applied to everything. Respondent notes
that Claimant’s expert did not discount the rental income received from 2007 to
2010; the expert “simply added the rents collected and deducted the sum from
the total damages claimed, which were computed as of December 2006.” (para.
35). Respondent also points out that counsel for Claimant maintained this
position in closing argument.

21. Respondent disputes the correctness of the amount of NPV put
forward by Claimant, and adds: “Significantly, the very fact that arguments about
these new calculations exist should put an end to any rectification request.”
(para. 36).

22. Respondent requests that the Tribunal “(A) deny Claimants [sic]
Request in its entirety; and (B) order the Claimants [sic] to assume all fees and

costs of the Republic’s legal representation and other costs incurred by the
Republic in connection with such proceeding.” (para. 37)

3. Reply

23. Claimant disagrees with Respondent that the Request seeks
substantive review or reconsideration of questions decided by the Tribunal.
Claimant argues that Article 49(2) allows the Tribunal to decide any question it
omitted to decide in the Award, and refers to Professor Schreuer’s explanation
that an inadvertently omitted question must concern “an issue that affects the
Award and is of sufficient importance to justify the procedure leading to a

supplemental decision.” '

In the view of Claimant the Tribunal omitted
inadvertently a question in the calculation of damages which, if decided in its
favor, would substantially increase the damages awarded. It follows, according to
Claimant, within the proper scope of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.
Claimant finds no support under Article 49(2) or in the jurisprudence for
Respondent's argument that the Tribunal is not obligated to decide a material
omitted question relating to the calculation of damages unless the Award is
completely silent on the amount of damages awarded.

24. Claimant also disputes that the Tribunal addressed implicitly
Claimant's request that its sunk investment costs be updated to the date of
breach by a reasonable rate of return. Claimant observes that it is undisputed
that there is no mention in the Award of such request despite the prominence of
this issue in the parties’ briefing. This leads Claimant to believe that it was an
inadvertent omission by the Tribunal. Claimant points out that the Award explicitly
states that Claimant should not recover a portion of its sunk investment costs,
and argues that “had the Tribunal decided that these sunk costs are not
compensable because they represent the actual negative rate of return on
Claimant’s investment [as argued by Respondent], it would have said so in the
Award rather than expressly denying recovery of these costs on entirely different
grounds.” (para. 11)

'C.H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 853 (2 edition, 2009).

25. Claimant refers to the expert opinion of Respondent’s expert in
support of its argument that, “if sunk investment costs are awarded, those
investments must be ‘brought forward to the date of [breach] at a rate equal to
the theoretical return these investments would have had in the absence of the
breach” (Rebuttal Report of P. Spiller, para. 30, quoted in para. 13 of the Reply).
Claimant, relying on the same opinion, points out that this is the case whether or
not the company concerned has a history of profitability.

26. Claimant also refers to the Respondent's expert recommendation
that a compensation award measured by actual investment should be adjusted
by business risk. Claimant observes that the Tribunal determined that Claimant
should not recover certain investment costs because these costs represented
risks that the Claimant took by investing in Guatemala. Hence Claimant
concludes that, “while the Tribunal by all appearances adopted Dr. Spiller's
actual investment NCC methodology with regard to adjusting Claimant’s
compensation downward by $8.5 million to take into account business risks
Claimant had voluntarily assumed, it inadvertently omitted in the Award the other
key element of the methodology, which requires that an award of sunk
investment costs, after adjustment for risks, include ‘a return equal to the
opportunity cost of capital’ (Rebuttal Report of P. Spiller, para 34). The Tribunal
should correct this omission by granting Claimant's Request and supplementing
the Award.” (para. 18)

27. Claimant rebuts Respondent’s argument that the Request is based
on new material and explains that “the rate of return analysis of Claimant’s
awarded sunk costs presented in Annex | of Claimant's Request is completely
supported by Respondent’s own expert and entirely consistent with the record
and the Tribunal findings. It is not ‘new evidence’, and has been presented by
Claimant simply to assist the Tribunal in its consideration of Claimant’s Request
for supplementation.” (para. 20)

28. Claimant then addresses Respondent's arguments on rectification
of the Award. Claimant finds that Respondent offers little substance in its
response and effectively concedes the error in its Observations. Claimant rejects

Respondent's argument that the Tribunal possibly made some cost deductions
associated with the real estate lease revenue to arrive at the amount set forth in
the Award. According to Claimant, “the Award sets forth on a step-by-step basis
how the Tribunal proceeded from Mr. Thompson’s NPV calculation to the
Tribunal’s NPV calculation, and the only input change from Mr. Thompson’s
calculation that the Tribunal discussed and adapted is the change from a 12.9%
discount rate to a 17.36% rate. There is no explicit or implicit suggestion in the
Award that the Tribunal made other, unspecified adjustments to Mr. Thompson’s
calculation which cause the NPV value to drop from $6,818,865 to
$4,121 281.62.” (para. 12)

29. As to the valuation of the set-off, Claimant acknowledges that, as
pointed out by Respondent, Mr. Thompson did not discount the set-off in his
report. This notwithstanding, Claimant considers that the failure of the Award to
discount FVG’s post-Lesivo rental income is a computational error that should be
rectified. Claimant maintains that Respondent has not disputed that, “in order to
determine the proper net amount owed by Respondent for FVG’s existing leases,
it is necessary that the set-off amount of rents paid to FVG since Lesivo be
discounted at the same rate as FVG’s leases. Respondent also does not dispute
that the Award currently does not do this [...] Furthermore, Respondent does not
dispute that, if this computational error is not corrected by the Tribunal, it could
lead to the absurd result of Claimant receiving nothing for (and Respondent
potentially profiting from) this item of damages.” (para. 30, emphasis in the
original). Claimant concludes by saying that: “Article 49(2) does not afford the
Tribunal discretion to tolerate an undisputed computational error in its damages
calculation simply because Claimant's expert made a similar error.” (para. 31)

30. Claimant confirms its relief request and adds that the Tribunal
award Claimant its costs, attorneys’ fees and administrative expenses incurred in
prosecuting its Request. (para. 32)

4. Rejoinder

31. Respondent argues that the Request is based on the erroneous
assumption that the Tribunal awarded Claimant sunk investment costs and

sought to place Claimant in the same position as if the investment had never
been made. According to Respondent, Claimant is trying to reformulate the
compensation standard applied by the Tribunal. Respondent affirms that: “The
Tribunal listened to what Dr. Spiller said and awarded Claimant full reparation at
the same time of the Lesivo, because that is when the breach of the Treaty
obligation attributable to Guatemala occurred. Thus, the Tribunal’s alleged failure
to address whether FVG’s sunk investment costs should be adjusted to the date
of the Lesivo was not an inadvertent omission.” (para. 6, emphasis in the original)
Furthermore, Respondent argues that, if the Tribunal had wanted to place
Claimant “in a position as if the investment had never been made”, Claimant
would not have been awarded damages on account of real estate leases.

32. As to the NPV calculation, Respondent disputes that it conceded
that the Tribunal erred as affirmed in Claimant's Observations and makes a
calculation based on certain assumptions that result in an amount close to the
amount calculated by the Tribunal.

33. Respondent also disputes that the Tribunal committed a
mathematical error by failing to discount FVG’s post-Lesivo rental income.
Respondent recalls that Mr. Thompson’s [Claimant's expert] did not discount
post-Lesivo rental and adds “...when it is clear that the Tribunal used
Mr. Thompson’s analysis, and that Claimant now argues that such analysis was
erroneous, there is no reason to fault the Tribunal for not discounting rents
actually received when calculating mitigation damages...Article 49(2) should not
be used by a party to change the methodology proposed by the Claimant for
mitigation of damages.” (para. 22)

34. Respondent confirms its request for relief.

5. Replies to the Tribunal’s Questions

35. In their replies to the questions posed by the Tribunal the parties
agree, although for different reasons: (a) that no weight should be given by the
Tribunal to the fact that funds from real estate rents have been accumulating in
the hands of Claimant since September 2006 and may have generated further
income for the Claimant; and (b) that, in the consideration by the Tribunal of

discounting the real estate rents, no weight should be given to the decision of the
Tribunal to award compound interest on damages as from September 2006.

il Considerations of the Tribunal

36. At the outset it will be useful to reproduce Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention:

“The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the
date on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party
decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and shall
rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its decision
shall become part of the award and shall be notified to the parties in the
same manner as the award. The periods of time provided for under
paragraph (2) of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of Article 52 shall run from
the date on which the decision was rendered.”

37. The Tribunal will first consider the issue of the new evidence
submitted by Claimant with its reply to the Tribunal’s questions followed by the
requests to supplement the Award and rectify it.

1. The Issue of New Evidence

38. The Tribunal considers that congruent with the limited scope of a
rectification request under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention no new
evidence should be filed by the parties at such stage of the proceedings. In the
instant case, in the Tribunal’s opinion, no new evidence was necessary to reply
to its questions and it, therefore, upholds the objection of Respondent. The new
evidence has been ignored in the deliberations of the Tribunal.

2. Supplementation

39. The Tribunal observes that the parties are in agreement that the
Tribunal has discretion as to whether or not to supplement an award under the
terms of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. The term “may” leaves no doubt
that this is the case when the Tribunal has omitted to decide a question
submitted to it. Hence the first issue to be addressed by the Tribunal is whether it

omitted to decide in the Award a question submitted by Claimant. The parties
disagree in this respect. Claimant alleges that the Tribunal omitted to deal with
the question of discounting the sunk costs up to the date of Lesivo, Respondent
considers that this matter was implicitly covered in the Tribunal’s considerations
underlying the damages calculation.

40. The parties’ disagreement turns on what is a question under the
Convention. The Black’s Law Dictionary defines “question” as follows: “A subject
or point of investigation, examination or debate; theme or inquiry; problem;
matter to be inquired into.” In the instant case the problem faced by the Tribunal
was “how to assess the compensation on account of a measure which has an
injurious effect, falling short of expropriation on assets which continue in
possession of Claimant.” (Award, para. 260)

41. There is no precise formula to determine damages on account of
the infringement of the fair and equitable standard. Here, the Tribunal’s damages
analysis is additionally influenced by its decision to require “Claimant, on the full
and effective payment of the prescribed compensation by Respondent, to
transfer to Respondent or its nominee all of the Claimant's shares in FVG.”
(Award para 265). This remedy, combined with the speculative nature of
Claimant’s claim of lost profits, led the Tribunal to award Claimant reparations
based on “certain known quantities related to the amount invested and the actual
rents received from leases of the real estate” that “have the additional merit of
arguably representing benefits which may be considered to accrue to
Respondent on payment of the amount awarded to Claimant.” (Award para 269.)
In the Tribunal’s estimation, this damages framework provides compensation for
Guatemala’s CAFTA breach, reflects the transfer of ownership that will take
place when Guatemala makes payment of the prescribed compensation, and
takes account of the fact that Claimant's investment was losing money for
reasons independent of Lesivo.

42. In propounding an automatic application of various elements of a
financial formula to Claimant’s investment amount, the Request advances an
analysis that is detached from reality. The Tribunal considers that to discount the

investment made up to the date of Lesivo irrespective of the performance of the
entity concerned would produce in the circumstances of this case an unfair and
inequitable result. The assets invested overall generated losses not gains up to
Lesivo. As the Tribunal noted (referring to the years of operation pre-Lesivo): “the
funds invested by Claimant to cover these losses represent the risks Claimant
took when investing in Guatemala and cannot be attributed to any action of
Guatemala contrary to CAFTA” (Award, para 272; see also paras 274, 277, 278).
To ignore this fact and discount sunk costs on the basis of what the return would
be on an alternative investment is a theoretical exercise. Such exercise may
perhaps be justified in cases where there is no record of the performance of the
investment. In the instant case that record exists. The Tribunal would have
engaged in contradiction if, after recognizing that the investment had made
losses, it would have added to that investment a theoretical rate of return. To
conclude, the Tribunal considers that in its calculation of compensation on
account of the breach of the fair and equitable standard it dealt with all questions
needed to reach its decision. In the view of the Tribunal the request to
supplement the Award has no merit.

3. Rectification
a) NPV Calculation

43. In the Award the Tribunal did its own assessment of the appropriate
discount rate to calculate the NPV of existing leases and noted the disagreement
of the parties in this respect (Award, paras. 271 and ff). The Tribunal reached
the conclusion that a discount rate of 17.36% would be appropriate. It is evident
that the Tribunal misapplied the discount rate. The Tribunal has recalculated the
NPV of the income streams of leased real estate set forth in Expert Thompson’s
Rebuttal Report? using the 17.36% discount rate. The results are identical to
those in the table in paragraph 18 of the Request. Paragraphs 277 and 283(2) of
the Award shall be rectified accordingly. The correct amount awarded to
Claimant on account of the real estate leases is $5,591 ,469.30.

? Rebuttal Report of L. Thompson, Ex 1.

b) Discount of Actual Lease Rents

44. Respondent has noted and Claimant has recognized that in its
pleadings Claimant did not discount the income FVG received post-Lesivo from
leased real estate. It will be useful to reproduce here the relevant parts of
Claimant's Reply on the Merits and of Expert Thompson's Rebuttal Report. The
Reply states:

“562. As a result, it was fortunate for Respondent that, because of these
factors, these lessees and tenants did not stop paying rent to FVG and
FVG, therefore, has been able to mitigate its damages in the amount of
$2,704,310, which Mr. Thompson has deducted from Claimant's total
damage claim.

563. Deduction of FVG’s mitigation income from Claimant's total damage
claim yields of total revised net damages claim of $63,778,212.1286.”
(Emphasis added by the Tribunal)
Expert Thompson’s Rebuttal Report submitted with the Reply on the Merits
states:

“42. Although FVG's railway operations rapidly declined and eventually
ceased after the Lesivo Declaration, FVG has continued to collect income
from four long-term right-of-way easement agreements and one long-term
lease (COBIGUA) and other short-term rental activities. This mitigation
income should rightly be deducted from the value of the claim.

43. Table Seven shows the lease and easement income that FVG has
received from 2007 through the end of 2010. The total amount of income
is US$2,704,310. Deduction of this amount from the revised damages
claim yields a total revised net damages claim of US$63,778,212, as
shown in Table Eight.” (Emphasis added by the Tribunal)

45. This notwithstanding it is Claimant's view that the Tribunal
committed an error by not discounting the income received by FVG post-Lesivo
at the same discount rate that it discounted the stream of that income from the
end of the railway concession to 2006. Claimant has argued that by “discounting
FVG’s projected real estate income over the remaining term of the Usufruct, but
not similarly discounting the amount that it is to be deducted from this amount,
the Tribunal has created an apples-to-oranges calculation, where the plus side of

the equation has been valued as of the date of Lesivo (August 25, 2006), while
the set-off amount — the total actual rental payments received to date — have
been valued as of the respective dates the payments were received by FVG from
September 2006 to the present.” (Reply, para. 22)

46. The power of the Tribunal to rectify the Award is limited. The
threshold question is whether the rectification requested falls within the
parameters of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. The parties disagree on
whether the request concerns a pure mathematical error or a change of
methodological approach.

47. The Tribunal first observes that Claimant benefited from expert
advice in the approach it took to claim and quantify damages. The Tribunal
accepted that approach to the extent that concerns us here. With hindsight
Claimant has realized that the approach that informed its pleadings had certain
unfavorable mathematical implications and has asked the Tribunal to correct
them. The Tribunal considers that to do so would exceed the terms of its powers
under Article 49(2). It was not for the Tribunal to go beyond what Claimant
pleaded prior to the Award and consider the mathematical implications of
Claimant’s approach when Claimant itself did not take them into account. In
these circumstances to rectify the Award as requested is not just a simple
mathematical operation, it implies the Tribunal accepting a change of pleading in
the context of a rectification request. This is beyond the power of the Tribunal
under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.

48. Claimant has also argued that “if there is no discounting and the
Award is not paid by Respondent until 2015, then the absurd result will obtain
that Claimant will likely owe Respondent money for this item of damage, as
Claimant's share of FVG’s actual non-discounted real estate income since the
date of Lesivo will by then likely exceed Claimant’s share of the NPV of FVG’s
lost future real estate income. The Tribunal certainly could not have intended
such an incongruous result, where Respondent could potentially profit from
Claimant's mitigation of its damages.” (Request, para. 24. Emphasis in the
original)

49. The Tribunal recalls that Claimant in its Reply and during oral
hearings pleaded the application of rental income to mitigation of a// damages. It
is not absurd that the mitigation of damages may exceed one of the damages
items. Claimant will not owe Respondent money. As Claimant has pleaded, the
amount of post-Lesivo income will be deducted from the total damages awarded
by the Tribunal.

50. To conclude, the Tribunal considers that the Request does not
concern rectification of a computational error but involves a change of approach
by Claimant in respect of the treatment of the payments received post-Lesivo
outside the scope of the terms of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.

ll. ~~ Costs

51. The Tribunal has found merit in part of the Request. None of the
parties has fully prevailed. Therefore, each party shall bear the costs and
expenses of their respective counsel, and half of the Tribunal fees and expenses
and of the administrative expenses of ICSID.

IV. Decision
For the above reasons, the Tribunal decides:
1. To uphold the objection to the new evidence submitted by Claimant
with its reply to the Tribunal’s questions.

2. To reject the Supplementation Request and the Rectification
Request as it relates to “Not Discounting the Actual Rents Received
by FVG Since the Lesivo Resolution.”

3. To rectify the Award as follows:

a) the amounts in line 7 of para. 277 shall be deleted and
replaced by “$6,818,865” and “$5,591,469.30”
respectively.

b) The amounts in line 5 of para. 283(2) shall be deleted
and replaced by “$6,818,865” and “$5,591,469.30”
respectively.

4. That each party shall be responsible for 50% of the administrative
expenses of ICSID and of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
related to this decision.

5. That each party shall be responsible for its own counsel fees and
expenses.

Dissent in respect of the Second Rectification Request
of Arbitrator Stuart E. Eizenstat

| agree with my colleagues that Claimant's new evidence should not be
considered; that Claimant's Request for Supplementation should be rejected; and
that Claimant’s First Request for Rectification should be granted. | write
separately because | would grant Claimant’s Second Request for Rectification.
| view the failure to discount the set-off amount for actual rents received
post-Lesivo as an arithmetical error that could be addressed at this stage of the
proceedings. Insofar as Claimant's expert erred in not discounting these rents, it
is my view that the Tribunal shares in the error. Therefore, the Tribunal should
correct it and | would do so. For that reason, | respectfully dissent from this part
of the decision.

The Tribunal

¢ ~)

 

Hon. Stuart E. Eizenstat Professor James Crawford
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: (2//1f//7 2 Date:
(2 44-(-
foes f a
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal

Date: »2°- 1 12

