BEFORE THE
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Claimant
v.
THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB 07/23

 

CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR SUPPLEMENTATION AND
RECTIFICATION OF AWARD

10 August 2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS. .....ccccsssssssssssseenessessesneeseeseenees 1

Il. THE AWARD SHOULD BE SUPPLEMENTED TO INCLUDE A REASONABLE
RATE OF RETURN ON CLAIMANT’S SUNK INVESTMENT COSTS.......ccssesseeseee 2

Ill. THE TRIBUNAL MISCALCULATED THE NPV OF FVG’S EXISTING REAL
ESTATE LEASES AND FAILED TO DISCOUNT THE ACTUAL RENTS PAID TO
FVG POST-LESIVO 7

A. The Tribunal’s Miscalculation of the NPV of FVG’s Existing Real Estate Leases....7

B. The Tribunal Erred by Not Discounting the Actual Rents Received by FVG Since
the Lesivo Resolution 8

IV. CONCLUSION AND RELIEF REQUESTED ........cccccssssssssesssssssescscsnesnesnesnesneeseeneesneenes 10

CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR SUPPLEMENTATION AND RECTIFICATION OF
AWARD
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS
1. Pursuant to and in accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and

Rule 49 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, Claimant Railroad Development Corporation
respectfully submits its request for supplementation and rectification of the award rendered on
June 29, 2012 in Railroad Development Corporation (RDC) v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/07/23 (the “Award’’).

2. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that
The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the
date on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party
decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and shall
rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award.

3. The purpose of a supplementary decision under Article 49(2) is to provide a
remedy for questions that were put before the Tribunal during the proceedings on the merits but
were not addressed or decided in the Award.' In order to warrant a supplemental decision, the
omitted questions must concern an issue that materially affects the award.” Examples of such
material questions would include the inadvertent omission of an item in the calculation of

damages or of a factor determining costs.*

4. Article 49(2) further states that the Tribunal “shall rectify any clerical,
arithmetical or similar error in the award.” Thus, whereas a supplemental decision under Article
49(2) is discretionary, the rectification of any error in the award is obligatory.‘ Typical errors
which are subject to rectification include computational errors with respect to set-off, interest and

cost allocation calculations.”

! CL-189, LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Claimant's
Request for Supplementary Decision (8 July 2008), 13.

2 CL-27, Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 853 4,40 (2d ed. 2009).

Id.

4 Id. at 853 { 38.

> CL-190, Maria Hauser-Morel & Jan Heiner Nedden, Correction and Interpretation of Arbitral Awards and

Additional Awards, POST AWARD ISSUES: ASA SPECIAL SERIES No. 38. 19, 25 (Pierre Tercier ed., 2011).

5. Claimant’s request for supplementation and rectification concerns certain
omissions and errors the Tribunal made in quantifying and calculating the compensation it
awarded Claimant in the Award. First, with regard to the $6,576,861 in sunk investment costs
the Tribunal awarded Claimant, the Award does not address whether Claimant is entitled to
recover a reasonable rate of return on those investment costs from the dates of investment up to
the date of Respondent’s breach. The Tribunal failed to address this claim even though Claimant
presented it to the Tribunal and, notably, the damages experts presented by both parties are in
agreement that inclusion of a reasonable rate of return on the amounts invested is necessary to
put Claimant back in the same position it would have been absent Respondent’s breach.
Addressing this claim now is necessary if the Tribunal is to achieve its stated intent “to

compensate [Claimant] fully for the injury suffered.”

6. Second, the Tribunal made two arithmetical errors in the Award that should be
rectified with regard to its award of 82% of the net present value (NPV) of FVG’s existing real
estate leases measured over their remaining life as of the date of Lesivo, less 82% of the actual
rents received by FVG from the date of Lesivo until payment of the Award. First, the Tribunal
miscalculated the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases to be $4,121,281.62, when, in fact,
the correct amount is $6,818,865 when the Tribunal’s 17.36% discount rate is applied. Second,
the Tribunal erred in not using the same valuation methodology for both the additions and set-
offs to this head of damages, i.e., the Tribunal failed to apply the same 17.36% discount rate it
utilized to determine the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases to the actual rent amounts

received by FVG since the date of Lesivo.

IL. THE AWARD SHOULD BE SUPPLEMENTED TO INCLUDE A REASONABLE
RATE OF RETURN ON CLAIMANT’S SUNK INVESTMENT COSTS

7. In the Award, the Tribunal found that Respondent breached the minimum
standard of treatment under Article 10.5 of CAFTA with respect to Claimant’s investment. As
part of the full reparation for Respondent’s breach, the Tribunal determined that Claimant is
entitled to recover, inter alia, (a) $6,576,861 on account of its sunk investment in Phases I and II
of the railway rehabilitation; and (b) 82% of $4,121,281.62 (i.e., $3,379,450.93), which

represents the net present value (NPV) of FVG’s existing real estate leases measured over their

Award | 267.

remaining life as of the date of Lesivo, less 82% of the rents paid to FVG under such leases post-

Lesivo until payment by Respondent of the awarded compensation.’

8. With regard to the $6,576,861 in compensation awarded for Claimant’s sunk
investment costs, the Tribunal did not include or address in the Award a key component in the
calculation of this item of damages: a rate of return that should have been applied to Claimant’s
investment costs from the dates of investment to the date of Lesivo. This rate of return should
have been factored into the awarded investment costs in order to place Claimant in the same

position it would have been absent Respondent’s breach.

9. Claimant’s claim that it should recover a reasonable rate of return on its sunk
investment costs as part of its full reparations was specifically presented by Claimant in its
Memorial on the Merits,* Reply on the Merits’ and at the hearing on the merits.'° The claim was
also raised and discussed extensively by both Claimant’s and Respondent’s damages experts. In
his first expert report, Claimant’s damages expert, Louis Thompson, opined that the nominal
value of Claimant’s lost investment should be adjusted forward to its real value as of the date of
Lesivo by using three possible rates of return: (i) a constant 10 percent interest rate; (ii) the
regulatory cost of capital as prescribed by the U.S. Surface Transportation Board (STB) for use
in calculating allowable costs in revenue adequacy proceedings; or (iii) the Consumer Price
Index in Guatemala.'! Claimant’s discount/interest rate expert, Dr. Shannon Pratt, likewise
opined that “[j]ust as the lost profits need to be adjusted for the time value of money so to [sic]
do the sunk costs in that they should be adjusted forward to the date of breach,”'? Dr. Pratt thus
recommended that, in order to return Claimant to the same financial position it would have been

in absent Respondent’s breach, the Tribunal gross up the value of Claimant’s sunk investment

7 Award 277. The Tribunal also awarded Claimant $1,350,429 for operating the railroad for another year

after the Lesivo Resolution, which permitted an orderly closure of the railroad service. This amount is not at issue in
this request for supplementation and rectification.

8 See Memorial on Merits, {J 185-87.

° See Reply on Merits, | 552.

0 See, e.g., Claimant’s Closing Argument, slides 123, 125-26.

" Expert Report of L. Thompson {| 61-64, Table 12.
Expert Report of S. Pratt, p. 12.

costs by a weighted average cost of capital (WACC) of 12.9%, which is the same rate he

recommended be applied to Claimant’s lost profits/discounted cash flow valuation."

10. Although Respondent’s damages expert, Dr. Pablo Spiller, disagreed with the
proposed rates of return that Claimant’s experts recommended be applied to Claimant’s sunk
investment costs, Dr. Spiller nevertheless agreed with Claimant’s experts on the underlying
economic concept that, where a compensation award is measured by actual investment costs
(also called “net capital contributions (NCC)”), those investment costs “should be brought
forward to the date of [breach] at a rate equal to the theoretical return these investments would
have had in the absence of the breach.”'* Dr. Spiller explained the economic basis for including
an appropriate rate of return on a claimant’s net capital contributions in an academic article he
co-authored with Dr. Manuel Abdala:

[The net capital contribution] method is based on historic documented figures
related to direct investments (in the form of equity or debt) carried out by
shareholders of the concession, net of historic distributions (dividends or interests
paid out). The underlying concept is that investors have the right to recover their
capital contributions to the firm, making a return equal to the opportunity cost of
capital. . . . To estimate compensation values, it is assumed that investments by
shareholders will provide profitability equal to its expected return, adjusted by
business risk and net of dividend payments, interests and/or other compensations
to equity and debt contributions that shareholders might have done before
expropriation.'°

11. Another leading authority on economic damages in international investment
arbitration, Mark Kantor, agrees with Dr. Spiller that full compensation for sunk investment
costs should also include a rate of return on those costs:

Tf the arbitral panel determines that, in the circumstances, the proper measure of
compensation should be based on recovery of an investor’s “sunk investment
costs,” that calculation comprises two elements: (i) the amount of sums invested;

8 Id. at p.13. In his rebuttal report, Mr. Thompson adopted and applied Dr. Pratt’s recommended 12.9% rate

to calculate the real value of Claimant's lost investment through the date of Lesivo. See Rebuttal Report of L.
Thompson { 6, Table One.

4 Rebuttal Report of P. Spiller 30. See also First Expert Report of P. Spiller 74 (“Unlike the DCF

approach, the NCC provides a ‘background looking’ damages estimate by focusing on the actual contributions made
by the investor, plus an expected return, minus the actualized value of all cash distributions received by the
investors, such as dividends, interest payments, or others.”) (emphasis added), 77 (“the NCC approach . . . imputes
a return to invested capital”).

15,

 

LECG-07, M. Abdala & P. Spiller, Damage Valuation of Indirect Expropriation in Public Services, 14
Am. Rev. Int'l Arb. 457-58 (2003) (emphasis added).

and (ii) the rate of return to be awarded on the invested sum from the investment
date until the award date.'®. . . [W]hen a tribunal awards “sunk investment costs”
it is seeking to place the investor back in the same position as if the lost
investment had never been made (the reliance interest). If that investment had not
been made, then the investor would of course have placed the invested sum
instead in a different investment, not put the money under its proverbial mattress.
The rate of return from the investment date to the award date reimburses the
investor for the sums the investor would have earned from the alternative
investment during that period of time.!”

12. Arbitral tribunals have also affirmed this fundamental economic principle. In
Santa Elena v. Costa Rica, the tribunal noted that “where an owner of property has at some
earlier time lost the value of his asset but has not received the monetary equivalent that then
became due to him, the amount of compensation should reflect, at least in part, the additional

sum that his money would have earned, had it, and the income generated by it, been reinvested
each year at generally prevailing rates of interest.”'%

13. The tribunal in the Himpurna case also recognized that, when it comes to
measuring damages, awarded sunk investment costs are simply the other side of the coin to
future lost profits and, therefore, should be grossed up to the date of breach just as lost profits are
discounted to the date of breach:

[Respondent] argues that to make the claimant whole means to return no more
than actual amounts expended, without “escalation”. Here again, the argument is
vain [sic]. Just as lost profits must be discounted because the nominal amount of
revenues earned in the future have a lesser present value, so it would be untrue to
say that the claimant is made whole by awarding amounts today which are
nominally identical to those it spent in the past. This is not a matter of
“escalation” in any other sense of the word than pure value maintenance."

te The Tribunal has already awarded Claimant pre-award interest at six-month LIBOR plus two percentage

points on its sunk investment costs from the date of the Lesivo Resolution (August 25, 2006) to final payment of the
Award. Award J 283(4). Thus, the Award need only be supplemented with regard to the rate of return that should
be applied to Claimant’s awarded sunk investment costs from the dates of investment to the date of the Lesivo
Resolution.

" LECG-10, M. Kantor, Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standards, Valuation Methods, and

Expert Evidence, p. 56 (2008) (emphasis added).

8 CL-154, Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No.
ARB/96/1, Final Award (17 Feb. 2000), {| 104.
° CL-146, Himpurna Cal. Energy Ltd. v. PT (Persero) Perusahaan Listruik Negara, 25 Y.B. Comm. Arb. 13

(4 May 1999), 274.

14. Thus, by failing to include a rate of return on Claimant’s $6,576,861 in sunk
investment costs from the dates of investment to the date of Lesivo, the Tribunal failed to address
and include in the Award a claim that was specifically raised by Claimant and that the parties,
their damages experts (including Respondent’s own expert), and legal authorities all agree
should have been awarded to Claimant in order “to compensate it fully” for its lost investment.
Accordingly, the Tribunal should supplement the Award to address this claim and award

Claimant this fundamental and necessary component of its damages.

15. In terms of what rate of return should be applied to Claimant’s sunk investment
costs, Claimant submits that the Tribunal should use a 17.36% rate in order to be consistent with
the discount rate it employed to determine the NPV of the future income stream of FVG’s
existing leases. Regardless of what rate of return the Tribunal ultimately chooses to apply, the
rate should be compounded for the same reasons the Tribunal awarded compound pre-award

interest from the date of Lesivo.”°

16. In order to assist the Tribunal in supplementing the Award, Claimant has prepared
Annex 1. Annex | is an Excel spreadsheet file which sets forth calculations of the escalated
value of Claimant’s awarded sunk investment costs to the date of Lesivo using a range of
proposed rates of return. Annex | shows that, under the Tribunal’s 17.36% WACC rate,
Claimant should recover $14,199,805 in accrued interest on its sunk investment costs. Under the
9.34% “coerced loan” rate, Claimant should recover $5,894,578 in accrued interest.7! Finally, if
the Tribunal decides to award a rate of return equal to six-month LIBOR plus two (i.e., the same
rate it has awarded for the pre-award period after Respondent’s breach), Claimant should recover

$3,086,856 in accrued interest.”

20 See Award 281.

21

See Expert Report of S. Pratt, p. 14, Ex. 11. Dr. Pratt’s “coerced loan” rate is also consistent with the 10%
rate proposed by Mr. Thompson in his first expert report.

2 Of course, the Tribunal can also choose to use a different rate of return and plug that number into the

Annex | spreadsheet to determine the amount of accrued interest due Claimant under that rate.

Ill. THE TRIBUNAL MISCALCULATED THE NPV OF FVG’S EXISTING REAL
ESTATE LEASES AND FAILED TO DISCOUNT THE ACTUAL RENTS PAID

TO FVG POST-LESIVO

A. The Tribunal’s Miscalculation of the NPV of FVG’s Existing Real Estate
Leases

17. As an additional component of Claimant’s full reparation for Respondent’s

breach, the Tribunal awarded Claimant 82% of the NPV of FVG’s projected rents from the real
estate leases it entered into prior to the Lesivo Resolution, less 82% of the actual rents FVG has
received from the date of Lesivo until Respondent’s payment of the Award.”> Based upon a
12.9% discount rate, Claimant’s expert, Mr. Thompson, calculated the NPV of FVG’s existing
rental income over the remaining 42 years of the Usufruct to be $10,751,437.4 The Tribunal,
however, found Claimant’s 12.9% discount rate to be too low and instead utilized a discount rate
of 17.36%.” Applying this discount rate, the Tribunal found the NPV of FVG’s existing real
estate leases to be $4,121,281.62, 82% of which is $3,379,450.93.7°

18. The Tribunal’s NPV calculation is erroneous. The correct NPV of FVG’s
existing lease income using a 17.36% discount rate is $6,818,865, not $4,121,281.62. The
correct NPV can be ascertained through a simple input change to Mr. Thompson’s damages
model, which is Exhibit 1 to his Rebuttal Report. As discussed above, that model used a 12.9%
discount rate/cost of capital to determine the NPV of FVG’s existing rental income over the
remaining 42 years of the Usufruct. The 12.9% discount rate is set forth in cell BS of the “Total
Claim” spreadsheet of the model. Total Claim cell BS is linked to, inter alia, the NPV formulas
set forth in the “Real Estate” spreadsheet, including the NPVs of FVG’s existing real estate
leases (cells C54 through G54 and cell 154). If the 12.9% discount rate in Total Claim cell BS is
changed in the model to 17.36%, the NPVs of FVG’s existing real estate leases in the Real Estate
spreadsheet are reduced accordingly to reflect this higher discount rate. The effect of applying

the Tribunal’s 17.36% discount rate to Mr. Thompson’s NPV calculations is as follows:

2 Award ff 277, 283(2).

Reply on the Merits | 520 (citing Rebuttal Report of L. Thompson, Ex. 1 (Real Estate Spreadsheet).
2 Award 274.

Award ff 277, 283(2).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Easement/Lease NPV NPV
@ 12.90% di: rate @ 17.36% di rate
1. Planos y Puntos/Gesur $736,675 $524,423
2. Texaco Guatemala 33,690 24,446
3. Zeta Gas 3,924 2,904
4. Genor 238,099 172,634
5. COBIGUA/Chiquita 8,775,988 5,375,278
6. Short-Term Rentals 963,061 719,180
TOTAL $10,751,437 7” $6,818,865 *
19. Thus, as Mr. Thompson’s model demonstrates, using a discount rate of 17.36%,

 

the Tribunal should have awarded Claimant $5,591,469.30 (82% of $6,818,865) for the NPV of

FVG’s existing real estate leases.

B. The Tribunal Erred by Not Discounting the Actual Rents Received by FVG
Since the Lesivo Resolution

20. In addition to correcting its calculation of the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate
leases, the Tribunal should also correct the basis for its calculation of the amount that must be
deducted from that NPV calculation to determine the actual amount of compensation due

Claimant for this item of damage.

21. In the Award, the Tribunal described the deduction that must be made from the

NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases as “82% of the rents paid to FVG under [its existing
real estate] leases post-Lesivo and until payment by Respondent of the awarded compensation.””?

Thus, while the Tribunal required FVG’s projected real estate income over the remaining 42
7 See Rebuttal Report of L. Thompson, Ex. | (Real Estate Spreadsheet) (showing NPV values @ 12.90%
discount rate/cost of capital).

8 See Annex 2, L. Thompson Real Estate Spreadsheet showing NPV values @ 17.36% discount rate/cost of
capital.

9 Award {J 277, 283(2).

years of the Usufruct to be discounted at 17.36% to its NPV as of the date of Lesivo, it did not
require that the set-off amount comprised of FVG’s actual rental income received since the date

of Lesivo be similarly discounted to its NPV as of the date of Lesivo.

22. The Tribunal’s failure to require the discounting of the actual rents received by
FVG since the date of Lesivo is a computational error. By discounting FVG’s projected real
estate income over the remaining term of the Usufruct, but not similarly discounting the amount
that is to be deducted from this amount, the Tribunal has created an apples-to-oranges
calculation, where the plus side of the equation has been valued as of the date of Lesivo (August
25, 2006), while the set-off amount — the total actual rental payments received to date — have
been valued as of the respective dates the payments were received by FVG from September 2006

to the present.

23. The Tribunal’s miscalculation is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that the NPV
of FVG’s projected rental income includes, inter alia, the real estate income FVG has actually
earned since 2007.” Thus, as currently stated in the Award, the calculation of this item of
damage discounts on the plus side of the equation the actual real estate income FVG has earned
since Lesivo, but does not similarly discount the exact same amounts on the subtraction side of
the equation. By not discounting the set-off amounts, Claimant has been denied full reparation

for this item of damage.

24. Indeed, if there is no discounting and the Award is not paid by Respondent until
2015, then the absurd result will obtain that Claimant will likely owe Respondent money for this
item of damage, as Claimant’s share of FVG’s actual non-discounted real estate income since the
date of Lesivo will by then likely exceed Claimant’s share of the NPV of FVG’s lost future real
estate income.*! The Tribunal certainly could not have intended such an incongruous result,

where Respondent could potentially profit from Claimant’s mitigation of its damages.

0 See Rebuttal Report of L. Thompson, Ex. | (Real Estate Spreadsheet) (showing that the NPV calculation of
“FVG Leases Prior to Lesivo” includes actual rents paid under such leases from 2007-10).

i FVG’s total projected non-discounted real estate income from September 2006 through 2015 is $8,362,382,

which exceeds the $6,818,865 discounted NPV of FVG’s projected real estate income over the remaining 42 years
of the Usufruct. See Annex 3, Non-Discounted Lease Income Spreadsheet.

25. Accordingly, an accurate calculation of the net amount of compensation owed
Claimant for its lost future rental income requires that both sides to the equation be valued in the
same manner, i.e., as of the date of Lesivo using the same discount rate of 17.36%. Annex 3 sets
forth a corrected computation of Claimant’s net lost rental income as of June 2012 by (i) using
the corrected NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases ($6,818,865); (ii) subtracting the NPV of
the rents received by FVG from September 2006 through June 2012 ($2,146,502); and (iii)
calculating Claimant’s 82% share of the difference, which results in a total compensation of

$3,831,338 for this item of damage through June 2012.”

IV. CONCLUSION AND RELIEF REQUESTED
26. For the foregoing reasons, Claimant respectfully requests that the Tribunal grant

its request for supplementation and rectification of the Award and grant the following relief:

a. That the Tribunal supplement the Award to include, as additional
compensation to Claimant, a reasonable rate of return, compounded annually,
on Claimant’s awarded sunk investment costs of $6,576,861, calculated from
the dates of investment to the date of Lesivo (August 25, 2006)";

b. — That the Tribunal rectify and amend paragraphs 277 and 283(2) of the Award
by correcting its calculation of 82% of the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate
leases measured over their remaining life as of the date of Lesivo, so that
Claimant is awarded $5,591 ,469.30 rather than $3,379,450.93; and

c. That the Tribunal rectify and amend the Award to require that the actual rents
received by FVG since the date of Lesivo be discounted and valued as of the
date of Lesivo at a discount rate of 17.36% before this amount is deducted
from the NPV of FVG’s existing real estate leases.

2 See Annex 3, Total Claim Spreadsheet. The amount Respondent owes for this item of damage will

obviously change up until Respondent pays the Award.

3 Claimant would also note that, per paragraph 283(4) of the Award, if the Tribunal grants this requested

supplemental relief, the compensation amount consisting of Claimant’s sunk investment costs plus compound
interest up to the date of Lesivo should be further compounded at the LIBOR +2% interest rate from the date of
Lesivo up to the date of payment of the Award. See CL-190, Hauser-Morel & Nedden, Correction and
Interpretation of Arbitral Awards and Additional Awards 35 (“If an additional award awards new damages, and if
interest was sought in this respect in the course of the arbitration, interest may be due on these new damages.”).

 

10

Regina K. Vargo
GREENBERG TRAURIG, LLP

Respectfully submitted,

A ee

C. Allen Foster

Kevin E. Stern

Ruth Espey-Romero

GREENBERG TRAURIG, LLP

2101 L Street, NW

Suite 1000

Washington, D.C. 20037

Email: fostera@ gtlaw.com
sternk @ gtlaw.com
espey-romeror@ gtlaw.com

Phone: 202-331-3100

Fax: 202-331-3101

Counsel for Claimant Railroad Development
Corporation

Juan Pablo Carrasco de Groote

DIAZ-DURAN & ASOCIADOS CENTRAL-LAW
15 Avenida 18-28, Zona 13

Guatemala City, Guatemala C.A.

Email: jpcarrasco@diazduran.com

Phone: 011-502 (2383) 6000

Co-Counsel for Claimant Railroad Development
Corporation

