INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23

DECISION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Honorable Stuart E. Eizenstat, Arbitrator
Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL

Natali Sequeira

Date: October 15, 2008

TABLE OF CONTENTS

BaCkQPOUN 0.0... eeececcceesceesesneeeeeeeteeneeeeseseeseseseeeeeeeseneeeeeeeteateneeneeteeeneae
Positions of the Parties 0.0... ccs eeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeetenseneeeeneteeee
Considerations of the TriDUNal ........... cece eeneseeseeeeteeeeseeeeeeeeeseenennes

DOCISION 0... eee eeeeeeceeceeeeeeeeeneeteeeeeseesesneteeseeseseesneeeeesseeateneeteeteaseneeneneeeeaee

Decision on Provisional Measures‘

I. Background

1. In its Request for Interim Measure of Protection Regarding Preservation of
Evidence (‘Request’), dated August 21, 2008, the Railroad Development
Corporation (‘RDC’ or the ‘Claimant’) requests the Tribunal to order an
interim measure of protection mandating that Respondent preserve certain
categories of documents while the arbitration proceedings are pending.
These documents, according to the Request, are ‘unquestionably relevant
and material to RDC’s ability to have its claims and requests for relief fairly
considered and decided by the Tribunal.’

2. At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Republic of Guatemala (‘Respondent’ or
‘Guatemala’) replied to the Request on September 12, 2008 (‘Response’).
The Claimant and the Respondent had a further opportunity to exchange
comments. A Reply was filed on September 26 (‘Reply’) and a Rejoinder
on October 3, 2008 (‘Rejoinder’).

Il. Positions of the Parties

3. According to the Claimant, on July 3, 2008, it requested the Respondent
to preserve listed documents in the Respondent’s possession, custody or
control that the Claimant believed should be preserved while the
arbitration proceedings are pending. On August 7, 2008, the Respondent
informed the Claimant that the request was premature because there is
under consideration of the Tribunal Respondent's objection to jurisdiction,
and that in any event it was too broad. The Claimant then requested the
Respondent to identify the documents which it would be willing to
preserve. The Respondent declined to identify them.

‘ The ICSID Convention uses the term ‘provisional measures’, CAFTA uses ‘interim measures.”

Both terms are used in this decision without any attempt to distinguish between them.
? Request, para. 1.

4. The Request classifies the documents to be preserved in the following
four categories:

‘a. Preservation Request No. 1: All documents referring or
relating to the Usufruct Agreements, including (but not limited to):
(i) documents referring or relating to the bidding, negotiation,
awarding, performance or breach of any or all of the Usufruct
Agreements; the public bidding process initiated by the
Government of Guatemala (“GOG”) on February 17, 1997 (the
“RFP”); (ii) documents referring or relating to RDC’s bid submitted
to the GOG in response to the RFP; (iii) documents referring or
relating to the award of the 50-year usufructary right to rebuild and
operate the Guatemalan rail system made on June 23, 1997 by
FEGUA; (iv) documents referring or relating to any analysis or
evaluation of the preceding by the GOG; (v) documents referring
or relating to royalty payments by FVG to FEGUA and the use of
same by FEGUA; (vi) documents referring or relating to GOG’s
and/or FEGUA’s compliance, efforts to comply and/or failure to
comply with its or their obligations under the Usufruct Agreements;
and/or (vii) documents referring or relating to the high level
railroad commission that was established at the instruction of
President Berger purportedly to support FVG’s railroad operations,
as described in paragraph 38 of RDC’s Arbitration Request.

b. Preservation Request No. 2: All documents referring or
relating to Government Resolution 433-2006, published in the
Guatemala Official Gazette on August 25, 2006 (the “Lesivo
Resolution”) as described in paragraph 39 of RDC’s Arbitration
Request, including (but not limited to): (i) documents referring or
relating to FEGUA’s January 13, 2006 legal opinion (Opinion No.
05-2006) described in paragraph 37 of RDC’s Arbitration Request;
(ii) documents referring or relating to the March 7, 2006 meeting
among RDC, FEGUA and the GOG described in paragraph 38 of
RDC’s Arbitration Request; (iii) documents referring or relating to
FEGUA’s request to the Attorney General of Guatemala on or

about June 22, 2005, to investigate the circumstances
surrounding the award of the Usufruct to RDC and/or to issue an
opinion on the validity of Deed 143 (as amended by Deed 158) as
described in paragraph 35 of RDC’s Arbitration Request; (iv)
and/or documents referring or relating to the issuance of the
Attorney General's lesion opinion dated August 1, 2005 (Opinion
No. 205-2005) as described in paragraph 36 of RDC’s Arbitration
Request.

c. Preservation Request No. 3: All documents referring or
relating to third party interest in assuming or acquiring an interest
in the Usufructs subsequent to their award to RDC, including (but
not limited to): (i) documents referring or relating to the potential
redistribution of the benefits of the Usufruct Agreements to the
Guatemalan sugar, electricity or telecommunications industry
sectors or the private sector companies and_ business
representatives thereof; (ii) documents referring or relating to the
sugar industry's interest in the use of the railroad; (iii) documents
referring or relating to meetings between the GOG, its officials and
Ramon Campollo, Héctor Pinto or other representatives of or
persons related to the sugar industry; (iv) documents referring or
relating to Ciudad Del Sur and/or the Empresa Eléctrica of
Guatemala's (EEGSA) interest in the right of way and/or easement
rights to distribute electricity; and (v) Presidential or Vice
Presidential calendars or other records by their offices that
indicate meetings with the above industry sectors, industry
representatives or individuals.

d. Preservation Request No. 4: All declarations of lesivo by
GOG since January 1, 1996 and the related judicial file.’

Since they have figured prominently in the exchanges between the
parties, it will be useful to reproduce here the Claimant’s definitions of
‘documents’, ‘communications’ and ‘relating to’:

$ Request, para. 12.

““Documents” means each and every form of communication and
each and every written, recorded or graphic matter of any kind,
type, nature, or description that is or has been in the Republic of
Guatemala's possession, custody, or control, including, but not
limited to, all printed and electronic copies of emails, notes,
correspondence, memoranda, work papers, calendars, registries
of entrance to public or private offices/buildings, tapes,
stenographic or handwritten notes, written forms of any kind,
charts, blueprints, drawings, sketches, graphs, plans, articles,
specifications, diaries, letters, telegrams, photographs, minutes,
contracts, agreements, reports, surveys, computer printouts, data
compilations of any kind, teletypes, telexes, facsimiles, invoices,
order forms, checks, drafts, statements, credit memos, reports,
summaries, books, ledgers, notebooks, schedules,
transparencies, recordings, catalogs, advertisements, promotional
materials, films, video tapes, audio tapes, brochures, pamphlets,
spreadsheets, or any written or recorded materials of any other
kind, however stored (whether in tangible or electronic form),
recorded, produced, or reproduced, and also including, but not
limited to, drafts or copies of any of the foregoing that contain any
notes, comments, or markings of any kind not found on the
original documents or that are otherwise not identical to the
original documents.

“Communications” means any oral or written (including e-mail)
communication or transmission of words or ideas between
anyone.

“Relating to” means constituting, defining, containing, embodying,
reflecting, identifying, analyzing, stating, concerning,
substantiating, supporting, referring to, conflicting with, dealing

with, generated wholly or partly in response to or because of, or in
any way pertaining to.”

5. The Claimant argues that the Tribunal is empowered to order the
preservation of evidence as an interim measure of protection to preserve
the rights of a party under Article 10.20.8 of CAFTA, Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention, and Arbitration Rule 39(1) of ICSID. The Claimant
adduces ICSID jurisprudence showing that arbitral tribunals have ordered
interim measures when the requesting party has shown the need and
urgency to avoid irreparable harm to a party’s rights. The Claimant
explains that the degree of urgency required ‘depends upon the
circumstances and may be satisfied where a party can show that there will
be a need to obtain the documents at some point in the proceedings

before the issuance of the award.’°

6. The Claimant specifies the reasons for each of the preservation requests.
In substance, the Claimant argues that the documents are: (i) needed to
understand the bidding, award, formation and performance of the
contracts that comprise the Claimant’s investment, and the Respondent's
knowledge of the destructive effect that the Lesivo Resolution would have
on the Claimant's investment, (ii) relevant to the Claimant's contention that
the intent of the Respondent when it issued the Lesivo Resolution was to
redistribute RDC’s usufruct rights to Guatemalan private sector companies
without paying compensation, and (iii) relevant to RDC’s claim that the
Lesivo Resolution and the law on lesivo do not meet the minimum
standard of treatment under international law.

7. The Claimant justifies the need and urgency on the basis of a recent
change of government in Guatemala, the fact that the proceedings on the
merits have been suspended while the objection to jurisdiction is under the
Tribunal’s consideration, and the fact that, in case the objection is

4+ Exhibit C-1 to the Request.
5 Request, para. 17.

sustained, the Responded has indicated that it would not object if the
Tribunal would allow an opportunity to cure the jurisdictional defect and,
therefore, ‘there is little chance that these documents will not be the
subject of document production requests in the near future.’© Furthermore,
the fact that the Respondent has not recognized the obvious need to
preserve the evidence ‘or to make an offer to assist in that regard only
underscores the “urgency” of an evidence preservation order from this

Tribunal.’”

8. The Claimant further argues that the level of urgency required depends
upon the measure requested: the more intrusive the measure requested,
the greater the degree of urgency required. The Claimant considers that
what its request involves is ‘largely a ministerial task that can hardly be

deemed intrusive or burdensome.’”®

9. In the Response, the Respondent first corrects certain affirmations of the
Claimant which the Respondent considers erroneous and reserves its
right to further dispute any characterization of fact or law in the Request.
The Respondent then explains that, when it first received the request of
the Claimant to preserve documentation, it invited the Claimant to
reformulate the request because of its breadth. The Claimant dismissed
the offer and took the position that the Republic was free to reformulate
Claimant's own request for the Claimant to consider. The Respondent

declined to do so.

10. |The Respondent further explains that it is not its position that it would have
no objection to the Tribunal permitting the Claimant to cure its defective
waiver pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.18, but it ‘acknowledged that the
Tribunal might, for efficiency purposes, seek to grant the Claimant an
opportunity to cure its defective waiver.’® If the Tribunal would choose

© Ibid. para. 25(c)

" Ibid. para. 27.

® Ibid. para. 26.

° Response, para. 7

such option, the Respondent confirms that it has not waived any further

objections it may have.

The Respondent also observes that the Claimant seems to understand
incorrectly that the current jurisdictional objection is the totality of the
jurisdictional phase. The Respondent explains that the current
jurisdictional objection has been submitted under the special mechanism
provided in Article 10.20.5 of CAFTA and reserves its right to raise any
other objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction at the appropriate time as
permitted under the ICSID Convention and CAFTA.

It is the Respondent's view that the Claimant has failed to establish that
protection is urgently required, and that there is a right to be protected.
The Respondent recalls that provisional measures under the ICSID
Convention are intended to be used only in situations of absolute
necessity. The Respondent argues that a change of government is not per
se evidence of any potential threat to documents; that, if it would be
sufficient to demonstrate a need that potentially relevant evidence not be
lost or destroyed, preservation orders would always be needed; and that
the intention to request documents in the future does not demonstrate a
need for protection.

The Respondent characterizes the Request as a US-style pre-trial
discovery ‘fishing expedition’ which has no place in_ international
arbitration. The request for preservation should be tailored to issues
relevant to the determination of the merits of the case and there must be a
reasonable belief that the documents exist by specifying the presumed
author or recipient, the date or time frame of the document and the
presumed content.

The Respondent argues that it did not consent to broad common-law-style
discovery by becoming party to CAFTA or the ICSID Convention anymore
than did other civil law countries. The Respondent points out that the

request includes four broad categories of documents starting with the

words ‘All documents referring or relating to’ or ‘All declarations’ and they
include sixteen broad document sub-categories. According to the
Respondent, the expansive nature of the Request becomes overbearing
when added to the definitions of the terms ‘documents’, ‘communications’

and ‘relating to’.

The Respondent affirms that the Claimant's right is only to those
documents which can reasonably be produced. The Respondent
considers that the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration (‘IBA Rules’) are a useful guide to evaluate the
Request and considers the Request under their requirements. Under the
IBA Rules the Request would qualify as imposing an unreasonable burden
because compliance would require significant resources and innumerable
persons. The documents lack sufficient relevance or materiality by the
simple fact that the great number of documents that fall in the broad
categories of the Request cannot be relevant. The Request violates
‘considerations of fairness and equality of the Parties’ because it asks the
Respondent to identify all possibly relevant evidence and much evidence
that is not relevant. Effectively the burden of identifying evidence would be
shifted unfairly to the Respondent.

The Respondent distinguishes the provisional measures order in the case
of Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/22), on which the Claimant has significantly relied in its
presentation. The Claimant observes that in that case the parties to the
dispute were common law parties; nonetheless the tribunal recognized the
overly broad and potentially burdensome nature of the original request

and circumscribed it to clearly identified documents.

In its Reply to the Response, dated September 26, 2008, the Claimant
emphasizes that Article 10.20.8 of CAFTA, as compared to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39(1), identifies evidence preservation as a specific right

to be protected. In this respect, the Claimant recalls that, as provided in

20.

Article 10.16.5 of CAFTA, the ICSID Arbitration Rules govern this
arbitration unless modified by CAFTA.

As to the need and urgency of the request, the Claimant points out that
there are precedents in Guatemala of theft, looting and destruction of
government property and documents in connection with a change of
government. The Claimant submits press reports in support of its
allegations related to the changes in government of 2004 and 2008. The
Claimant reasons that since its ‘preservation requests will likely be the
subject of RDC document requests once the Republic’s jurisdiction
objection is resolved, it is, as a matter of logic, necessary that these

documents be preserved in the interim.’'°

The Claimant agrees with the Respondent that broad US-style discovery
is not the norm in international arbitration and that the extent of the
discovery is entirely within the discretion and control of the Tribunal. The
Claimant disputes that its requests for document preservation would go
beyond the normal limits of permissible discovery in ICSID proceedings.
The Claimant observes that the ICSID Convention and CAFTA place few
limits on the Tribunal’s power to recommend any provisional measures
and the Tribunal may at its own initiative recommend a provisional
measure or make a recommendation that is different from what was
requested.

The Claimant points out that the IBA Rules on which the Respondent
extensively relies are related to the production of evidence and not to its
preservation. In any case, it is the view of the Claimant that the Request
meets the requirements of the IBA Rules. The Claimant affirms that the
Request is confined to specific categories of documents purposely broken
down into sub-categories to enable the Respondent to identify the precise

documents to be preserved, and confirms that the documents to be

preserved are only those currently in the Republic’s possession, custody

*° Reply, para. 12.

21.

22.

23.

or control and not those in the public domain or already in RDC’s

possession.

The Claimant re-affirms the ‘extremely limited’ nature of RDC’s request,
and therefore that it is not unduly burdensome. It only requires from the
Respondent that ‘it order that the requested relevant documents be
preserved and take reasonable steps to communicate and effectuate such

order to relevant government entities and officials.’""

The Claimant contends that the expectations of the Respondent regarding
the conduct of discovery are irrelevant since it signed a treaty where the
special importance of evidence preservation is recognized and, in any
case, the expectations from a party haling from a common law country are
equally deserving of respect. The Claimant argues that a denial of an
order of preservation in light of the historical chaos when governments
change in Guatemala and constant changes in the current administration
of the Respondent would send the message that preserving records in the
face of alleged substantial treaty violations is not required in international

arbitration.

In its Rejoinder, dated October 3, 2008, the Respondent re-asserts that
the Request be dismissed. The Respondent points out that the evidence
submitted with the Reply concerns mostly the 2004 government transition,
only one newspaper report concerns the disorderly state of government
offices when President Colom took office in January 2008. The
Respondent argues that ‘the state of affairs at the initiation of the Colom
administration—or that of past Presidents, for that matter—has nothing to
do with the management of information during times other than transitions
from one party to another, and no inference should be drawn that
President Colom or any of his cabinet members has or will engage in

behavior that would result in the loss or destruction of evidence.’'? The

" Ibid. para. 25.
” Rejoinder, para. 8.

24.

25.

26.

Respondent reaches the conclusion that the evidence submitted by the
Claimant is historical and irrelevant and that the Claimant has not provided
evidence to suggest that ‘it will be denied access to any reasonably
tailored set of documents to which the Tribunal might grant discovery.’?

The Respondent confirms its view that the Request is excessive and
argues that the Claimant misunderstands the import of arbitration with a
sovereign under ICSID and CAFTA. The Tribunal, contrary to what
Claimant seems to believe, has not an unlimited power to grant provisional
measures. The power of the Tribunal is bounded by ‘the precise scope of
the consent given by the State in the ICSID Convention as well as in any
relevant treaty. The Republic’s relevant expectations and understanding of
this consent at the time of signing these treaties is thus essential for any

determination by this Tribunal regarding the exercise of its power.’

The Respondent emphasizes once more that the definition of ‘documents’
in the Request is so broad as to be incongruous; it encompasses sixty
different types of materials without limitation of time in three of the four
categories of documents and in the fourth the time limitation spans twelve
years. This broad scope of time and type of documents places an undue
burden on the resources that Respondent would have to dedicate to
comply with the order requested. The Respondent gives as an example of
the burden the fact that it would have to try to identify and locate
documents spanning five administrations from five different political

parties.

The Respondent concludes by requesting the Tribunal to deny the

Request.

* Ibid. para. 11.
“* Ibid. para. 14.

Il. Considerations of the Tribunal

27. _ It will be convenient to reproduce here the provisions of CAFTA, the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules setting forth the power of the
Tribunal to recommend provisional measures:

28. Article 10.20.8 of CAFTA provides in relevant part:

‘A tribunal may order an interim measure of protection to preserve
the rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the tribunal’s
jurisdiction is made fully effective, including an order to preserve
evidence in the possession or control of a disputing party or to
protect the tribunal's jurisdiction.’

29. Article 47 of the ICSID Convention states:

‘Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any
provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the
respective rights of either party.’

30. Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules reads in relevant part as follows:

‘(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may
request that provisional measures for the preservation of its rights
be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the
rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of
which is requested, and the circumstances that require such

measures.

(...)
(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its
own initiative or recommend measures other than those specified
in a request. It may at any time modify or revoke its
recommendations.’

31. There is no question between the parties that the Tribunal has the power

to grant provisional measures under the ICSID Convention and CAFTA.

14

32.

Articles 47 and 10.20.8 of the ICSID Convention and CAFTA, respectively,
could not be more explicit in this respect. Nonetheless, in its Response the
Respondent argued that the Request was premature because the
proceeding is still at its jurisdictional phase. Both treaties governing this
arbitration are clear in stating that the power of the Tribunal to grant
provisional measures is not limited to any particular phase of a
proceeding. Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides for the power to
recommend any provisional measures without reference to any particular
phase of the proceeding. Rule 39(1) is more specific in stating that such
power may be exercised ‘At any time after the institution of the
proceeding...’ Art. 10.20.8 of CAFTA provides, inter alia, that a tribunal
may order an interim measure ‘to ensure that the tribunal’s jurisdiction is
made fully effective.’ Therefore, if the circumstances that require the
measures are present, in the view of the Tribunal the phase of the

proceedings in which the request is formulated is not relevant.

In its arguments, the Claimant has relied substantially on the precedent of
the provisional measures ordered by the tribunal in the ICSID case of
Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania and the Respondent on the IBA Rules. The
Claimant has observed that the IBA Rules are not applicable in this
arbitration and are not relevant since they concern the production rather
than the preservation of evidence, while the Respondent has attacked the
relevance of the Biwater precedent. Biwater is one of many examples of
provisional measures requests in ICSID arbitral practice, which tend to be
case-specific. The IBA Rules are used widely by international arbitral
tribunals as a guide even when not binding upon them. Precedents and
informal documents, such as the IBA Rules, reflect the experience of
recognized professionals in the field and draw their strength from their
intrinsic merit and persuasive value rather than from their binding
character.

33.

34.

The Tribunal considers that, in the instant case, it does not need the
guidance of the IBA Rules to appreciate that the categories of documents
requested and reproduced above are excessively broad and _ their
relevance difficult to assess. The breadth of the Request is particularly
compounded by the definition of the terms ‘documents’, ‘communications’
and ‘relating to’ which have also been reproduced. As broken down by the
Respondent, the term ‘documents’ includes sixty types of documents, in
most cases without time limits. The Tribunal is doubtful that such all-
encompassing requests, if recommended, can realistically be put in
practice. In this respect, the Tribunal fails to see how the measures
requested would suppose a merely ‘ministerial task’ for the government.
Compliance with the Request would not entail simply a communication
from a Minister to those in the administration who are the actual holders of
the documents to be preserved. The documents would need to be
identified by an undetermined number of government officials across the
administration.

The Tribunal turns now to the question of whether the circumstances
which would justify provisional measures exist. Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention does not specify any particular circumstances and neither
does Article 10.20.8 of CAFTA. The parties have discussed the
circumstances in terms of need and urgency of the measures requested.
They disagree on whether the need and the urgency that would justify the
provisional measures are present and on the standard to be applied by the
Tribunal. As to the standard, the Respondent has argued, quoting
Professor Schreuer, that provisional measures would only be used in
‘situations of absolute necessity and that tribunals would exercise self-
restraint in their application’. The Tribunal observes that this quote refers
to the history of the preparation of the ICSID Convention and, as reported
by Professor Schreuer in the same paragraph, a proposal to include in

35.

Article 47 ‘a reference to urgency and imminent danger’ was defeated. '®
The conclusion of Professor Schreuer is that ‘provisional measures will
only be appropriate where a question cannot wait the outcome of the
award on the merits.’"® This seems a reasonable conclusion but it does
not imply that the necessity must be ‘absolute’ or that the Tribunal not act
unless such a high threshold of necessity exists. Since no qualifications to
the power of an ICSID tribunal to recommend provisional measures found
their way in the text of the ICSID Convention, the standard to be applied is
one of reasonableness, after consideration of all the circumstances of the
request and after taking into account the rights to be protected and their
susceptibility to irreversible damage should the tribunal fail to issue a
recommendation. Based on this standard and as explained below, the
Claimant has not shown that circumstances exist which would justify a
recommendation of provisional measures.

To prove the need and urgency of the provisional measures, the Claimant
relies on destruction or loss of documentation during the 2004 and 2008
changes of administration in Guatemala and the frequent changes in high
positions in the administration of President Colom. As evidence, the
Claimant has presented mainly news reports which refer to document
destruction in 2004. As regards the change of government in 2008, the
evidence presented refers to the disorder found in government offices
when the new administration took over. No evidence has been presented
that during the course of 2008 documents have been destroyed or lost by
the current government of Guatemala or that the destruction of relevant
documents is imminent because of the existence of this arbitration. A
change of government in the normal course of constitutional transfer of
power from one administration to another does not justify the

recommendation of provisional measures for preservation of documents.

*S Exhibit R-5, para. 14.
** Ibid.

36.

In any case, the next change of government in Guatemala would not take

place until January 2012.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the Request would place an unfair
burden on the Government because of its excessive breadth and that no
need or urgency has been proven to justify the recommendation. In
reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal is mindful that the Respondent has
affirmed in the Rejoinder that Claimant has not provided evidence to
suggest that it will be denied access to any reasonably tailored set of
documents to which the Tribunal might grant discovery, and it is also
mindful of the statement of the Respondent that ‘no inference should be
drawn that President Colom or any of his cabinet members has or will
engage in behavior that would result in the loss or destruction of

evidence.’"”

*” Rejoinder, para. 8.

IV. Decision
For all the above reasons the Tribunal,

1. Affirms its power to recommend provisional measures at any stage of the

proceeding.

2. Denies the request of provisional measures of the Claimant.

Done in Washington, D.C.

The Tribunal

[Signed] [Signed]

Hon. Stuart E. Eizenstat Professor James Crawford

[Signed]
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda

