INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23

DECISION ON CLARIFICATION REQUEST OF THE DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President

Honorable Stuart E. Eizenstat, Arbitrator
Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL

Natali Sequeira

Date: January 13, 2009

Decision on Clarification Request of the Decision on Jurisdiction

1. On December 12, 2008, the Republic of Guatemala
(‘Respondent’) filed a request for clarification (‘Request’) of the Decision
on Jurisdiction of November 17, 2008 (‘Decision’). The Railroad
Development Corporation (‘Claimant’) filed comments on December 19,
2008 (‘Comments’).

|. Positions of the Parties

2. Respondent is ‘gravely concerned’ by the interpretation
Claimant has given the Decision and requests a detailed clarification
regarding precisely what is excluded by the defect the Tribunal found in
the waiver as well as what is not excluded. According to Respondent,
there is an inconsistency between the acknowledgement by the Tribunal
that there are three specific claims in this arbitration and its conclusion
that ‘claims arising out of the Lesivo Resolution and the subsequent
conduct of Respondent pursuant to that resolution’ are permissible and
not affected by the overlap in measures and the Claimant's defective
waiver.

3. It is Respondent's contention that this seeming inconsistency
can be likely reconciled ‘when one considers the Tribunal’s determination
that, while all three claims reference the Lesivo Resolution, Claimant’s
Article 10.5 claim contains measures which create impermissible overlap
with the claims in the local arbitrations,’’ and, therefore, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over Claimant's Article 10.5 claim in accordance with Article
10.18.2.

4. Respondent finds that the Decision fails to state explicitly the
consequences of holding Claimant’s waiver defective and believes that its

' Request, para. 8.

understanding of the Decision as articulated in the Request ‘permits the
Decision to be internally consistent.’

5. As Respondent understands Claimant's interpretation of the
Decision, the Decision would permit the Claimant to recast the pre- and
post-Lesivo measures related to squatters and payments to the Trust
Fund in a denial of justice claim. According to Respondent, such
interpretation would maintain an impermissible overlap of this proceeding
with the two domestic arbitrations.

6. Respondent concludes by requesting the Tribunal to confirm
that the Republic’s understanding of the Decision is correct or, if it is
incorrect, to articulate what specific claims it understands Claimant to
have brought before it and which of these specific claims are excluded
from these proceedings because of the defect in the waiver.

7. Claimant does not find the Decision to be _ internally
inconsistent or vague. Claimant considers that Respondent attempts to re-
open the Decision and re-argue the case under the guise of a clarification.
Claimant draws the conclusion from the Decision that its claim under
Article 10.5 related to the failure to remove squatters and to make
payments into the Trust Fund cannot proceed.

8. Claimant points out that these failures are the only measures
identified by the parties to be at issue in the domestic arbitrations.
According to Claimant, it can proceed to claim that Respondent has
violated Article 10.5, for instance, by failure of the Guatemalan court
system and police to afford redress and protection for injuries to the rights
of Ferrovias Guatemala.

9. Claimant notes that it intends to press claims that relate to
squatters that it believes are consistent with the Decision and provides an
example of one such claim to show that the Tribunal is not in a position to

? Ibid., para. 9.

accommodate the request to articulate ‘precisely what specific claims it
understands Claimant to have brought before it.’°

10. Claimant disagrees with the Respondent's contention that
affirmative actions of Respondent to deny Claimant access to its courts
and due process are the same measures as those at issue in the local
arbitrations. Claimant concludes by agreeing with Respondent that the
parties have drawn opposing conclusions from the Decision but it ‘fails to
see how this forms an adequate basis for compelling the Tribunal to
address the self-serving and erroneous arguments that Respondent
advances in its request for clarification.’*

Il. The Views of the Tribunal

11... The Tribunal has reviewed the Decision in light of the
Request and Claimant’s comments. For the reasons that are set forth
below, the Tribunal considers that it is neither necessary nor appropriate
to clarify the Decision on the terms requested.

12. It is unnecessary to clarify the Decision because it is not
vague or internally inconsistent. The Decision clearly states that the
waivers are valid ‘in respect of the claim arising from the Lesivo
Resolution and from subsequent conduct of the Respondent pursuant to
the Lesivo Resolution.’® To reach this conclusion and as part of its
considerations, the Tribunal found it difficult to accept the argument of
Claimant that ‘references to removal of squatters and failure of payments
to the Trust Fund are only references to facts to provide context to the
Lesivo Resolution,’”® particularly, in view of paragraph 50 of the Arbitration
Request.’ After this finding, the Tribunal proceeded to consider whether

> Comments, para 3.

* Ibid., para. 6.

5 Decision, para. 76(b).

° Ibid., para. 52.

’ This paragraph reads as follows: ‘Since the Lesivo Resolution, the Government of Guatemala
has made successive specific decisions not to pay into the Trust the funds required by Deed 820,

the entire waiver was defective. The Tribunal first observed that it had
‘previously concluded that measures concerning squatters and payments
to the Trust Fund alleged to be related to the Lesivo Resolution are
measures at issue in the local arbitrations under Deed 402 and Deed
820.® Then the Tribunal frames the question to be considered as follows:
‘The question for the Tribunal is whether, because of this overlap, the
entire waiver is defective and affects the whole proceedings before this
proceeding or whether the waiver is only partially defective in respect of
those claims maintained in contradiction to the waiver requirements of
Article 10.18.°

13. It is the Tribunal’s view that the reasoning of the Tribunal
leading to its decision clearly excludes claims based on the measures at
issue in the local arbitrations under Deed 402 and Deed 820 irrespective
of the article of CAFTA under which they would be advanced. On the other
hand, Article 10.5 provides for the minimum standard of treatment under
customary international law. This is a general and wide ranging standard
of treatment that may cover claims based on other measures taken by
Respondent beyond those at issue in the local arbitrations. It would be
inappropriate for the Tribunal to exclude them a priori or to speculate on
how Claimant may articulate its claims.

Ill. Decision

14. For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects the request for
clarification of the Decision on Jurisdiction.

 

and, through FEGUA, has made successive specific decisions not to remove squatters from the
railway right of way, stations and yards. These decisions are an integral part of the Lesivo
Resolution and other affirmative actions by the Government of Guatemala to deny RDC and FVG
the minimum standards of treatment required by international law and, thereby, to make it
impossible for FVG to remain in business and thereby to appropriate FVG’s assets without
compensation.’ The Tribunal emphasized the expression ‘integral part’.

® Decision, para. 62.

* Ibid.

Done in Washington, D.C.

Hon. Stuart EE Professor James Crawford
Arbitrator Arbitrator

. fed
ABiSeae

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal

