INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (RDC)
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23

SECOND DECISION ON OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Honorable Stuart E. Eizenstat, Arbitrator
Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL

Natali Sequeira

DATE: May 18, 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND. 4
Il. STATEMENT OF FACTS 10
II THE OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION ......0sce cece eeseeee essen

 

1. First objection: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Claimant’s Claims relate to a
Dispute and “Acts or Facts” that predate the Treaty’s Entry into Force (Objection Ratione
Temporis) 14

A. —RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

 

B.  CLAIMANT’S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS.

 

2. Second Objection: The Tribunal lacks Jurisdiction because the Alleged Investment with
respect to the Usufruct Contracts is not a Covered Investment under the Treaty (Objection

 

 

Ratione Materiae) 29
A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE... 129
B. CLAIMANT'S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE ...... 131

 

3. Third Objection: The Tribunal lacks Jurisdiction over Claims related to Squatters and to
Payments into the Trust Fund because such Claims are the Subject of Local Proceedings......33

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION ON THE THIRD OBJECTION. 233
B. — CLAIMANT’S POSITION ON THIRD OBJECTION 234
4. Relief Requested 35
IV. POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS 35
1. The Tribunal’s Questions 35
2. The Parties’ Replie 36
A. REPLIES TO THE FIRST QUESTION 36
B. REPLIES TO THE SECOND QUESTION. 37

C. REPLIES TO THE THIRD QUESTION 3
D. REPLIES TO THE FOURTH QUESTION. 39
E, REPLIES TO THE FIFTH QUESTION .. 40

 

V. THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR’S SUBMISSION AS A CAFTA NON-DISPUTING PARTY .41

 

 

 

 

 

VI. ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL 42
1. Preliminary Matter: 42
2. Objection Ratione Tempori: 43
3. Objection Ratione Materi 53
4. Third Objection 56

VII. DECISION 5

 

SECOND DECISION ON OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

I PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. On June 14, 2007, Railroad Development Corporation (“RDC” or
“Claimant”) filed before the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) a Request for Arbitration against the Republic
of Guatemala (“Respondent’, “Guatemala” or the “Government”) on its own
behalf and on behalf of Compafifa Desarrolladora Ferroviaria, S.A., a company
which does business as Ferrovias Guatemala (“FVG”), a Guatemalan company
majority-owned and controlled by RDC. The Request was brought under the
Dominican Republic — Central America — United States of America Free Trade
Agreement’ (“CAFTA” or the “Treaty”). ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration on August 20, 2007.

2. The Tribunal, composed of Professor James Crawford, Honorable
Stuart E. Eizenstat and Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda (President) was constituted on
April 14, 2008.

3. On May 29, 2008, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal
considered on an expedited basis, an objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.20.5. As required by Article 10.20.5, the Tribunal
suspended the proceedings on the merits. The parties exchanged written
submissions and a hearing on jurisdiction was held on October 10, 2010. On
November 17, 2008, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction
under CAFTA Article 10.20.5 (“First Decision on Jurisdiction”). In that decision
the Tribunal held:

' Signed in August 5, 2004. CAFTA entered into force between the United States of America and Guatemala
on July 1, 2006.

“(a) That the reservation included in the waivers submitted by the
Claimant pursuant to Article 10.18.2 is of no consequence for
purposes of their validity. [and] (b) [t]hat the waivers submitted by
the Claimant pursuant to Article 10.18.2 are valid in respect of the
claim arising from the Lesivo Resolution and from subsequent
conduct of the Respondent pursuant to the Lesivo Resolution and,
therefore, fulfill the Respondent's consent to arbitration conditions
under Article 10.18 in respect of that claim.”

4. On December 12, 2008, the Respondent filed a request for
clarification of the First Decision on Jurisdiction. The Claimant filed comments on
December 19, 2008. On January 6, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order
No. 2 establishing the procedural calendar on the merits phase of the
proceedings and fixing May 24, 2009 as the deadline for the submission of the
Memorial on the Merits, and a two-week deadline after the date of submission of
the Memorial on the Merits for “Respondent [to] inform the Tribunal and Claimant
of any intention to raise preliminary objections.” On January 13, 2009, the
Tribunal issued the Decision on Clarification in connection with the First Decision
on Jurisdiction.

5. By letter of May 5, 2009 and the Respondent's letter of May 7,
2009, the parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement to modify the schedule
for the submissions of pleadings set forth in Procedural Order No. 2. By letter of
May 8, 2009, the Tribunal approved the parties’ proposal. According to the new
calendar, the Claimant’s Memorial was to be submitted on June 26, 2008 while
the Respondent's notice of any jurisdictional objections was scheduled for July
25, 2009. Accordingly, Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits on June 26,
2009.

6. On July 24, 2009, Guatemala filed a notice of intent to raise
preliminary objections, as it had reserved the right to do under CAFTA, Article

10.20.4.? Claimant objected on August 4, 2009. A further exchange between the
parties on this matter took place by Respondent's letter of August 7 and
Claimant's letter of August 14, 2009.

7. On August 24, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3
suspending the proceeding on the merits, establishing September 24, 2009 as
the deadline for Guatemala to submit its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and granting Claimant 30 days after receipt of Respondent's Memorial to submit
its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

8. On September 24, 2009, Guatemala filed its Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction (“Respondent’s Memorial”); Claimant filed its Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Claimant’s Counter-Memorial”) on October 26, 2009.

9. On November 3, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4
whereby the Tribunal decided that “given the thoroughness of the memorials
filed, the Tribunal does not need to receive further written argument but, before
deciding on Respondent’s objections, it would assist the Tribunal to hear the
parties in oral argument.”

10. On November 18, 2009, Claimant proposed a bifurcated hearing
whereby the Tribunal would hear first oral argument on whether any of
Respondent's jurisdictional objections are “maintainable or proper as a matter of
law without any need to resolve any disputed questions of fact”, and, only if the
Tribunal would determine that one or more of Respondent’s objections are
properly maintainable as a matter of law, would the Tribunal hold a subsequent
evidentiary hearing.

11. On November 24, 2009, Respondent objected to Claimant’s
proposal, inter alia, because “its jurisdictional objections are inextricably
intertwined with certain facts and thus the legal issues involved can only be
evaluated with reference to those facts.”

? CAFTA Article 10.20.4 provides that the “preliminary question” procedure (laid down in Article 10.20.5) is
“[wlithout prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections as a preliminary question”. This led
in the present case to two jurisdictional hearings on different points, which is inconvenient, to say the least.

12. On December 1, 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5
deciding to hold a single three-day hearing on the objections to its jurisdiction.

13. After consulting the parties, the Tribunal decided to hold the
hearing from March 1 to March 3, 2010.

14. The hearing on jurisdiction took place at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. Pursuant to CAFTA Article 10.21 the hearing was open to the
public. Representatives of the United States of America (the ‘United States’) and
the Republic of El Salvador (‘El Salvador’) attended the hearing as non-disputing
parties. The parties were represented by their respective counsel who made
presentations to the Tribunal. Present at the hearing were:

Tribunal
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Prof. James Crawford, SC, Arbitrator

Hon. Stuart E. Eizenstat, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat

Ms. Natali Sequeira

Assistant to Hon. Stuart E. Eizenstat

Mr. Adam M. Smith

Claimant

Mr. C. Allen Foster, Greenberg Traurig, LLP

Ms. Ruth Espey-Romero, Greenberg Traurig, LLP
Ms. Regina Vargo, Greenberg Traurig, LLP

Mr. Kevin Stern, Greenberg Traurig, LLP

Mr. Nick Caldwell, Greenberg Traurig, LLP

Ms. Ha Jeang (Julie) Lee, Greenberg Traurig, LLP
Mr. Adam Wolfe-Bertling, Greenberg Traurig, LLP
Mr. Henry Posner Ill, RDC

Mr. Bob Pietrandrea, RDC

Ms. Hannah Posner, RDC

Mr. Jorge Senn, RDC

Mr. William J. Duggan, RDC

Mr. Pablo Alonzo, RDC

Respondent

Mr. Guillermo Porras Ovalle, Attorney General of the Republic of
Guatemala

Mr. Estuardo Sati Oliva Figueroa, Attorney General's Office
Mr. Anibal Samayoa Salazar, Presidential Delegate

Mr. Jesus Insta, Vice-Minister of Communications, Infrastructure and
Housing

Mr. Joaquin Romeo Lopez Gutiérrez, Ministry of Economy

Mr. Mynor Castillo, Ministry of Economy

Mr. Francisco Vazquez, Ministry of Economy

Ms. Myriam Lopez, Palacios y Asociados

Mr. Fernando de la Cerda, Embassy of Guatemala, Washington, D.C.
Mr. José Lambour, Embassy of Guatemala, Washington, D.C.

Mr. David M. Orta, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Mr. Patricio Grané, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Mr. Bonard Molina Garcia, Arnold & Porter, LLP
Ms. Margarita Sanchez, Arnold & Porter, LLP
Ms. Giselle Fuentes, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Mr. Andrés Orddofiez, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Ms. Paloma Gémez, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Mr. Danilo Antezana, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Ms. Cynthia lbafiez, Arnold & Porter, LLP

Witnesses for the Respondent
Mr. Arturo Gramajo Mondal, FEGUA

Mr. Julio Roberto Berdto Samayoa, Lawyer (retained by the Government
of Guatemala)

Mr. Manuel Duarte Barrera, Legal Adviser to the President of Guatemala

Ms. Celena Deyanira Ozaeta Méndez, Consultant to the Government of
Guatemala

Ms. Susan Pineda Mendoza, Member of the High Level Commission

Mr. Mario Rodolfo Marroquin Rivera, Member of the High Level
Commission

Ms. Astrid Zosel Gantenbein, Legal Adviser to the Government of
Guatemala

Ms. Marithza Ruiz Sanchez de Vielman, Expert Witness

Witnesses for the Claimant
Mr. Henry Posner Ill, RDC and FVG
Mr. Jorge Senn, RDC and FVG

Mr. Mario Estuardo José Fuentes Sanchez, Presidential Sub-
Commissioner for Mega Projects

Mr. William J. Duggan, RDC and FVG

Mr. Eduardo A. Mayora, Expert Witness

15. During the hearing, on March 3, 2010, the representatives of the
United States and El Salvador made statements reserving their right to make
submissions under CAFTA Article 10.20.2 and requesting the Tribunal to fix a
dateline for filing them.

16. On March 5, 2010, the Tribunal sent a communication to all non-
disputing parties fixing March 19, 2010 as the time limit to file submissions under
CAFTA Article 10.20.2.

17. On March 10, 2010, the Tribunal requested the parties to file post-
hearing briefs on specific questions not later than March 31, 2010.

18. On March 18, 2010, the United States informed the Tribunal that it
would not be making a non-disputing party submission pursuant to CAFTA Article
10.20.2.

19. On March 19, 2010, El Salvador filed a submission as a non-
disputing party under CAFTA Article 10.20.2.

20. On March 23, 2010, the Tribunal invited the views of the parties on
the submission of El Salvador.

21. On March 31, 2010, the parties filed their replies to the Tribunal’s
questions and their observations on El Salvador’s submission.

I. STATEMENT OF FACTS

22. Railroad Development Corporation (“RDC”) is a privately-owned
railway investment and management company incorporated in the United States.

10

In 1997 it won, through international public bidding, the use of the rail
infrastructure to provide railway services in Guatemala (the “Usufruct”). Only two
bids were submitted. RDC’s bid consisted of a staged plan to rebuild the rail
system, which had been closed since March 1996, with an investment program
of about ten million U.S. dollars. Only RDC’s bid was considered responsive by
Respondent, in spite of the fact that RDC submitted an integrated bid that
included the use of the railway equipment.

23. The Usufruct awarded to RDC consisted of a 50-year right to
rebuild and operate the Guatemalan rail system by way of a usufruct. On
November 25, 1997, FVG signed the Usufruct Contract of Right of Way with
Ferrocarriles de Guatemala (“FEGUA”), a state-owned company, established in
1969, responsible for providing railway transport services and managing the
railway’s personal property and real estate assets. The Usufruct and the related
Railway Usufruct Contract were ratified by the Congress of Guatemala by Decree
27-98, and published in the Official Gazette on April 23, 1998. It is accordingly
not in dispute that - whether RDC’s bid conformed to the tender requirements or
was a non-conforming bid accepted by Guatemala — the Railway Usufruct
Contract was lawfully concluded as a matter of Guatemalan law.

24. The Usufruct covers a 497-mile narrow gauge railroad and includes
the right to develop alternative uses for the right of way, such as pipelines,
electric transmission, fiber optics and commercial and institutional development.
In return for the right-of-way Usufruct, RDC (through FVG) agreed to make
certain payments to FEGUA.

25. The Railway Usufruct Contract was documented by Deed Number
402 (“Contract 402”) and came into force on May 23, 1998. In addition, on
December 30, 1999, FVG and FEGUA entered into a Trust Fund Agreement for
the Rehabilitation and Modernization of the railroad system (“Contract 820”)
providing for certain payments to be made by FEGUA into a trust fund
established for this purpose (“Trust Fund”).

26. In November 1997, Guatemala invited bids for the use of FEGUA’s
rail equipment in onerous usufruct. On December 11, 1997, FVG submitted its
bid. FVG was the only bidder and on December 16, 1997 won the rail equipment
usufruct. The Tribunal would observe that it is not surprising that FVG was the
only bidder. As noted above, its original bid (which resulted in Contract 402) had
explicitly envisaged both the right of way and the use of the railway stock and
property. Further, the railway being narrow gauge, only the narrow gauge rolling
stock retained by FEGUA was of any use.

27. On March 23, 1999, FEGUA and FVG signed Usufruct Contract 41
(“Contract 41”), granting FVG “the use, enjoyment, repair and maintenance of
railway equipment owned by FEGUA for the purposes of rendering railway
transportation services.” This contract never entered into force for lack of
approval by an Acuerdo Gubernativo (“Executive Resolution”). Such approval
was required under Guatemalan administrative law and also by Clause 6.4 of the
bidding conditions for Contract No. 41. As reported below (see paragraph 104)
and despite a question by the Tribunal, it is uncertain why no Acuerdo
Gubernativo was issued. Meanwhile, FVG had the use of the railway equipment
under short-term arrangements (see below, paragraph 143).

28. In view of the fact that Contract 41 did not enter into force and in
order to achieve the same purposes, FVG and FEGUA entered into Contract 143
on August 28, 2003. The circumstances and effect of Contract 143 are a matter
of controversy between the parties and the Tribunal simply registers here the fact
that FVG and FEGUA signed this contract, and subsequently modified it by
Contract 158 (“Equipment Usufruct Contracts”)

29. FVG restored commercial service between El Chile and Guatemala City
on April 15, 1999. In December 1999, commercial service was restored between
Guatemala City and the Atlantic ports of Puerto Barrios and Puerto Santo
Tomas. Tonnage traffic gradually increased until 2005 but declined in 2006.

30. On June 13, 2005 and on July 25, 2005, FVG filed domestic arbitration
cases against FEGUA for breach of Contract 402 and Contract 820, respectively.

FVG alleged that Guatemala through FEGUA failed to remove squatters from the
rail right of way and to make payments to the Trust Fund. FVG further alleged
that, in anticipation of FVG’s filings, FEGUA requested the Attorney General to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the award of the Usufruct and to issue
an opinion on the validity of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts. The Attorney
General issued Opinion No. 205-2005 on August 1, 2005 (the “Lesividad
Opinion”), and recommended that Guatemala declare the Equipment Usufruct
Contracts void as not in the interest of the country.

31. On January 13, 2006, FEGUA issued Opinion 05-2006, arguing, in
agreement with the Attorney General’s opinion, that the Contracts were not
awarded as a result of a public bid.

32. Claimant met the President of the Republic, Mr. Oscar Berger, on
March 7, 2006; as a result the President set up a high level commission to work
with RDC and FVG, on which FEGUA was represented. This commission met a
number of times but the meetings were suspended after the meeting held on May
11, 2006. The importance of this meeting loomed large in the exchanges
between the parties. At issue is when Claimant learned about the process of
lesividad, which Respondent alleges to have been started in late April 2006, and
to what extent this process was suspended to allow the negotiations to proceed.
For reasons that will become apparent, this is a matter which is not material to
the question of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

33. Contract 143 having been executed on August 26, 2003, the
period for the Government to declare it /esivo under the Guatemalan statute of
limitations (three years from the date of execution of the contract) expired on
August 26, 2006. The day before, i.e. August 25, 2006, the resolution declaring
the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivos to the interests of the State was
published. It had been signed by the President on August 11, 2006.

34. After the publication of the Lesivo Resolution a “mesa de didlogo”
was established and FEGUA, FVG and the parties continued to negotiate during
the period of ninety days within which the Attorney General had to file the

13

lesividad claim with the Administrative Tribunal. To this date the Administrative
Tribunal has not decided on the /esividad claim.

* * *

35. The Tribunal will now summarize the three objections to jurisdiction
as they were developed in the evidence and in argument, and the parties’ replies
to the Tribunal’s questions addressed in the post-hearing briefs.

Mh. THE OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

1. FIRST OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS JURISDICTION BECAUSE CLAIMANT’S
CLAIMS RELATE TO A DISPUTE AND “ACTS OR FACTS” THAT PREDATE THE
TREATY’S ENTRY INTO FORCE (OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS)

A. RESPONDENT'S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

CAFTA Article 10 provides as follows:

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained
by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) covered investments; and

(c) with respect to Articles 10.9 and 10.11, all investments in
the territory of the Party.

3. For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind any Party
in relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that
ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.

36. According to Respondent, all claims of RDC fall outside the
temporal scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction because Claimant’s Treaty claim is a
continuation of a dispute which arose before the Treaty entered into force and
the acts or facts on which RDC relies also happened before such entry. (The
CAFTA entered into force between Guatemala and the United States on July 1,
2006.)

37. Respondent's contention is based on CAFTA Article 10.1.3 and
Article 28 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”)
which reflect the customary international law principle of non-retroactive
application of treaties. According to Respondent, this general rule applies, as
held by the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”) in the Ambatielos case, unless
there is a special clause providing for retroactive application, which is not the
case here.° It is the Respondent's view that the phrase “for greater certainty” at
the beginning of CAFTA Article 10.1.3 indicates that an explicit non-retroactivity
clause was included to reaffirm the customary international law rule of non-
retroactivity. Respondent argues that the non-retroactive nature of the Treaty
implies that pre-treaty disputes and acts or facts that pre-date the Treaty are
outside its scope.

38. In support of its contention Respondent adduces the work of the
International Law Commission (“ILC”) and in particular the Third Report of Sir
Humphrey Waldock, Special Rapporteur on the Law of Treaties, which was
considered at the Sixteenth Session of the ILC.* Respondent points to the
statement that, when jurisdictional clauses are attached to substantive clauses to
secure their application, the non-retroactivity principle applies to exclude any
disputes that arose prior to the treaty’s entry into force. Respondent also
adduces jurisprudence of the Permanent Court of International Justice (“PClJ”)

3

i Ambatielos Case (Greece v. United Kingdom), |.C.J. Rep. 1952, p. 28, 45.

Third Report on the Law of Treaties, by Sir Humphrey Waldock, Special Rapporteur, Yearbook of
the International Law Commission, 1964, Vol. II, A/CN.4/167 and Add. 1-3.

15

(Phosphates in Morocco’) and of investment treaty arbitration tribunals (/mpregilo
v. Pakistan,® Salini v. Jordan,’ MCI v. Ecuador,® Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine®)
in support of its conclusion that, regardless of the wording of the treaty,
“investment treaty tribunals have consistently held that unless there is evidence
of intent to the contrary, they lack jurisdiction under the treaties over disputes
which arose prior to the treaty’s entry into force and over acts or facts that
predate the treaty.”’° Respondent finds that there is no evidence that the parties
to the Treaty intended that it would have retroactive effect.

39. Respondent finds further support in the case law of investment
treaty arbitration to determine whether the dispute originated before the Treaty.
Based on Lucchetti v. Peru,'' Vieira v. Chile'® and MCI v. Ecuador,'®
Respondent argues that the key test is whether the facts or considerations that
gave rise to the earlier dispute continued to be central to the later dispute.
According to Respondent, when this test is applied to the instant dispute, the
dispute is clearly a pre-Treaty dispute because the facts and considerations that
gave rise to the decision to declare the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivos are
“the very same facts and considerations that have been in play in the dispute that
has existed between the parties since 2004 concerning the legality of the subject
contracts.”'* Respondent points out that FEGUA has questioned the validity of
the Equipment Usufruct Contracts since April 2004 when it denied the request
made by FVG to hand over certain warehouses and attached the legal opinion of
FEGUA’s Legal Department on the illegalities of the Equipment Usufruct

5

6 Phosphates in Morocco Case, P.C.I.J., Series A/B, no. 74, 1938,

p. 23.

Impregilo SpA v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Decision on
Jurisdiction, April 22, 2005, 12 ICSID Rep. 242.

Salini_ Construttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13), Decision on Jurisdiction, November 29, 2004, 14 ICSID Rep. 303.

M.C.1. Power Group L.C. and New Tribune, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/6), Award, July 31, 2007.

Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award, September 16, 2003, 10
ICsID Rep. 236.
Respondent's Memorial, para. 112.
Industria Nacional de Alimentos S.A. and Indalsa Pert (formerly Empresas Lucchetti S.A. and
Lucchetti Pert S.A.) v. Republic of Peru (I\CSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Award on Jurisdiction, February 7,
2005, 12 ICSID Rep. 218.
Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Vieira v. Chile (\CSID Case No. ARB/04/7), Award, August 21, 2007.
M.C.I. v. Ecuador, see note 8 above.
Respondent's Memorial, para. 133. Emphasis in the original.

"

18
14

Contracts. The same illegalities were the basis on which the Attorney General’s
Office, the Cabinet Ministers and the President of Guatemala himself concluded
that the Equipment Usufruct Contracts must be declared /esivos. Furthermore,
alleges Respondent, the subject matter of the dispute is the same that gave rise
to the pre-Treaty dispute since it results from Guatemala’s position on the
invalidity of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts which now Claimant characterizes
as a Treaty breach. Respondent explains that the Lesivo Resolution was
Guatemala’s way to deal with this dispute when the parties were unable to reach
a settlement to cure the underlying illegalities. According to Respondent, the
dispute did not come to an end, or subsequently crystallize in a new dispute.
This was attested by Claimant’s own conduct in requesting the suspension of the
signing of the Lesivo Resolution in order to continue the negotiations, an event
which occurred two months before the resolution was adopted and before the
CAFTA entered into force. It was also attested by the repeated references of
Claimant to the “/esivo process”, which show that Claimant did not understand
the lesividad declaration to be a single act which occurred after the Treaty
entered into force.

40. Respondent describes the steps of the /esividad process in the
instant case as follows:

. First, on August 1, 2005, the Attorney General's Office issued
Opinion 205-2005 recommending that the Usufruct Contracts be
declared /esivos on account of invalidity.

. Second, on January 13, 2006, FEGUA submitted this opinion to the
President’s Office with its own recommendation that the Usufruct
Contracts be declared /esivos on account of nullity. Then the
President’s Office transferred the recommendation to the Ministry of
Finance for analysis.

. Third, on April 6, 2006, in a joint opinion three departments of the

Ministry of Finance concurred in the /esividad of the Usufruct
Contracts on account of their invalidity.

. Fourth, on April 26, 2006, the President decided the issuance of the
lesividad declaration and began the collection of ministerial
signatures.

41. Respondent contests Claimant’s affirmation that it knew nothing
about the /esividad process until the Treaty entered into force. Respondent points
out that this matter was public knowledge, it was discussed in the press and, on
May 11, 2006, “in the midst of settlement negotiations and before the Treaty
entered into force, Claimant objected to the ongoing lesivo process in light of the
settlement negotiations and required that the /esivo process be suspended, the
decision of the President put on hold, pending the negotiations.”’® According to
Respondent, on that date, the process was put on hold but if negotiations did not
succeed the resolution would need to be adopted because the President would
incur personal liability if he did not declare the /esividad within the three-year
statute of limitations period.

42. Respondent alleges that Claimant manipulated the timing of the
issuance of the Lesivo Resolution. According to Respondent, “Claimant, after
purportedly negotiating with Guatemala for months to settle the disputes that
gave rise to the Lesivo Resolution, and aware that the Lesivo Resolution would
not be issued until negotiations [failed], kept negotiations going, but then
curiously lost all interest in reaching a negotiated resolution to the dispute soon
after CAFTA entered into force.”"® On the other hand, Respondent finds proof of
its own negotiating good faith in the fact that, as late as September 8, 2006,
FEGUA offered to negotiate new contracts with Claimant to replace the Usufruct
Contracts.

43. Respondent argues that the ratione temporis constraints cannot be
circumvented by asserting a Treaty claim since such interpretation would mean
that the ratione temporis objection could always be defeated by invoking a
different cause of action under the Treaty. Respondent finds support for this

18 Ibid., para. 145. Emphasis in the original.

Ibid., para. 148.

argument in Lucchetti v. Peru'’ and Impregilo v. Pakistan’® and affirms that,
merely because certain acts took place after the Treaty’s entering into force,
“such circumstances do not obviate the need for the Tribunal to dig deeper in
order to determine whether the dispute at bottom relates to the ‘same subject’

matter as some earlier, pre-Treaty dispute.”'®

44. Respondent argues further that, even if Claimant's assertions are
assumed to be true, the evidence shows that the dispute arose before the entry
into force of the Treaty. Respondent addresses each of Claimant's assertions.
First, Respondent refers to Claimant’s assertion that the /esividad process was
used in an attempt to force FVG to withdraw from the local arbitration processes
in which FVG has charged FEGUA with breach of contract. According to
Respondent, this assertion would mean that Respondent's maneuver was
designed to address the local arbitrations and underlying contractual disputes
that arose long before the Treaty’s entry into force.

45. Respondent refers to two more assertions of Claimant, that it was
the purpose of the /esividad process: (a) to appropriate FVG’s rolling stock
making it impossible for FVG to perform under the basic right-of-way and thus
effectively appropriating all of FVG’s business without paying compensation, and
(b) to redistribute to Guatemalan private sector companies the benefits of the
Equipment Usufruct Contracts. Respondent denies the truthfulness of these
assertions but, in its opinion, they show that, by Claimant’s own admission, the
Lesivo Resolution arose in the context of a pre-Treaty dispute.

46. Alternatively, Respondent argues that,

“if the Tribunal takes a narrower view of the scope of the ratione
temporis objection, and focuses on the specific ‘acts or facts’
alleged by Claimant as part of its Treaty claims, without regards to
the existence of the underlying broader dispute to which these
acts and facts relate, Claimant's claims are still outside the scope

Lucchetti v. Peru, see note 11 above, quoted in Respondent's Memorial.
Impregilo v. Pakistan, see note 6 above, quoted in Respondent's Memorial.
Respondent's Memorial, para. 152.

of the treaty because its claim centers on an act or fact that took
place before the Treaty’s entry into force.””°

47. Then Respondent addresses Claimant's argument that, if it were
not for the Lesivo Resolution, the Treaty would not have been breached and
affirms that the /esividad process was set in motion and the decision to declare
the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivos taken by the President of Guatemala
shortly after April 26, 2006 well before the Treaty entered into force. According to
Respondent, the Lesivo Resolution was inescapable given the unanimous
recommendation of the Guatemalan administration to declare the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts /esivos, and the fact that the President faced personal liability
if the resolution was not issued within the statutory limitation of three years,
which expired on August 25, 2006.

B. CLAIMANT'S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

48. As an initial matter, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant contests
facts on which Respondent relies in support of its arguments. According to
Claimant: (a) FEGUA did not inform FVG of any legal defects with regard to the
Equipment Usufruct Contracts in the April 2004 exchange of correspondence
between the General Manager of FVG, Mr. Senn and the Director of FEGUA, Dr.
Gramajo; (b) discussions between FEGUA and FVG since late 2004 did not
concern the validity of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts or whether they were
lesivos; (c) FEGUA never conveyed to FVG its concern about the historical and
cultural value of the railway equipment assets; (d) during the years 2004-2005,
FVG only presented proposals and possible draft contracts at FEGUA’s request,
not because FVG deemed a new contract necessary; (e) FEGUA never informed
FVG that the parties were at an impasse; (f) Respondent never provided or
communicated to FVG any of the legal opinions concerning the /esivo character
20

Ibid. para. 164.

20

of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts; (g) at the meeting between the Chairman of
RDC, Mr. Posner, and President Berger on March 7, 2006 there was no mention
that the Equipment Usufruct Contracts were illegal or harmful to the State, the
President indicated his desire to see a high-level commission formed to work with
RDC and FVG to resolve outstanding contract disputes with FEGUA related to
FVG’s arbitrations; and (h) no legal or technical defects of the Usufruct Contracts
were discussed at the meetings of the High-Level Commission held on April 3,
May 5 and May 10, 2006.

49. As to the May 11" meeting of the High-Level Commission,
Claimant alleges that Claimant’s representatives heard on the way to the meeting
that a document to cancel FVG’s contract was being circulated for signature
among the Ministers. At the meeting the Government's representatives informed
the Claimant's representatives that the Government was not willing to withdraw
FEGUA’s legal actions which sought to annul the arbitration clause in Contracts
402 and 820. When confronted with what the Claimant’s representative had
heard just before the meeting, the Government's representatives appeared
surprised and, after trying unsuccessfully to contact the persons whom they
needed to talk to, stated that they would investigate the issue and stop whatever
it was and get back to FVG at the next meeting scheduled for later in the month.

50. The meeting scheduled for May 24, 2006 was cancelled by the
Government on that same day and no further meetings took place. Through the
remainder of May and June 2006 Messrs. Senn and local FVG counsel,
Carrasco contacted the High-Level Commission members in an effort to
reconvene the meetings. On July 6, 2006, Mr. Carrasco e-mailed the
Commission members insisting that negotiations resume. Commission member
Ms. Pineda responded only on August 16, 2006 stating that the Government was
working on a negotiating proposal. Claimant points out that the President had
signed the Lesivo Resolution five days earlier.

51. Claimant affirms that only in mid-August did it learn that the /esivo
rumor heard on May 11, 2006 was true. According to Claimant, on August 11 Mr.

21

Melville of Cementos Progreso, a minority shareholder of FVG, informed Mr.
Posner that at the doing of Mr. Campollo, a local businessman, the Government
would declare some aspects of unspecified usufruct contracts of FVG /esivos.
Mr. Posner instructed Mr. Carrasco to seek the support of the United States
Embassy and, to this effect, Mr. Carrasco prepared a fact sheet. Claimant finds
support in the fact sheet for its argument that up to then Claimant had no
specifics regarding the impending Lesivo Resolution and was unaware that it had
already been signed.

52. On August 24, 2006, representatives of the Government and FVG
met. According to Claimant, at this meeting Respondent presented “a written
take-it-or-leave it proposal which principally demanded that FVG renegotiate key
terms of Contracts 402 and 820, dismiss its breach of contract arbitrations, and
surrender ‘railway sections yet to be restored in which other investors may be
interested;”*' this proposal also included “a minor reference to modifying the
terms’”? of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts. Claimant alleges that Responded
“informed FVG that it intended to issue the Lesivo Resolution with regard to the
equipment contracts the next day unless FVG agreed to its demands concerning
Contracts 402 and 820 and regardless if FVG was willing to agree to the
Government’s requested modifications to the equipment contracts.” Claimant
refused Respondent's demands and the Lesivo Resolution was issued the next
day.

53. Regarding the specific arguments made in this objection, Claimant
agrees with Respondent that CAFTA Article 10.1.3 only serves to “reaffirm the
standing residual rule of customary international law of non-retroactivity
embodied in Article 28 of the VCLT [Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties]’,
but it contests Respondent’s assertion that, due to the Treaty’s non-retroactivity,
it must explicitly provide that it applies to disputes that arose prior to the Treaty’s
entry into force.

Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 35.
Ibid.
Ibid.

22
23

22

54. Claimant considers this to be a misstatement of customary
international law which, according to Claimant, provides that, “absent expressly
stated party intent to the contrary, an investment treaty applies to any dispute
existing between the parties at the time of the treaty’s entry into force.”™*
Claimant finds support in the official Commentary to Article 28(3) of the Vienna
Convention which states that when “an act or fact or situation which took place or
arose prior to the entry into force of a treaty continues to occur or exist after the
treaty has come into force, it will be caught by the provisions of the treaty.””°
Claimant also refers to the Commentary on Article 28(2) which, based on the
Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, concludes that if an agreement uses “the
word ‘disputes’ without any qualification, the parties are understood as accepting
jurisdiction with respect to all disputes existing after the entry into force of the
agreement.””° Claimant contests the meaning attributed by Respondent to the
Sixteenth Session Report of the ILC and quotes the following paragraph: “[The]
word ‘disputes’ is apt to cover any dispute which exists between the parties after
the coming into force of the treaty. /t matters not either that the dispute concerns
events which took place prior to that date or that dispute itself arose prior to it; for
the parties have agreed to submit to arbitration or judicial settlement all their

existing disputes without qualification.”””

55. Claimant argues that this is how Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
has been construed by the doctrine and arbitral tribunals. Claimant points out
that the cases of Lucchetti v. Peru and Vieira v. Chile, relied on by Respondent,
concern treaties which specifically provide that they do not apply to disputes prior
to their entry into force. Claimant observes that Respondent ignores in its
argument that “the obvious reason for the inclusion of specific language barring
pre-entry disputes in the Chile BITs at issue in Lucchetti and Vieira was to bar a

Ibid. para. 41.

Ibid. para. 43.

Ibid. para. 44.

Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Sixteenth Session, July 11, 1964,
Doc. A/CN.4/173, Yearbook of the ILC, 1964, Vol. Il, p. 178 (emphasis added by Claimant) quoted in para.
47 of the Claimant's Counter-Memorial.

23

category of disputes that otherwise would not be excluded from the treaties’

respective jurisdiction.””°

56. Claimant dismisses the relevance of other arbitral case law relied
on by Respondent because on closer analysis it does not support Respondent's
position. Claimant further refers to the decision of the arbitral tribunal in Chevron
v. Ecuador where the tribunal rejected Ecuador’s ratione temporis objection
because the treaty’s temporal restrictions referred to investments and not
disputes.

57. After rebutting Respondent's arguments based on_ arbitral
jurisprudence, Claimant addresses the text of the Treaty itself. Claimant argues
that nowhere in CAFTA Article 10.15 (Consultation and Negotiation) and CAFTA
Article 10.16 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration) or elsewhere in Chapter 10
does the Treaty qualify or restrict the types of investment disputes that may be
submitted to arbitration. Claimant points out that the term “measure” as used in
the Treaty relates to a national or an enterprise of a State party that has made an
investment in the territory of another Party in existence as of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement, and reasons:

“RDC is the ‘investor’ in Article 10.1(a), FVG is the ‘covered
investment’ in Article 10.1(b), and the ‘measure(s) adopted or
maintained by [Respondent]’ that form the basis for RDC’s
‘claim(s)’ under Article 10.16 are ‘the Lesivo Resolution
and...subsequent conduct of the Respondent pursuant to the
Lesivo Resolution.’ These measures adopted by Respondent
‘breached...an obligation under Section A.’ The initial breach, the
Lesivo Resolution, was officially declared on August 25, 2006 by
publication in the Guatemalan Official Gazette; additional
breaches arising from Respondent's subsequent conduct pursuant
to the Lesivo Resolution by definition occurred after August 25,
2006."*°

Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 55. Emphasis in the original.
Ibid. para. 76.

24

58. Claimant concludes that the parties to the Treaty chose not to
define the Treaty’s ratione temporis jurisdiction by reference to the timing of the
dispute and instead chose the timing of a “measure”, the State act complained of.
Claimant sees bad faith on the part of the Respondent when it fails to take this
into account in its Memorial and had relied on it in its previous preliminary
objection.

59. Claimant offers an alternative argument should the Tribunal find
that it has no jurisdiction over disputes that arose prior to the Treaty’s entry into
force. It is Claimant's contention that there was in fact no dispute between
Claimant and Respondent in respect of the Lesivo Resolution or any of the
alleged legal defects in the Equipment Usufruct Contracts before the Treaty
entered into force. As a further alternative argument, Claimant contends that its
Treaty claims are based on a different dispute,*° one that arose after the Treaty
entered into force.

60. As regards the first alternative argument, Claimant points out that
most of the events Respondent relies upon were internal to Respondent and
FEGUA and cannot have been part of a dispute with FVG. Claimant relies on the
six factors which characterize a dispute outlined by the Vieira tribunal to show
that no dispute existed with Respondent prior to the Treaty entering into force.
First, “there was absolutely NO communication between Respondent and
Claimant prior to CAFTA’s entry into force about the Government's intention to
declare these contracts [the Equipment Usufruct Contracts] /esivo.”*' Second,
“With minimal exception, the Government went to great lengths NOT to
communicate to Claimant either the nature of the contracts’ alleged legal defects
or the possibility of using /esivo to take over RDC’s investment prior to August
2006, when the Lesivo Resolution issued.”**

61. Claimant points out that, prior to the Lesivo Resolution, Respondent
never communicated to Claimant any of the legal opinions on the alleged /esivo

Ibid. para. 83. Emphasis added by Claimant.
Ibid. para. 89. Emphasis added by Claimant.
Ibid. Emphasis added by Claimant.

25

nature of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts and, as to the illegalities of the
Equipment Usufruct Contracts, the only communication identified by Respondent
is the letter of April 14, 2004 of Dr. Gramajo to Mr. Senn attaching FEGUA legal
opinion 47-2004 which does not mention any of the alleged illegalities. Dr.
Gramajo’s transmittal letter simply denied Mr. Senn’s request.

62. Claimant argues that the “conversations” to which Dr. Gramajo
refers can hardly constitute a dispute when the two parties seem to be of one
mind to solve the existing problems. Claimant observes that the issues identified
were almost entirely within Respondent's control and, while Respondent never
offered to solve them, there is no evidence that it ever refused to do so, “thereby
potentially creating a dispute.”

63. Claimant contests Respondent's argument based on FEGUA’s
purported concern for the condition of the railroad equipment as historical and
cultural patrimony of the State. According to Claimant, prior to the Lesivo
Resolution, Respondent never declared any of FEGUA’s railway equipment or
rolling stock to be part of its cultural and historic patrimony, and this contention
does not appear in the Lesivo Resolution itself.

64. Claimant also points out that Dr. Gramajo’s concern about
cannibalization of equipment is raised now for the first time. According to
Claimant, there is nothing in the Equipment Usufruct Contracts or in the
predecessor Contract 41 which prohibited FVG from removing parts from unused
equipment to be used in working equipment. Claimant also refers to the criminal
complaint filed by FEGUA against FVG in order to safeguard railway equipment
cited by Dr. Gramajo and observes that it was not legally notified of the suit until
after the Treaty entered into force and no ruling has been issued by the court to
this date.

65. Claimant argues in great detail how the exchanges that took place
at the May 11" meeting of the High Level Commission do not constitute a

8 Ibid. para. 92.

26

disagreement which implies “a minimum of communication between the parties”
as put by the Vieira tribunal.

66. Claimant continues with its analysis of the May 11" meeting and of
the events that preceded the issuance of the Lesivo Resolution to show that the
remainder of the requirements for a dispute to exist, as set forth by the Vieira
tribunal, were lacking before the entry into force of the Treaty. Claimant argues
that there was neither a disagreement on a point of law or fact expressed at the
May 11" meeting or at any other meeting of the High-Level Commission; at that
meeting or afterwards no argument took place which reflected a situation in
which the parties had clearly opposing positions in regard to an issue of fact or of
law; there is no authentic oral or written registration of a disagreement either in
the minutes of the May 11" meeting or thereafter, in fact, according to Claimant,
the offer of Commissioner Fernandez to suspend any consideration of /esivo is
the antithesis of registering a disagreement; and there was no concrete claim of
Claimant before the Treaty’s entry into force because, in the aftermath of the May
11" meeting, Respondent misled Claimant to believe that any governmental

action was in abeyance. Claimant concludes by saying that the May 11" meeting
was not the origin or the source of a dispute between the parties regarding the

declaration of /esividad of the Usufruct Contracts.

67. Claimant argues alternatively that, even assuming that
Respondent’s assertions are true, Claimant's Treaty claims are based on a
different dispute than any dispute between the parties that arose prior to the
Treaty’s entry into force. According to Claimant, the declaration of lesividad is a
new and separate dispute from that concerning the validity of the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts under Guatemalan law.

68. Claimant finds support for this contention in Jan de Nul v. Egypt.

As in that case, any dispute that allegedly existed between Claimant and
Respondent prior to entry into force of the Treaty with regard to the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts would have been decided in accordance with Guatemalan law

ad Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (I\CSID Case No.

ARB/04/13), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 16, 2006.

27

and FEGUA never presented its claims against FVG in a domestic court. It also
finds support in Lucchetti v. Peru since the entry of a new actor can be a decisive
factor in determining whether the dispute is a new dispute.°° The new actor in the
instant case is the President of Guatemala and the Cabinet Ministers who
intervened to issue the Lesivo Resolution. Furthermore, according to Claimant,
“the separate and distinct nature of the Lesivo Resolution from any of the alleged
contract disputes between FVG and FEGUA is confirmed by the fact that the
lesivo claim the Government filed in Administrative Court subsequent to the
Lesivo Resolution was filed against both FVG and FEGUA.”**

69. On the basis of Mondev v. United States*’ and Tecmed v. United
States, the Claimant contends that it is permissible to refer to the conduct of
Respondent prior to the Treaty’s entry into force in order to provide context to the
Respondent's issuance of the Lesivo Resolution and subsequent conduct of
Respondent.

70. Claimant rebuts Respondent’s argument that the act of declaring
the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivos actually took place when the President
decided to take such action in April 2006 following the unanimous opinion of his
advisors; and that, barring settlement, the President had no option but to go
through with the declaration to avoid potential personal liability. Claimant argues
that: (a) there is no evidence of any such decision except hearsay within
hearsay; (b) Respondent's own expert does not attempt to define the legal act of
declaring lesividad as the moment the President decides in his own head to
begin the necessary administrative process to issue such declaration; and (c)
Guatemalan administrative law specifically forbids to take as a resolution the
opinions given by any legal or technical advisor: “The judgment of the President
of the Republic cannot be constitutionally or legally substituted by the judgment

35
36
37

Lucchetti, see note 11 above, quoted in Claimant's Counter-Memorial.

Ibid. para. 141. Emphasis added by Claimant.

Mondev International Ltd v. United States of America (I\CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award,
October 11, 2002, 6 ICSID Rep.181.

38 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award, May 29, 2003.

28

of his legal advisors or other lower ranking Government officials, no matter how

many opinions and recommendations they provide.”*

2. SECOND OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS JURISDICTION BECAUSE THE
ALLEGED INVESTMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE USUFRUCT CONTRACTS IS NOT A
COVERED INVESTMENT UNDER THE TREATY (OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE)

A. RESPONDENT'S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE

71. Respondent bases this objection on CAFTA Article 10.28(g), which
includes in the definition of “investment”, “licenses, authorizations, permits, and
similar rights conferred pursuant to domestic law’. Respondent argues that the
Equipment Usufruct Contracts are in the nature of ‘licenses, authorizations,
permits and similar rights”. The purpose of Contract 143 was to confer to FVG
the use, enjoyment, repair and maintenance of the railroad equipment identified
in that contract, for rendering of services in the different branches of the railroad
service. Contrary to what is asserted by Claimant, the Usufruct Contracts are not
run-of-the-mill concession contracts but “usufruct contracts that involve the
inherent governmental function of granting to a private third party the permission

and right to use a public good.”*°

72. Respondent goes on to argue that, according to CAFTA Article
10.28(g), licenses, authorizations permits and similar rights need to be conferred
“pursuant to domestic law” if they are to constitute investments; if they do not
create rights protected under domestic law, they “do not have the characteristics
of an investment.” It is the contention of Respondent that the Equipment Usufruct
Contracts suffer from grave legal defects; they were not awarded through a
public bidding process and were not approved by an Acuerdo Gubernativo.
Accordingly they were not conferred pursuant to Guatemalan law. Respondent
explains that, although the terms of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts were

Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 155.
Respondent's Memorial. para. 179.

29

assumed to have been based on the bidding terms intended for Contract 41,
Guatemalan law required a new bidding term for the new contract which was
signed four years after the Contract 41 bidding process. The absence of new
bidding terms was one of the key grounds of the Lesivo Resolution.

73. Respondent affirms that Claimant was well aware of these
requirements having participated in the bidding process of other usufruct
contracts included the intended Contract 41. Respondent contests the Claimant's
allegation that Clause 10 of Contract 402 already conferred rights over the rolling
stock. Respondent explains that this clause needs to be read together with the
bidding terms of that contract which provide for a subsequent bidding process to
acquire the rolling stock that it deems convenient for its activities, and it shows
that Claimant was aware of this requirement.

74. Respondent further explains that FEGUA’s authority as an
autonomous agency is limited to the powers delegated to it by the Guatemalan
Congress and the powers of the /nterventor of FEGUA are in turn limited to those
specified in FEGUA’s Organic Law, which in either case do not include the
authority to grant usufruct rights to private parties of the public railway stock
without the President’s approval through an Acuerdo Gubernativo. Respondent
alleges that Claimant was aware of this requirement, having participated in the
bidding processes of Contracts 402 and 41; in particular it was well aware that
Contract 41 never entered into force for lack of this requirement. Furthermore,
Respondent points out that Claimant was sufficiently concerned over the validity
of the Equipment Usufruct Contracts to seek their “official recognition”.

75. Respondent considers misleading the contention of Claimant that
Contract 41 was replaced by Contract 143 at the Government's request.
Respondent observes that one year after the execution of Contract 41 and being
aware that the Acuerdo Gubernativo was not forthcoming, Claimant's General
Manager wrote to FEGUA’s /nterventor seeking alternative ways to ensure that
they could use the equipment. Respondent also alleges that the Equipment

30

Usufruct Contracts were prepared by Claimant in an attempt to circumvent a
legal precondition for the use of rolling stock.

76. Respondent explains that the approval by the Guatemalan
Executive was not a mere formality but a substantive requirement under
Guatemalan law; lack of this approval meant that none of these contracts
generated usufruct rights. Respondent adds that the “reasons for that approval
not having been obtained have no bearing on this dispute, and the tribunal could
not make a determination about them because they predate the entering into
force of the Treaty.”*"

77. Respondent concludes that the Equipment Usufruct Contracts are
not “covered investments” under CAFTA Article 10.28(g) because they were not
conferred in accordance with Guatemalan law and, therefore, pursuant to Article
25 of the ICSID Convention and CAFTA Article 10.17, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction because Guatemala has not consented to submit to arbitration legal
disputes that do not arise out of a “covered investment”.

B. CLAIMANT'S POSITION ON THE OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE

78. Claimant refers to the broad definition of investment under CAFTA
and points out its non-exhaustive character. Claimant argues that its covered
investment is not defined or limited to the Equipment Usufruct Contracts, but
consists of its controlling interest in and ownership of shares in its investment
enterprise FVG: “It is through this investment and ownership stake in FVG that
RDC had an ‘expectation of gain’, not only through the profits that FVG was
expected to earn through the Usufruct (which could have been paid to RDC in
the form of dividends), but also through the expected increased equity value of
FVG as the business enterprise operating the Usufruct.”** Furthermore, “even if
one were to construe the nature of RDC’s covered investment on the basis of the

“ Ibid. para. 199.

Ibid., para. 162.

31

bundle of rights granted to FVG by Guatemala pursuant to all of the Usufruct
Contacts“, it would still satisfy the Article 10.28 [of the Treaty] definition of
‘investment’ because the Usufruct was an ‘asset’ that RDC indirectly owned that

had the ‘expectation of gain or profit.”"*

79. Claimant contests the characterization of the Equipment Usufruct
Contracts as “concessions over public goods”. Claimant refers to the
Guatemalan Civil Code distinction between goods under public domain of
“common use” and of “special use”. The latter are those destined for the services
of state decentralized entities such as FEGUA. According to Claimant, this
mischaracterization implies that the Usufruct Contracts are not “licenses,
concessions, authorizations, permits and similar rights” as contended by
Respondent.

80. Claimant further argues that the expression “conferred pursuant to
domestic law” in CAFTA Article 10.28(g) refers to the validity of the investment
and not to its definition. Claimant observes that this expression appears only in
Article 10.28(g) and contends that, even assuming arguendo that the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts fall under Article 10.28(g), this article does not limit the
definition of what constitutes an “investment” under this provision but is
concerned with the legality of the investment.

81. Claimant rebuts Respondent's argument that the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts were void ad initio under Guatemalan law. According to
Claimant, the Equipment Usufruct Contracts were “conferred pursuant to
domestic law’. Claimant points out that Respondent has not alleged that RDC or
FVG committed any acts in violation of Guatemalan law in obtaining or entering
into the Equipment Usufruct Contracts but it has argued that they are not
“protected investments because a State-owned entity, FEGUA, acted in violation
of Guatemalan law by entering into these agreements without initiating a new
public bidding process and obtaining Executive approval.”*°

In this context the term “Usufruct Contracts” includes Contract No. 402.
Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 164. Emphasis added by Claimant.
Ibid. para. 178.

32

82. Claimant contends that Respondent is estopped from objecting to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae because FEGUA provided a legal
opinion of its legal advisors to RDC and other potential bidders to the effect that
the bidding rules complied with Guatemalan law and each of the Equipment
Usufruct Contracts set forth the legal capacity of FEGUA’s representative to
enter into the contract and the legal basis for the contract. Furthermore, Contract
143 states that “[t]his contract shall be in force as of its endorsement, without
need of subsequent authorization from any other authority’, a statement contrary
to later assertions by the Government that Contract 143 is void because it was
not awarded pursuant to a separate public bidding process and not authorized or
approved by Acuerdo Gubernativo.

83. Claimant recalls that during nine years Respondent allowed FVG to
perform Contract 402 and the Equipment Usufruct Contracts. RDC further
argues that it reasonably relied upon the Government's representations and
actions in making its initial and subsequent investments and concludes that the
Government's conduct generated in RDC expectations protected by international
law and Respondent is estopped from asserting that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction ratione materiae.

3. THIRD OBJECTION: THE TRIBUNAL LACKS JURISDICTION OVER CLAIMS RELATED

TO SQUATTERS AND TO PAYMENTS INTO THE TRUST FUND BECAUSE SUCH
CLAIMS ARE THE SUBJECT OF LOCAL PROCEEDINGS

A. RESPONDENT'S POSITION ON THE THIRD OBJECTION

84. This objection was the subject of the First Decision on Jurisdiction
and the subsequent Decision on Clarification. Respondent includes it in its
Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction because Claimant, in its Memorial on the
Merits, “insists on raising claims based on the same measures that are at issue
in the local arbitrations, measures that the Tribunal already ruled were excluded

33

from this arbitration by virtue of Claimant’s failure to adequately meet the
threshold requirement of Article 10.18.2 of the Treaty.“

85. Respondent re-affirms that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear
claims related to the removal of squatters from the right of way of the railroad and
related to FEGUA’s payments into the Trust Fund because they are the subject
of local arbitration proceedings and Claimant has failed to waive its right to
continue those proceedings. Respondent supports its contention with arguments
which the Tribunal heard in connection with the first round of preliminary
objections to its jurisdiction and for which Respondent finds support in the
Decisions of the Tribunal. They will not be repeated here.

B. CLAIMANT'S POSITION ON THIRD OBJECTION

86. Claimant explains that its claim of breach of fair and equitable
treatment is based upon the Lesivo Resolution and not Respondent's failure to
remove squatters. According to Claimant, the Memorial on the Merits clearly
states that “the Government's action in issuing the Lesivo Resolution, in violation
of the standard of fair and equitable treatment, served to undermine RDC’s
investment-backed expectations, one of which was RDC’s_ reasonable
expectation that the Government would protect the railway against squatters.”*”

87. Claimant further explains in respect of its full protection and security
claim that the type of measures at issue in FVG’s claim in the local arbitrations
are different from the measures on which Claimant relies in this arbitration. In the
case of the local arbitration, FVG’s claim is against FEGUA, as legal owner of the
railway right-of-way, for breaching its contractual obligation to bring legal actions
to evict squatters from the right of way. In the case of the Treaty arbitration,
Claimant relies “upon the failure of an entirely different organ of the Government
of Guatemala — the local police and law enforcement authorities — to provide any

46 Ibid. para. 224.

Ibid. para. 189. Emphasis added by Claimant.

34

semblance of physical or legal protection to FVG’s property and assets (and,

hence, RDC’s investment) after the issuance of the Lesivo Resolution.”*®

88. Finally, Claimant disputes that its claims are based upon
Respondent's failure to make Trust Fund payments as alleged by Respondent.
According to Claimant, references to such failure are in “the context of factual
background...and in discussing the reasonable factual assumptions underlying

FVG@’s Business Plan.”“?

4. RELIEF REQUESTED

89. Respondent has requested that the Tribunal dismiss all claims of
Claimant for lack of jurisdiction and order Claimant to pay Respondent's costs,
legal fees, and share of administrative expenses incurred in these proceedings.

90. Claimant requests that the Tribunal deny the jurisdictional

objections without any further briefing or hearings and award Claimant its
reasonable costs and attorney's fees in responding to Respondent's objections.

IV. PosT-HEARING SUBMISSIONS

1. THE TRIBUNAL’S QUESTIONS

91. After the hearing the Tribunal requested that the parties answer the
following questions:

(a) On the assumption (which is understood is in dispute) that a
declaration of lesividad involves a measure of judgment or
discretion can it really be said that a contract subsequently
declared lesivo is unlawful ab initio.

(b) Can a contract be declared lesivo as a result of facts occurring
after its conclusion?

48 Ibid. para. 193.

Ibid. para. 198.

35

(c) Can the Administrative Tribunal disagree with an executive
determination of lesividad? Has the Administrative Tribunal ever
done so? If so, how can it be said that the executive declaration is
decisive for CAFTA purposes?

(d) What are the publication requirements of acts of the
administration under Guatemalan law? Can it be said that the
declaration of lesividad was legally finalized prior to proper
notification to the complainant via publication, with a list of
reasons for the act?

(e) Why was Contract 41 never approved? Why did each side
proceed under Contract 41 (and then Contracts 143 and 158) as
though there was a legal contract in place?

2. THE PARTIES’ REPLIES

A. REPLIES TO THE FIRST QUESTION

92. Respondent replied that a contract declared /esivo by the
competent judicial authority is deemed unlawful ab initio. According to
Respondent, Guatemala cannot unilaterally declare a contract lesivo and cease
performance. Respondent explains that the governmental agency concerned
must continue to operate under the contract until the Administrative Tribunal
declares the contract unlawful ab initio; if it does so, the Administrative Tribunal
orders that the parties restore things to their respective positions before the
agreement was entered into, thus avoiding any unjust enrichment due to the
partial de facto performance of the contract declared /esivo.

93. Respondent explains further that a determination of lesividad by
the Executive is not binding on the Administrative Tribunal, and the State has the
burden of proof to establish that the contract concerned is unlawful and
prejudicial.

94. Claimant draws a distinction between the concepts of “legality” and
“harmfulness to the interests of the State”. Claimant explains that the lawfulness

36

of a contract is a matter of the law of contracts and not /esividad. According to
Claimant, a contract may comply with Guatemalan law and still be harmful to the
interests of one of the parties; the legality of a usufruct contract is regulated by
the civil law on contracts while the /esividad is a procedure regulated by the Ley
de Ilo Contencioso Administrativo. |t is the view of Claimant that “The availability
to the State of separate and distinct remedies in the civil and administrative
courts to declare a contract void ab initio or voidable due to various legal defects
demonstrates that Guatemalan law draws a clear distinction between the

‘legality’ of a contract and ‘lesividad’ of a contract.”*°

95. Claimant concludes by affirming that the declaration of /esivo
should not be based on the technical defects of a contract which can be
otherwise remedied but because, in the judgment of the President of Guatemala,
“the announced interests of the State upon which the contract is based were
capricious or because the terms of the contract were not reasonably related to

those announced interests.”°'

B. REPLIES TO THE SECOND QUESTION

96. Respondent replied in the negative and explained that “/esividad is
determined by legal defects and illegalities relating to the contract’s formation
and the terms of the contract as such, and not by supervening causes or
subsequent conduct by the parties. This helps to explain why a contract declared

lesivo is deemed unlawful ab initio.”

97. Claimant replied substantially in similar terms. According to
Claimant, “the nature of /esivo itself and the structure of the procedures
concerning the declaration of /esividad,...indicate that independent facts
occurring subsequent to the formation of the contract cannot be considered as a
ground for lesivo.”®> Claimant considers that this view is confirmed by the fact
that “the statute of limitations on declaring /esividad runs three years from the
1

52
53

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 8. Emphasis in the original.
Ibid. para. 11.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 12.

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 13.

37

date of the contract, not from some subsequent event’, and by the fact that
none of the declarations of /esivo over the last 20 years have relied on
independent post-execution facts.°°

C. REPLIES TO THE THIRD QUESTION

98. Respondent replied that the Administrative Tribunal is an
independent branch of government under Guatemalan law and free to disagree
with the executive declaration of /esivo: “The court’s mandate in those cases is to
objectively and independently assess whether the contract in question is lesivo,
considering the evidence presented both by the Attorney General and the private
party to the contract.”°° Respondent explained that in the last thirty years only
one decision has been rendered based on /esividad claims and in that instance
the State prevailed. However, Respondent points out that, in the case of the
lesividad claim concerning Contracts 143 and 158, the Administrative Tribunal
has twice decided against requests of the Attorney General for the suspension of
those contracts, which shows, according to Respondent, the independence of
this adjudicatory body.°”

99. Respondent considers that the President’s decision of /esivo is
decisive, “because that act or fact, which serves as the basis for Claimant's
claim, is an act or fact that occurred and was completed before the entry into
force of CAFTA.”©° Respondent reasons that “At that precise moment, the
President made an official determination that could not be reversed without
incurring in personal liability, unless the parties reached a negotiated solution
that would resolve causes giving rise to the /esividad of Contracts 143/158.”
However, the President’s declaration is “not necessarily decisive when one
considers liability under CAFTA, because that executive declaration of lesividad,
by itself, has no legal effect other than instructing the Attorney General to initiate

54
55
56
57
58
59

Ibid. para. 14.

Ibid. para. 16.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 18.
Ibid. para. 22.

Ibid. para. 23. Emphasis in the original.
Ibid. para. 24.

38

a claim against Ferrovias in the Contencioso Administrativo court.”© In this
respect, Respondent recalls that Claimant has had no legal or other impediment
to operate in Guatemala while the lesividad proceeding is pending.®"

100. Claimant agrees that, as a technical legal matter, the Administrative
Tribunal can disagree with the President's finding of /esivo but it points out that
“there exists no known case where an Administrative Tribunal has disagreed with
or denied a Government /esivo claim when such claim was made within the
requisite three-year time frame for such claims.”© According to Claimant, “lesivo
is little more than a thinly guised methodology for State-sponsored extortion”
because once a /esivo claim is filed the Government may not desist from it and
thus settlement may be justified only on terms favorable to the Government.
Claimant considers that, for CAFTA purposes, “it is the declaration of lesividad
and not the subsequent Administrative Court proceeding, which is substantively
decisive because a /esividad declaration has immediate and profound negative

consequences on the private contracting party.”"™

D. REPLIES TO THE FOURTH QUESTION

101. Respondent explains that the purpose of the publication of a /esivo
declaration is to instruct the Attorney General to present a /esividad claim before
the courts within three months of its publication and not to notify private parties
(in the instant case the Claimant), that the contracts are /esivo nor of the reasons
for such declaration. Publication of the instruction has no legal effect in itself as
regards the private parties’ rights. Respondent explains further that the legal
justification for the finding of contracts /esivo is formally presented before the
Administrative Tribunal. Thereafter private parties are notified and have the
opportunity to rebut it, as was the case of Claimant.® According to Respondent,

Ibid. para. 28. Emphasis in the original.
Ibid. para. 29.

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 19.
Ibid. para. 22.

Ibid. para. 24.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 33.

39

notice to Claimant officially or otherwise does not affect the finality of the
President's decision.®©

102. Claimant replies that, inter alia, Acuerdos Gubernativos require
publication under Guatemalan law which is explained by the fact that the private
parties are not party to the proceedings leading to the declaration of lesividad
and are not given notice otherwise. Furthermore, without publication, the
declaration of /esividad has no legal effect, “no party other than the President and
his Cabinet can take official notice of a declaration’s existence in order to take
specific action until after it is published.” Claimant reasons that “if the
Government actually believed that publication of the declaration had no legal
significance in relation to the three-year statute of limitations, it would not have
made sure that publication took place prior to the expiration of the limitations

period.”®”

103. Claimant notes that, contrary to the presupposition underlying the
Tribunal’s question, the lesivo declaration contains no list of reasons and only
refers to the report of FEGUA’s Overseer and the Solicitor General office’s
opinion which were not in the public domain or provided to FVG.®°

E. REPLIES TO THE FIFTH QUESTION

104. According to Respondent, the reasons for the lack of approval of
Contract 41 “remain essentially unclear based on the evidence of record.”©
However, Respondent notes that Ferrovias never utilized the legal remedies
open to it in such circumstance. Respondent emphatically denies that the parties
ever considered that Contract 41 entered into force or operated as if it were in
force. On the other hand, Contracts 143 and 158 are “technically in force and

must be observed by the parties —notwithstanding its [sic] illegalities- at least until

Ibid. para. 37.

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 27 and 28.
Ibid. para. 29.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 38.

40

such time as the Contencioso Administrativo court decides whether those

Contracts are /esivo and should be declared null ab initio””°

105. In its reply Claimant first points out that it is not correct to state that
Contract 41 was never “approved” by the Government since the Government had
approved and published the bidding terms and conditions. At most, according to
Claimant, it can be argued that Contract 41 was not ratified by the President.
Claimant also observes that,

“Despite the Government's purported position that such ratification
was necessary and essential, it never provided FVG with any
reason or explanation as to why it did not or could not obtain
ratification...Even to this day, FVG does not know or understand
why the Government never obtained Executive ratification of
Contracts 41 and 143, and Respondent's witnesses have certainly
not offered any logical or credible explanation for the

Government's failure to do so.””"

106. As to the second part of the question, Claimant believed that
Contract 143 was legal, and “Entirely consistent with the fact that FVG had been
using the railroad equipment without objection or protest from the Government
for six years prior to the execution of Contract 143 on August 28, 2003. Contract
143 specifically provided that no further Executive approval or ratification of the

contract was necessary.””

V. THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR’S SUBMISSION AS A CAFTA Nown-DISPUTING
PARTY

107. El Salvador filed comments under Article 10.20.2 on the issue
whether CAFTA Chapter Ten applies to disputes that existed before CAFTA
entered into force and remain unresolved after CAFTA entered into force.

Ibid. para. 44.
Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 35. Emphasis in the original.
Ibid. para. 37.

a1

108. Based on CAFTA Article 10.1.1 and Article 10.1.3, it is El
Salvador’s opinion that consent to arbitration by CAFTA parties does not include
“consent to arbitration with respect to measures adopted or any act or fact that
took place or any situation that ceased to exist before the date of entry into force
of CAFTA for the consenting Party.””* El Salvador is confirmed in this opinion by
CAFTA Article 10.15 which begins with the words “In the event of an investment
dispute...” According to El Salvador this phrase when read together with CAFTA
Article 10.1.1 and Article 10.1.3 “can only mean an investment dispute based on
CAFTA, i.e. an investment dispute that arose after CAFTA entered into force.””
El Salvador concludes that Chapter Ten is prospective and “a dispute that
existed before CAFTA entered into force that remains unresolved after CAFTA
entered into force, cannot give rise to a claim for a violation of the substantive
provisions of CAFTA.”

109. The Tribunal invited the parties to comment on El Salvador’s
submission. The parties had addressed the issue of the applicability of CAFTA to
continuing disputes in their memorials. Claimant’s communication refers to its
prior submissions and arguments and considers that El Salvador’s submission
does not warrant further comments. Respondent supports the views expressed
by El Salvador which it considers to be consistent with its position in this
proceeding.

VI. ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL

1. PRELIMINARY MATTERS

110. Before addressing the objections to jurisdiction raised by
Respondent, the Tribunal will consider as preliminary matters the law to be
applied and its jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention.

111. The law to be applied by the Tribunal at this jurisdictional phase is
not a matter in dispute. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is governed by Chapter

8 EI Salvador's Submission, para. 5.

4 Ibid., para. 6.
8 Ibid., para. 7.

42

Ten of CAFTA and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and, to the extent required
for their interpretation, the Tribunal will have recourse to customary international
law as codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaties.

112. Except for the issue of whether an investment which does not
conform to the laws of Respondent may qualify as an investment under the
ICSID Convention, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the ICSID Convention as
such has not been a matter of contention between the parties. It is undisputed
that Claimant is not a national of Respondent, that the dispute between the
parties is a legal dispute and that the dispute arises out of an investment. The
Tribunal does not need to dwell on the extensive case law on the characteristics
to be met by an investment to be considered such under the ICSID Convention”
or on whether such characteristics are in the nature of jurisdictional conditions.”
Based on the facts of this case, Claimant’s investment was risky, substantial, of
long duration, there was an expectation of return and it would assist in the
resumption of rail transport in Guatemala, which Respondent judged “un objetivo
de interés econdmico para las actividades productivas de la nacion.””* The
Tribunal will consider the issue of the legality of the investment and its relevance
to qualify as such under the ICSID Convention as part of its analysis of the
Second Objection to its jurisdiction.

113. The Tribunal will now proceed to analyze each of the objections.

2. OBJECTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

78 See e.g. Salini Construttori and Intalstrade v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4)

Decision on Jurisdiction, July 16, 2001. See also Joy Mining Machinery, Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Decision on Jurisdiction, August 6, 2004, para. 53; Jan de Nul N.V. v. Arab
Republic of Egypt (I\CSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 16, 2006, at para. 91;
Helnan International Hotels A/S v. The Arab Republic of Egypt (I\CSID Case No. ARB/05/19), Decision on
Objection to Jurisdiction, October 17, 2006, at para. 77; L.E.S.l.-DIPENTA v. Republic of Algeria (\CSID
Case No. ARB/03/08), Decision on Jurisdiction, July 12, 2006.

The Tribunal notes that several recent tribunals have discussed this issue in depth -- see e.g.
Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10), Decision on the
Application of Annulment of April 16, 2009 (Award and Dissent); Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United
Republic of Tanzania, (\CSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award, July 24, 2008, paras. 310, 312-318).

Clatsula Primera, Contract 402 (“an objective of economic interest to the productive capacities of
the nation”).

43

114. The following issues emerge from the parties’ exchanges on the
ratione temporis objection and are listed in the order they will be addressed by
the Tribunal: i) first, the date of the measure subject of the claim; is the critical
date the date the /esivo process began or the date of publication of the Lesivo
Resolution?; ii) Second, is there a dispute between the parties and, if the answer
is yes, when did the dispute begin?; iii) Third, if it is the Tribunal’s conclusion that
the dispute began before the date of entry into force of the Treaty, is it the
intention of the Treaty to cover disputes which began before such date?

115. Respondent has based its first objection on CAFTA Article 10.1.3
and Article 28 of the Vienna Convention. For ease of reference, it is convenient
to reproduce the text of these provisions. CAFTA Article 10.1.3 reads as follows:

“For greater certainty, this Chapter does not bind any Party in
relation to any act or fact that took place or any situation that
ceased to exist before the date of entry into force of this
Agreement.”

Article 28 of the Vienna Convention provides:

“Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is
otherwise established, its provisions do not bind a party in relation
to any act or fact which took place or any situation which ceased
to exist before the date of the entry into force of the treaty with
respect to that party.”

116. The consent of Respondent to arbitration is limited to breaches of
obligations undertaken by Respondent under the Treaty. Therefore, to
paraphrase Article 28 in positive terms, the Tribunal has jurisdiction in respect of
any act or fact that took place or any situation that continued to exist after the
Treaty entered into force. The Treaty cannot be breached before it entered into
force: “An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an international

44

obligation unless the State is bound by the obligation in question at the time the

act occurs.””°

117. It will be useful to recall here that in the First Decision on
Jurisdiction the Tribunal determined that:

“(b) ... the waivers submitted by the Claimant pursuant to Article
10.18.2 are valid in respect of the claim arising from the Lesivo
Resolution and from subsequent conduct of the Respondent
pursuant to the Lesivo Resolution and, therefore, fulfill the
Respondent's consent to arbitration conditions under Article 10.18
in respect of that claim’®°

118. The Lesivo Resolution is an act of the Government under
preparation since before the Treaty entered into force. To be issued, the
resolution needed approval by Acuerdo Gubernativo signed by all Government
Ministers and the President, who signed it last on August 11, 2006. Publication of
the resolution was two weeks later on August 25, 2006.

119. If the President had not signed the Acuerdo Gubernativo and the
Resolution had not been published, the measure represented by the Lesivo
Resolution would not have come into existence as expressly stated in its Article
3: “El presente Acuerdo Gubernativo empieza a regir al dia siguiente de su

81

publicacion en el Diario de Centro América’”’ The Tribunal remains unconvinced,

as argued by Respondent, of the inevitability of the /esivo process and the lack of
discretion of the President to sign or not to sign a /esivo resolution once he has
been advised that a contract is /esivo and has decided to proceed with the
declaration of /esivo unless there is a settlement.

120. Respondent has alleged that the /esivo process started at the latest
in April-May 2006 when the President decided to declare the Equipment Usufruct

9 Article 13, International Law Commission, Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally

Wrongful Acts, adopted in the Annual Report of the International Law Commission on its Fifty-third Session
(April 23- June 1 and July 2- August 10, 2001), A/56/10 ch. IV, endorsed by UNGA res. 56/83, December
12, 2001.
80 First Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, November 17, 2008, para. 76.

“The Acuerdo Gubernativo begins to take effect the day after its publication in the Diario de Centro
América.” Emphasis added by the Tribunal.

81

45

Contracts /esivo or as early as in August 2005 when the Lesivo Opinion was
issued. The evidence before the Tribunal does not show the exact date when the
President took the decision to declare the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivo
and Respondent has not submitted any document which registers the date of
such decision or the decision itself. It seems incongruent with the formal
requirements of the Guatemalan legal system that the controlling date of a
measure of the Government would be uncertain and unknown to members of the
Government or those affected by it, as opposed to the legal certainty of the date
of the President’s signature and of the publication of the Lesivo Resolution. It is
undisputed that both these acts occurred after the entry into force of the Treaty
as between the parties on July 1, 2006. These considerations are even more
applicable to the argument that the Tribunal should consider the Lesivo Opinion
itself as only the first step in the process.

121. Furthermore, even if the Tribunal were to accept the inevitability of
the /lesivo process after some undefined point in time in April-May 2006, we
would be faced with an act or situation which occurred before the Treaty entered
into force and continued to occur or exist afterwards. Respondent’s own expert,
Dra. Vielman, in her oral testimony, testified that /esivo is a “comprehensive
proceeding”. When Dra. Vielman was cross-examined about the steps to reach
the Lesivo Resolution — in her written expert opinion she had affirmed that there
were two steps: the signature of the President and the publication of the
resolution in the official gazette — she replied “...it is important to note at this
point...that this is a comprehensive proceeding. First, you have the President's
decision, and then there are some other related acts that lead to a proceeding to
declare...that the Contract is null and void.” Counsel to Claimant queried whether
the expert was saying that there are three steps as opposed to the two steps
asserted in her expert statement. Dra. Vielman replied:

“lam not contradicting my own statement. In my statement, we
said that there is the step —and | could give you more steps. You
have the decision by the President, you have all the decisions that
support the discussion by the President, which is the one that

46

determines the willingness of the State, and then you have the
signing of the document — of the resolution and the publication.
But once again, | think it is important to state that this is a
comprehensive proceeding. These are related acts and they are
final.”®

122. The idea of process is also reflected in the affirmation of Dra.
Vielman in her written statement that a /esivo resolution has no legal effect on the
“administrado”. \t is simply a “supuesto procesal’ (“procedural course”) which
permits the Attorney General to seek the annulment of the /esivo contract in
Administrative Court. During her cross-examination she reiterated this idea:
“Whether it [was] published, not published, the Executive Resolution of lesividad
has no effects whatsoever. What it does is that it instructs the Attorney General
to start the /esividad proceedings, and these proceedings are the vehicle for

annulment to be declared.”®

123. This idea of a comprehensive process brings the Tribunal to
consider whether it is faced with a “continuing act.” As pointed out in the ILC
Commentary to Article 24 of the Draft Convention on the Law of Treaties
submitted to the General Assembly, if

“an act or fact or situation which took place or arose prior to the
entry into force of a treaty continues to occur or exist after the
treaty has come into force, it will be caught by the provisions of
the treaty. The non-retroactivity principle cannot be infringed by
applying a treaty to matters that occur or exist when the treaty is in

force, even if they first began at an earlier date.”®*

The Commentary then adds: “In other words, the treaty will not apply to acts or
facts which are completed or to situations which have ceased to exist before the
treaty comes into force.”*°

Transcript of March 3, 2010, pp. 737-738. Emphasis added by the Tribunal.

Ibid. p. 741.

Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties with commentaries, adopted by the ILC at its eighteenth
session, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1966, Vol. Il, p. 212, Para. 3 of the commentary to
Article 24 which became Article 28 of the Vienna Convention.

Ibid. para. 4. Emphasis in original.

84

47

124. There is consistent arbitral case law considering “continuing acts” in
breach of a treaty when their occurrence spans a period before and after a treaty
enters into force. The Mondev tribunal noted that the parties accepted that “in
certain circumstances conduct committed prior to the entry into force of a treaty
might continue in effect after that date, with the result that the treaty could
provide a basis for determining the wrongfulness of the continuing conduct.”®
The tribunal in SGS v. Philippines considered a continuing breach the persistent
failure to pay sums due under a contract.®”

determined to be a continuing breach acts, omissions or conduct provided “upon

Similarly, the tribunal in Tecmed

consummation or completion of their consummation after the entry into force of

the Agreement constitute a breach of the Agreement...”©°

125. The Tribunal concludes that, if the Lesivo Resolution is viewed as a
measure taken on a specific date, it was taken on the day of publication.
Alternatively, if it is considered as part of a process, then it is part of a continuing
act which started before the date of the entry into force of the Treaty and
continued after such date. On either view, Respondent's argument fails.

126. The Tribunal will now address the second issue, is there a dispute
and, if the answer is in the affirmative, when did it start?

127. Whether there is a dispute and when it started depends on the
definition of dispute and the elements which differentiate one dispute from
another. The term “dispute” is not defined in CAFTA Article 10.28 (Definitions).
The dictionary defines dispute as “a conflict or controversy; a conflict of claims or
rights; an assertion of a right, claim or demand on one side, met by contradictory
claims or allegation on the other.”®° Somewhat more broadly the ICJ has defined
“dispute” as a “disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or
interests between the parties.”°° The ICSID Convention does not define
“dispute”. The Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention explains in

86 Monaev v. U.S.A., see note 37 above, Award, para. 56.

8 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Republic of Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6),
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004, 8 ICSID Rep. 515, para. 167.

88 Tecmed v. Mexico, see note 38 above, Award, para. 63.

Black's Law Dictionary (West Paul, 1968), Revised Fourth Edition, p. 558.

See e.g. Case Concerning East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), |.C.J. Rep 1995, pp. 89 and 99.

89
20

48

the context of delimiting the nature of disputes which may be submitted to the
jurisdiction of ICSID under Article 25(1) of the Convention that: “The expression
‘legal dispute’ has been used to make clear that while conflicts of rights are within

the jurisdiction of the Centre, mere conflicts of interests are not.”®"

128. Claimant has argued its case on the basis of the Vieira tribunal’s
definition and has applied each of the requirements listed in that definition to the
facts before the Tribunal in order to deny the existence of a dispute before the
date of entry into force of the Treaty. In the view of the Tribunal the Vieira
definition of “dispute” is arguably the strictest definition of such term in
international arbitral practice and stricter than the way the term “dispute” has
been understood in arbitral practice and under the jurisprudence of the ICU.

129. For its part, the Tribunal retains the concept of dispute as a conflict
of views on points of law or fact which requires sufficient communication between
the parties for each to know the other’s views and oppose them. Furthermore
and for purposes of determining the date when a dispute starts, it is necessary to
distinguish it from the facts leading to the dispute, which naturally will have
occurred earlier. In this respect, the Tribunal finds useful the description of the
emergence of a dispute in Maffezini:

“It begins with the expression of a disagreement and the
statement of a difference of views. In time these events acquire a
precise legal meaning through the formulation of legal claims, their
discussion and eventual rejection or lack of response by the other
party. The conflict of legal views and interests will only be present
in the latter stage, even though the underlying acts predate them.
It has also rightly commented that the existence of the dispute
presupposes a minimum of communication between the parties,

a Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

between States and Nationals of Other States (1965), p. 44, para. 26.

Relevant jurisprudence has preferred not to look at a check-list understanding of “dispute,” but
rather to rely on a more commonly-understood notion of what makes for a dispute. See paragraph 127
above and e.g. AALP v. Sri Lanka, (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3), Award of June 27, 1990; Lucchetti, see note
11 above, para. 48; Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, Advisory Opinion
of March 1950, |.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 65 at 74; South West Africa, Preliminary Objections. Judgment, |.C.J.
Reports 1962, p. 319, at 328.

49

one party taking the matter with the other, with the latter opposing
the Claimant's position directly or indirectly. This sequence of
events has to be taken into account in establishing the critical date
for determining when under the BIT a dispute qualifies as one
covered by the consent necessary to establish ICSID’s
jurisdiction.”°°

130. The next step for the Tribunal is to determine which dispute is
before it. The so-called /esivo process is different from the disagreements
between FVG and FEGUA related to Contract 402 and Contract 820 and the
subject of local arbitrations. It is clear from the record that there were also
disagreements between FVG and FEGUA related to the Equipment Usufruct
Contracts, such as access to a workshop, use of tools, preservation of historic
assets and the irregularities pointed out in the opinion attached to the letter of Mr.
Gramajo to FVG dated April 14, 2004. The conflict in that regard was sufficiently
serious for Claimant to seek the help of the President to solve the issues
between FVG and FEGUA.

131. The issue for the Tribunal is whether the instant dispute may be
differentiated from the disputes in the local arbitration proceedings. For this
purpose, the Tribunal finds guidance in arbitral practice related to lis pendens. |n
Benvenuti & Bonfant the tribunal held that “there could only be a case of lis
pendens where there was identity of the parties, object and cause of action in the

proceedings pending before both tribunals.”

132. In the instant case, the cause of action is based on the Treaty and
not the Equipment Usufruct Contracts. The parties to the dispute are RDC and
the Republic of Guatemala and the object of the dispute is the Lesivo Resolution
itself and the subsequent conduct of Respondent as it relates to the Claimant's
investment. For purposes of this proceeding the dispute between RDC and the

8% Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction,

January 25, 2000, 5 ICSID Rep. 387, para. 96.
84 Benvenuti & Bonfant SRL v. the Government of the People’s Republic of Congo (ICSID Case No.
ARB/77/2), Award, August 8, 1980, 1 ICSID Rep. 330, p. 340 at para. 1.14.

50

Republic of Guatemala crystallized when the Lesivo Resolution was published
after CAFTA entered into force.

133. The /esivo process proceeded in parallel to negotiations of FEGUA
with FVG regarding issues in dispute in the local proceedings; to the extent that
Claimant was aware of such process, which is disputed by Claimant, it was used
to negotiate other pending issues. Suffice here to mention that, in the settlement
proposal communicated to FVG by FEGUA in the meeting of August 24, 2006, of
seven items, only the seventh is related to the Equipment Usufruct Contracts.
More importantly, the Lesivo Resolution in the “Exposicién de Motivos” does not
list items such as the conservation of the historic and cultural patrimony of
railway equipment, nor does it list the other six items part of the settlement
proposed by Respondent on August 24, 2006.°°

134. Expressed differently, the grounds for the Lesivo Resolution

96

(“Exposicién de Motivos”)*”, even if they had been cured by FVG, would not have

satisfied the conditions of the settlement proposed on August 24, 2006. While
this confirms, as argued by Claimant, the use of the /esividad process as an
element of pressure to achieve other results which seem unrelated to the
lesividad declaration®’, this does not make the dispute in connection with the

8 The Lesivo Resolution fails to mention the grounds for lesividad which were included in the Lesivo

Opinion of the Attorney General (Exhibit R-15). For instance, that Opinion found as grounds of /esividad
certain provisions of Contract 143 (which had been copied from Contract 41 and which the Government had
attested to be in accordance with Guatemalan law), namely: (a) the fact that the canon was paid at the end
of the year because Government was deprived of the interest which would accrued to the Government if
FVG would had to pay the canon in installments; and (b) the fact that a 45 year-term was too long taking into
account the life of the equipment. Similarly in his letter, dated January 13, 2006, to the President of
Guatemala, Dr. Gramajo lists as irregularities matters which can also be found in Contract 41, for instance,
“FEGUA's obligation to grant any new or used equipment or spare parts in usufruct to the selected entity”
(para. 4(a); “The usufructuary is authorized to move the equipment outside the national territory for the term
it deems necessary” (para. 4(b)); “the contract provides that the usufructuary may remove component parts
of a piece of equipment to use them as replacements in other equipment” (para. 4(f)); the term of the
contract (para. 4(g)); the canon of 1.25% of the net freight turnover, “No method was established for
calculating the amounts charged for freight services, and FEGUA is not allowed to participate in the prior
determination of said freight services.” (para. 4(h)) (Exhibit R-21).
‘ Exhibit C-10. The translation provided by Claimant does not convey the full meaning of the Spanish
original. “Exposicién de Motivos” has been translated as “Explanatory Statement”. “Motivo” in this context
means “ground”. The statement lists the grounds for Respondent's adopting the Lesivo Resolution.

The element of pressure is registered in the minutes of the meeting held at FEGUA’s request and
without representatives of Claimant at the Procuradoria General de la Nacion (“PGN") on September 28,
2006. The Attorney General “indicd que habia dejado pendiente de iniciar dichas acciones [acciones
correspondientes en el caso de la Declaracion de Lesividad] por la existencia de una mesa de didlogo entre
las partes pero que él considera que sino hay avances en dicha mesa no es conveniente esperar mas para

51

Lesivo Resolution and the subsequent conduct of Respondent an integral part of
other disputes which may have existed or may still exist in the local arbitration
proceedings. It is understandable that parties in a negotiation bargain on all
pending matters but, if a settlement is not reached, the nature of the dispute or
disputes returns to whatever it was ex ante. The disputes submitted to local
arbitration are no more part of the dispute before this Tribunal than the dispute
before this tribunal is part of them.

135. The Tribunal is aware, as pointed out by Respondent, that in
Lucchetti, the tribunal decided that: “The allegation of a BIT claim, however
meritorious it might be on the merits, does not and cannot have the effect of
nullifying or depriving of any meaning the ratione temporis reservation spelled out
in Article 2 of the BIT.”°° This warning, however, is inapposite in a situation as in
the instant case where relevant facts arose or continued, and/or a dispute (on
which jurisdiction could be based) emerged after the BIT was in force.

136. The Tribunal concludes that there is a dispute between Claimant
and Respondent which began on the date the Lesivo Resolution was published
in the Official Gazette. Having reached this conclusion, the Tribunal does not
need to determine whether a tribunal under CAFTA has jurisdiction over disputes
which began before the date the Treaty entered into force and continued after
such date. It merely notes that CAFTA is expressed to apply “to measures
adopted or maintained by a Party” (Article 10.1.1), and that it was not until the
Lesivo Resolution was finally published that it could be considered a “measure”.

137. On the basis of the above considerations, the Tribunal rejects the

ratione temporis objection.

138. In view of the Tribunal’s finding that the dispute between the parties
concerns a measure dated after the entry into force of the Treaty, the Tribunal
does not need to address the arguments in El Salvador’s submission in support
of Respondent's position in respect of the ratione temporis objection.

 

actuar en este caso. Considera también el Procurador, que al iniciar la PGN los procesos juridicos haria un
poco de presién para que efectivamente se agilicen las negociaciones.” Exhibit R-36.
8 Lucchetti v. Peru, see note 11 above, Award, para. 59.

52

3. OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE

139. Respondent has argued that Claimant’s investment is not a
“covered investment” under the Treaty or the ICSID Convention because the
investment was illegal and did not create rights protected under domestic law.
Respondent has based its argument on CAFTA Article 10.28(g) and the fact that
the Equipment Usufruct Contracts were not let through public bidding and did not
receive Presidential and Congressional approval. Claimant has argued that the
Equipment Usufruct Contracts were in the nature of a concession under Article
10.28(e) which does not refer to domestic law.

140. CAFTA Article 10.28(g) is part of a non-exhaustive list of forms of
investment and reads as follows: “licenses, authorizations, permits, and other
rights conferred pursuant to domestic law.” As part of the same list, Article
10.28(e) provides “turnkey, construction, management, production, concession,
revenue-sharing and other similar contracts.” The Tribunal notes that reference
to domestic law is limited to paragraph (e), but it does not consider that it is
correct to infer from this fact that rights conferred under other forms of investment
may be contrary to Guatemalan law. It is to be expected that investments made
in a country will meet the relevant legal requirements. Therefore, it is immaterial
whether the Equipment Usufruct Contracts qualify as a form of investment under
CAFTA Article 10.28(g) or 10.28(e). The Tribunal agrees with Claimant,
supported by a long line of case law, that “conferred pursuant to domestic law” is
not a characteristic of the investment to qualify as such but a condition of its
validity under domestic law. °°

141. It is well established before this Tribunal that Contract 41 was
legally tendered by the Government and that the only bid was submitted by FVG
and accepted by Respondent on December 16, 1997. Contract 41 was signed
more than a year later, on March 23, 1999, but never approved by Acuerdo

° The Salini v. Morocco tribunal held that reference to the law of the host State in the BIT was “to the

validity of the investment and not to its definition. More specifically, it seeks to prevent the Bilateral Treaty
from protecting investments that should not be protected, particularly because they would be illegal.” See
note 76 above, Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 46.

53

Gubernativo and Congress, both approvals being conditions for Contract 41 to
become effective.

142. Shortly after signature of Contract 41, on April 12, 1999, FEGUA
authorized FVG by letter to use the towing and traction equipment at the request
of FVG.'° The authorization was renewed in 2000 at FVG’s request. The letter
of FVG, dated April 16, 2000, explains that the requested equipment is needed
by FVG to fulfill its obligations under Contract 402 pending the approval of
Contract 41, and then it states: “The use of the railway equipment we are hereby
requesting is subject to the same terms and conditions as apply to the agreement
mentioned in item b) above [Contract 41], and will not in any way amend or affect
the agreement already mentioned.”"”

143. Thus notwithstanding that Contract 41 was never approved,
FEGUA let FVG operate the equipment to the extent that, shortly after signature
of Contract 41 and three days after FEGUA authorized the use of the railway
equipment, on April 15, 1999, train service was established between Guatemala
City and El Chile. It is worth noting that at that time Contract 402 was not yet
effective; it became effective more than a month later on May 23, 1999, which
implies that the section Guatemala City-El Chile of the railway was rehabilitated
before Contact 402 was effective. In December 1999 train service was extended
to Puerto Barrios and Puerto Santo Tomas. FVG used the equipment and paid
the corresponding canon under the terms of Contract 41 as if it would have been
in effect until signature of Contract 143. Afterwards, the equipment continued to
be used and the higher canon provided for in Contract 143 was paid and
accepted until after the publication of the Lesivo Resolution.

144. The Tribunal concludes that both parties to the Contract - FEGUA
and FVG — conducted themselves substantially as if the terms of Contract 41 had
been in effect — as they have done since the beginning of their relationship in the
case of Contract 402. Contract 143 was entered into four years after Contract 41
when it was evident that Contract 41 would not come into effect. The reasons for

100

401 Oficio 076-99 Clasificacion GaP referred to in FVG's letter dated April 16, 2000. Exhibit R-41.

Exhibit R-41.

54

declaring the Equipment Usufruct Contracts /esivo as stated in the “Exposicién
de Motivos” of the Lesivo Resolution are substantially the same as those that
prevented Contract 41 becoming effective (lack of approval by Acuerdo
Gubernativo and by Congress) or relate to the need to follow the procedures for
public contracting that, notwithstanding the fact that they had already been
followed by FVG and FEGUA in respect of the same equipment in the case of
Contract 41, had been to no avail to secure the approvals entirely under the

Government's control.

145. Respondent has argued that FVG was fully aware of the approval
conditions of Contract 143 when it entered into it since its objective was the
same: the usufruct of the equipment. Respondent has denied that FEGUA and
FVG entered into Contract 143 at the Government's request. Who took the
initiative to sign a new contract is irrelevant to the Tribunal’s conclusion. FEGUA
and FVG were faced with a de facto situation which they tried to reflect in
Contract 143, and FEGUA benefited from a 25% increase in the canon stipulated
in Contract 41.'°

146. Even if FEGUA’s actions with respect to Contract 41/143 and in its
allowance to FVG to use the rail equipment were ultra vires (not “pursuant to
domestic law’), “principles of fairness” should prevent the government from
raising “violations of its own law as a jurisdictional defense when [in this case,
operating in the guise of FEGUA, it] knowingly overlooked them and [effectively]

endorsed an investment which was not in compliance with its law.”"°

147. Based on these considerations the Tribunal finds that Respondent
is precluded from raising any objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground
that Claimant's investment is not a covered investment under the Treaty or the
ICSID Convention.

102 The Tribunal notes that prior ICSID tribunals have accorded determinative import to such de facto

situations. For instance, in Amco Asia the Tribunal held that even if the government's action did not change
the legal realities, it did create a de facto situation on which the Tribunal based its decision. Amco Asia
Corp., Pan-American Development Ltd and PT Amco Asia Indonesia v. Republic of Indonesia (Case No.
ARB/81/1), Award (Original Arbitration Proceeding), November 20, 1984, para. 257.

108 Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (\CSID Case No.
ARB/03/25), Award, August 16, 2007, para. 346.

55

4. THIRD OBJECTION

148. As already pointed out, in its First Decision on Jurisdiction the
Tribunal determined that:

“(b) the waivers submitted by the Claimant pursuant to Article
10.18.2 are valid in respect of the claim arising from the Lesivo
Resolution and from subsequent conduct of the Respondent
pursuant to the Lesivo Resolution and, therefore, fulfill the
Respondent's consent to arbitration conditions under Article 10.18
in respect of that claim.”

149. When Respondent requested a clarification of the First Decision on
Jurisdiction the Tribunal denied the request because it was the Tribunal’s view
that:

“the reasoning of the Tribunal leading to its decision clearly
excludes claims based on the measures at issue in the local
arbitrations under Deed 402 and Deed 820 irrespective of the
article of CAFTA under which they would be advanced. On the
other hand, Article 10.5 provides for the minimum standard of
treatment under customary international law. This is a general and
wide ranging standard of treatment that may cover claims based
on other measures taken by Respondent beyond those at issue in
the local arbitrations. It would be inappropriate for the Tribunal to
exclude them a priori or to speculate on how Claimant may
articulate its claims.”

150. Now Claimant has articulated its claims in its Memorial on the
Merits and Respondent has raised the issue of Claimant's compliance with the
First Decision on Jurisdiction of the Tribunal by allegedly pressing claims
excluded by the terms of this decision.

151. As clearly stated above, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is limited to
claims arising from the Lesivo Resolution and from subsequent conduct of

56

Respondent pursuant to this Resolution. Therefore, Claimant should strictly
circumscribe its claims to the terms of the First Decision on Jurisdiction.

152. As regards payments by FEGUA into the Trust Fund, Respondent
lists specific references to Contracts 402 and 820 in the Memorial on the Merits
in paragraphs 39, 195 and 222. Claimant explains that:

“The only specific references in Claimant's Memorial on the Merits
regarding Guatemala’s failure to make Trust Fund payments are
in the context of factual background (paragraph 39) and in
discussing the reasonable factual assumptions underlying FVG’s
Business Plan (paragraph 222). Nothing in Claimant's Memorial
even arguably suggests that any of its claims — indirect
expropriation, fair and equitable treatment, full protection and
security and national treatment — are based upon Guatemala’s
failure to make payments into the Trust Fund” '*

153. The Tribunal observes that paragraph 195(vii) of the Memorial on
the Merits, which is not referred to in the Counter-Memorial, reads as follows:

“Despite serious breaches of contract by the Government prior to
the Lesivo Resolution, which cannot be allowed to diminish the
amount of compensation due RDC, FVG, through its own efforts,
was on track to achieve its long-term business plan up to the
Lesivo Resolution.”

Both, this paragraph and paragraph 222 are part of the chapter on
compensation. While the Tribunal accepts that paragraph 39 is part of the factual
context, as argued by Claimant, references in the chapter on compensation show
that Claimant continues to press claims related to payments by FEGUA into the
Trust Fund, a matter which the Tribunal has determined to be outside its
jurisdiction and which should not be further discussed in this arbitration.

t04 Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 198.

57

154. As to the removal of squatters, Claimant has drawn a distinction
between the measures subject of the local arbitration on the failure of FEGUA to
remove squatters and the conduct of Respondent subsequent to the Lesivo
Resolution: “in contrast to FVG’s breach of contract claim in the squatters
arbitration, the failure of law enforcement authorities to provide full protection and
security to RDC’s investment arose only after and as result of the issuance of the
Lesivo Resolution.”' To the extent that such difference may be proven, prima
facie, the Tribunal would have jurisdiction to consider measures of Respondent
related to squatters which are part of “the conduct subsequent to the Lesivo
Resolution.”

Vil. DECISION

155. Having carefully considered the parties’ arguments in their written
pleadings and oral submissions, and for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal
has decided: (a) to reject Respondent’s objections ratione temporis and ratione
materiae to its jurisdiction; and (b) to confirm that its jurisdiction is limited to the
Lesivo Resolution and conduct subsequent to this Resolution, which may include
acts or omissions of Respondent related to squatters, but only to the extent that
these result from the Lesivo Resolution.

156. Both parties have requested the award of costs and their respective
legal fees and expenses associated with this phase of the proceeding. The
Tribunal will consider this matter as part of its final award.

157. The Tribunal will order the continuation of the proceeding on the
merits and will establish a calendar for the filing of further pleadings on the merits
after consultation with the parties.

108 Claimant's Counter-Memorial, para. 196. Emphasis in the original.

58

Done in Washington, D.C.

The Tribunal
Mi Lgl ae
Hon. Stuart E. Eizegstat Professor James Crawford
Arbitrator Arbitrator

ted

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal

