INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

RAYMOND CHARLES EYRE AND
MONTROSE DEVELOPMENTS (PRIVATE) LIMITED

Claimants

and

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/16/25

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Lucy Reed, President
Professor Julian DM Lew QC, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Geraldine R. Fischer

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 5 March 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Raymond Charles Eyre and
Montrose Developments (Private) Limited:

Mr Garreth Wong

Ms Rhiannon Price
Mr Navin Joseph Lobo
Mr Theo Rees-Bidder
Bird & Bird LLP

12 New Fetter Lane
London EC4A 1JP
United Kingdom

and

Dr Christopher Harris QC
Dr Cameron Miles

3 Verulam Buildings
Gray’s Inn

London WCIR SNT
United Kingdom

and

Dr Harsha Cabral, PC

114/8 Horton Place

Colombo 07

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Representing Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka:

Hon. Dapula de Livera, President’s Counsel
Mr. Milinda Gunetilleke

Mr. Nirmalan Wigneswaran

Ms. Anusha Jayatilake

Attorney General’s Office

P. O. BOX 502

Hulftsdorp

Colombo 12

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

and

Mr Ricky Diwan QC
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln's Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United Kingdom

and

Mr John Whittaker

Ms Grace Asemota

Ms Caitriona McCarthy
Clyde & Co LLP

The St Botolph Building
138 Houndsditch
London EC3A 7AR
United Kingdom

and

Mr Andrew Chan

Allen & Gledhill LLP

One Marina Boulevard #28-00
Singapore 018989

VI

Vil.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

A. The Request for Arbitration

 

B. Tribunal Constitution
C. The Written and Oral Phases
FACTUAL BACKGROUND.

 

 

A. The Montrose Land and the Initial Development Project:

 

B. The Lease of the Montrose Land to Mr Eyre

C. The Incorporation of Montrose Developments (Private) Limited and the Sale of the
Montrose Land 15

 

D. The Montrose Land Development Planning...
E. The Dredging and Compulsory State Acquisition of the Montrose Land ..........0...0ece 26
F. Montrose Developments Pte Ltd 29
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF
A. The Respondent’s Request for Relief.

 

 

 

B. The Claimants’ Request for Relief
RESPONDENT’S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: IN SUMMARY ..........cccseeees 30

 

A. The Respondent's Initial Jurisdictional Objections......
B. The Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections in Its Reply on Jurisdiction ...... 32

C. The Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections at the Jurisdiction Hearing
and in Its Closing Submission 33

PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: THE MONTROSE LAND LEVEL....35

A. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection A: Montrose Cannot Claim in Respect of the

 

Montrose Land and/or the Entirety of Its Alleged Profit-Earning Capability ......0.0..0.00..... 35
(1) The Respondent’s Position 35
(2) The Claimants’ Position 42

 

B. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection B: The Montrose Land Is Not an Investment
Under Article 1 of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, Because the
Claimants Did Not Make Any Contribution or Take Any Investment Risk.....

(1) The Respondent’s Position 48
(2) The Claimants’ Position 51
PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: THE SHAREHOLDER LEVEL......... 53

 

A. Preliminary Objection C: Any Alleged Shareholder Claim Is ts Dependent Upon the
Land Constituting an Asset of Montrose, Which It Is Not...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection D: Indirect Shareholders Are Not Covered by
Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT; a Locally Incorporated Company Does Not Take the
Nationality of the Indirect Shareholder Under Article 8(2) of the BIT ..
(1) The Respondent’s Position 54
(2) The Claimants’ Position 58
C. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection E: Mr Eyre’s Alleged Beneficial Interest in
the Share Is Not Protected by the BIT
(1) The Respondent’s Position 63
(2) The Claimants’ Position 67
D. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection F: The Alleged Investment Was Not Made in
Accordance with Law and Good Faith, and So is Not a Protected Investment Under
the BIT 70
(1) The Respondent’s Position 70
(2) The Claimants’ Position 1
E. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection G: Mr Eyre Does Not Have a Claim as Indirect
Legal Title Holder to the Montrose Land
(1) The Respondent’s Position 73
(2) The Claimants’ Position 75
F. Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection H: The Claimants’ Reflective Loss Claim Is Not
Permitted Under the BIT 76
(1) The Respondent’s Position 716
(2) The Claimants’ Position 77
VIII. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS
A. Jurisdictional Principle: 78
B. Jurisdiction Ratione Personae 82
C. Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae. 86
(1) The Alleged Investment in the Montrose Land
(2) The Alleged Investment in the Montrose Share.
Ix. COSTS 98
A. The Claimants’ Cost Submissions..................
B. The Respondent’s Cost Submissi 98
C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs .........:000
X. AWARD 101

 

iii

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

BIT also UK-Sri Lanka
BIT

Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments

 

Deed of Transfer

Deed of Transfer of Montrose Land from Electro Holidays to
Montrose Developments (Private) Limited, dated 4 August 2010

 

FCEPO

Greater Colombo Flood Control and Environmental Promotion
Office

 

FCO Memorandum

The United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Commentary on the 1972 UK Model BIT

 

 

MOU Memorandum of Understanding between Electro Holiday Resorts
and Montrose Global LLP
Montrose Montrose Developments (Private) Limited

 

Montrose Global

Montrose Global LLP

 

Montrose Share

The share used to incorporate Montrose Developments Private
Limited as a Sri Lankan private limited company

 

Montrose Singapore

Montrose Developments Pte Limited

 

 

 

 

 

 

RS Sri Lankan Rupees

SFRS Singapore Financial Reporting Standards

SLLRDC Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation
VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

UDA Urban Development Authority of Sri Lanka

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’”) on the basis of the Agreement between
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments (the “BIT” or the “UK-Sri Lanka BIT”) and the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States

(the “ICSID Convention’).

The Claimants are Mr Raymond Charles Eyre (“Mr Eyre’), a British national, and
Montrose Developments (Private) Limited (“Montrose”), a company incorporated under
the laws of Sri Lanka (together, the “Claimants”). Mr Eyre has had a long career in
international finance, including as Managing Director and Head of Leasing and Capital
International Development at Bank of America for 15 years before founding and becoming
the Chairman of Montrose Global LLP (“Montrose Global”), described by the Claimants
as “‘an alternative asset-based investment and management partnership focused on the

1

leasing and financing of large ticket assets and private equity”.

The Respondent is the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (“Sri Lanka” or the

“Respondent’).

The Claimants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

This arbitration concerns a dispute between the Parties arising out of the Claimants’
alleged investment in a plot of land on a lake in Sri Lanka (the “Montrose Land”), which
the Claimants allege was to be developed into a hotel complex (the “Hotel Project”). The

Claimants allege that Sri Lanka expropriated the land by dredging along the shoreline and

' Claimants’ Memorial (“Memorial”), para 6.

restricting access to the Montrose Land without notice and then failing to pay adequate

compensation.

The subject of this Award is Sri Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections brought
under Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention. For the reasons set forth below, the Tribunal
has determined that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae and hence dismisses this

arbitration, with reasonable costs to be borne by the Claimants.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

THE REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION

On 7 July 2016, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration from Mr Eyre and Montrose
against Sri Lanka (the “Request”) together with an affidavit of Mr Eyre dated 30 June
2016 and Exhibits C-001 through C-009.

On 4 August 2016, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request,
supplemented by letter of 27 July 2016, in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID
Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In the Notice of Registration, the
Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon
as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the

Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTION

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention, whereby the Tribunal would comprise three arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each Party and the presiding arbitrator to be appointed by agreement of the

Parties.

The Tribunal is composed of Professor Lucy Reed, a US national, President, appointed by
agreement of the Parties; Professor Julian DM Lew QC, a British national, appointed by
the Claimants; and Professor Brigitte Stern, a French national, appointed by the

Respondent.

On 6 March 2017, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms Geraldine Fischer, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

THE WRITTEN AND ORAL PHASES

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the

Parties on 1 May 2017 by teleconference.

Following the first session, on 1 June 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No 1.
Procedural Order No 1 provides, inter alia, that the applicable ICSID Arbitration Rules
are those in effect from 10 April 2006, the procedural language is English, and the place

of proceeding is London, United Kingdom.

In accordance with Procedural Order No 1, the Claimants filed their Memorial on 11
August 2017 (the “Memorial’), together with the Witness Statement of Mr Eyre dated 2
August 2017 (the “First Eyre Statement’), the Witness Statement of Mr Sanjeewa
Wijeratne dated 2 August 2017, the Expert Report of Mr KBV Dharmasiri dated 8 August
2007, the Expert Report of Mr Achin Khanna dated 11 August 2017, Exhibits C-010
through C-087 and Legal Authorities CL-001 through CL-123.

On 8 December 2017, Sri Lanka filed its Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections pursuant
to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention (the “Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections”)
which contained a request that the Tribunal bifurcate and address the Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections “as a preliminary issue and/or by way of formal stay of the
proceedings on the merits” (the “Respondent’s Request to Bifurcate”), together with

Exhibits R-001 through R-011 and Legal Authorities RL-001 through RL-049.

On 29 December 2017, the Claimants filed their Objections to the Respondent’s Request

to Bifurcate with a proposed schedule and two Legal Authorities.

20.

21,

22.

23.

24.

25.

Further to the Tribunal’s instructions, on 10 January 2018, Sri Lanka filed its Response to
the Claimants’ Objection to the Respondent’s Request to Bifurcate together with one Legal

Authority.

On 17 January 2018, further to the Tribunal’s directions, the Claimants filed their

Observations on the Respondent’s 10 January 2018 Response on the issue of bifurcation.

In January and February 2018, the Tribunal consulted with the Parties on the proposed

scope of bifurcation and possible hearing dates.

On 21 February 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No 2, granting Sri Lanka’s
Request to Bifurcate the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections and setting the procedural

timetable for the bifurcated first phase.

On 25 April 2018, the Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (the
“Counter-Memorial’) together with the Second Witness Statement of Mr Eyre dated 25
April 2018 (the “Second Eyre Statement”), Exhibits C-088 through C-098 and Legal
Authorities CL-124 through CL-176.

In May 2018, the Parties pursued document production requests. On 30 May 2018, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No 3 addressing the Parties’ contested document

production requests.

On 18 July 2018, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction (the “Reply”) together
with the Expert Report of Ms Narissa Chen dated 18 July 2018, Exhibits R-012 through
R-022 and Legal Authorities RL-050 through RL-148.

On 31 July 2018, the Secretary-General moved the Tribunal to stay the proceeding
pursuant to ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(d) for non-payment of
the required advances. The proceeding was stayed on | August 2018. On 9 August 2018,
after the Centre received the requested advance from the Respondent, the Tribunal lifted

the stay of the proceeding.

On 13 August 2018, the Tribunal granted the Claimants’ request for an extension to file
their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction until 7 September 2018.

4

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

On 6 September 2018, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (the
“Rejoinder”) with Legal Authorities CL-177 through CL-235. The Rejoinder also
contained Claimants’ application, under ICSID Arbitration Rules 41(1), 26(3) and 27, to
exclude three allegedly new jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent in its Reply

(the “Exclusion Application’).

On 18 September 2018, the Respondent opposed the Claimants’ Exclusion Application
and filed an application to adduce two new legal authorities and one new exhibit (the “New
Evidence Application”). Sri Lanka also requested disclosure of “documents containing
and/or evidencing any discussion and/or negotiation concerning the terms of the MOU and
any alleged developments and/or changes in those terms, subsequent to the signature of
that document” (the “Disclosure Application”). As discussed below (at paragraphs 80-
86), the “MOU” is an undated document headed “Memorandum of Understanding
between Electro Holiday Resorts and Montrose Global LLP”, which became the focus of

substantial dispute between the Parties.

On 24 September 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No 4, denying the
Claimants’ Exclusion Application on grounds that the Claimants had requested and
received an extension of time to address the allegedly new jurisdictional objections in their
Rejoinder. The Tribunal subsequently allowed the Parties to make substantive
submissions on the relevant three jurisdictional objections at the 17-19 October 2018
hearing on jurisdiction in London (the “Jurisdiction Hearing”). The Tribunal also
granted the Respondent’s New Evidence Application and invited the Claimants to respond

to the Respondent’s Disclosure Application by 27 September 2018.

On 27 September 2018, the Claimants opposed the Respondent’s Disclosure Application
and represented that, in any event, they did not have in their possession or control any

responsive documents.

On 28 September 2018, the Tribunal held a meeting by teleconference with the Parties to

address the organisation for the Jurisdiction Hearing.

31. On2 October 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No 5 addressing the organisation
of the Jurisdiction Hearing and the Respondent’s Disclosure Application. The Tribunal
granted the Disclosure Application and directed the Claimants to conduct a further search
for “doc cc and/or evidencing any di ion and/or negotiation concerning

the terms of the MOU and any alleged developments and/or changes in those terms, subsequent

to the signature of that document” and then produce those documents immediately or report

the results of the search to the Tribunal by 8 October 2018.

32. On 10 and 11 October 2018, the Parties exchanged correspondence regarding their
positions on the Claimants’ compliance with the further search directed in Procedural
Order No 5. On 11 October 2018, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it would address
the issue at the Jurisdiction Hearing. At the opening of the Jurisdiction Hearing, counsel
for the Respondent confirmed that they would address the issues during opening

submissions, although Sri Lanka was not seeking an order from the Tribunal at this stage.”
33. The Jurisdiction Hearing proceeded on 17-19 October 2018.

34, The following persons were present at the Hearing on Jurisdiction in London:

Tribunal:
Professor Lucy Reed President
Professor Julian DM Lew QC Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms Geraldine R Fischer

For the Claimants:
Dr Christopher Harris QC
Dr Cameron Miles
Mr Garreth Wong
Ms Rhiannon Price
Mr Theo Rees-Bidder
Dr Harsha Cabral PC
Mr Nishan Premathiratne AAL
Ms Marina Litvak
Mr Raymond Charles Eyre

2 Transcript (“Tr”) Day One 9:10-20.

Secretary of the Tribunal

3 Verulam Buildings

3 Verulam Buildings

Bird & Bird

Bird & Bird

Bird & Bird

Chambers of Dr Harsha Cabral
Chambers of Dr Harsha Cabral
Counsel, Montrose

Montrose

35.

36.

Mr Sanjeewa Wijeratne Witness

For the Respondent:

Mr Ricky Diwan QC Essex Court Chambers

Mr John Whittaker Clyde & Co LLP

Ms Grace Asemota Clyde & Co LLP

Ms Caitriona McCarthy Clyde & Co LLP

Ms Sophie Morrison Clyde & Co LLP

Mr Andrew Chan Chee Yin Allen & Gledhill LLP

Mr Milinda Gunetilleke Attorney General's Department

Mr Nirmalan Wigneswaran Attorney General's Department

Ms Anusha Jayatilake Attorney General's Department

Mr CB Amerasinghe Sri Lanka Land Reclamation &
Development Corporation

Ms HKKW Ekanayake Sri Lanka Land Reclamation &
Development Corporation

Court Reporter:

Ms Diana Burden

Interpreter:

Mr Mohamed Rizvi Rawoof thebigword

Observer:

Mr Geoffrey Shaw Temple Bar Scholar (with Dr Christopher

Harris QC).

On the first day of the Jurisdiction Hearing, counsel presented opening statements. On the

first and second days of the Jurisdiction Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants:
Mr Wijeratne
Mr Eyre

On behalf of the Respondent:

Ms Chen

On the second and third day of the Jurisdiction Hearing, counsel presented closing
arguments. In response to inquiries from the Tribunal as to the possible outcomes
stemming from Sri Lanka’s various jurisdictional objections, counsel for the Claimants
submitted a demonstrative in the form of a Decision Tree. Counsel for both sides

addressed the Decision Tree during their closings. At the close of the Jurisdiction Hearing,

37.

38.

39.

40.

4l.

42.

the Tribunal requested the Parties to attempt to update and agree on the Decision Tree.

The Tribunal also directed the Parties to file post-hearing submissions.

On 7 December 2018, as directed, the Claimants filed their Post-Hearing Brief and the

Respondent filed its Closing Submissions on Jurisdiction.

On 11 December 2018, the Respondents filed an application to exclude two allegedly new
substantive issues in the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief (the “Post-Hearing Exclusion
Application”). In brief, the alleged new issues were: first, the Claimants’ assertion that
under Sri Lankan law no express trust arose from the MOU over the profits from the future
Hotel Project; and, second, the Claimants’ alternative case that a constructive trust was

created for Mr Eyre in relation to the Montrose shareholding.

By letter dated 14 December 2018, the Claimants’ counsel reported to the Tribunal that
the Parties had not been able to agree a final version of the Decision Tree. The Claimants
submitted a copy of the Decision Tree “in its almost finally agreed form — thereby
incorporating a large number of changes proposed by Sri Lanka that the Claimants do not

accept”.

By letter also dated 14 December 2018, Sri Lanka’s counsel confirmed that they had been
unable to agree with the Claimants’ counsel on a final version of the Decision Tree,
because the Decision Tree “presents a number of the key issues from the Claimants’
perspective in the body of the flow chart with a number of points raised by the Respondent
addressed by way of footnote rather than in the chart itself ... and the visual impression

created by the Chart reflects the Claimants’ position and not the Respondent’s position”.

On 21 December 2018, the Claimants opposed the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Exclusion
Application. Again in brief, the Claimants argued that, first, the express trust issue had
been sufficiently addressed at the Jurisdiction Hearing and, second, any disadvantage to
Sri Lanka caused by the late raising of the constructive trust issue could be alleviated by

allowing Sri Lanka a supplementary submission.

On 18 January 2019, Sri Lanka maintained the arguments in support of its Post-Hearing

Exclusion Application.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

On 6 February 2019, by Procedural Order No 6, the Tribunal (by majority) granted the
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Exclusion Application, finding that the Claimants had failed
to provide satisfactory justification for raising two new issues after the Jurisdiction

Hearing.

On 20 February 2019, as directed, the Claimants filed their Statement of Costs (the
“Claimants’ Costs Statement”) and the Respondent filed its Schedules of Costs Relating
to Jurisdiction and to Substantive Proceedings (Excluding Costs of Jurisdiction

Application) (the “Respondent’s Costs Statement”).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Tribunal sets out below the factual background as relevant to the jurisdictional phase
of these proceedings, based on the Parties’ documentary and witness evidence. The record

reflects several significant factual disputes.

As will be seen, the Claimants corrected and supplemented certain aspects of the factual
background as they reacted to Sri Lanka’s case and as Mr Eyre located additional
documents in his personal records. The Tribunal includes the evolving presentation of the

facts in this Factual Background section, identified as such.

THE MONTROSE LAND AND THE INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

The Montrose Land is a plot of land of approximately 3.87 acres on the banks of Lake
Diyawanna, approximately eight kilometres to the southeast of downtown Colombo and
bordering the township of Kotte. When the Montrose Land was officially surveyed in
August 1978, it was owned by Electro Plastics Limited, which had a factory on the site.
The then Managing Director of Electro Plastics Limited, Dr Sir Don Buddadasa

Wethasinghe, had the idea to redevelop the Montrose Land for a hotel.

On 11 September 1979, the Urban Development Authority of Sri Lanka (the “UDA”)
granted preliminary planning approval to Dr Wethasinghe for the proposed hotel on the

following terms:

With reference to your letter dated 21 August 1979, forwarding the
preliminary plans submitted by your architects, Messrs Alfred Wong
Associates of Singapore, there is no objection to the proposed
development from a planning point of view. You will, however, be
required to submit detailed drawings to the Local Authority for
formal approval. ... It is presumed that you have received the
approval of the Ceylon Tourist Board for the Hotel Complex.*

49. On 13 September 1979, the Ceylon Tourist Board granted Dr Wethasinghe conditional
permission to construct a 212-room hotel complex, subject to certain conditions including
the provision of detailed cost estimates and an implementation plan within three months

of approval and ideally the commencement of construction within six months.

50. Dr Wethasinghe thereafter advanced his plans to develop the hotel. At some point prior
to October 1980, the name of Electro Plastics Limited was changed to Electro Holiday
Resorts Ltd (“Electro Resorts’). In May 1980, a further survey was undertaken of both
the Montrose Land and an approximately seven-acre plot on the far side of Lake
Diyawanna (later purchased by Mr Eyre and known as the “Natiso Land”). The Montrose
Land and the Natiso Land are shown as Plots | and 2, on the left and right side,

respectively, on the survey reproduced below.*

3 Memorial, para 15; Exhibit C-11.
+ Memorial, para 17.2; Exhibit C-13.

 

Ma Je Sotunga, PS. Te

 
  

Parangigaiusbura
foraerly beslonging to
Azeez nov vested io

 

Pilea
Yornerly delonging to
8. ¥, Amszasinghe now
vested in the State

   

‘veated in the State

   

E> an
C {
VE A IN|
OP ever} atiotasats of land called Potuptilove, Pelmophuatts, Beligimatte oto, Divamavebelpaia kusbar
Fotavaaan Paravent Kamketiye ete.,and Mecgabainsbur., Dangahtlusbura ete, nov forming one property sarked lots 1& 2
SAIS i ch ns unseen
5 tani te one met ante alot aot foe Send Hate of Settee
Was mune hes er airins fonts
sewn se shown stove

 

   

 

nants YY
hie. 4 Lever :

 

Lice

 

 

51. It was also in 1980 that Dr Wethasinghe met Mr Eyre. Dr Wethasinghe retained Samuel
Montagu & Co in London to facilitate financing to develop the Montrose Land hotel, and
Mr Eyre was assigned to assist him. Mr Eyre recalls that Dr Wethasinghe considered the
hotel development plan to have great potential, because the Sri Lankan government
planned to build a new parliament complex on an island in Diyawanna Lake and there
would be renewed interest in the Kotte area. Mr Eyre also recalls that he actively
approached a number of international banks and there was “an appetite for providing
funding” including from Chase Manhattan and Citibank, but works “ground to a halt with
the outbreak of civil war in Sri Lanka in July 1983”.5 The hotel financing work was put
on indefinite hold, but, in the course of their dealings, Dr Wethasinghe and Mr Eyre
developed a close friendship. Mr Eyre thereafter attended many Wethasinghe family

events including the marriage of Dr Wethasinghe’s son, Mr Ravi Wethasinghe.

52. On 31 October 1991, the UDA granted conditional planning permission to Electro Resorts
for “Residential Development” and “Mixed Development of Residential and Commercial

Development of Shops & Offices Only” for the Montrose Land and Natiso Land.®

53. Dr Wethasinghe died in 1996, after which control of Electro Resorts passed to his son.
Ravi Wethasinghe continued efforts to develop the Montrose Land, the Natiso Land and

two other nearby parcels known as the “Wethasinghe Land” and the “Tubal Land”.

54. In November 2000, the UDA wrote to Ravi Wethasinghe confirming that it had granted
preliminary planning clearance, which would be valid for one year, for the development
of the Montrose Land and nearby parcels subject to certain planning guidelines and

instructions.

55. Over the next several years, Ravi Wethasinghe was engaged in several business ventures
in Sri Lanka. He controlled a Sri Lankan company, La’ tec, which built buses for the public
transportation system. In or around 2001, when Sri Lanka began to privatise bus routes,

Ravi Wethasinghe determined to try to bid on certain bus routes. To obtain the personal

5 Witness Statement of Raymond Charles Eyre dated 2 August 2017 (“First Eyre Statement”), paras 6-7.
© Memorial, para 17.4; Exhibit C-16.

12

financing to do so, he turned to Mr Eyre, who was then at Bank of America. Mr Eyre
initially refused. In 2003, Ravi Wethasinghe obtained planning permission and financing

for the Wethasinghe Land, on which a residential complex ultimately was built.

B. THE LEASE OF THE MONTROSE LAND TO MR EYRE

56. In around 2003, Ravi Wethasinghe bid for a privatised bus route but could not afford to
pay the US$ 1.1 million bond required by the Sri Lankan government. Out of loyalty to
Ravi Wethasinghe’s father, Mr Eyre reconsidered his original refusal to lend funds to Ravi
Wethasinghe and agreed to provide the financing for the bond by way of a personal loan
from himself and his wife (a Singapore national) of US$ 1.1 million, subject to being
granted a lease on the Montrose Land as security for the loan. Mr Eyre attributed his
decision to make the loan to Ravi Wethasinghe to “loyalty to his late father’,’ and testified

at the Hearing on Jurisdiction as follows:

Iwas still at Bank of America. At the last minute when he was due
to make a bid for the bus companies he called me to say he did not
have the money to put up the bid bond and would I help him, which
I guess is a phone call I regret to this day, frankly, but it did happen.
I lent him I think approximately $1 million converted into rupees,
but it was around $1 million to go into the bid bond. ... He was the
youngest son of a very dear old friend of mine and I agreed to that
to try to see if the project could go through.*

57. There is no loan agreement or other documentation in the record concerning Mr Eyre’s
US$ 1.1 million loan to Ravi Wethasinghe. When asked on cross-examination at the
Jurisdiction Hearing whether he had entered into a written loan agreement with Ravi
Wethasinghe, Mr Eyre testified: “I am fairly sure we didn’t because it was just a rush of

9

time’”.” Mr Eyre recalled that he paid the total US$ 1.1 million to Ravi Wethasinghe in

more than one sum, but he could not locate any bank documents showing definitively when

7 First Eyre Statement, para 10.
8 Tr Day One 113:12-114:9.
° Tr Day One 138:11-15.

and how the sums were paid.!? Nor could Mr Eyre locate any documents concerning the

related debt owed to him by Ravi Wethasinghe.!!

58. On 11 August 2005, Electro Resorts granted Mr Eyre a lease over the Montrose Land for
25 years expiring on 30 June 2030 (the “Lease”).'* The Lease is written and notarised.'*
The Lease makes no reference to a US$ 1.1 million loan from Mr Eyre to Ravi
Wethasinghe. The Lease recites that the monthly rental is to be Sri Lankan Rupees (“Rs”)

125,000 for a total rental of Rs 30 million over the 25-year lease period, and that:

the Lessee has deposited with the Lessor a sum of Rupees Thirty
Million (Rs.30,000,000/-) at the time of execution of these presents
(the receipt whereof the Lessor doth hereby admit and acknowledge)
to be set off on account of the monthly rental throughout the
leasehold period.'*

59. Mr Eyre testified that he could not remember whether he had in fact made the deposit of
Rs 30 million, and suggested that the comparatively low rental fee in relation to the size
of his loan to Ravi Wethasinghe might be because he also arranged a mortgage on the

Natiso Land.!5

60. At around the same time as the lease in 2005, Ravi Wethasinghe informed Mr Eyre of his
plans to develop the Montrose Land and nearby parcels, noting that he had secured
approval in late 2000 from the Sri Lankan Board of Investment for a mixed development
project with foreign collaboration on the Montrose and Natiso Land. In that connection,
Ravi Wethasinghe asked Mr Eyre to contribute US$ 350,000 in funding for the initial
development of the land. Mr Eyre agreed, subject to the requirements, first, that the US$

350,000 be distributed over three months and repaid by 31 March 2008 and, second, that

16

he be appointed a director of Electro Resorts. Ravi Wethasinghe agreed to these

1 Tr Day One 141:18-24, 145:21-146:11.

' Tr Day One 150:20-24.

2 Memorial, para 24; Exhibit C-27; First Eyre Statement, para 11.
13 Exhibit C-27, pages 6-8.

14 Exhibit C-27, page 2 (emphasis in original).

15 Tr Day One 147:9-25, 148:1-19.

‘© Memorial, para 26; First Eyre Statement, para 13.

requirements, which were recorded, not at the time, but some two years later in an
Agreement to Finance dated 13 December 2007.'7 Mr Eyre testified that he could not
locate bank records documenting when and how he made the US$ 350,000 loan to Ravi

Wethasinghe.'*

C. THE INCORPORATION OF MONTROSE DEVELOPMENTS (PRIVATE) LIMITED AND THE
SALE OF THE MONTROSE LAND

61. In early 2010, Ravi Wethasinghe proposed to transfer title to the Montrose Land to Mr
Eyre rather than repay the loans. Mr Eyre decided that his “best option was to progress
the hotel development and recoup the loaned sums from its eventual sale”, and so he agreed
with Ravi Wethasinghe to take the title and “transfer an additional sum as consideration

for the Montrose Land”.!°

62. On 27 July 2010, the board of Electro Resorts resolved to sell the Montrose Land to Mr

Eyre for the “negotiated sum” of Rs 100 million (approximately US$ 887,000).”°

63. On3 August 2010, Montrose Developments Private Limited (again, the second Claimant,
“Montrose” was incorporated as a Sri Lankan private limited company with one share
(the “Montrose Share”), to hold legal title to the Montrose Land. According to Mr Eyre,
his “understanding at the time was that it was necessary for a Sri Lankan company to have
a Sri Lankan national as the initial subscriber of shares and company director in order to
comply with local legal requirements”.?! At the suggestion of a business associate in the
tourism business, Mr Wijeratne, Mr Joseph Ranjan Fernando was named the nominee
shareholder and director of Montrose. Mr Eyre testified repeatedly that Montrose was to
be only the legal owner of the Montrose Land, while he was to be the beneficial owner and

Mr Fernando was to act only on his instructions. According to Mr Eyre:

7 Memorial, para 26; Exhibit C-29.

'8 Tr Day One 133:2-6.

'9 First Eyre Statement, paras 14-15.

20 First Eyre Statement, para 16; Exhibit C-33.
2! First Eyre Statement, para 18.

The intention and understanding of all concerned was that at all
times that I would retain full beneficial ownership and control over
the company.”

64. At the hearing, Mr Eyre testified on cross-examination that he did not use or understand
the phrase “beneficial interest”.??

65. There was no written agreement between Mr Eyre and Mr Fernando. The Claimants’
evidence is that, to ensure Mr Fernando could be removed as the sole director of Montrose
at any time, Mr Eyre (through Mr Wijeratne) obtained a signed and undated resignation
letter from Mr Fernando, a copy of which is in the record.*+ At the Jurisdiction Hearing,
Mr Wijeratne testified that Mr Fernando also provided a signed blank share transfer form,

but no copy of that form was entered in the record.”°

66. Sri Lanka disputes Mr Eyre’s testimony on the reason for having Mr Fernando serve as
the nominee shareholder and director of Montrose. According to Sri Lanka, there were no
legal restrictions at the time precluding foreign shareholders or directors from acquiring
Sri Lankan land, but Section 58(1) of the Finance Act No 11 of 1963 (the “Sri Lankan
Finance Act”) did give rise to a statutory obligation on a foreign citizen purchasing Sri
Lankan land to pay a tax equivalent to the full value of the property.”° Sri Lanka argues
that the real purpose for Mr Eyre to incorporate Montrose with Mr Fernando as sole
shareholder and director must have been to evade this 100% tax on the purchase of the

Montrose Land from Electro Resorts.””

> First Eyre Statement, para 18.

3 Tr Day One 196:1 1-15, 204:25, 205: 1-2.

24 Memorial, para 29; Exhibit C-85.

25 Tr Day One 235:3-7.

26 Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections Pursuant to Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention
(“Preliminary Objections”), para 20; Finance Act No 11 of 1963 (RL-2).

2” Preliminary Objections, paras 20-22.

67. On 4 August 2010, one day after Montrose was incorporated, Electro Resorts transferred
ownership of the Montrose Land to Montrose by a Deed of Transfer."* The Deed of

Transfer, which is notarised by Ms Sarjonie Mudalige, provides in relevant part:

AND WHEREAS the VENDOR has agreed with MONTROSE
DEVELOPMENTS (PRIVATE) LIMITED a company duly
incorporated in the Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka
(hereinafter called and referred to as the PURCHASER ...) for the
absolute sale and conveyance to the PURCHASER all that allotment
of land depicted in Plan No.1700 ... free of all encumbrances and
charges whatsoever at or for the price of sum of RUPEES ONE
HUNDRED MILLION ONLY (Rs100,000,000/-) of lawful money of
the said Republic of Sri Lanka.

NOW KNOW YE AND THESE PRESENTS WITNESS that in
pursuance of the said agreement and in consideration of the said
sum of RUPEES ONE HUNDRED MILLION ONLY
(RS.100,000,000/-) of lawful money of the said Republic of Sri
Lanka well and truly paid to the VENDOR by the PURCHASER (the
receipt whereof the VENDOR doth hereby expressly admit and
acknowledge) the VENDOR doth hereby sell grant convey transfer
assign set over and assure unto the PURCHASER all that allotment
of land depicted in Plan No.1700 ....

68. The notary added at the end of her certification:

I further certify and attest that the within mentioned consideration
was not passed in my presence.”

69. The Claimants admit that there was no written sale contract for the Montrose Land:

The Claimants have never relied on a written contract of sale
because no such contract exists. As Mr Eyre says, the Montrose
Land was transferred by way of a Deed of Transfer, which has
already been disclosed.*°

28 Memorial, para 32; Exhibits C-7 and C-35.
29 Exhibit C-7.

3 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (“Rejoinder”), para 188.

17

70. In their Memorial, the Claimants describe the payment for the sale of the Montrose Land
as coming some eight months later, on 4 April 2011. According to Mr Eyre in his First

Witness Statement:

Shortly before 4 April 2011, I transferred the additional sums in
respect of the purchase price from another company, Montrose
Developments Pte Limited (Montrose Singapore) (which is owned
99% by me), to a bank account held by Electro Holidays [footnote
to Exhibit C-44].*!

71. In their Memorial, the Claimants rely on a written receipt from Electro Resorts to Montrose
Developments Pte Limited (“Montrose Singapore”) dated 4 April 2011, which is Exhibit
C-44, as proof of this payment. Exhibit C-44, which became the focus of substantial
discussion and dispute between the Parties, merits quoting in full. The document is on
Electro Resorts letterhead, is dated 4 April 2011, is headed “Receipt”, and is signed by

“Director for Electro Holiday Resorts Ltd” (apparently Ravi Wethasinghe).

We do hereby acknowledge receipt of US$ 1000,000/-(US Dollars
One Million Only) from Montrose Developments (PVT) Ltd being
the purchase price of land depicted in plan no 1700 dated 14"
February 1978 made by S.J.Setunga Licensed Surveyor containing
in extent THREE ACRES THREE ROODS AND TWENTY FIVE
PERCHES (A3.R3.P25) and situated at Kotuwegoda in the district
of Colombo which [sic — is] more fully described in the schedule to
the Deed of Transfer No 2207 dated 04'" August 2010 attested by
C.K.LP.A. Mudalige, Notary Public.**

72. Inits Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections, Sri Lanka describes Exhibit C-44 as a “curious
document” in that it refers to receipt from Montrose Singapore of US$ 1 million, rather

than Rs 100 million or the US dollar equivalent of US$ 887,000 described by Mr Eyre.*

Further, Montrose Singapore was not incorporated until September 2011, some five

3! First Eyre Statement, para 20.
> Exhibit C-44.

3 Preliminary Objections, para 17.

months later.** At the Jurisdiction Hearing, Mr Eyre testified that he wanted to correct the

original reference of “(Montrose Singapore)” in Exhibit C-44 to “(Montrose Sri Lanka)”.*>

73. In their Counter-Memorial, having undertaken a further document search and obtained
records from BNP Paribas Wealth Management (among other banks at which Mr Eyre had
accounts), the Claimants withdrew their reliance on Exhibit C-44 as evidence of payment
for the Montrose Land and corrected the evidentiary record. They explain in the Counter-
Memorial that Montrose Aircraft Leasing Pte Limited (“Montrose Aircraft Leasing”), a
Singapore company within the Montrose Group of companies owned 99% by Mr Eyre (the
“Montrose Group”), made a payment on 5 July 2012 of US$ 400,055 to Latec
International Logistics and Shipping Pte Ltd (“Latec International”), a company of which
Ravi Wethasinghe was a 50% shareholder and a director.*° The Claimants rely on
contemporaneous emails between Mr Eyre and Ravi Wethasinghe in June and July 2012
to confirm that the US$ 400,055 was a contribution in respect of the Montrose Land. In
those emails, Ravi Wethasinghe provided Mr Eyre with reports on the Montrose Land title
search; Mr Eyre agreed to release US$ 400,000 “as a sign of good faith and to keep the
approvals process going”;?’ Ravi Wethasinghe asked that the payment be made into the
Latec International account; Mr Eyre so directed the payment; and Ravi Wethasinghe

acknowledged receipt of the payment.**

74. In its Reply, Sri Lanka accuses the Claimants of retreating from reliance on the 4 April
2011 Electro Resorts receipt in Exhibit C-44 “because its contents are untrue, i.e. it was
manufactured for some ulterior reason”.*? The Claimants object to this characterisation in
their Rejoinder, stating that “Mr Eyre relied on this receipt as he could not precisely recall

the payment in question [which] was in the context of a personal transaction, managed

* Preliminary Objections, para 17.

38 Tr Day One 109:3-12.

8 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Counter-Memorial”), para 11; Exhibit C-91.

57 Counter-Memorial, para 11.4.1; Witness Statement of Raymond Charles Eyre dated 25 April 2018 (“Second Eyre
Statement”), para 20(b); Exhibit C-89.

38 Counter-Memorial, paras 1 1.4.2-11.4.4; Exhibits C-90-C-92 and R-12.4.

» Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction (“Reply”), para 4.

 

75.

76.

71.

78.

without the corporate infrastructure of the Montrose Group”.*° Further, say the Claimants,
the receipt was not generated by Montrose but by Electro Resorts. In his Second Witness
Statement, Mr Eyre explains that, despite significant efforts, he had “not been able to find
the relevant entry for the payment to Electro Holidays” of the purchase price for the

Montrose Land.*!

There is an entry on the 2012 Montrose books indicating that the sum of Rs 100 million
payable to Electro Resorts was settled directly by Mr Eyre, and so was treated as a loan
repayable by Montrose to Mr Eyre.*” In specific, the Notes to the Financial Statement in
the Independent Auditor’s Report of 14 August 2013 record the sum of Rs 100 million as
payable to Electro Resorts in 2010/2011 and to Mr Eyre in 2011/2012, followed by:

Note: The amounts payable to Electro Holiday Resorts (Pvt) Ltd on
land acquisition, had been settled by the director Mr.R C Eyre.
Accordingly the company has to pay that amount to Mr.R C Eyre.

The Claimants deny that any such loan was made by Mr Eyre. They explain that “this was

nothing more than a book debt reflecting the anticipated payment of the purchase price of

the Montrose Land by Mr Eyre on Montrose’s behalf”,*# which did not occur.

The Claimants confirm in their Counter-Memorial that further document searches did not
uncover any documents concerning Mr Eyre’s original loans to Ravi Wethasinghe of
US$ 1.1 million and US$ 350,000. Counsel for the Claimants assert that this is
“unsurprising, as the transactions occurred over 10 years ago, and the payment records

associated are not easily obtainable from the banks involved”.*>

In the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections, Sri Lanka points out that Mr Eyre fails to

mention in his evidence that, based on Minutes of the Montrose Board of Directors, Mr

4 Rejoinder, para 185.

4! Second Eyre Statement, para 18.

+ Preliminary Objections, para 25; Exhibit R-5.
43 Exhibit R-5, page 11.

4 Counter-Memorial, para 18.

45 Counter-Memorial, para 13.

20

Fernando transferred the Montrose Share to Mr Eyre on 11 October 2010, which was
subsequent to the 4 August 2010 Deed of Transfer of the Montrose Land and prior to the
alleged payment for the Montrose Land by Montrose Singapore on 4 April 2011.4° In
their Counter-Memorial, the Claimants explain that the 11 October 2010 transfer was
defective under Sri Lankan law because of the lack of a completed share transfer form by
which Mr Eyre consented to the transfer, and hence the transfer was never reported to the
Registrar of Companies.*” The transfer was eventually regularised, say the Claimants, by
the transfer of the Montrose Share from Mr Fernando to Montrose Singapore in March

2012.

79. In response to criticism by Sri Lanka concerning the late discovery of certain documents
and the absence of other documents underpinning various loans and payments, counsel for
Mr Eyre emphasised that “Mr Eyre’s activities in Sri Lanka were very much of a personal
character” outside his busy professional finance practice.** Mr Eyre testified that he did
not conduct document searches on his personal computer and in fact he had changed
computer systems at some point, but he personally did manual document searches “over
several weekends”.*? At the Jurisdiction Hearing, when asked in cross-examination what
he thought of the criticisms made of the limited documentation of his alleged investment

in Sri Lanka, Mr Eyre testified:

Well, I think in response to that I would like to say that this was not
a business for me. This was really a personal favour I was doing
and I was really trying to collect my debts. I was at the time this
initially started as I just mentioned in the global leasing group at
Bank of America. That was a $25 billion portfolio. I had 250 people
working for me around the world. This event was a very small piece
of my time.

When I joined Montrose from Bank of America we had a 12 billion-
dollar portfolio which was probably around 170 aircraft globally.
Unfortunately, after the tragic events of 9/11, a number of those

46 Preliminary Objections, para 26.

47 Counter-Memorial, para 20; Second Eyre Statement, para 22.
48 Counter-Memorial, para 4.

4° Tr Day One 152:5-23.

21

aircraft were parked, so my so-called semi-retirement job became a
full-time job and that continued. So this was really a very small
element of my time. It was an annoyance. It was an embarrassment
to me that I had lent money to this guy but really he had just treated
me in this manner.°°

80. In its Reply, Sri Lanka relies heavily on the Memorandum of Understanding between
Montrose Global and Electro Resorts (again, the “MOU”), which the Claimants produced
after Mr Eyre’s further document searches but did not mention or discuss in their Counter-
Memorial.*! The MOU is undated, but, alleges Sri Lanka, presumably was signed
sometime in late July 2010 before the 4 August 2010 Deed of Transfer.*? To situate the
MOU in time, the Respondent relies on an email dated 23 July 2010 from Ravi
Wethasinghe to Mr Eyre with the Subject heading of “MOU”.°? The email reads in

relevant part:

With your approval and agreement we can implement this without
delay.

A-1. Register Montrose Developments Ltd in Sri Lanka and Electro
Holiday Resorts transfers ownership of this land to Montrose
Developments Ltd.

2. Value of the property for the deed will be US$ I Million,
Montrose will pay US$ 1,000,000 (less any deposits paid) at the time
of development of the hotel project.

3. Stamp duty will be payable on the US$ 1 Million of the deed
value of the property. That will come to approximately US$ 30,000.
B-1.__ As per MOU between Montrose and Electro Holiday
Resorts/Ravi agreement property value has been estimated at:

US$ 18,000 per perch
US$ 11,250,000 for 625 perches
US$ 1,000,000 deed value that is deducted from final price

US$ 10,250,000 total land value

50 Tr Day One 116:4-23.

S! Reply, para 7; Exhibit R-12.3.
52 Reply, para 7.

53 Exhibit R-12.2.

22

Total land value will be payable when the development/sale
commences and will be jointly agreed by both parties.

81. The MOU sets out terms for the sale of the Montrose Land by Electro Resorts to Montrose

Global, as follows:

As consideration for the land, Montrose Global LLP (‘Montrose’)
hereby agrees to pay US$1 million for the land upon completion of
an appropriate Purchase and Sale Agreement and no later than 36
months from the date of the Purchase and Sale Agreement 30"
September 2010.

This land together with the land recently acquired by Natiso (Pvt)
Ltd will form the basis of land for the Development Project (‘DP’).

DP will consist of the building of a new apartment block together
with a Five Star hotel and associated serviced apartments,
conference facilities and shopping centre.

In relation to DP, Montrose will be responsible for all cost in
relation to the negotiation for planning and actual impl. ie
of DP. Montrose will be solely responsible for all negotiations
relative to DP but will report to Electro at least once a month by
written form.

The DP to be 100% owned by Montrose but where a 50% beneficial
interest on the profit will be maintained for Electro in addition to
payment for the land itself of US$5million.**

82. The MOU was signed by Mr Eyre as Managing Director of Montrose Global and Ravi

Wethasinghe as Director of Electro Resorts.* It is not notarised.

83. The Respondent characterises the MOU as a binding agreement under Sri Lankan law for
Electro Resorts to sell the Montrose Land to Montrose Global, creating a constructive trust
for Electro Resorts over the Montrose Land or at least over 50% of future profits from the

hotel development on the Montrose Land as part of the overall development project (the

* Exhibit R-12.3.
°5 Exhibit R-12.3.

23

“Development Project”). The Respondent emphasises the similarity between the terms
in the MOU and those in the 4 April 2011 Electro Resorts receipt (Exhibit C-44), in

particular the reference to US$ | million as a payable amount.*°

84. The Claimants vigorously object to Sri Lanka’s characterisation of and reliance on the

MOU. In summary, their position is:

[T]he MOU is not a binding document under English law, which
governs it. Instead, the MOU was intended simply to document the
status at that point in time of negotiations between the parties
concerning the transfer of the Montrose Land. As is common in such
discussions, the parties’ negotiations evolved. The Montrose Land
was not transferred under the arrangement contemplated in the
MOU. This is clear from the transaction that actually took place,
which was on markedly different terms. Sri Lanka’s hypothesised
joint venture between Electro and Montrose Global did and does
not exist.”

85. In his testimony at the Jurisdiction Hearing, Mr Eyre stated that he did not mention the

MOU in his Witness Statements because he did not consider it significant:

I had not forgotten about it but, as I have tried to explain
consistently, there were any number of discussions, promises, with
Mr Wethasinghe. By this stage it was somewhat of a nonsense,
frankly, to think that something was actually going to happen with
Mr Wethasinghe. If I may just finish, I signed probably 100 MOUs
a year, and probably 95 per cent of those don’t happen for whatever
reason. It is a very common technique we use in aircraft asset
financing to describe a potential transaction, but unfortunately very
rarely does that turn out to be [sic] true transaction.**

86. Sri Lanka requested production of related documents subsequent to the MOU. As noted
in the Procedural History section above, the Tribunal ordered a further search for and

production of such MOU-related documents. The Claimants reported that none could be

found.

$6 Reply, para 12; Exhibit C-44.
57 Rejoinder, para 194.
58 Tr Day One 158:3-14.

24

D. THE MONTROSE LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANNING

87.

88.

89.

With improved prospects for Sri Lankan tourism following the end of the civil war in 2009,
Mr Eyre took steps to explore development of the Montrose Land as a 250-room “mid-
market” hotel, in conjunction with a luxury serviced apartment complex to be constructed

on the Natiso Land.*?

As he lacked personal experience in property development, Mr Eyre reached out to expert
consultants. He retained HVS Hospitality Services, which reported in a November 2010
feasibility study and development strategy paper that the Montrose Land Hotel Project
likely would be successful, at a development cost of approximately US$ 53 million
inclusive of land cost of US$ 21,159.178.° Mr Eyre also retained the international firm
Woods Bagot, assisted by the Sri Lankan firm Arch International (Pvt) Limited, to provide
architectural and design consultancy services and, on 18 May 2011, Woods Bagot
delivered a “Masterplan Initial Concepts: Developed Building Concepts” proposal
including a hotel with spa and fitness centre, residential and serviced apartments, and retail
space.*! As he planned to involve an international hotel group in the project, Mr Eyre also
approached various well-known hotel groups, which led to “an overwhelmingly positive
response” as evidenced by meetings and site visits.° The Starwood, Hyatt, Marriott and

Langham hotel groups all made initial proposals.

As for financing the estimated development costs of approximately US$33 million
(excluding the land cost), Mr Eyre approached various professional contacts at
international banks with a presence in Sri Lanka, and found HSBC, Standard Chartered
and CIMB to be preliminarily receptive. Mr Eyre testified about his financing plans as

follows:

I planned to part-fund the hotel development using my own
resources or the resources of Montrose Global and to obtain

5° Memorial, para 34; First Eyre Statement, para 23.

© Memorial, para 35.4; Exhibit C-37, page 8.

°! Memorial, paras 36-38; Exhibits C-39 and C-45.

© Memorial, para 40; First Eyre Statement, para 28.

© Memorial, para 41; Exhibits C-41-43, C-46 and C-50.

° Memorial, para 43; First Eyre Statement, para 26.

25

funding for the remainder of the development costs of the hotel from

elsewhere. I intended to secure funding from a number of sources,
including international and domestic banks, the International
Finance Corporation (the IFC) and international hotel groups, the
latter of which would contribute funds toward the development costs
in exchange for an agreement that they would operate and manage
the hotel in due course. I also intended to agree deferred payment
mechanisms with the contractors working on the project in lieu of
upfront payments. My plan was for [sic] to retain the completed
hotel for a period of two to three years or until it was financial [sic]
advantageous to sell it.

E. THE DREDGING AND COMPULSORY STATE ACQUISITION OF THE MONTROSE LAND

90. In September 2011, Woods Bagot informed Mr Eyre that the Sri Lanka Land Reclamation
and Development Corporation (the “SLLRDC”) was conducting dredging works in Lake
Diyawanna close to the western boundary of the Montrose Land. Despite entreaties to the
UDA by Montrose’s Sri Lankan counsel, Ms Mudalige, the dredging continued and
resulted in approximately three acres of the Montrose Land being submerged in Lake

Diyawanna. The dredging also affected the nearby Tubal Land.

91. Mr Eyre nonetheless remained optimistic about development, thinking that the Montrose
Land could be drained or the Hotel Project could be re-designed to be built on stilts. He
and Ms Mudalige devoted substantial efforts in seeking assistance from the then-President
of Sri Lanka, the UDA and the SLLRDC. At a meeting on 17 February 2012, attended by
Mr Shafig Iqbal as a representative of the Tubal Group, the Additional Secretary for Urban
Development reportedly relayed strong government support for the Montrose Land
development and suggested that the hotel plans be amended for construction on stilts in

light of environmental concerns.

92. On 12 March 2012, an amended application for preliminary planning clearance was
submitted to the UDA on behalf of Montrose, which application was suspended and has

not been processed.°”

© First Eyre Statement, para 25 (emphasis in original).
© Memorial, para 50; Exhibit C-56.
©? Memorial, para 51; Exhibit C-55.

26

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

On 4 May 2012, the Greater Colombo Flood Control and Environmental Promotion Office
(the “FCEPO”) issued a notice pursuant to the Sri Lankan Land Acquisition Act
authorizing FCEPO to enter the Montrose Land for the purpose of surveying it to

determine whether the land was suitable for a public purpose.

On 30 November 2012, Mr Eyre and Mr Iqbal arranged a meeting with the Secretary of
Defence and Urban Development, which was attended by Ms Mudalige, the British High
Commissioner and the Deputy British High Commissioner on behalf of Mr Eyre and

Montrose. The dredging was discussed but no conclusion was reached.

On 30 January 2013, Sri Lanka issued a Gazette Notice confirming that it was proceeding

to acquire the Montrose Land.”

On 10 July 2013, a Gazette Notice recorded that the Montrose Land was needed for a
public purpose and was being compulsorily acquired under Section 5 of the Land

Acquisition Act.”!

On 10 April 2015, a Gazette Notice published under Section 7 of the Sri Lankan Land
Acquisition Act requested all persons interested in the Montrose Land to notify a certain
Mr C.W. Abeysuriya of the nature of their interest and be prepared to appear on 15 May
2015.’2 Mr Wijeratne notified Mr Abeysuriya of Montrose’s interest in the Montrose
Land and requested compensation of Rs 2,749,700.000 (approximately US$ 20,705,241).

Ms Mudalige appeared on behalf of Montrose and confirmed Montrose’s title to the land.

On 3 July 2015, Mr Wijeratne wrote to Mr Abeysuriya and requested compensation of 5

million RS per perch.’? No offer of compensation was forthcoming.

8 Memorial, para 55; Exhibit C-60.
Memorial, para 57; Exhibit C-63.
7 Memorial, para 58: Exhibit C-64.
”! Memorial, para 58; Exhibit C-68.
™ Memorial, para 59; Exhibit C-71.
3 Memorial, para 60; Exhibit C-73.

27

99.

100.

S

S
oO

Mr Eyre directed Mr Wijeratne to make a claim to the Land Acquisition Board for
compensation. To that end, Mr Wijeratne commissioned a report from a retired former Sri
Lankan government chief valuer, who valued the Montrose Land, under restrictions the
Claimants understood to be applicable in Sir Lankan compensation proceedings, at
Rs 1,891,000,000 (approximately US$ 13,218,090).”4 (Apparently this report was initially
put under Ravi Wethasinghe’s name, which Mr Wijeratne explained was a mistake
resulting from Ravi Wethasinghe having used the same former government chief valuer to
value Electro Resorts’ neighbouring plot of land.”>) Mr Wijeratne included the Montrose
Land valuation report in the claim made to the Land Acquisition Board on 5 December

2016.

On 8 December 2016, the Land Acquisition Board awarded Montrose the sum of
Rs 123,738,500 (approximately US$ 838,947) as compensation for the Montrose Land.”°

. On 4 January 2017, on Mr Eyre’s instructions, this compensation award was appealed to

the Land Acquisition Board of Review. According to counsel for both the Claimants and

the Respondent, the appeal remained pending as of the Jurisdiction Hearing.”’

. No entity other than Montrose, including Electro Resorts and Ravi Wethasinghe,

submitted any notification of an interest in the Montrose Land in response to the 10 April

2015 Gazette Notice.

. Much of Mr Eyre’s correspondence with Sri Lankan government officials over the course

of this land acquisition and compensation process, as with his correspondence with hotel
development consultants before the Montrose Land was dredged, was on letterhead and

under email addresses of Montrose Global rather than Montrose itself. The Claimants

4 Memorial, para 63; Exhibit C-81.

5 Tr Day One 242:6-14; Tr Day Two 446:5-447: 1.
% Memorial, para 64; Exhibit C-82.

” Tr Day One 60:2-16.

28

F.

10:

10.

10:

IV.

z

5.

6.

explain this as normal commercial practice for the head of a closely-held corporate group

of companies such as the Montrose Group.”

MONTROSE DEVELOPMENTS PTE LTD

. According to Mr Eyre, when he was exploring possible financing for the Montrose Land

Hotel Project in the spring of 2012, “concerns ... had been raised by financial institutions
... in respect of the legal ownership of the [Montrose] share”.”? To alleviate such concerns,
Mr Eyre directed that legal title to the Montrose Share be transferred from Mr Fernando

to Montrose Singapore, as another company in the Montrose Group owned 99% by him.

On 31 March 2012, a share transfer form was executed and the Montrose share ledger was
updated to reflect that the Montrose Share was owned by Montrose Singapore.*’ On 19
June 2012, a share certificate was issued in favour of Montrose Singapore.*! Mr Fernando
resigned his directorship of Montrose, and Mr Eyre and Mr Wijeratne became directors of

Montrose.

The Parties dispute the terms on which Montrose Singapore holds the Montrose Share.
The Claimants’ evidence is that Mr Eyre, through the transfer from Mr Fernando, remains
the beneficial owner of Montrose. Sri Lanka points to Montrose Singapore’s Financial
Year 2014 year-end accounts, which expressly describe Montrose Singapore as the equity
owner of Montrose, with total assets valued at US$ 1,474,063 including the Montrose

Land.*?

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

A. THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR RELIEF

10

_

In its Reply on Jurisdiction, the Respondent requests that the “Claimants’ claims ... be

dismissed on each, alternatively any, of the jurisdictional grounds” raised by the

8 For example, Second Eyre Statement, para 12.

™ Memorial, para 52; First Eyre Statement, para 21.

8° Memorial, para 53; Exhibit C-58.

8! Memorial, para 53; Exhibit C-61.

®2 Preliminary Objections, para 29; Exhibit R-4, page 4.

29

Respondent and that the Claimants “should pay the Respondent’s costs of these

jurisdictional proceedings”.

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR RELIEF

108. In their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Claimants request that the Tribunal:

10!

11

So

Ss

DISREGARD OR DEEM WAIVED those jurisdictional objections
that Sri Lanka could have but failed to raise in the Preliminary
Objections on the basis set out in Rules 41(1), 26(3) and 27 of the
ICSID Rules — particularly the objections set out in §$B, D and E of
the Reply and those objections which depend on the reasoning set
out therein;

OTHERWISE DISMISS Sri Lanka’s jurisdiction objections as
reflected in the Preliminary Objections and the Reply;

CONFIRM its jurisdiction over this dispute;
MAKE such other or further orders as it sees fit; and
ORDER that Sri Lanka pay the Claimants’ costs of this jurisdiction

phase of the proceedings in any event and immediately, without
awaiting the conclusion of the merits phase.

RESPONDENT’S JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: INSUMMARY

. Just as the factual background presented by the Claimants evolved over the course of the

proceedings, so did the focus and organisation of the Respondent’s Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections, particularly in relation to the MOU. The Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections are set out below in their three major iterations, which the

Tribunal found to complicate the necessary understanding and analysis of the objections.

To establish certain parameters at the start, it is undisputed that: (a) Montrose has legal
title to and owns the Montrose Land; and (b) Montrose Singapore has equity title to and
owns the Montrose Share, and hence directly owns Montrose. Although the Claimants
originally asserted that Mr Eyre beneficially owns the Montrose Land, their position
changed to a claim that Mr Eyre has a beneficial ownership interest not in the Montrose

Land but in the Montrose Share through his 99% ownership of Montrose Singapore.

30

A. THE RESPONDENT’S INITIAL JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS

111. In its initial Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections, Sri Lanka sought dismissal of the

Claimants’ claims on several grounds under three main headings.

2. First, Sri Lanka alleged that neither Mr Eyre nor Montrose has standing as a protected
“investor” to invoke the offer to arbitrate in Article 8(2) or, alternatively, in Article 8(1)
of the BIT. As to Article 8(2), the Claimants’ alleged investment in the Montrose Land
through Montrose as a Sri Lankan incorporated company gives rise to exclusive
application of Article 8(2), and neither of the Claimants can satisfy Article 8(2) because
the shareholding in Montrose was at all material times directly owned by Montrose
Singapore, which has no standing under the UK-Sri Lanka BIT. As to Article 8(1), if there
is a jurisdictional basis to circumvent Article 8(2), it is necessary to establish that the
alleged investor actively made the investment within the meaning of Article 8(1), which
Mr Eyre cannot satisfy because it was only Montrose Singapore that took on the risk,

funding and decision-making roles in relation to the Montrose Land.

11

w

. Secondly, Sri Lanka alleged that there has been no “investment” within the meaning of
Article 1(a) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, because: (a) there is no
evidence that the Claimants actually paid for the Montrose Land; (b) the Claimants did not
make any commitment of any duration or take any risk to develop the Montrose Land,
having undertaken only pre-investment activity; and/or (c) the acquisition of the Montrose
Land per se did not contribute to the economic development of Sri Lanka. Further, the
claims advanced do not “directly arise” out of any alleged investment as required by
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, because the alleged investment is the alleged
acquisition of the Montrose Land and not the “future aspirational hotel development plans
in respect of which there was no contractual commitment at the time of making the

investment”.*

11

-

Thirdly, Mr Eyre’s claim to have a beneficial interest in Montrose, by way of a

trustee/nominee relationship both when Mr Fernando was the legal owner and when

Preliminary Objections, para 13.

31

11

a

Montrose Singapore was the legal owner, does not assist in giving him standing under the
BIT, because the alleged beneficial interest: (a) does not provide a basis for circumventing
Article 8(2) of the BIT; (b) fails under Sri Lankan law; and (c) is not entitled to protection

under the BIT, as an invalid investment under Sri Lankan law.

THE RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS IN ITS REPLY ON
JURISDICTION

. In its Reply on Jurisdiction, in part due to the evolving presentation of facts and legal

argument in the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Sri Lanka articulated nine

separate Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections under the following headings:

Objection 1: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae, or subject matter
jurisdiction, in respect of Mr Eyre’s shareholding in Montrose Singapore, because

Article 1(a) of the BIT does not extend to “indirect shareholdings”.

Objection 2: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae, or personal
jurisdiction, over: (a) Montrose, because it does not constitute a company of the
United Kingdom; and (b) Mr Eyre, because he is not the owner of the Montrose

Share.

Objection 3: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae, because a
shareholder lacks standing to claim under the BIT for alleged loss of shareholder

value reflective of alleged loss of corporate value.

Objection 4: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae, because Article

1(a)(ii) of the BIT does not extend to an alleged beneficial interest.

Objection 5: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae, because Mr Eyre

has no beneficial interest in the shares of Montrose in any event.

Objection 6: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the Claimants cannot make
claims in respect of Electro Resorts, which holds the Montrose Land on

constructive trust.

32

Objection 7: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae because there was
no investment under either Article 1 of the BIT or Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention, because no payment was made for the Montrose Land.

Objection 8: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Mr Eyre made no contribution
and took no action that would confer upon him the status of an investor pursuant to

the BIT.

Objection 9: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because, if the Montrose Share was
held on trust for Mr Eyre, then it was not for a lawful purpose and constituted
illegitimate tax avoidance, and Sri Lanka did not agree to give investment

protection in these circumstances.

C. THE RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AT THE
JURISDICTION HEARING AND IN ITS CLOSING SUBMISSIONS

116. At the Jurisdiction Hearing, counsel for Sri Lanka presented the Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections not in the order utilised in the Reply but instead, “because we say you have to
build up”, first under the category of the “Montrose Land level” and then under the
category of the “shareholder level”.** The Respondent used essentially the same order in

its Closing Submissions, as set out below.

117. At the Montrose Land level, Sri Lanka challenges jurisdiction on two overlapping bases

focused on investment treaty interpretation principles:

Objection A: Based on the MOU, Montrose cannot claim in respect of Electro
Resorts’ beneficial interest in the Montrose Land and its profit-earning capability
and/or the Montrose Land does not constitute an investment of Montrose under

Article 1(a)(ii) and Article 8(1) of the BIT.

85

Objection B: Applying the Salini principles,’ the Montrose Land is not an

investment under Article | of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,

“ Tr Day One 55:2-57:3.

8S Salini Construttori SpA & Italstrade SpA v Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No ARB/O0/04, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001 (“Salini”), para 38. (CL-26).

33

because Montrose and Mr Eyre did not make any contribution to acquire the

Montrose Land and took no investment risk.
118. At the shareholder level, Sri Lanka challenges jurisdiction on six bases:

Objection C: Any alleged shareholder claim by Mr Eyre is dependent upon the

Montrose Land constituting an asset of Montrose, which it is not.

Objection D: Indirect shareholders are not covered by Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT
and, under Article 8(2) of the BIT, a locally incorporated company does not take

the nationality of an indirect shareholder.

Objection E: A beneficial interest in shares is not covered by Article (1)(a)(ii) of
the BIT and in any event Mr Eyre did not have a beneficial interest in the Montrose

Share.

Objection F: Mr Eyre’s alleged beneficial interest is not in accordance with law

and good faith, and is void under Sri Lanka law.

Objection G: Mr Eyre does not have a claim as indirect legal title holder to the

Montrose Land.

Objection H: Mr Eyre’s reflective loss claim is not permitted under Article 5(2)
of the BIT.

119. For the sake of good order and clarity, the Tribunal summarises the Parties’ positions on
the jurisdictional objections below using the framework of the Respondent’s Closing
Submissions — identified immediately above as Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections A
through H — as closely as possible. Thereafter, as noted above, the Tribunal will analyse
the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections in a different structure focusing on core issues

of jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae.

34

VI. PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: THE MONTROSE LAND
LEVEL

A. PRELIMINARY_ JURISDICTIONAL (0):3 JECTION_A: MONTROSE CANNOT CLAIM IN
RESPECT OF THE MONTROSE LAND AND/OR THE ENTIRETY OF ITS ALLEGED PROFIT-
EARNING CAPABILITY

(1) The Respondent’s Position

120. The Respondent’s primary Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection goes to jurisdiction
ratione materiae. Sri Lanka argues that Montrose, although it is the legal owner of the
Montrose Land, cannot claim under the BIT because, based on the MOU, the beneficial
interest in the Montrose Land is vested in Electro Resorts. Sri Lanka argues that the
Montrose Land was transferred pursuant to the signed MOU,®° which was a “contractual
memorandum of understanding” entered into “sometime in late July 2010 between Electro
Resorts and Montrose Global LLP (not Mr Eyre), prior to the Deed of Transfer”.8’ This
is evident, argues Sri Lanka, from the email of 23 July 2010 from Ravi Wethasinghe to Mr
Eyre allegedly preceding the signing of the MOU, “which contemplated signing the MOU
on Monday 26 July 2010”.8

121. As set out in the Factual Background section above, the MOU envisioned the following:
(i) Montrose Global would pay Electro Resorts US$ 1 million for the Montrose Land
upon completion of a Purchase and Sale Agreement, and no later than 36 months from 30
September 2010; (ii) the Montrose Land and the Natiso Land would form the basis for
the land for the Development Project of hotel, apartments, conference facilities and
shopping centre; (iii) Montrose Global would own 100% of the Development Project, but
“a 50% beneficial interest on the profit will be maintained for Electro in addition to
payment for the land itself of US$ 5 million”.*” However, according to Sri Lanka, the

initial consideration of US$ 1 million was not paid.”

86 Exhibit R-12.3,

*7 Reply, para 7.

88 Exhibit R-12.2.

* Reply, para 8.

°” Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 19.

35

122. The Respondent contends that the MOU “has significant jurisdictional implications in and

12.

12.

12.

Oo

4.

A

of itself apart from other fundamental jurisdictional obstacles”.°! In specific, the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction over any part of the claim or, alternatively, “only has jurisdiction over
the alleged claim less, at the very minimum according to the MOU, 50% of the alleged
future profits and less USD 5 million and less USD 1 million; meaning that the maximum

claim that can be put forward is USD 4,758,028.5[0]”.°?

. The Respondent bases its position on the application of the well-established principle of

international law as set out in, for example, Occidental v Ecuador.” This, says Sri Lanka,
necessarily excludes any claim in respect of the profit-earning capability of the Montrose
Land based on the Hotel Project. Independent of this, and again on the principle in
Occidental v Ecuador and in Impregilo v Pakistan, Montrose cannot claim under the BIT
in respect of Electro Resorts’ beneficial interest in the profit-earning capability of the
Montrose Land, to the extent the MOU entitles Electro Resorts to 50% of such profits and
US$ 5 million.

Sri Lanka argues that the Claimants cannot avoid this impact of Electro Resorts’ beneficial
interest on their claim by arguing that principles of customary international law are not
applicable to the BIT. Applying the decision in ELSI,” as exemplified in Occidental v

Ecuador, clear wording in the BIT would be required for such an exclusion.

. Nor can the Claimants rely on the discussion of legal title in Saba Fakes v Turkey to

support their claim, because the tribunal in that case did not have the benefit of the
applicable rule of customary international law cited to it and therefore started on the

premise that legal title of the relevant asset had to be excluded.*° Further, on the facts, the

°! Reply, para 9.

° Reply, para 295.

°3 Occidental Petroleum Corp. v Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No ARB/06/11, Decision on Annulment, 2
November 2015 (“Occidental”), paras 258-266 (RL-49).

° Ibid; Impregilo S.p.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/03, Award on Jurisdiction, 22 April
2005, paras 151-155 (RL-132).

°5 ELSI (United States v Italy) (1989) ICJ 15 (RL-82).

°% Saba Fakes v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/20, Award, 14 July 2010 (“Saba Fakes”), para 134
(CL-75).

36

12

12

128.

s

_

tribunal concluded that the claimant Mr Fakes, as the alleged legal title holder, was not the

true owner but only a nominal owner.®”

Further, and/or alternatively, Sri Lanka submits that the Montrose Land is not an
“investment” of Montrose under Article 1(a) and 8(1) of the BIT, because Montrose is
merely the trustee under Sri Lankan law (see below). For this treaty argument, Sri Lanka
relies on Blue Bank v Venezuela, where the tribunal interpreted the relevant BIT and
concluded, on the basis of the Barbados Trust Act, that the trustee had title of the relevant
assets but did not own the assets in any relevant sense, and so the trustee could not claim.**
Here, under section 3(a) of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, ownership is only nominally
vested in the trustee, and so Montrose is not the owner of the Montrose Land in the true
sense.*? Sri Lanka disagrees with the Claimants that Blue Bank v Venezuela turned on
specific wording in the relevant BIT, that an asset had to be “invested by the investor’, for
two reasons. First, citing Postové Banka v Hellenic Republic, Sri Lanka says that this
wording merely makes express what is implicit in all definitions of “investment”.'”
Secondly, citing Standard Chartered Bank v Tanzania (“SCB v Tanzania’), the UK-Sri
Lanka BIT here conveys the same requirement by requiring in Article 8(1) that the

investment be an investment “of” the investor. !°!

Applying the facts to its BIT interpretation points, Sri Lanka argues that Montrose owns
the Montrose Land only on constructive trust to the benefit of Electro Resorts under Sri

Lankan law.

Under section 83 of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, a constructive trust is created where

it cannot reasonably be inferred consistently with the attendant circumstances that the

°” Saba Fakes, para 137.

°8 Blue Bank International v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Award, 26 April 2017
(“Blue Bank”), paras 162, 168-169 (CL-232).

% An Ordinance to Define and Amend the Law Relating to Trusts, 16 April 1918 (“Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance”),
section 3(a) (RL-42).

10 Postovd Banka, a.s.. and Istrokapital SE v Hellenic Republic, SID Case No ARB/13/8, Award, 9 April 2015
(“Postové Bank”), paras 230-246 (RL-100).

©! Standard Chartered Bank v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No ARB/10/12, Award, 2 November 2012
(“SCB v Tanzania”), paras 198-201 (RL-1).

37

12

102

se

owner of the property intended to dispose of the beneficial ownership therein.'°? The
intention of the owner is to be ascertained objectively, with greater reliance on written
evidence than oral evidence, and it is not necessary to establish a binding contract.!
Whether or not consideration has passed is a highly relevant circumstance.! Section 83
of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance includes the Pallant-type trust, recognising that a
constructive trust arises by operation of law when the circumstances render it
unconscionable for a party to claim the entire beneficial interest in the relevant property
and/or the proceeds of the property and deny the interest of another.'°> The consequence
of such a constructive trust is that any pecuniary advantage, including profits, is held on
trust.! A trust being a concept of equity, equity will disregard any attempt to evade its
application, for example by piercing the corporate veil if the veil is being abused to
frustrate the law.!°’ Also consistent with the notion of equity, a party is able to go behind
the terms of a notarised deed to challenge the alleged payment of consideration. Proviso 1
of Section 92 of the Sri Lankan Evidence Ordinance expressly states that parole evidence

S and even the

is admissible to demonstrate the want or failure of consideration, !”
attestation of a notary that consideration has been paid does not establish the truth of

payment, which still has to be proven.!°°

Examining the circumstances of the ownership of the Montrose Land against these
principles of Sri Lankan law, Sri Lanka submits that, on both the Respondent’s case and

the Claimants’ case, “[t]he critical point is that there was an agreement to pay for the Land

Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, section 83.

3 Sudarshani v MHMG Somawathi, SC Appeal/173/2011, 6 April 2017 (“Sudarshani”), pages 14-16 (RL-136).
'04 WCK Kulasuriya v Harischandra, SC Appeal No 157/2011, 4 April 2014, page 9 (RL-135).
"5 Peter Farrar v David Miller, [2018] EWCA Civ 172, paras 21 and 42 (RL-143), citing Pallant v Morgan [1953]

Ch 43.

'06 Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, section 90.
1 Prest v Prest [2013] 2 AC 415, paras 27, 35-36, 57-58, 61, 81-82, 96-97, 103-104 (RL-139).

108

Proviso | to section 92 of the Evidence Ordinance (RL-151); authorities include Sudarshani, pages 12-13.

109 Menika v Menike, CA 846/96 (2013), headnote (5) (RL-153).

38

410 Respondent’s Closing Subm
11 Respondent’s Closing Subm

112

113

(whether binding or informal) and payment was never made” and “[t]his automatically

gives rise to a constructive trust”.!!° On this point, the Respondent argues:

First, the true position — though not material for present purposes —
is that the Land was transferred pursuant to the signed MOU; a
document that was disclosed late in the day and constitutes the
relevant attendant circumstance. Under the terms of the MOU, the
consideration to be paid for the Land was USD I million. What is
more, as Mr Eyre acknowledged, and is obvious from the email of
23 July 2010 preceding the signing of the MOU (which
contemplated signing the MOU on Monday 26 July 2010), the Land
was transferred following the signing of the MOU: Tr. Day
/p.157/17-21.'"!

130. Sri Lanka firmly rejects the “unfounded allegation in the Rejoinder that the MOU was

Respondent's Closing Submi
Respondent’s Closing Submis

subject to subsequent on-going negotiation” and maintains its objection that Mr Eyre’s
unsupervised manual searches for emails around the MOU were inadequate.'!? Sri Lanka
asks that adverse inferences be drawn “to the extent necessary to rebut any allegation that
the MOU is not the relevant attendant circumstance and to rebut any allegation — were it

to be advanced — that there was no agreement (formal or otherwise) to pay for the Land”.!!>

In any event and even without more documentation, argues Sri Lanka, the same
constructive trust arises out of the Claimants’ pleaded case and witness evidence. Mr Eyre
in his First Witness Statement, and the Claimants in their Memorial, specifically referred
to an agreement by Electro Resorts to sell the Montrose Land to “Mr Eyre for
Rs 100,000,000 (approximately USD 1 million)”, which was reiterated in the Rejoinder.!'*
The Electro Resorts board resolved on 27 July 2010 to sell the Montrose Land to Mr
Eyre.''> Montrose was incorporated as the holding vehicle for the sale, with Mr Eyre

retaining full beneficial ownership.''® Further, even though the Claimants originally relied

 
 
   
 

jons, para 13.
ions, para 14 (emphasis in original, footnotes omitted).
ions, paras 15-16.

 

ions, para 17.

114 Memorial, para 30; First Eyre Statement, paras 15-16; Rejoinder, para 215.
1S Exhibit C-33.
‘6 First Eyre Statement, paras 17-18.

39

on the receipt of 4 April 2011 from Electro Resorts as proof of payment of US$ 1 million,
they later had to acknowledge that payment had not in fact been made. Mr Eyre testified
that he could not locate a bank statement or equivalent showing the transfer of that sum in
2010, that Rs 100,000,000 or US$ 1 million was not paid in one lump sum “for sure”, and

that he did not know whether or not the sum had ever been paid.!!”

132. In these circumstances and applying the relevant Sri Lankan legal principles, the
Respondent describes this as “a classic case of Electro retaining the beneficial interest in
the Land, by reason of a constructive trust being automatically imposed pursuant to section
83 of the Trust Ordinance”.''® The critical attendant circumstance to the transfer of the
Montrose Land was Mr Eyre’s agreement to pay Rs 100 million/US$ 1 million, which the
Claimants have not proven was ever paid. It is undisputed that payment of this
consideration was a binding commitment, whether under the MOU or otherwise, but in
any event a constructive trust arises from an informal promise. The Claimants are wrong
to submit that a party cannot go around the notarised Deed of Transfer for the Montrose
Land sale to challenge alleged payment of consideration, especially as Ms Mudalige, in
notarising the Deed of Transfer, added “the mentioned consideration was not passed in my

presence”.!!9

13.

wo

. Nor does it help the Claimants to suggest that Electro Resorts has not enforced the trust by
failing to file a claim for the Montrose Land with the government after the dredging,
because, under Section 57 of the Land Acquisition Act, Electro Resorts is entitled to
recover directly from Montrose any compensation paid to Montrose.'2° To the extent
relevant, because the trust attaches to the Montrose Land, equity would disregard the
separate corporate personality of, first, Montrose Global as the party to the MOU and,
second, Montrose, because Mr Eyre controls them both and used this control to evade Sri

Lankan tax law. Even on the Claimants’ case, says Sri Lanka:

47 Tr Day One 118:23-25; 119:1-5; 128:7-11.

418 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 22.

419 Exhibit C-7.

20 Land Acquisition Act (Law No. 9 of 1950), 9 March 1950, section 57 (CL-2).

40

the arrangement was with Mr Eyre personally, which reinforces the
artificiality of distinguishing the corporate personality of the entities
involved. Indeed, Montrose Global LLP described itself as having
acquired the Land in its letter to the President of Sri Lanka of 10
October 2011.'?!

 

134. To the extent the Claimants rely on the alleged historical payments of US$ 1 million and
US$ 350,000 by Mr Eyre to Ravi Wethasinghe, Sri Lanka considers those alleged loans to
be irrelevant to the constructive trust. There is no evidence in the record documenting that
Mr Eyre made those loan payments or that Mr Eyre treated the amounts as part of the

consideration for the transfer of the Montrose Land.

13

a

. Moving beyond the Montrose Land itself to the profit-earning capability of the Montrose
Land, the Respondent relies on operation of either a constructive trust or an express trust
in favour of Electro Resorts. Under section 6 of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, an
express trust is created by words or acts through which the author of the trust indicates
with reasonable certainty an intention to create a trust. 122 As with a constructive trust, the

requirement is reasonable certainty rather than a binding contract.

13

a

. The Respondent emphasises that the MOU was the basis on which Electro Resorts on 4
August 2010 transferred the Montrose Land to Montrose and the Natiso Land to Natiso,
both companies of Mr Eyre. The Montrose Land and the Natiso Land, respectively, were
to be used for the Development Project of the linked hotel and residential complex, in
which Electro Resorts — as recited expressly in the MOU — was to have a 50% beneficial
interest in profits and receive a later payment of US$ 5 million for the land. As Mr Eyre
acknowledged, Electro Resorts proceeded to play an active role in seeking to obtain

planning permission for the Development Project. !”?

137. Sri Lanka argues that this arrangement gives rise to an express trust by its plain terms or,
alternatively, a constructive trust for Electro Resorts in respect of 50% of the profit-earning

capability of the Montrose Land plus US$ 5 million.

 

'2! Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 22(e) (emphasis in original).
'22 Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, section 6 (RL-42).
"23 Tr Day One 169:11-18.

4l

138. Sri Lanka describes the Claimants’ efforts to rebut the binding nature of the MOU as
unavailing. Sri Lanka’s case for a constructive trust on the profit-earning capability of the
Montrose Land is not dependent on a binding agreement, because a reasonable certainty
suffices. Further, the fact that the parties to the MOU agreed that there would be further
documentation of the arrangement was not a condition precedent to the binding nature of
the MOU and, indeed, the parties progressed the Development Project immediately after
signing the MOU. Most important, because of the limitations in their search for MOU-
related documents following the Tribunal’s order, the Claimants cannot be heard to

contend that the MOU was subject to ongoing negotiation and further documentation.

139. Overall, according to Sri Lanka, this arrangement resonates with a Pallant-type trust, and
Montrose cannot claim for the entire beneficial interest in the proceeds of the Montrose
Land and deny Electro Resorts its interest. As a consequence of this express trust or,
alternatively, constructive trust, Sri Lanka submits that the Claimants are not entitled to

claim the full alleged earning potential of the Montrose Land.

(2) The Claimants’ Position

140. The Claimants firmly reject the Respondent’s reliance on the MOU to defeat jurisdiction.
The Claimants contend that, to accept Sri Lanka’s MOU-based argument that Electro
Resorts is the real owner of the Montrose Land by operation of a Sri Lankan law trust, the
Tribunal would have to ignore Mr Eyre’s testimony, ignore the Deed of Transfer, ignore
the fact that Electro Resorts has not challenged the Claimants’ ownership of the Montrose
Land for almost a decade, and “‘be forced to rely on the MOU, which amounts to nothing
more than an undated and non-binding agreement to agree set down on a single piece of

A4 paper, to which neither Claimant is even a party”.'*+ According to the Claimants:

it is obvious that the MOU offers little more than a snapshot into the
status of the ongoing and evolving negotiations between the parties
concerning the Montrose Land. The MOU was never legally
binding and was in fact superseded in the normal way by the parties’
subsequent negotiations, which ultimately concluded in a

24 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 3.

42

125

significantly different structure and outcome than envisaged in the
125

141. Citing the Sri Lanka Supreme Court case of Sudarshani v Herath, the Claimants allege

oS

that Sri Lanka bears the burden of proving Electro Resorts’ alleged interest in the Montrose
Land via constructive trust, which it has failed to do.'?° Sri Lanka is mistakenly relying
only on the MOU in support of a constructive trust allegedly held by Electro Resorts over

the Montrose Land and/or the sums of US$ 5 million and 50% of the expected profits. !27

. The Claimants’ primary defence is that the MOU carries no weight whatsoever and, in any

event, is negated by the 4 August 2010 Deed of Transfer.

. Under English law, which is the governing law of the MOU, the MOU is a non-binding

“agreement to agree”:!?8 it is undated and not notarised; it is entitled “Memorandum of

Understanding” rather than “agreement”; it expressly anticipates the conclusion of a
purchase and sale agreement, which never materialised; it provides that “all documentation
in relative to the [Development Project] ... will be completed by 30 September 2010”,
anticipating further agreements, which never materialised; and “‘it is simply not credible
that an agreement intended to govern a development project worth millions of US$ was
concluded on a single piece of A4 paper”.!?° The Claimants contend that the non-binding
nature of the MOU is consistent with Mr Eyre’s testimony that many MOUs are executed
but rarely lead to actual transactions. 130 Further, even if it were binding, the MOU was
executed by Electro Resorts and Montrose Global, and Sri Lanka has not explained how it
could bind the Claimants or overcome the clear and contrary language of the Deed of

Transfer.

Rejoinder, para 206.

26 Sudarshani, page 15 (RL-136).

'27 The Claimants included arguments against the Respondent’s alternative argument of an express

trust in favor of

 

Electro Resorts over 50% of the expected profits in their Post-Hearing Brief. The Tribunal does not address these

arguments

s they were excluded as untimely in Procedural Order No 6.

 

28 Rejoinder, paras 201-206.
29 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 13; Exhibit R-12.3.
80 Tr Day One 158:3-14.

43

144. According to the Claimants, the 4 August 2010 Deed of Transfer, in comparison to the
MOU, is a dated and fully notarised document which “transferred absolute, unencumbered
title to the Montrose Land and reflects the true basis on which the land was transferred to
Montrose Sri Lanka’”.'*! In the Deed of Transfer, Electro Resorts stated that it did “hereby
expressly admit and acknowledge” that Montrose had “well and truly paid” the purchase
price for the Montrose Land of Rs 100 million, and that it was transferring the Montrose

Land to Montrose “free of all encumbrances and charges whatsoever”. !77

14:

a

. Given the undisputed validity of the Deed of Transfer, the Claimants reject Sri Lanka’s
argument that the MOU is an “attendant circumstance” supporting creation of a
constructive trust to Electro Resorts’ benefit under section 83 of the Trusts Ordinance,
because the Claimants allegedly never paid the purchase price under the MOU. The
Claimants rely on Sri Lankan evidence law, under which “a notarised deed represents near-
incontrovertible proof of the facts set out there in”.'** In support, the Claimants again cite

Sudarshani v Herath:

a declaration of Trust can be granted only if the Court finds that
title was not_transferred absolutely and that the parties always
intended that the beneficial interest in the property will remain with
the transferor. In other words, the Court has to determine that there
was no true sale and that, therefore the deed of transfer is of no
force or effect —i.e. that the deed of transfer is void. '**

146. The Claimants contend that Sri Lanka has not presented anywhere near “incontrovertible
proof” of a constructive trust. Instead, say the Claimants, the evidence before the Tribunal
shows that the joint venture contemplated by the MOU was never implemented, while the
Claimants did pay for the Montrose Land in accordance with the Deed of Transfer. The
documentary evidence includes: (i) the 27 July 2010 Electro Resorts board resolution

recording the sale and transfer of the Montrose Land for Rs 100 million, with no mention

'5! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 18 (emphasis in original).

82 Exhibit C-7.

53 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para 21; Tr Day Three 536:21-538.

'S4 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 21; Sudarshani, page 8 (emphasis from the Claimants).

44

14

14

7.

*

of the MOU;!*> (ii) the express disavowal in the Deed of Transfer of any intention by
Electro Resorts to retain a beneficial interest in the Montrose Land or any profits arising
therefrom; '* (iii) the recording in the Montrose audited company accounts of Mr Eyre’s
having paid Rs 100 million for the Montrose Land, which debt is still recorded in the
Montrose accounts; '*’ (iv) Electro Resorts not having made any claim for the Montrose
Land, despite obtaining a valuation and making a claim for flooded land it owned
nearby; !** and (v) Electro Resorts’ failure to challenge the validity of the Deed of Transfer
or Montrose’s unencumbered title to the Montrose Land, or to seek payment for the land,

for more than eight years since the date of the Deed of Transfer.

The Claimants describe Mr Eyre’s witness evidence as consistent with the documentary
record. Whilst he could not recall exactly how the purchase price for the Montrose Land
had been paid, he testified adamantly that a significant portion of that payment was via his
US$ 1,450,000 in debt forgiveness to Ravi Wethasinghe, with those debts being evidenced
and secured by the Lease of 11 August 2005 and the Agreement to Finance of 13 December
2007.!°°

Even if the Tribunal were to find that the purchase price under the Deed of Transfer was
not paid to Electro Resorts, the Claimants argue against the imposition of a constructive
trust. This is because Electro Resorts expressly stated in the Deed of Transfer that it
intended title to the Montrose Land to pass to Montrose “free of all encumbrances and
charges whatsoever”, thereby disavowing any interest in the Montrose Land and being
estopped from any claim otherwise.'4° At most, Electro Resorts could attempt a claim for

non-payment of the purchase price, which it would also be estopped from pursuing in light

85 Exhibit C-33.

136 Exhibit C-7.

57 Exhibit R-4.

88 Tr Day One 240:17-242:16.
189 Exhibits C-27 and C-29.

40 Exhibit C-7.

45

of its express admission and acknowledgement that it had been “well and truly paid” the

purchase price of Rs 100 million.'*!

14

S

. In contrast, argue the Claimants, Sri Lanka has failed to identify any evidence that the
MOU was the basis for the transfer of the Montrose Land. Sri Lanka has failed to point to
any document post-dating the MOU in which the MOU is mentioned, and the deal
contemplated in the MOU was superseded by the different deal documented in the Deed
of Transfer. As for the 23 July 2010 email from Ravi Wethasinghe to Mr Eyre referencing
an MOU, which Sri Lanka alleges must have been sent before the MOU was signed, the
Claimants contend that the context — in particular, use of the present tense in mentioning
an MOU - suggests that the email actually post-dates the executed MOU (in the record)
and was anticipating a further MOU. That further MOU apparently was not concluded
and, instead, Ravi Wethasinghe and Mr Eyre proceeded to conclude the Deed of Transfer

on 4 August 2010.

150. The Claimants also refute Sri Lanka’s suggestion that, despite their allegedly owing
Electro Resorts some US$ 1 million, the Claimants are collaborating with Ravi
Wethasinghe behind the scenes in relation to the Hotel Project. The Claimants explain the
limited ongoing connections between Mr Eyre and Ravi Wethasinghe as the result, not of
the MOU, but of their owning neighboring plots of land subject to similar treatment in Sri
Lanka. For example, Mr Wijeratne explained that the former government official retained
by Montrose to value the Montrose Land for purposes of its claim under the Land
Acquisition Act originally mistakenly put the report under Ravi Wethasinghe’s name,
because Ravi Wethasinghe had retained the same person to value a neighbouring plot
owned by Electro Resorts. The Claimants assert that, assuming arguendo Sri Lanka is
right that Ravi Wethasinghe has an ongoing interest in the Montrose Land under the MOU,
“it would be bizarre for him to allow the valuation to be issued without that interest being

recorded”. !4?

41 Exhibit C-7.
‘2 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 33.2.

46

15

Rejoinder, paras 235-23
44 Saba Fakes, para 134; Rejoinder, paras 239-242.
45 Occidental, para 134; Tr Day 3 561:14-24.

46 Blue Bank, paras 161-173.

47 Tr Day Three 563:1-566:9.

nm

oo

. Finally, the Claimants take the position that, even if Electro Resorts is found to have a

beneficial interest in the Montrose Land via the MOU, they would still have valid claims

under the BIT, for two main reasons.

First, argue the Claimants, while Mr Eyre could not bring a claim on behalf of Electro
Resorts as a joint venture partner, Montrose — which has legal title to the Montrose Land
— has independent legal personality and is not precluded from bringing a claim in its own
right. It does not assist Sri Lanka to rely on cases like Impregilo v Pakistan, which

involved joint ventures lacking such separate legal personality. '4°

Secondly, citing Saba Fakes v Turkey, the Claimants insist that bare legal title to an asset
— here, Montrose’s legal title to the Montrose Land — is an investment for purposes of
Article 1(a) of the BIT, falling within the definition of “investment” as “every kind of

asset”, 4+

As exemplified in Occidental Petroleum v Ecuador, rules of customary
international law granting standing only to the beneficial owner of an investment do not
apply to the lex specialis regime in the UK-Sri Lanka BIT, and Sri Lanka is wrong to argue
otherwise.'*> Sri Lanka is also wrong to argue that cases such as Blue Bank v Venezuela,
where specific treaty language — in that case, that an asset had to be “invested by the
investor” — excluded trustees from bringing claims related to assets they held in trust, are
applicable in the instant case.'*° That case must be distinguished because the facts there
involved a professional trustee that had not made an investment in its own right, which is

different from the situation of Montrose here. '47

 

r Day Three 560:12-561:13.

47

B. PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION B: THE MONTROSE LAND IS NOT AN

INVESTMENT UNDER ARTICLE 1 OF THE BIT AND ARTICLE 25(1) OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION, BECAUSE THE CLAIMANTS Dip NoT MAKE ANY CONTRIBUTION OR
TAKE ANY INVESTMENT RISK

(1) The Respondent’s Position

154, The Respondent argues that the Montrose Land — as bare land — is not a protected

15

a

investment for purposes of Article 1 of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,
and therefore the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae of Montrose’s claim based

on the Montrose Land.

. Sri Lanka bases its analysis on the ordinary meaning of the term “investment”, utilising
the Salini criteria and the more recent case of Orascom v Algeria, with focus on the
attributes of contribution and risk.'4* Sri Lanka rejects the Claimants’ reliance on the
analysis in Philip Morris v Uruguay, in which the tribunal, in Sri Lanka’s view,
erroneously relied on the fact that the term “investment” in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention was compromise language amongst the treaty parties and went on to infer that

there should be wide leeway to find jurisdiction .'4°

Citing to Professor Schreuer’s
commentary, Sri Lanka says that the reason the compromise language was introduced into
Article 25(1) was because the treaty parties could not agree on a definition.'"° Under the
circumstances, the correct approach is to interpret Article 25(1) applying the principles of
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “WCLT”) in order to give
the term “investment” its ordinary meaning without speculating on the treaty parties’

intentions.

156. Sri Lanka also rejects the Claimants’ assertion that they do not have to prove contribution

to the Montrose Land, as it is sufficient to prove contribution to the Hotel Project under
principles of unity of investment. Sri Lanka describes this as “‘misconceived”, because to

rely upon principles of unity of investment, the Claimants would have to prove that the

148 Salini (CL-26); Orascom v Algeria, ICSID Case No ARB/12/35, Award, 31 May 2017, paras 370-371 (RL-79).

49 Respondent’s Closing Submis
ARB/10/07, Decision on Jurisdiction, 2 July 2013 (“Philip Morris’), para 198 (CL-96).

50 © Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2 ed, 2009) (“Schreuer”), page 128 (RL-7).

 

ns, para 32; Philip Morris v Oriental Republic of Uruguay, 1CSID Case No

48

15

15)

16

a

*

9.

S

5! Respondent’s Closing Submi
Ukraine, ICSID ARB/08/08, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 March 2010 (“Inmaris”), para 92 (CL-72).

overall Hotel Project constituted a qualifying investment under Article 1 of the BIT and
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which they cannot do because the Montrose Land
remains bare land.'*! The Claimants neither had planning permission nor had entered into
any contractual commitments for development of the land. If they had had such
contractual commitments, they perhaps could have relied on them as constituting an
investment under Article 1(a)(iii) of the BIT as a claim to money or performance and also
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and then relied on that investment as
subsuming within it the sub-components for the Hotel Project. Sri Lanka challenges the
Claimants’ reliance on Jnmaris v Ukraine, on grounds that, in that case, the relevant overall
operation of a Bareboat Charter Contract constituted an investment as “claims to
performance” under the relevant treaty, with the various sub-contracts being subsumed in

: 2
the operations. !*?

. With only aspirational intentions for the Hotel Project, the Claimants’ activities constituted

only pre-investment activities. Citing Romak v Uzbekistan, Sri Lanka argues that, by
definition, the Claimants took no investment risk with respect to such aspirational hotel

development because they had not yet paid for or committed to pay any funds.'*?

Further, Sri Lanka argues on several grounds that the Claimants did not make any

contribution to the Montrose Land and hence incurred no investment risk.
First, Montrose itself made no payment to acquire the land.

Secondly, to rely on the alleged historical loan payments made by Mr Eyre to Ravi
Wethasinghe as a contribution to the Montrose Land, the Claimants would need to
demonstrate that: (a) the loans had actually been made and not repaid; and (b) there was
an agreement that the debts arising would be part of the consideration for the Montrose
Land. Sri Lanka contends that the Claimants can demonstrate neither. As to the alleged

payment of US$ 350,000 pursuant to a financing agreement of 13 December 2007, there

 

sions, para 33; Inmaris Perestroika Sailing Maritime Services GmbH & Ors v

Respondent’ s Closing Submissions, para 33;

53 Romak SA Switzerland v Republic of Uzbekistan, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No AA/280, Award, 26 November 2009
(“Romak”), paras 228-231 (RL-25).

49

is no evidence of a drawdown request, payment or any chaser for payment. As to the
alleged loan of US$ 1 million in 2003, there is no evidence of the terms, payment or any
chaser for payment and, insofar as Mr Eyre relies on the 2005 lease agreement, the terms
reflect that only Rs 30 million (less than US$ 200,000) was paid and even that payment is
not correlated to the alleged US$ 1 million loan amount. Relying again on the MOU and
the anticipatory email of 23 July 2010, Sri Lanka argues that the only relevant evidence
before the Tribunal demonstrates that these alleged loan payments formed no part of the

consideration for the Montrose Land.

a

. Thirdly, Sri Lanka denies that the US$ 400,000 paid by Mr Eyre (through Montrose
Aircraft Leasing) to Ravi Wethasinghe on 5 July 2010 can constitute consideration for the
Montrose Land, because it was paid in the context only of the planning approval process
for the Hotel Project and so was not related to the Montrose Land. Sri Lanka asserts further
that the planning approval process could require US$ 400,000, and so suggests that the
payment was more likely a “personal fund to Mr Wethasinghe as a quid pro quo for Mr

Wethasinghe assisting in getting a clean title report”. !**

a
wm

. Finally, Sri Lanka alleges that Montrose “was merely the holding vehicle established to
avoid paying 100% sales tax otherwise payable for the acquisition of the Land” and
therefore “was in no sense the active investor’.!*° Applying the test developed by the
President of the tribunal in SCB v Tanzania that Article 8(1) of the United Kingdom-
Tanzania BIT required “an active relationship between the investor and the investment”,
the Montrose Land was not a protected investment of Montrose under Article 8(1) of the

BIT. 5°

163. Sri Lanka flatly rejects the Claimants’ justification based on the “economic reality” of the

oO

transaction, charging a “double standard”:

The Respondent fails to understand how a good faith interpretation
of the BIT permits the Claimant to evade sales tax by not overtly

'S4 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 38.

  

'55 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 39.

 

'56 Respondent's Closing Submissions, para 39; SCB v Tanzania, paras 199 and 230.

50

presenting itself as a foreign national, and at the same time rely
upon the alleged economic reality of the foreign actor behind the
company to then gain the benefit of the BIT.'*"

(2) The Claimants’ Position

164. The Claimants describe as “untenable” Sri Lanka’s arguments that, first, they have not
made active contributions to the Montrose Land and assumed risk in Sri Lanka so as to
have made an investment within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,

applying the relevant Salini criteria and, second, they are not active investors under Article

8(1) of the BIT within the meaning of SCB v Tanzania.'**

16

a

. Although the Claimants included the Salini factors in the jurisdictional case in their
Memorial, they nonetheless argue that the “so-called ‘Salini factors’ are a treaty
interpretation dead-end that should never have been implied into the ICSID
Convention”.!*° According to the Claimants, to the extent the term “investment” has any
autonomous meaning in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, it is merely to exclude
obviously absurd claims of investment.'© Citing Philip Morris v Uruguay, the Claimants
explain that the drafters of the ICSID Convention left “investment” undefined, due to the
difference of views between capital-importing and capital-exporting States.'°!
Accordingly, the Tribunal should respect the broad definition of “investment” in Article

1(a) of the BIT and recognise the Claimants’ investment in the Montrose Land.

16

>

As for the active investment test in SCB v Tanzania, the Claimants contend that the
reasoning of the President of the tribunal in that case was wrong, “relying on a stilted
reading of the word ‘of’ as it appears [in the phrase ‘disputes ... concerning an investment
of’ a foreign national or company] in Article 8(1) of the BIT to imply a requirement of

‘active’ investment as a precondition to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae” .'

 

57 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 40(a).
'58 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 60; Rejoinder, paras 274-278.

'89 Rejoinder, section VIII.C(1); Tr Day Three 517:1-520:3; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 62.
60 Counter-Memorial, paras 91-92.

'6! Counter-Memorial, para 92; Philip Morris, para 198.

16 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 63; Counter-Memorial, paras 59-67.

Sl

The correct position, argue the Claimants, is that of the CEMEX v Venezuela tribunal,
which interpreted the word “of” to connote mere possession of an investment, including

indirect investment.!°

167. In any event, argue the Claimants, there is ample evidence in the record that they made
active contributions and incurred risk sufficient to meet both the Salini factors and the SCB
v Tanzania test.'©! Mr Eyre was the directing mind behind the incorporation of Montrose
to purchase and hold the Montrose Land and serves as director; and he liaised with advisors
in Sri Lanka, financial institutions, hotel management companies, hotel planning
consultants and architects to implement the Hotel Project on the Montrose Land.'°> Mr
Eyre paid: (a) US$ 1,450,000, by way of debt forgiveness to Ravi Wethasinghe, as
consideration for the Montrose Land; (b) stamp duty and professional fees in relation to
the transfer of the Montrose Land to Montrose; and (c) the US$ 400,000 through Montrose
Aircraft Leasing to procure clean title to the Montrose Land.'® Montrose also contributed
to the Montrose Land by entering into the Deed of Transfer, owning the Montrose Land
over an extended period of time, serving as the entity through which the Hotel Project was
implemented, and pursuing the claim for compensation for the Montrose Land after it was

flooded.!°

168. The Claimants charge Sri Lanka with disconnecting these substantial contributions from
economic reality. Insofar as Sri Lanka contends that it was Montrose Global and Montrose
Aircraft Leasing, rather than the Claimants, which made the relevant contributions, the
Claimants explain that, as is common in business, Mr Eyre uses Montrose Global as

“corporate shorthand for his name and activities” and as a “common corporate brand that

"68 CEMEX Caracas Investments BV & CEMEX Caracas II Investments BV v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID
Case No ARB/08/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30 December 2010, para 157 (CL-151).

'64 Rejoinder, paras 309-313.

'65 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 65, citing Exhibits C-37 through C-40, C-59, C-94, C-98; First Eyre Statement,
paras 22-32; Counter-Memorial paras 69-70, 82-86, 108; Rejoinder, sections VIII.B and VIII.C(2); Tr Day Two 436:4-
447:24; Tr Day Three 514:22-515:2, 520:10-23.

'66 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 65, citing Exhibits C-7, C-27, C-89 to C-92, R-12.5; First Eyre Statement,
paras 19-20; Tr Day One 176:20-177:1 1.

'61 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 66, citing Exhibits C-7, C-73, C-82, C-84, R-12.6; Counter-Memorial, para
108; Rejoinder, paras 216, 347-351; Tr Day Two 436:4- 447:24; Tr Day Three 515:3-14.

 

52

16!

VIL.

170.

©

may have given greater credibility to the Hotel Project than if Mr Eyre presented himself
to third parties as a private individual”.' Given that Mr Eyre owns every entity in the
Montrose Group, “from the economic standpoint that the BIT prioritizes over corporate

personality, Mr Eyre can claim contributions made by Montrose Global as his own”.!

Insofar as Sri Lanka identifies many of the contributions, in particular the US$ 400,000
payment related to the title search, as not going towards the Montrose Land but rather to
the Hotel Project, the Claimants contend that the Tribunal must consider their investments
as a whole. Relying on Jnmaris v Ukraine in support of the concept of “unity of
investment” for jurisdictional purposes, the Claimants argue that the Montrose Land and
the Hotel Project cannot be treated as separate investments.!”° As proof that their intention
at all stages was to acquire the Montrose Land for the purpose of the Hotel Project, the
Claimants quote the statement of purpose in the Montrose Articles of Association: “To
carry on the business of hotels and hotel services” and “To carry on the development of

hotels and managing hotels”.'7!

PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS: THE SHAREHOLDER
LEVEL

PRELIMINARY OBJECTION C: ANY ALLEGED SHAREHOLDER CLAIM IS DEPENDENT
UPON THE LAND CONSTITUTING AN ASSET OF MONTROSE, WHICH IT Is NOT

The Respondent’s main argument at the “shareholder level” is that the shareholder claims
are “parasitical” to the claim by Montrose as the company through which a shareholder
must claim, “whether as indirect shareholder, alleged beneficiary of shares, and/or
otherwise”.!’? The shareholder claims are necessarily jurisdictionally dependent upon the
extent to which the Montrose Land constitutes a protected investment of Montrose —
which, for the reasons supporting its Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections A and B, it is

not.

168 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 67; Tr Day Two 341:22-348:8.
‘6° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 67 (footnote omitted); First Eyre Statement, paras 7-10.

170 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 68; Counter-Memorial, paras 102-108; Inmaris, para 92.
171 Exhibit C-88.
'72 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 41.

53

171. Sri Lanka rejects the Claimants’ defensive assertion, made without any authority, that this
objection goes only to the value of the shareholder claims and hence is a matter only of
admissibility. As it is well-established in principle, in for example, Postovd Banka v
Hellenic Republic, that a shareholder cannot make a claim in respect of the assets of the
relevant company, it must follow that a shareholder lacks standing to claim for alleged loss

of shareholder value that is not based on company assets. !77

B. PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION D: INDIRECT SHAREHOLDERS ARE NOT
COVERED BY ARTICLE 1(A)(II1) OF THE BIT; A LOCALLY INCORPORATED COMPANY
Does NoT TAKE THE NATIONALITY OF THE INDIRECT SHAREHOLDER UNDER ARTICLE
8(2) OF THE BIT

(1) The Respondent’s Position

172. The Respondent fundamentally disagrees with the Claimants’ jurisdictional claim that,
because Article 1(a) of the BIT refers to “every kind of asset”, any asset whether directly
or indirectly held and whether or not listed in Article 1(a)(i)-(v), falls within the definition.
Again relying on Postovd Banka v Hellenic Republic for propositions of treaty
interpretation under the VCLT, Sri Lanka argues that, despite the broad asset-based
definition of investment in the BIT, the list of categories following that broad definition

must be given specific meaning to avoid redundancy.

173. The relevant category here is Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT, which includes in the definition
of investment “Shares, stock and debentures of companies or interests in the property of
such companies” (emphasis added). Sri Lanka argues that, on proper interpretation of the
clause, the “shares, stock and debentures of companies or interests in the property” must
be directly “of such companies” (emphasis added). As the word “companies” is defined
in Article 1(d)(ii) of the BIT as the relevant locally incorporated company, the protected
shares must be shares of Montrose as a Sri Lankan company. Further, given that Article
1(a)(ii) specifically covers an “interest in property of such companies’) but not an interest
in shares of such companies” (emphasis added), the Article necessarily here excludes Mr
Eyre’s indirect shareholding interest in Montrose (through Montrose Singapore) because

such shareholding reflects only his interest in the Montrose Share as opposed to ownership

"3 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 42; Postova Banka, paras 230-246.

54

17:

17.

17

-

a

a

of the Montrose Share itself. It is Montrose Singapore that owns the Montrose Share, and

Montrose Singapore is not a qualifying investor.

The Respondent urges the Tribunal, under Article 32 of the VCLT, to have regard here to
supplementary means of interpretation to confirm the meaning of Article 1(a)(ii) of the
BIT under Article 31. In specific, Sri Lanka relies heavily on a Foreign Commonwealth
Office (“FCO”) Memorandum of 21 February 1973 (“FCO Memorandum’) commenting
on the 1972 UK Model BIT, which the Parties agree was the model for the BIT. 4 The
definition of investment in Article 1(a)(ii) of the 1972 UK Model BIT differs, by referring

to:

Shares, stock and debentures of companies wherever incorporated
or interests in the property of such companies.

 

. The FCO commented that the words “wherever incorporated” were included to cover

shareholders in companies “incorporated in any third State”, because customary
international law does not provide the United Kingdom the right to protect shareholders
incorporated in third states, as opposed to UK shareholders in UK companies and
companies in the other Contracting State, absent specific drafting protection. Sri Lanka
contends that, in making this reference to the customary international law position in 1973,
the FCO clearly had the recent judgment in Barcelona Traction in mind and, contrary to
the Claimants’ suggestion, Barcelona Traction cannot be ignored as a diplomatic

protection case.!7°

If indirect shareholdings were already covered, says Sri Lanka, then
the specific words “wherever incorporated” would not have been necessary in the UK 1972

Model BIT.

The United Kingdom and Sri Lanka did not include the allegedly critical words “wherever
incorporated” in Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT. Sri Lanka contends that this implies that the

concept — the extension of protection to investments of companies incorporated in third

'™ FCO Commentary on the 1972 UK Model BIT, under cover of FCO Memo dated 21 February 1973 (“FCO

"76 Respondent’s Closing Submi
ICJ 3, 5 February 1970 (2 Phase) (RL-57).

Memorandum”) (RL-54).
"5 Final Model IPPA under cover of FCO Memorandum dated 7 July 1972 (RL-53) (emphasis added).

 

ns, para 54; Barcelona Traction Light and Power Co. Ltd. (Belg. v. Spain), 1970

55

states — was rejected. This adds further support to Sri Lanka’s interpretation of Article

1(a)(ii), because:

it is unrealistic to suppose that the wording to extend the catchment
area of the BIT was dropped because it was not needed: the UK
thought it was needed so why on earth would Sri Lanka agree to its
removal on the basis that it was not needed as opposed to not
agreeing to extend the catchment area.‘

177. The Respondent goes on to argue that this interpretation is reinforced by reference to
Article 5(2) and Article 8(2) of the BIT, which the Respondent says provide context for

the interpretation of Article 1(a)(ii). These Articles provide:

Article 5(2)

Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company
which is incorporated or constituted under the law in force in any
part of its own territory, and in which nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party own shares, it shall ensure that the
provisions of paragraph (1) are applied to the extent necessary to
guarantee prompt, adequate and effective compensation in respect
of the investment to such nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party who are owners of those shares. (Emphasis
added)

Article 8(2)

A company which is incorporated or constituted under the law in
force in the territory of one Contracting Party and in which before
such dispute arises the majority of shares are owned by nationals
or companies of the other Contracting Party shall in accordance
with article 25(2)(b) of the [ICSID] Convention be treated for the
purposes of the Convention as a company of the other Contracting
Party. (Emphasis added)

178. Sri Lanka states that Article 5(2) was “drafted with specific regard to the limited exception
envisaged by Barcelona Traction in which a shareholder in the company could bring an

indirect claim in respect of the expropriation of the assets of the company”.!”® Sri Lanka

 

"77 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 54(d).

"8 Reply, para 63.

56

emphasises that Article 5(2) refers to assets of a company “in which” a person or entity
“owns shares” and is the “owner of those shares”; while Article 8(2) refers to the majority
of shares in a company “in which” shares “are owned” by nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party. Looking at ordinary meaning, the Respondent contends that these
two provisions only confer (in the case of Article 5(2)) rights and (in the case of Article
8(2)) nationality for purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention on the person
or entity who actually owns the shares in the relevant company. Citing to Professor
Douglas, Sri Lanka takes the position that an indirect shareholder does not own shares in
the company and so, here, Mr Eyre does not own the Montrose Share, even if his indirect

shareholding provides him with control of Montrose.!7?

17!

se

The Respondent puts particular emphasis on Article 8(2) of the BIT, which it says defines
the circumstances in which the Contracting States consented to a locally incorporated
company taking the nationality of the other Contracting State for purposes of Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Citing to Vacuum Salt v Ghana, Sri Lanka takes the
position that Article 25(2)(b) sets an “objective limit (of foreign control) beyond which
ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist” and, here, Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom “did not
opt for the outer limit of control by simply agreeing to Article 25(2)(b) but chose a
narrower definition of equity ownership”.'®° Given that the UK-Sri Lanka BIT does not
use the language of “ownership or control (directly or indirectly)” used in other treaties,
for example, the Romania-Sweden BIT interpreted by the tribunal in Micula v Romania,
the Claimants’ reliance on awards interpreting such broader language cannot assist their

jurisdictional case under the more limited BIT language here. !*!

180. Nor, argues Sri Lanka, are the Claimants assisted by the case they must rely upon in this
context, SCB v Tanzania. The United Kingdom-Tanzania BIT in that case does include in

the definition of “investment” the same category of “Shares, stock and debentures of

 

"79 Respondent’ s Closing Submissions, para 48; Z Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (Cambridge
University Press, 2009) pages 197-198 (CL-196).

'89 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 49(b); Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v Republic of Ghana, 1CSID Case No
ARB/92/01, Award, 16 February 1994 (“Vacuum Salt”), para 36 (CL-128).

'8! Respondent’s Closing Submissions, paras 49-50; Micula v Romania, ICSID Case No ARB/05/20, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 24 September 2008 (RL-97).

    

 

s7

182

183

companies or interests in the property of such companies” as appears in Article 1(a)(ii) of
the UK-Sri Lanka BIT here, but Sri Lanka disputes that the tribunal in SCB v Tanzania
determined that an indirect shareholding was covered by this definition. Sri Lanka
emphasises that the tribunal left open that question without analyzing any of the specific

terms in the definition:

For good order, the Tribunal clarifies that it does not find that the
UK-Tanzania BIT applies only to direct as opposed to indirect
investments. Emphasis added. Such a conclusion is not necessary
to the decision here. The Tribunal leaves the question to be
addressed by a tribunal in a case in which the issue is essential to
the decision to be made.'*?

(2) The Claimants’ Position

181. The Claimants maintain their position that, with a proper interpretation under Article 31

18

oO

Respondent's Closing Subm

of the VCLT, the ICSID Convention and the BIT, Montrose and Mr Eyre have standing as

qualifying investors. !*°

. The Claimants describe Sri Lanka’s overall objection that Article 1(a) of the BIT does not
protect Mr Eyre’s indirect legal ownership of the Montrose Share as misconceived, and
contrary to the many tribunal decisions recognising indirect shareholder claims where the
relevant treaty defines “investment” broadly as “every kind of asset”.'** The Claimants
criticise Sri Lanka for offering interpretations of the BIT that are based on “misconceived
references to Sri Lankan law derived from the ICJ’s judgment in Barcelona Traction,
which is irrelevant in the investment treaty context”; that are an “anathema to the object
and purpose of the BIT”; and that violate the general rule of international law that a tribunal
should not import a requirement limiting its jurisdiction when the parties have not

specified such a requirement in the relevant treaty.

. As for Article 1(a) of the BIT, the Claimants’ primary response is that Sri Lanka is wrong

to focus on the illustration of an “investment” in Article 1(a)(ii) — “Shares, stock and

 

ions, para 51; SCB v Tanzania, paras 240, 266.

Counter-Memorial, para 29.

'S4 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 5.

58

18.

185.

>

debentures of companies or interests in the property of such companies” — to assert that
the concept of indirect shareholding is missing. Instead, argue the Claimants, the focus
must remain on the definition of “investment” itself in the opening language of Article 1(a)
— “every kind of asset” — without any qualifier that an asset be “directly” held. Such a
broad definition must include assets held directly or indirectly, to fulfill the purpose of

o> 185

investment treaties “to give investors the widest possible protection’ In support, the

Claimants cite to a statement by the United Kingdom’s FCO that this language “is
deliberately non-exhaustive so that the [BIT] will have the widest possible coverage” and

this is “essential” to the functioning of the treaty.'%°

Given the Claimants’ focus on the definition of “investment” in Article l(a) of the BIT
rather than the illustrative example in Article 1(a)(ii), they give short shrift to the
Respondent’s reliance on the FCO Memorandum of 21 February 1973 commenting on
Article 1(a)(ii) in the 1972 UK Model BIT. Further, even if the United Kingdom provided
the 1972 UK Model BIT to Sri Lanka during the BIT negotiations and it became part of
the travaux préparatoires, the Claimants assert that the same cannot be said for the FCO
Memorandum. Even if the FCO Memorandum could properly be used to interpret the BIT
under Article 31 and, as a supplementary interpretation tool, Article 32 of the VCLT, it is
“not a direct source for understanding the object and purpose of the BIT” and is “a partisan
document separate from the BIT and indeed drafted some seven years prior to the

execution of the BIT”.!*”

In any event, argue the Claimants, Sri Lanka has “clearly misunderstood the FCO
Memorandum” in contending that it shows that the 1972 UK Model BIT attempted to

codify customary international law, given that the purpose of a BIT is to create a lex

Rejoinder, para 25.

'86 Rejoinder, para 26; Letter from the FCO to Clifford Chance LLP (16 November 2007), cited in C Brown and A
Sheppard, “United Kingdom”
2013) 697, 711 (CL-93) (emphasis from Claimants).

'87 Rejoinder, para 36 (emphasis from Claimants).

  

in C Brown (ed), Commentaries on Selected Model Bilateral Investment Treaties (OUP

59

specialis.'*8 Further, Sri Lanka has made a “fundamental error” in “conflat[ing] the rule

in Barcelona Traction with the concept of indirect shareholder claims”. '*°

186. The Claimants similarly reject Sri Lanka’s arguments based on Article 5(2) of the BIT,
which were also based on Barcelona Traction and the FCO Memorandum to the effect
that Article 5(2) limits Mr Eyre’s ability to bring an indirect claim arising from losses
suffered by Montrose. The Claimants disagree and rely on the FCO Memorandum to
support their position that Article 5(2) is designed to protect against the indirect
expropriation of an investment vehicle whether or not that vehicle is itself the investment,
leaving the shares functionally worthless even though the investor retains title to the

shares. !°°

187. The Claimants further rely on RosInvest v Russia, where they say the tribunal found that
the sole purpose of Article 5(2) (in that case, in the United Kingdom-United Soviet
Socialist Republic BIT) is to clarify that indirect expropriation claims are available to
shareholders in relation to their shares when company assets are expropriated.!°! The
Claimants contend this was also decided in AAPL v Sri Lanka, in which a shareholder
brought a reflective loss claim “in precisely the circumstances that Sri Lanka now attempts
to exclude” and was compensated for the lost value of its 48% shareholding in the Sri

Lankan company destroyed in the Sri Lanka civil war.'°?

188. The Claimants similarly reject Sri Lanka’s argument that Montrose cannot be deemed a
UK national under Article 8(2) of the BIT because Mr Eyre does not directly own the

Montrose Share. In the Claimants’ words:

Article 8(2) merely allows a locally incorporated investment vehicle
— which may have suffered a distinct loss from its direct or indirect
owner — to bring a claim in its own right in conjunction with Article

'88 Rejoinder, para 49, and paras 48-50.
'89 Rejoinder, para 55, and paras 51-57.
19 Rejoinder, paras 73-74; FCO Memorandum, para 10 (RL-54).

9! Rejoinder, para 146; RosInvestCo UK Ltd v Russian Federation, SCC Case No V079/2005, Final Award, 12
September 2010 (“RosInvest”), para 608 (CL-79).

2 Rejoinder, para 147; Asian Agricultural Products Ltd v Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (1990) 4 ICSID
Rep 245, Award, 27 June 1990 (“AAPL”), paras 95-108 (CL-182).

60

189.

190.

191.

25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. It says nothing about whether
the BIT protects indirect shareholders nor restrict their claims.'*

The Claimants maintain the position taken in their Memorial that the purpose of Article
8(2) is to serve as a declaration for purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID

Convention. !°*

The Claimants firmly disagree with the Respondent’s argument that Article 25(2)(b) sets
a lower limit or floor on ICSID jurisdiction, contending that it rather “is intended to expand
the scope of ICSID jurisdiction, not to narrow it”.'° Article 25(2)(b), the Claimants say,
is designed to avoid having an investment vehicle incorporated in the host State, but
controlled by a national of the other Contracting State, from being treated as a national of
the host State, which would be an exercise of “prioritising corporate form over economic
reality”.!°° Article 25(2)(b) gives ICSID Member States the capacity to consent — as Sri
Lanka and the United Kingdom did here, in the BIT — that a company incorporated in one
may be considered to hold the nationality of the other, “so long as an autonomous and
objective standard of ‘foreign control’ inherent to Article 25(2)(b) is met”.'°? The

Claimants cite Professor Schreuer in support:

Whereas the first part of Art. 25(2)(b) merely refers to an investor’s
nationality, the second part specifically refers to control. This
would indicate an approach that is governed less by formal aspects
of corporate nationality than by economic realities. Therefore, on
balance, the better approach would appear to be a realistic look at
the true controllers thereby blocking access to the Centre for
juridical persons that are controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals of non-Contracting States or nationals of host States.'°*

Further, the Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s position that control must be

exercised by the majority shareholder that directly owns the relevant shareholding. They

Rejoinder, para 91.

Counter-Memorial
196 Counter-Memorial

'°4 Counter-Memorial, para 38.

para 32 (emphasis in original).

1,
1,
1, para 32.
1,

57 Counter-Memorial, para 32.
8 Schreuer, page 323.

61

19:

S

wo

argue that the requirement of direct ownership and control is not found in the text of Article
8(2) of the BIT, and therefore the Contracting States did not intend to exclude indirect
ownership of a controlling interest by a UK national like Mr Eyre from the scope of Article
8(2). The tribunal in Plama v Bulgaria, in interpreting the words “investment [...] owned”

in Article 17(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty, held that:

ownership includes indirect and beneficial ownership; and control
includes control in fact, including an ability to exercise substantial
influence over the legal entity’s management, operations, and the
selection of members of its board of directors or any other managing
body.'°

For the Tribunal here to read a requirement of only direct ownership into the BIT would
be contrary to the “well-known” rule of international law, as set out in Bear Creek Mining
v Peru, that a tribunal should not import a requirement limiting its jurisdiction when the

parties have not specified that requirement.”

In this regard, the Claimants reject Sri Lanka’s interpretive argument that the words “in
which” in Article 8(2) provide the same meaning as the word “directly”. As a matter of
ordinary meaning, the words “in which” do not change the fact that, to fulfill the purpose

of Article 8(2), the shares may be directly or indirectly ““owned”.?°!

In this context, the
Claimants agree with the Respondent that SCB v Tanzania is of little use to the Tribunal

in interpreting Article 8(2).

. The Claimants describe it as “common ground” that Mr Eyre exercised legal and factual

control over Montrose, given his 99% stake in Montrose Singapore (with his wife holding
the other 1%), which was the legal owner of the Montrose Share when this arbitration was

commenced. This is effectively the 100% foreign ownership that the tribunal in Vacuum

89 Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, CSID Case ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February

2005 (“Plama”’), para 170 (CL-43).

2 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 5; Rejoinder, paras 136-139; Bear Creek Mining Corp v Republic of Peru,
ICSID Case No ARB/14/21, Award, 30 November 2017 (“Bear Creek Mining”), para 320 (CL-176).

21 Counter-Memorial, para 39.

62

19.

Cc.

195

196.

-

Salt v Ghana found, in the context of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, “almost

certainly would result in foreign control, by whatever standard”.7°

In sum, the Claimants argue that Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article
8(2) of the BIT must be interpreted to prevent corporate legal personality from interfering
with the real economic interests of the investment — and “the ‘real’ economic interest

behind Montrose Sri Lanka is Mr Eyre”.

Further, as Mr Eyre is entitled to claim his
indirect ownership of the Montrose Share as a qualified investment under the broad
definition in Article 1(a) of the BIT, Montrose is entitled to rely on that indirect ownership

to be deemed a UK national under Article 8(2).

PRELIMINARY_JURISDICTIONAL. Ox. JECTION E: MR EYRE’S ALLEGED BENEFICIAL
INTEREST IN THE SHARE IS NOT PROTECTED BY THE BIT

(1) The Respondent’s Position

. Repeating the interpretive analysis set out in support of its Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objection based on indirect ownership of shares, the Respondent asserts that the BIT does

not protect Mr Eyre’s alleged beneficial interest in the Montrose Share.

. Sri Lanka dismisses the cases relied upon by the Claimants for the contrary position on
grounds that the specific wording in the treaties involved is broader than that in Article
l(a) of the UK-Sri Lanka BIT. In Saba Fakes v Turkey, the Netherlands-Turkey BIT
includes in the definition of investment “shares of stock or other interests in a company”
and provides that investments may be “owned or controlled” by investors (emphasis
added). In Plama v Bulgaria, the tribunal held that the Energy Charter Treaty defines
investment to mean “every kind of asset owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an
investor and includes: (b) shares, stocks or other forms of equity participation in a

company” (emphasis added).?°°

Vacuum Salt, para 43.

23 Clair
Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, para 51 (CL-133).

24 Saba Fakes; Netherlands-Turkey BIT, Article 1(b)(ii), 1(d) and 2 (RL-106).
285 Plama; Energy Charter Treaty, Article 1(6) (RL-19).

mants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 9 citing CMS v Argentina, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/08, Decision on

63

197.

19:

199.

206 Respondent’s Closing Submiss
(1927) BOM 161 (RL-113). The Respondent notes that this
based on the Indian Trust Act of 1882.

207 Tr Day One 196:1-15, 19-25; 197:11-25; 198:1-6.
208 Exhibit R-12.5; Exhibit C-85.

ad

In any event, argues the Respondent, Mr Eyre did not have the necessary beneficial interest
in the shares of Montrose Singapore, the holder of the Montrose Share. To establish such
a beneficial interest, Mr Eyre must prove that: (i) at the Montrose level, Mr Fernando held
the Montrose Share on trust for Mr Eyre; and (2) at the Montrose Singapore level,
Montrose Singapore held its shares in Montrose on trust for Mr Eyre, following the transfer
of the Montrose Share from Mr Fernando. Mr Eyre, says Sri Lanka, has failed to prove

the beneficial interest on either basis.

At the Montrose level, the Respondent contends that Sri Lankan legal principles must
apply to the creation of a valid trust between Mr Eyre and Mr Fernando. Articles 3, 6 and
10 of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance require proof that Mr Eyre intended to create a trust
of the Montrose Share vis-a-vis Mr Fernando and that Mr Fernando agreed to act as trustee.
Citing Pandit v Maheshri, Sri Lanka argues that proof of such intention and agreement
requires clear evidence and cautions the Tribunal against accepting oral evidence of

interested parties.?°°

Sri Lanka emphasises that the only evidence of the alleged Montrose trust is just such oral
evidence of interested parties — Mr Eyre and his fellow Montrose director, Mr Wijeratne.
In the absence of any written trust arrangement, Mr Eyre testified that he left it to local
lawyers to advise and create a trust and he did not recall instructing Mr Wijeratne to
appoint Mr Fernando as trustee.”°” In Sri Lanka’s view, if Mr Eyre really had instructed
local lawyers to create a trust, there would have been a document. The only evidence of
legal advice was Ms Mudalige’s email suggesting that Mr Eyre have a local director for
Montrose, with arrangements to remove the director at will by obtaining the signed
resignation letter from Mr Fernando.”°8 Further, says Sri Lanka, a trust of shares would
have been “ill-advised” because it would have been void under Sections 4(1)(b) and 4(2)

of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance as an illegitimate attempt to evade and

 

ions, para 59; Madhavprasad Nanuram Pandit v Monghilal Ramandand Maheshri
an Indian case, and the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance is

  

64

201

20

20:

Ss

S

2 Respondent’s Closing Subm
20 Ty Day One 223:19-21; 230:11-17.

211 Tr Day One 227:13-16; 230:1-10.

22 Tr Day One 235:3-4

213 Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, section 10(2) (RL-42).
214 Tr Day One 206:11-17.

“defeat the purpose” of the 100% sales tax imposed by Section 58(3)(A) of the Finance
Act No 11 of 1963.”

The Respondent describes Mr Wijeratne’s testimony as being equally unreliable. Among
other reasons, Mr Wijeratne is in the tourism business and is not a lawyer, and had no
familiarity with the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance or any experience in creating a trust.?!°
At the highest, he recalled that Mr Eyre wanted to “have control” of Montrose and asked
him to find “‘a trusted person” as director, and that he therefore recommended Mr Fernando

211 Under cross-

and obtained the undated signed resignation letter from Mr Fernando.
examination at the hearing, he recounted that Mr Fernando also provided a blank signed

shareholder transfer document, but the Claimants produced no such document.?!?

Turning next to the Montrose Singapore level, the Respondent contends that there is no
evidence whatsoever — not even oral testimony from Mr Eyre — that Montrose Singapore
agreed to act as trustee in respect of the Montrose Share. Although the Claimants suggest
that this was simply a question of transferring an existing Sri Lankan trust to a new trustee,
the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance provides that “[n]o one is bound to accept a trust”.?!> What
the Claimants must prove, therefore, is that Montrose Singapore had knowledge of the

trust and agreed to be bound by it.

The Respondent charges the Claimants with patently failing to meet this burden of proof.
Mr Eyre testified that he was not aware of any trust at the Montrose level, and there is no
way to impute knowledge of any existing trust to Montrose Singapore. Nor, on his
evidence, did Mr Eyre give any thought as to whether the Montrose Share should be held
on trust for him by Montrose Singapore in addition to his having 99% of the Montrose
Singapore shareholding.”!* To be compliant with the Singapore Companies Act and the

Articles of Association of Montrose Singapore, there should have been a Board Resolution

 

ions, para 63(b), citing RL-42 and RL-3.

65

215

216 Montrose Singapore Article:

20:

20:

oO

*

regarding the trust — and the Claimants produced no such document.*!> Further, given the
conflict of interest posed by the trust, the Articles of Association call for an ordinary
shareholders’ resolution — and again the Claimants produced no such document.”!® The
Claimants may object that failure to comply with the Singapore Companies Act and the
Article of Association of Montrose Singapore does not invalidate a trust, but, says Sri
Lanka, “this is to convert a factual point into a legal point” and the “absence of any board
and shareholder resolutions and minutes and the positive absence of any intention to act

as trustee strongly rebuts the contention” that such a trust was created.*!7

Further, argues the Respondent, Mr Eyre had an obligation under the Singapore
Companies Act to disclose his alleged beneficial interest in Montrose at the time the
shareholding was transferred, with the failure to disclose constituting a criminal offense.?!*
Given Mr Eyre’s insistence that he always relied on local legal advice, the “reality” is that
he was not advised to make such a disclosure in Singapore because “he never had any
intention of creating or transferring a trust in the shares and did not give this a moment’s

thought”.?!?

Finally, the Respondent points out that the 2014 accounts of Montrose Singapore are
“fundamentally inconsistent with the existence of a trust which fundamentally negates that
contention on a factual level”.??° There is no disclosure in the accounts of Mr Eyre’s

beneficial interest,77!

which would imply that the accounts failed to give a true and fair
view of the financial position of Montrose Singapore in violation of the Singapore
Companies Act and the Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (“SFRS”).2 The

accounts were prepared on a consolidated basis on the ground of the exercise of control by

Singapore Companies Act, section 157A (RL-128); Memorandum of Articles of Association of Montrose
Singapore (“Montrose Singapore Articles”), sections 77, 83 and 90 (R-14).

ctions 81(A) and (C).

 

217 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 67(d).

2!8 Singapore Companies Act,
2!° Respondent's Closing Subm
220 Respondent's Closing Subm

ction 156 (RL-128).

 
 
  
 

ions, para 67(f).

221 Montrose Singapore’s Financial Year End 31 December 2014 Accounts, Exhibit R-4.

222

Singapore Companies Act, section 201(5) (RL-128); Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (“SFRS”) 1, 110,

112 (Exhibit 2.1 to Expert Report of Narissa Chen).

66

20:

a

Montrose Singapore over Montrose and a right to a return from its holding in Montrose,

223

but there is no such return right in a trust~~” and, under Singapore law, a company cannot

assert control over another company where shares are held on trust.?”4

. In conclusion, the Respondent argues that it is “implausible and inconsistent with Mr
Eyre’s own evidence to suggest — as the Claimants hypothesis — that “Mr Eyre was not
aware of any of his statutory responsibilities” with regard to a Montrose Singapore trust.
Instead, says Sri Lanka:

The reason why he gave this no thought was simply that he never
considered himself to have an interest beyond his 99%

shareholding, which explains why it was never considered, voted
upon or otherwise acted upon.”

(2) The Claimants’ Position

206. As with their answer to Sri Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection based on indirect

a

ownership of the Montrose Share, the Claimants primarily rely on the broad definition of
“investment” in Article 1(a) of the BIT to refute Sri Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objection based on Mr Eyre’s alleged beneficial ownership of the Montrose Share. Article
1(a) defines “investment” as “every kind of asset” and, according to the Claimants, “[i]t is

beyond argument that beneficial title to shares is an ‘asset””.?7°

. The Claimants argue further that Article 1(a)(1) includes “property rights” as an
illustration of a covered investment and, given that Sri Lankan law recognises beneficial
ownership of a share as a property right, Mr Eyre’s beneficial ownership of the Montrose
Share ipso facto fulfils this requirement. They rely on the Trusts Ordinance, which
recognises that shares can be held on trust without entry into the company register and the

resulting beneficial interest is enforceable.77”

23 SERS 110, Appendix (definition of control).

24 Singapore Companies Act, section 5(3) (RL-128).
Respondent's Closing Submi

 

ions, para 67(g).

226 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 7.
227 Tr Day Three 524:22-544:9.

67

208. In further support, and following on from its arguments under Article 8(2) of the BIT, the

20!

2i

2i

Ss

0.

Claimants rely on other tribunal decisions. As noted in connection with the Claimants’
indirect ownership claim, the tribunal in Plama v Bulgaria interpreted the word “owned”
in Article 17(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty to include “beneficial ownership”.??* In

Saba Fakes v Turkey, the tribunal found:

the division of property rights amongst several persons or the
separation of legal and beneficial ownership is commonly accepted
in anumber of legal systems, be it through a trust, fiduciary or other
similar structure. ... The separation of legal title and beneficial
ownership rights does not deprive such ownership of the
characteristics of an investment within the meaning of the ICSID
Convention or the Netherlands-Turkey BIT. °°

. In response to the Respondent’s argument that the tribunals in Plama v Bulgaria and Saba

Fakes v Turkey were interpreting broader language contained in the relevant BITs, the
Claimants point out that the language at issue went to illustrations of covered investments,
while the Claimants here are relying on the definition of “investment” itself in the UK-Sri

Lanka BIT — the broad phrase “every kind of asset”.?°°

The Claimants argue further that Mr Eyre is in fact the beneficial owner of the Montrose

Share.

Starting first with Montrose, the Claimants contend that the evidence clearly shows that
Mr Fernando was only a nominee director and shareholder, subject to Mr Eyre’s control
and to removal by Mr Eyre at any time.?*! This evidence includes Mr Eyre’s unequivocal
statement that “[t]he intention and understanding of all concerned was that at all times that
I would retain full beneficial ownership and control over the company”.?*? Especially, as

Sri Lankan law does not require a written document to create a trust over shares,?°? the

28 Plama, para 170.

29 Saba Fakes, para 134.

230 Rejoinder, para 172.

231 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 42; Exhibits C-85 and C-58.

232

First Eyre Statement, para 18.

233 Rejoinder, para 248.

68

witness testimony of Mr Eyre is sufficient to prove that Mr Eyre’s intention was to create
a trust and that Mr Fernando held the Montrose Share on trust for Mr Eyre — unless the
Tribunal finds Mr Eyre’s testimony not credible. Further, while it is true that Article 86(1)
of the Sri Lanka Companies Act provides that the person who is registered as the legal
owner of shares in the share registry is treated as the holder of those shares under the

Companies Act, it does not disallow off-register beneficial ownership.?*+

2i

v

Secondly, as for Montrose Singapore, Sri Lanka “grossly overstates” the situation in
alleging that Mr Eyre’s beneficial interest is incompatible with Sri Lankan law, in
particular that Mr Eyre’s failure to record his beneficial interest in the Montrose Singapore
2014 accounts disproves the transfer of his beneficial interest in the Montrose Share.?*>
Particularly given that Montrose Singapore is an exempt non-public company under the
Singapore Companies Act, any violation of the SFRS was “utterly trivial in character”.”*°
Insofar as Sri Lanka relies on the expert evidence of Ms Chen to demonstrate a breach of
the SFRS, her cross-examination — in which, among other things, she had to admit that
Montrose Singapore is an exempt private company not required to file audited financial
statements containing beneficial interests — discredited her testimony.”*” In any event,
argue the Claimants, Mr Eyre explained that his failure to disclose and record his beneficial
interest in the Montrose Share in Montrose Singapore’s accounts was innocent — in the
press of his other business, he was unaware of the Singaporean legal requirement and
assumed he owned the Montrose Share; in response to a question in cross-examination
whether he “[gave] any thought at all as to whether [he] wanted, needed or intended to
keep a beneficial interest in the shares independently of [his] 99 per cent shareholding in

Montrose Sri Lanka’, Mr Eyre answered “No, absolutely not”.238

213. Even if the Tribunal were to find that the Montrose arrangements were inconsistent with

Sri Lankan law and that inconsistency with host State law has preclusive effect with regard

234 Counter-Memorial, para 138.

235 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 45.

236 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 45.

237 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 46; Tr Day Two 265: 11-17.
238 Tr Day One 206:1 1-24.

69

S

to jurisdiction or admissibility, the Claimants argue that this would not exclude the
Tribunal’s competence over all aspects of the claims. This is because, under international
Jaw, Mr Eyre still has indirect legal title to the Montrose Share as the 99% shareholder of
Montrose Singapore and Montrose has a separate direct claim in respect of the Montrose

Land.2?

PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION F: THE ALLEGED INVESTMENT WAS NOT
MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND GOOD FAITH, AND SO Is NOT A PROTECTED
INVESTMENT UNDER THE BIT

(1) The Respondent’s Position

214. In this Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection, the Respondent directly alleges that, if the

21

2i

on

a

Claimants did have a beneficial interest in the Montrose Share via trust, that beneficial
interest is void under section 4 of the Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance as unlawful, being “of
such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law”.?*° The relevant
Jaw is section 58(3)(A) of the Sri Lankan Finance Act, which imposes a 100% sales tax on
a sale of a Sri Lankan company where — as with Montrose — more than 25% of the shares
are foreign owned. As any trust in Montrose is void, it is ineffective to create a beneficial

interest and incapable of constituting an investment under the BIT.

. In opposition to the Claimants’ position that this illegality argument goes to admissibility
or the merits rather than jurisdiction, the Respondent emphasises that even Professor
Douglas supports this argument in the article on which the Claimants rely. According to
Sri Lanka, Professor Douglas acknowledges that if a foreign national acquires title that is
ineffective under the host State’s law, then there is no investment as a jurisdictional

matter.”4! This is the situation here under section 4 of the Sri Lankan Trusts Ordinance.

Given this situation, with the illegality rendering any trust void, the Respondent describes

as “sterile” the Parties’ debate as to whether it is implicit in the BIT that investments made

23° Counter-Memorial, para 119; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 49.

0 Sri Lankan Trust Ordinance, section 4(1)(b) (RL-42).

21 Z Douglas QC, The Plea of Illegality in Investment Treaty Arbitration (2014), 29 ICSID Review — FILJ, page 178
(CL216).

70

contrary to host state law or good faith are not protected.*4? However, the Respondent’s
position — that such a requirement is implicit in the BIT, without express language of
illegality — is supported by Phoenix v Czech Republic. The Claimants’ reliance on Bear
Creek v Peru for the contrary position, says Sri Lanka, is misplaced because the tribunal
in that case: (a) acknowledged that every case depends on the specific treaty at issue; and,
(b) in the case before it, it would not be right to imply a requirement of compliance with
host state law and good faith in circumstances where Peru had the option under the relevant
treaty to require that an investment be legally constituted to attract protection, but chose

: a)
not to exercise the option.744

(2) The Claimants’ Position

217. The Claimants take umbrage with Sri Lanka’s position that Mr Eyre’s beneficial interest
in the Montrose Share breached Sri Lankan law or was otherwise in bad faith. However,
even if this Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection were accepted, the Claimants deny that
jurisdiction would be ousted, because Mr Eyre still has indirect ownership of the Montrose
Share through Montrose Singapore. The alleged illegality, say the Claimants, is a question

for admissibility or the merits.745

218. The Claimants identify their primary position to be that “a violation of Sri Lankan law
cannot strip the Tribunal of jurisdiction over the beneficial interest — unless that interest is
determined void as a matter of Sri Lankan law”.”*° This is because the BIT has no express
legality clause, and so the issue of whether a claimant procured an investment for a purpose
in violation of host State laws can only affect a claimant’s case on the merits and not
jurisdiction.?*” The Claimants rely on Bear Creek Mining v Peru, Stati v Kazakhstan, and

Liman v Kazakhstan, while emphasising that Sri Lanka has proved unable to point to a

22 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 70.

23 Phoenix Action Ltd v Czech Republic, 1CSID Case No ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009 (“Phoenix Action”) (RL-
146).

24 Bear Creek Mining, paras 319-320.

25 Rejoinder, paras 317 and 335.

26 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 50.

>47 Rejoinder, paras 316-329; Tr Day Three 567:1-568:8.

71

219.

220.

single case in which a tribunal held that investor illegality was a jurisdictional issue where
the BIT lacked an express legality clause.”“* Insofar as the Respondent relies on Phoenix
Action v Czech Republic, the Claimants emphasise that the tribunal there considered the
need for compliance with host State law and good faith to be two additional Salini factors
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and the case has not been followed in that

respect.74?

The Claimants cite to a commentary by Professor Douglas that the relevant jurisdictional
question is whether the alleged illegality is violative of international public policy rather

than only of host State law:

If the investment is procured for a purpose that is illicit under the
law of the host State but not under international public policy then
this would provide a defence to the merits of the claims.?°°

The Claimants assert that the most serious allegation levied against them by Sri Lanka is
violation of only host State law, namely tax evasion under the Sri Lanka Finance Act —
and “[a]t no point is the allegation made that tax evasion is violative of international public

policy”.?5!

In any event, argue the Claimants, Mr Eyre’s beneficial interest in the Montrose Share was
not contrary to the Sri Lankan Finance Act.?°? This is because the Finance Act addresses
the transfer of property rather than a beneficial interest. Section 58(3A) of the Finance
Act provides:

Where there is a transfer of ownership of any property within Sri

Lanka to a company there shall be charged from the transferee of
such property, a tax of such amount as is equivalent to the value of

8 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para 50; Bear Creek Mining, paras 319-320 (CL-176); Anatolie Stati, Gabriel Stati,

Ascom Group SA & Terra Raf Trans Trading Ltd v Republic of Kazakhstan, SCC Case No V (116/2010), Award, 9
December 2013, para 812 (CL-213); Liman Caspian Oil BV & NCL Dutch Investment BV v Republic of Kazakhstan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/14, Award, 22 June 2010, para 187 (CL-200).

% Rejoinder, para 321; Phoenix Action, para 114.

280 Z Douglas QC, The Plea of Illegality in Investment Treaty Arbitration (2014), 29 ICSID Review — FILJ, pages
155, 184 (CL-216)

251 Rejoinder, para 319.

Counter-Memorial, paras 129-144; Rejoinder, paras 330-334.

72

221

222.

223.

224

that property, if more than twenty five per centum of the issued
shares in such company are owned by persons who are not citizens
of Sri Lanka.?

. Section 66 of the Finance Act provides that the term “property” in this context refers only

to land.?*4

The Claimants juxtapose this plain wording of Section 58(3A) of the Finance Act against
Sri Lanka’s reliance on principles of statutory construction used by the courts to avoid
interpreting statutes in ways that “would enable persons to undermine [the law’s integrity]
by using the scheme of the Act in unintended ways”.**> Despite this reliance, Sri Lanka
failed to identify any cases in which the Sri Lankan courts did in fact use these principles
in interpreting and applying Section 58(3A). Most important, the Sri Lankan authorities
have taken no enforcement action against the Claimants, or even sought to contact them,

about this alleged violation of the Finance Act.

Finally, the Claimants oppose Sri Lanka’s argument that BIT jurisdiction should be denied
because of Mr Eyre’s failure to record his beneficial interest on the Montrose Singapore
accounts in alleged violation of Singapore law. No tribunal, say the Claimants, has denied
jurisdiction on grounds of violation of a municipal law other than the host State law, which

is why most legality clauses specifically require compliance only with host State law.

PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION G: MR EYRE DOES Not HAVE A CLAIM

AS INDIRECT LEGAL TITLE HOLDER TO THE MONTROSE LAND
(1) The Respondent’s Position
. As one of their points supporting the limited scope of the definition of “investment” under
Article 1(a) of the BIT, the Respondent contends that by mentioning “interests in the

property of such companies” in Article 1(a)(ii) without a mention of “interests in shares”,

the BIT excludes indirect shareholdings from coverage.*°° To repeat, Article 1(a)(ii)

283 RL-3 (emphasis added).
24 RL-5,

285 Tr D:
256 Rejoi

ay Two 390:3-18.
inder para 23, citing Reply, para 39.

73

reads: “Shares, stock and debentures of companies or interests in the property of such

companies” (emphasis added). In Sri Lanka’s words:

any alleged “interests” in shares are not covered by the reference
to “shares” because otherwise the language in the second part of
the sub-clause of Article 1(a)(ii) would have been used in the context
of “shares”. A clear distinction is drawn between owning the shares
of the company, and having an interest in the property of the
company. What is more and in any event, an indirect shareholder
does not have any form of legal or equitable interest in the shares,
though it may have a level of control, something entirely distinct
from having an interest.?>"

225. In this connection, the Respondent opposes the Claimants’ related jurisdictional claim that,
based on the “every kind of asset” definition in Article 1(a) of the BIT, the “economic
reality” of the situation must allow Mr Eyre to bring a claim as the indirect title holder to
the Montrose Land, without regard to the separate corporate personality of Montrose as

direct title holder.

22

a

. The Respondent contends that Pezold v Zimbabwe, on which the Claimants rely for this
position, was decided incorrectly and, in any event, the tribunal in Pezold v Zimbabwe did
not have the benefit of the more helpful line of authority in Postovd Banka v Hellenic
Republic.?** As set out in Postovd, with reference “to extensive well-established
authority”, the default position in international law is that a company is legally distinct
from its shareholders (or others claiming to have an interest), the company alone has rights
over its own assets, which it alone is capable of protecting, and others have no standing to
pursue claims over those assets.”? Absent clear wording, which is lacking here, Mr Eyre
lacks standing to pursue a claim to the Montrose Land because he has no legal right to the

Montrose Land, as an asset of Montrose.

257 Reply, para 39.

28 Bernhard von Pezold & Others v Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No ARB/LO/I5, Award, 28 July 2015
(“Pezold”) (CL-170).

2° Postovd Bank, paras 230-246.

74

(2) The Claimants’ Position

227. The Claimants reject Sri Lanka’s interpretive argument based on the absence of the phrase
“interests in shares” from Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT, charging that the argument “conflates
the asset that forms the subject matter of the investment (i.e., “‘shares”) with the method of
holding it (i.e., directly or indirectly)’. As addressed in connection with Sri Lanka’s
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection based on indirect investment, the Claimants insist that
Article 1(a)(ii) is merely illustrative of investments and so the absence of the phrase

“interests in shares” does not support Sri Lanka’s limited interpretation of Article 1(a)(ii).

228. However, even if the Tribunal were to accept Sri Lanka’s interpretation, there is no impact

on jurisdiction. According to the Claimants:

even if Sri Lanka is correct, and the supposed distinction between
“interests in the property of such companies” and “shares” means
that indirect shareholdings are not protected by Article I(a) (which
is denied), then this is tantamount to an acknowledgement that
Article I(a) gives an indirect investor the right to claim with respect
to the property of a company. A fortiori, Mr Eyre still holds an
investment: the Montrose Land, held indirectly through Montrose
Singapore and Montrose Sri Lanka.”°!

 

229. This is consistent, say the Claimants, with the line of authority in Pezold v Zimbabwe,
where the tribunal upheld the claimants’ position that “where a company is controlled,
legally or factually, by a certain shareholder or group of shareholders, the latter may be
entitled to a direct claim in respect of the assets of the former”, and dismissed Zimbabwe’ s
objection that the claimants lacked standing to bring claims related to the protected

investments.7

23

S

Based on the Pezold v Zimbabwe reasoning, the Claimants describe as incorrect Sri

Lanka’s argument that Mr Eyre lacks standing to bring a claim based on his indirect legal

26 Rejoinder, para 24.
261 Rejoinder, para 32.
282 Pezold, paras 317-327.

75

title to the Montrose Land. The Tribunal, say the Claimants, does have jurisdiction ratione

materiae over this claim.

F. PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION H: THE CLAIMANTS’ REFLECTIVE Loss

CLAIM Is NOT PERMITTED UNDER THE BIT
(1) The Respondent’s Position

231. Sri Lanka relies on Article 5 of the BIT for its final Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection,
which goes to Mr Eyre’s reflective loss claim based on the loss in value of the Montrose
Share as a result of the alleged expropriation of the Montrose Share. Article 5 provides

(emphasis added):

(1) Investments of nationals or companies of either Contracting
Party shall not be nationalised, expropriated, or subjected to
measures having effect equivalent to nationalization or
expropriation ... in the territory of the other Contracting Party
except for a public purpose related to the needs of that Party and
against prompt, adequate and effective compensation. ... The
national or company affected shall have a right, under the law of
the Contracting Party making the expropriation to prompt
determination of the amount of compensation either by law or by
agreement between the parties and to prompt review ....

(2) Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a
company which is incorporated or constituted under the law in force
in any part of its own territory, and in which nationals or companies
of the other Contracting Party own shares, it shall ensure that the
provisions of paragraph (1) are applied to the extent necessary to
guarantee prompt, adequate and effective compensation in respect
of the investment to such nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party who are owners of those shares.

232. Sri Lanka argues that Article 5(2) of the BIT limits a shareholder’s right to make a claim
for expropriation of the relevant company’s assets only where “necessary”. Looking to
the ordinary meaning of the phrase “to the extent necessary”, a shareholder may make a
claim for expropriation of a company’s assets only in the Barcelona Traction type case
where the company itself is incapable of acting and, in all other situations, may claim only
for direct or indirect expropriation of the actual shares themselves under Article 5(1) of

the BIT. Here, says Sri Lanka, Montrose as a company is fully capable of making a claim

76

233

234

23

a

Vil.

236.

26 Rejoi
2% Rejoi

for expropriation of the Montrose Land in Sri Lanka — and, indeed, has done so in Sri

Lanka, and has been paid compensation.

. The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ reliance on RosInvest v Russia for the
contrary position is misplaced, because the relevant treaty article in that case did not
contain the limitation of necessity. The Claimants’ reliance on AAPL v Sri Lanka is also

misplaced, because the relevant point was not taken in that case.

(2) The Claimants’ Position

. The Claimants give short shrift to Sri Lanka’s reflective loss argument. They first state
that “[nJaturally, a claim can only be brought under [Article 5(1)] in respect of shares if
those shares are expropriated — whether directly or indirectly”, but that does not prevent a
shareholder like Mr Eyre from pursuing another cause of action under the BIT, for example

for unfair and inequitable treatment, for losses caused by state action.?*

. With regard to Article 5(2) of the BIT, the Claimants reiterate their responses to Sri
Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection against indirect shareholder claims. They
again rely on RosInvest v Russia and AAPL v Sri Lanka in support of Mr Eyre’s reflective
loss claim for the reduction in value of the Montrose Share as a result of the Respondent’s
expropriation of the Montrose Land without full compensation. According to the
Claimants, the tribunal in RosInvest v Russia found that the sole purpose of Article 5(2) is
to clarify the right of an indirect shareholder to make an indirect claim in relation to its
shares when company assets are expropriated, which was also decided in AAPL v Sri

Lanka.?*
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS

The Tribunal commences its analysis of the Parties’ positions by setting out the basic
jurisdictional principles applicable in the instant case. The Tribunal will then address the

central disputed issues of jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione personae.

inder, para 145.
inder, paras 146-147.

77

A. JURISDICTIONAL PRINCIPLES

237. The governing principles of jurisdiction are found in the ICSID Convention and the UK-
Sri Lanka BIT.

238. The relevant jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention are contained in Article

25, which reads in pertinent part (emphasis added):

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting
State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting
State designated to the — Centre by that State) and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute
consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties
have given their consent, no party may withdraw the consent
unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State Party to the dispute on the date on
which the parties consented to submit such dispute to
conciliation or arbitration as well as on the date on which
the request was registered ...

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute on
the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical
person which had the nationality of the Contracting State
party to the dispute on that date and which, because of
foreign control, the parties agreed should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of
this Convention.

239. As reflected in Article 25, three well-known conditions must be met for ICSID to have

jurisdiction:

a. a condition ratione personae: the dispute must oppose a Contracting State

and a national of another Contracting State;

78

b. a condition ratione materiae: the dispute must be a legal dispute arising

directly out of an investment; and

c. a condition ratione voluntatis: the Contracting State and the investor must
consent in writing that the relevant dispute be settled through ICSID

arbitration.

240. A fourth condition ratione temporis must be added, namely that the ICSID Convention

must have been applicable at the time of the relevant dispute.

241. The jurisdictional requirements of the UK-Sri Lanka BIT are contained in Article 8, which

reads in pertinent part:

(1) Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to
[ICSID] for settlement by conciliation or arbitration under
the [ICSID Convention] any legal disputes arising between
the Contracting Party and a national or company of the
other Contracting Party concerning an investment of the
latter in the territory of the former.

(2) A company which is incorporated or constituted under the
law in force in the territory of one Contracting Party and in
which before such dispute arises the majority of shares are
owned by nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party shall in accordance with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention be treated for such purposes of the Convention
as a company of the other Contracting Party.

242. Article 1 of the BIT provides the definition of the terms “investment”, “nationals” and

“companies”, as relevant here (emphasis added):

(a) “investment” means every kind of asset and in particular, though
not exclusively, includes:

(i) moveable and immovable property and other property rights
such as mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) shares, stock and debentures of companies or interests in
the property of such companies;

79

243.

24.

BR

24:

a

265

(iti) claims to money or to performance under contract having a
financial value;

(c) “nationals” means:

(i) In respect of the United Kingdom: physical persons deriving
their status as United Kingdom nationals from the law in
force in any part of the United Kingdom or in any territory
for the international relations of which the Government of
the United Kingdom is responsible;

(d) “Companies” means:

(i) In respect of the United Kingdom: corporations, firms or
associations incorporated or constituted under the law in
force in any part of the United Kingdom or in any territory
to which this Agreement is extended in accordance with the
provisions of Article 11; ...

The Respondent has raised no objections concerning the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
voluntatis or ratione temporis based on consent or time limitations. For good order, the

Tribunal confirms that it has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis and ratione temporis.

. As to jurisdiction ratione temporis, the relevant dates are not disputed. First, the ICSID

Convention entered into force in respect of the United Kingdom on 18 January 1967 and
in respect of Sri Lanka on 11 November 1967. Therefore, as of 11 November 1967, the
Convention was in effect between Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom within the meaning
of Article 25(1). Second, the UK-Sri Lanka BIT entered into force on 18 December 1980.
Accordingly, both the ICSID Convention and the BIT were in force when the instant

dispute arose, according to the Claimants, on 10 July 2013.75

. As to jurisdiction ratione voluntatis, the necessary consent of the Respondent to ICSID

arbitration is found in Article 8(1) of the UK-Sri Lanka BIT of 18 December 1980, and

Memorial, para 82.

80

the consent of the Claimants has been given in their Request for Arbitration dated 7 July

2016.

24

aS

The Respondent’s numerous Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections concern the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae.

247. At the outset, the Tribunal observes that the Respondent has sometimes blurred the
different concepts of jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione personae, particularly in
the evolving organisation of its Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections, which has made it
necessary for the Tribunal to distinguish what is relevant to each. To give one example
among many, the Respondent presented Objection 2 in its Reply in the following manner:

The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae over: (1) Montrose
Sri Lanka, because it does not constitute a company of the United

Kingdom; and (2) Mr Eyre, because he is not the owner of the shares
of Montrose Sri Lanka.?®°

24)

oo

. It can readily be seen that the first sentence indeed relates to jurisdiction ratione personae,

but the second does not, as it relates instead to jurisdiction ratione materiae.

24

©

In light of the Parties’ blurring of jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione personae
issues, as well as the challenges posed by the evolving facts presented by the Claimants
and the evolving categorisation of the Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections presented by
the Respondent, the Tribunal has found it necessary to analyse those Objections in a

structure that does not strictly follow the Parties’ positions.

25

S

As a further preliminary point, the Tribunal confirms that the Claimants carry the burden
of proof on their affirmative jurisdictional case. Where the burden shifts to the Respondent
in connection with a particular Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection, the Tribunal will so

indicate.

266 Reply, Heading C.

81

B. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE

251. The Claimants Montrose and Mr Eyre contend that each is a qualifying United Kingdom
national under Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention.

252. The case of Mr Eyre is straightforward. It is undisputed that Mr Eyre is a UK national,
and the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae as to him under Article 25(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention and Article 1(c) of the BIT.

253. The case of Montrose, as a Sri Lankan company, is more complicated. The Respondent

challenges jurisdiction over Montrose in its Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection D

(corresponding to Objection 2 in the Respondent’s Reply).

254. Having considered the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction

ratione personae as to Montrose as well as Mr Eyre, for the reasons that follow.

25.

a

. Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, in its second sentence, provides that ICSID
jurisdiction extends — by exception to the general rule that ICSID arbitration is not
designed for companies against their own State of incorporation — to “any juridical person
which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute
... and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention”. Although the
text is one interrupted sentence, the text also reflects that Article 25(2)(b) separately

establishes both a subjective test and an objective test of jurisdiction ratione personae.

25

as

First, the Article 25(2)(b) subjective test is raised by the phrase “the parties have agreed
should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention”. In the Tribunal’s view, this subjective test is met here by Article 8(2) of the
BIT, as a declaration of the agreement between Sri Lanka and United Kingdom for

purposes of the second clause of Article 25(2). To recall, Article 8(2) provides:

A company which is incorporated or constituted under the law in
force in the territory of one Contracting Party and in which before
such dispute arises the majority of shares are owned by nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party shall in accordance with
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention be treated for such

82

purposes of the Convention as a company of the other Contracting
Party.

257. Article 8(2) expressly makes a connection to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention,

and Montrose is a juridical person incorporated under the law in force in Sri Lanka.

25

*

Secondly, the Article 25(2)(b) objective test is raised by the phrase “because of foreign
control”. A claimant does not meet this test simply by meeting the subjective test: these
two tests are not the same. This is well-reflected in two decisions where issues similar to
those in this arbitration were present. In Vacuum Salt v Ghana, the tribunal decided

(emphasis added):

the parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign national
“because of foreign control” does not ipso jure confer jurisdiction.
The reference in Article 25(2)(b) to “foreign control” necessarily
sets an objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID jurisdiction
cannot exist and parties therefore lack power to invoke same no
matter how devoutly they may have desired to do so ....7°7

25

©

Similarly, the tribunal in Autopista v Venezuela decided: “locally incorporated companies
may agree to ICSID arbitration subject to two requirements: [t]he parties have agreed to
treat the said company as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this

Convention; and [t]he said company is subject to foreign control”.?%

260. Accordingly, the next question for the Tribunal is whether the necessary objective foreign
control of Montrose exists. According to Article 8(2) of the BIT, the relevant national
company — here, Montrose — may be deemed foreign if “the majority of shares are owned
by nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party” — here, Mr Eyre as a United
Kingdom national. The issue here is whether Mr Eyre must directly exercise “foreign
control” of the sole Montrose Share, i.e. by owning the share directly himself, or whether
indirect control will suffice, i.e. the share being held by Montrose Singapore over which

he has ultimate control.

261 Vacuum Salt, para 36.

268 Autopista Concesi de V la CA, ian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/OO/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001. para 104 (RL-8).

 

83

261. The Respondent’s basic position, as detailed in Section VII.B above, is that Mr Eyre’s
indirect ownership of Montrose deprives Montrose of deemed United Kingdom nationality
for purposes of the BIT. This position rests on Sri Lanka’s interpretation of Articles 1(a)
and 8.2 of the BIT. Given that: (a) Article 1(a) includes in the definition of “investment”
“[s]hares, stock and debentures of companies or interests in the property of such
companies”; (b) “companies” is defined in Article 1(d)(ii) as the relevant locally
incorporated company; and (c) Article 1(a)(ii) does not expressly include an interest in
shares as “an interest in the property of such companies”, the protected “shares” may only
be shares of Montrose as a Sri Lankan company. As only Montrose Singapore directly
owns the Montrose Share, Article 1(a) necessarily excludes Mr Eyre’s indirect holding in
Montrose because this shareholding through Montrose Singapore reflects only his interest
in the Montrose Share and not ownership of the Montrose Share itself. Further, given that
Article 8(2) of the BIT requires that the majority of the shares of the relevant locally
incorporated company be “owned by nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party”, Mr Eyre cannot own the sole Montrose Share for purposes of Article 8(2) without

having direct legal title to the sole Montrose Share, which he does not have.

26

wm

. The Claimants’ response, in brief, is that Mr Eyre has “direct beneficial title to the sole
share in Montrose, which is a Sri Lankan-domiciled company”, and holds indirect legal
title to the sole Montrose Share through his (Mr Eyre’s) 99% stake in Montrose Singapore,
which owns Montrose.” This is sufficient, argue the Claimants, to allow Mr Eyre to
exercise the foreign control of Montrose necessary to establish jurisdiction ratione

personae under the ICSID Convention and Article 8(2) of the BIT.

263. Having considered the Parties’ positions, the Tribunal does not accept Sri Lanka’s

interpretation of Article 1(a) of the BIT together with Article 8(2).

26:

+

As for the definition of investment in Article 1(a), there are many tribunal decisions
recognising indirect shareholder claims where the relevant treaty, like the UK-Sri Lanka

BIT, defines investment broadly as “every kind of asset”.

2 Memorial, paras 99-101 (emphasis in original).

84

265. Turning to Article 8(2), which the Tribunal confirms is a declaration of consent for
purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and hence most relevant to the
instant issue, there is no indication in the text of Article 8(2) of the BIT that the majority
of shares in the relevant host State company cannot be owned indirectly by a national of
the other Contracting State. The purpose of Article 8(2) is to allow a locally incorporated
company, which is often required for local investment, to bring a claim in its own right for
purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, without regard to the rights of direct

or indirect shareholders in that company.

26

a

To recognize indirect foreign control of such a locally incorporated company, through
indirect as well as direct share ownership, is in line with both ICSID jurisprudence and
commercial reality. In modern international economic relations, chains of closely-held
companies are frequently used, without preventing the majority shareholder at the top of a
chain from asserting control of or making claims on behalf of a foreign company lower in

the chain. To quote Professor Schreuer:

Whereas the first part of Art. 25(2)(b) merely refers to an investor’s
nationality, the second part specifically refers to control. This
would indicate an approach that is governed less by formal aspects
of corporate nationality than by economic realities. Therefore, on
balance, the better approach would appear to be a realistic look at
the true controllers thereby blocking access to the Centre for
juridical persons that are controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals of non-Contracting States or nationals of host states.?”°

No
a
a

. Turning to the instant case, the Tribunal accepts that the Claimants have met the indirect
foreign control test. Mr Eyre, a United Kingdom national, owns 99% of the shares of
Montrose Singapore, which in turn is the legal owner of the sole Montrose Share, and
hence Mr Eyre indirectly exercises control over the Sri Lankan national company
Montrose. This nearly 100% foreign ownership meets the level that the Vacuum Salt
tribunal found, in the context of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, “almost

certainly would result in foreign control, by whatever standard”.?7!

2” Schreuer, page 323.
2” Vacuum Salt, para 43.

85

268. Accordingly, the Tribunal has decided, based on Mr Eyre’s indirect ownership of the
Montrose Share, that Montrose can “be treated as a national of another Contracting State”
for purposes of the objective foreign control test in Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID

Convention.

26!

©

In light of this holding, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to address Sri Lanka’s
arguments based on the United Kingdom FCO Memorandum, especially as there is no
indication that it was part of the travaux préparatoires of the BIT. Similarly, the Tribunal
does not find it necessary to address the Parties’ lengthy exchanges on the possible import
of Barcelona Traction, customary international law and Article 5(2) of the BIT on the

interpretation of the definition of investment in Article 1(a) of the BIT.

27

S

In conclusion, the Tribunal determines that it has jurisdiction ratione personae as to both
Claimants: as to Mr Eyre, under Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(c)
of the BIT; and as to Montrose, under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and
Article 8(2) of the BIT. The Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional

Objection ratione personae D (corresponding to Objection 2 in the Respondent’s Reply).

C. JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE

27

. Again, as there are two Claimants — Montrose and Mr Eyre — the Tribunal must ascertain
its jurisdiction ratione materiae for each of them, by determining whether each has a
protected investment for purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article
1(a) of the BIT.

27

vp

. The first step is to identify the investment at issue. The Claimants together seek
compensation of some US$ 20 million for the loss of their investment in the planned Hotel
Project on the Montrose Land. Sri Lanka has, more or less clearly, divided its Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objections between the Claimants’ alleged investment in the Montrose Land

itself and Mr Eyre’s alleged investment in the Montrose Share.

27

oO

. In this regard, it bears restating that Montrose has legal title to and owns the Montrose
Land, and Montrose Singapore has equity title to and owns the Montrose Share, and hence

directly owns Montrose. Although Mr Eyre originally based a claim on alleged beneficial

86

ownership of the Montrose Land itself, he has limited his claim to a beneficial ownership
interest only in the Montrose Share through his 99% ownership of Montrose Singapore.
Accordingly, only Montrose has a claim based on investment directly in the Montrose
Land.

(1) The Alleged Investment in the Montrose Land

a. Investment in the Montrose Land by Montrose versus Electro Resorts —
Import of the MOU

274. The question whether Montrose itself has a protected investment under the UK-Sri Lanka
BIT is the focus of Sri Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection A (corresponding to
Objection 6 in the Respondent’s Reply). Sri Lanka contends that the Claimants cannot
claim in respect of Electro Resorts’ beneficial interest in the Montrose Land and/or the
Montrose Land does not constitute an investment under Articles 1(a)(ii) and 8(1) of the
BIT. This Objection turns on the impact of the undated (apparently July 2010)
Memorandum of Understanding between Montrose Global and Electro Resorts (again, the

“MOU”), which assumed such prominence in the Respondents case.

275. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal considers that Sri Lanka carries the burden to prove
that Electro Resorts has a beneficial interest in the Montrose Land by operation of the
MOU and a constructive trust under Sri Lankan law, rather than requiring the Claimants
to prove a negative. The Tribunal finds that Sri Lanka has failed to prove, on a balance of
the probabilities, that the operative instrument for transfer of the Montrose Land was the

MOU and not the 4 August 2010 Deed of Transfer.

276. Following careful examination of the Parties’ submissions and the relevant evidence, the
Tribunal finds the MOU to be a non-binding agreement both on the facts and under the

applicable English governing law. There are several reasons for this conclusion.

277. First, the Tribunal cannot accept that reasonable businesspersons would agree, on a
binding basis, to regulate a multi-million-dollar real estate development project with an
undated document, from which other agreements would potentially follow. It is simply
not a credible situation, especially given that, in comparison, the MOU contained a

specific date for the completion of other Development Project documentation and all of

87

the other prospective agreements referred to in the MOU are identified with their

respective future dates.

278. Secondly, on the facts in the record, Sri Lanka has failed to show whether, how and when
the parties to the MOU acted upon the terms therein for the purported sale of the Montrose
Land. Sri Lanka has also failed to show how an understanding between two parties —
Montrose Global and Electro Resorts — could bind Montrose as a non-party to that
understanding, particularly when Montrose subsequently concluded a Deed of Transfer

with Electro Resorts to purchase the same Montrose Land.

279. Thirdly, and most importantly, the Tribunal considers that the MOU was superseded by
the Deed of Transfer signed on 4 August 2010. The Deed of Transfer is a dated and
notarised document. The date and content of the Deed of Transfer is patently inconsistent
with the MOU-related email exchanged between Ravi Wethasinghe and Mr Eyre less than
two weeks earlier on 23 July 2010, which envisioned transfer of the Montrose Land, a
meeting with a notary, and the signing of the MOU on the following Monday, 26 July
2010.

280. The transfer language of the Deed of Transfer is unequivocal. It recites that Electro

Resorts, as the Vendor, has agreed with Montrose, as the Purchaser:

for the absolute sale and conveyance ... all that allotment of land
depicted in Plan No.1700 dated 14th February, 1978 ... together
with the buildings, trees, plantations and everything else standing
thereon ... free of all encumbrances and charges whatsoever at or
for the price or sum of RUPEES ONE HUNDRED MILLION ONLY
(Rs.100,000,000-) of lawful money of the said Republic of Sri
Lanka”.

In the presence of the said agreement and in consideration of the
said sum of [Rs 100 million] of lawful money of the said Republic of
Sri Lanka well and truly paid to the VENDOR by the PURCHASER
(the receipt whereof the VENDOR doth hereby expressly admit and
acknowledge) the VENDOR both hereby sell grant convey transfer
assign set over and assure to the PURCHASER all that allotment of
land depicted in Plan No.1700 dated 14" February, 1978 ... .

88

281. In the view of the Tribunal, the Deed of Transfer could serve as a valid and binding
transfer of the Montrose Land from Electro Resorts to Montrose. However, its validity
was not challenged, and could have been challenged only for a good legal reason, for
example, for fraud, failure of consideration, or non-existence of the land, and this is not

Sri Lanka’s case.

28

N

. The Tribunal acknowledges the Respondent'’s point that the notary, Ms Mudalige, added
at the end of the Deed of Transfer the certification that “the within mentioned
consideration was not passed in my presence”.?”* This does not prove, however, that
Montrose did not pay the consideration, but only that it was not paid in the notary’s
presence. There is contrary evidence that the consideration was paid, including: (a) the
27 July 2010 Electro Resorts Board resolution recording the sale and transfer of the
Montrose Land for Rs 100 million (with no mention of the MOU); and (b) the entry in
the Montrose audited company accounts of Mr Eyre’s having paid Rs 100 million for the

Montrose Land, which Mr Eyre admitted he did not remember.

28.

w

. Although this evidence does leave the record uncertain as to whether and when Montrose
paid the 100 million rupees, the Tribunal cannot agree that this invalidates the effect of
the Deed of Transfer. If in fact the payment was not made, Electro Resorts may have had
a claim for non-payment against Montrose or some other remedy for breach of contract,

but this matter is not before this Tribunal, and no suggestion to that effect has been made.

28.

#

Although the Tribunal considers that its findings on the effect of the MOU are
determinative, it will nonetheless address the Respondent’s assertion of a constructive
trust in favour of Electro Resorts. To remind, the Respondent describes the present
dispute as “a classic case of Electro retaining the beneficial interest in the Land, by reason
of a constructive trust being automatically imposed pursuant to section 83 of the Trust
Ordinance”.?” To this end, Sri Lanka contends that, because the constructive trust arose

automatically under Sri Lankan law: (a) it is entitled to take the same points as, and be in

2? Exhibit C-7.

273 Respondent's Closing Submissions, para 22.

89

285.

28

a

aA

no less a position than, Electro Resorts in these proceedings; and (b) that equity would
disregard the separate corporate personality of Montrose Global and Montrose, because

Mr Eyre controls both.?”*

The Tribunal finds both of these contentions unpersuasive and insufficiently supported
by either facts or law. Sri Lanka has not shown why it is entitled to be in the same position
as Electro Resorts, which is a private entity owned and controlled by Ravi Wethasinghe,
or provided any legal basis for such assertion. Nor has Sri Lanka proven on what grounds
the Tribunal should disregard the corporate personality of both Montrose Global and

Montrose, other than noting that Mr Eyre owns both companies.

Given the Tribunal’s determination that the MOU was superseded by the Deed of
Transfer, there is no need for a ruling on the Respondent’s request that the Tribunal draw
adverse inferences from the Claimants’ failure to produce MOU-related documents post-

dating the MOU itself.

In this regard, the Tribunal recalls Sri Lanka’s allegations that the Claimants were
“deliberately economical with the true facts”,?”> and the objection of the Claimants’
counsel to what they saw as an “attempt to undermine or attack Mr Eyre’s credibility at
every stage”.?”° As the Tribunal President stated in the hearing: “that is not how the
Tribunal heard that evidence yesterday. Sloppy perhaps, too busy, perhaps, but ... we did
not hear that as being a charge of lying or an attack on Mr Eyre’s overall business
reputation”.”” The Tribunal reiterates that Mr Eyre appeared to be a witness of integrity,
who clearly explained what he did remember and frankly admitted what he could not
remember about transactions that he described as personal matters to which he

acknowledged he did not bring his full professional attention and skills.

274 Respondent’s Closing Submissions, para 22.

25 Reply, para 3.
26 Ty Day Two 432:22-433:24.
2” Tr Day Two 433:25-434:10.

90

28

28

29

29

29)

cd

se

S

s

wo

To conclude, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection

A (corresponding to Objection 6 in the Respondent’s Reply).
b. Proof of Investment in the Montrose Land by Montrose and/or Mr Eyre

In its Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection B (corresponding most closely to Objections 7
and 8 in the Respondent’s Reply), Sri Lanka contends that the Claimants have no
investment in the Montrose Land under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article
1 of the BIT because neither made a contribution to acquire the Montrose Land for the

Hotel Project nor took any related investment risk.

As a preliminary matter, it is undisputed that Montrose holds legal title to the Montrose
Land, which could be an investment if the Montrose Land qualifies as a protected

investment under the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

As the Tribunal has determined that the Deed of Transfer and not the MOU was the
operative instrument for transfer of the Montrose Land, Electro Resorts does not have a
competing beneficial interest in the Montrose Land. Nor is Mr Eyre asserting an

investment claim based on beneficial ownership of the Montrose Land.

. Therefore, although technically Sri Lanka’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection B should

concern only Montrose’s claim for investment in the Montrose Land, the record reflects
that any investment came through Mr Eyre and so the Tribunal must also examine his role.
This examination necessarily overlaps with other Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections
made by Sri Lanka based on Mr Eyre’s claims for loss of his alleged investment in the
Montrose Share. Indeed, the Tribunal decides that the Montrose Share can qualify as a
protected investment under the ICSID Convention and the BIT only if Montrose itself has
a protected investment in the planned Hotel Project on the Montrose Land, which is

addressed below.

. The Tribunal does not find it necessary to resolve the dispute between the Parties as to

whether the Salini criteria do or do not apply per se in evaluating whether an investor has
made a protected investment. There are now many decisions that have considered that

“investment” has an inherent meaning and implies at least a contribution by the investor,

91

a certain duration, and economic risk. This risk may be anticipated or unanticipated
changes to market conditions, economic factors and/or political influences affecting the
commercial transaction in the area of the investment. This was pertinently stated by the

tribunal in Postovd Banka v Hellenic Republic:

361. If an “objective” test is applied, in the absence of a
contribution to an economic venture, there could be no investment.
An investment, in the economic sense, is linked with a process of
creation of value, which distinguishes it clearly from a sale, which
is a process of exchange of values

 

367. Under an “objective” test, the element of risk is essential and
cannot be analysed in isolation. Indeed any economic transaction
— it could even be said any human activity entails some element of
risk. Risk is inherent in life and cannot per se qualify what is an
investment.

368. The investment risk, for purposes of the application of an
“objective” test, was defined by the Romak tribunal as follows:

  

“All economic activity entails a certain degree of risk. As
such, all contracts — including contracts that do not
constitute an investment — carry the risk of non-
performance. However, this kind of risk is pure commercial,
counterparty risk, or, otherwise stated, the risk of doing
business generally. It is therefore not an element that is
useful for the purpose of distinguishing between an
investment and a commercial transaction.

An ‘investment risk’ entails a different kind of alea, a
situation in which the investor cannot be sure of a return on
his investment, and may not know the amount he will end up
spending, even if all relevant counterparties discharge their
contractual obligations. Where there is ‘risk’ of this sort,
the investor simply cannot predict the outcome of the
transaction.”

369. In other words, under an “objective” approach, an investment
risk would be an operational risk and not a commercial risk or a
sovereign risk. A commercial risk covers, inter alia, the risk that
one of the parties might default on its obligation, which risk exists

92

in any economic relationship. A sovereign risk includes the risk of
interference of the Government in a contract or any other
relationship, which risk is not specific to public bonds.

370. Under the objective approach, commercial and sovereign risks
are distinct from operational risk. The distinction here would be
between a risk inherent in the investment operation in its
surrounding — meaning that the profits are not ascertained but
depend on the success or failure of the economic venture concerned
—and all the other commercial and sovereign risks.°”*

294. The Tribunal accepts these criteria for the concept of a protected investment — “a
contribution to an economic venture of a certain duration implying an operational risk” —
and will analyse the Claimants’ alleged investment in the Montrose Land against these

criteria.

29

A

. The Respondent bases this Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection on the lack of credible
evidence in the record that either Montrose or Mr Eyre paid consideration for the alleged
transfer of the Montrose Land from Electro Resorts. Sri Lanka also rejects the Claimants’
contention that they do not need to prove payment for the Montrose Land itself, but can
rely on proof of Mr Eyre’s contribution to the Hotel Project under principles of unity of
investment. Sri Lanka argues that the Claimants cannot rely upon principles of unity of
investment to prove that the Hotel Project qualifies as an investment under Article 1 of the
BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, because they never obtained planning
permission nor entered into contractual commitments to develop the bare Montrose Land.
As the Hotel Project was only aspirational, the Claimants undertook at most pre-

investment activity without incurring investment risk.

29.

Ss

In support of their claim that the Montrose Land constitutes an investment, the Claimants
argue that Mr Eyre “owned — both directly and indirectly — Montrose, which served as the
investment vehicle for the entire Hotel Project”.””? They rely upon the unity of investment

concept in Inmaris v Ukraine.?*° Mr Eyre claims further that he made substantial

2"8 Postova Bank, paras 361 and 367-370 (footnotes omitted), citing Romak, paras 229-230.
2° Memorial, para 112.
28 Inmaris, para 92.

93

contributions to the investment in the Hotel Project, by arranging for feasibility studies
and development strategy reports, retaining Woods Bagot to prepare the initial
architectural proposal, and approaching hotel management companies and potential
sources of development finance in the private and public sectors. Once the Montrose Land
was flooded, he made significant efforts to have the damage remedied and to find a
solution by liaising with Sri Lankan officials. Mr Eyre also: (a) in 2003, lent
approximately US$ 1 million to Ravi Wethasinghe to obtain his initial security interest
over the Montrose Land by way of lease; (b) in 2007, contributed US$ 350,000 to the
initial development costs of the Montrose Land; (c) in 2010, arranged the incorporation of
Montrose and, through Mr Fernando, directed operations of the company; and (d) in 2010,
through Montrose Singapore, paid the additional sum of US$ | million to Electro Resorts
to purchase the Montrose Land. Mr Eyre intended to be involved in the Hotel Project long-
term, and certainly took on commercial risk. Finally, through Mr Eyre’s efforts, the Hotel
Project would have provided substantial work and jobs for the local community, as well

as tax revenue to Sri Lanka.

N
oO
a

. For purposes of determining whether the Montrose Land constitutes a protected
investment, the Tribunal considers that in this case and for the reasons explained above,
the criteria of contribution and operational risk are sufficient to defeat jurisdiction ratione

materiae.

298. As for Montrose, there is no evidence whatsoever on the record that Montrose itself paid
any funds or made any other contribution towards the purchase of the Montrose Land from

Electro Resorts or later towards the Hotel Development.

29

Ss

. The situation is more complicated for Mr Eyre. Turning first to the Montrose Land itself,
the Claimants admit that there was no written sale contract for the Montrose Land, and
rely on the Deed of Transfer.”*! The Deed of Transfer recites that Montrose Singapore paid
Electro Resorts consideration of Rs 100 million (approximately US$ 887,000) for the
Montrose Land, but the notary attested that she did not witness actual payment. The

Claimants rely on evidence that payment came on 4 April 2011 from Montrose Singapore,

281 Exhibit C-7.

94

although Montrose Singapore was not incorporated until September 2011, and the receipt
from Electro Resorts is for US$ | million.** Mr Eyre attempted to explain the difference
with testimony that part of the consideration for the Montrose Land was his forgiveness of
his earlier loans of US$ 1 million and US$ 350,000 to Ravi Wethasinghe, but there is no
evidence on the record documenting that those loans were in fact made or, more

importantly, connecting those loans to the sale and transfer of the Montrose Land.

30

Ss

. Even accepting Mr Eyre’s explanation that his dealings with the Ravi Wethasinghe and
the Montrose Land were personal and hence suffered from a lack of his customary
professional attention, the Tribunal cannot ignore the patent lack of credible evidence
documenting the sale and transfer terms for the Montrose Land. The Tribunal cannot find,
on a balance of the probabilities, that Mr Eyre — through Montrose or Montrose Global or
any other Montrose Group entity — contributed funds towards the purchase of the Montrose
Land or, in any event, that he (or Montrose Group companies) contributed more than US$
1 million. Even if he did contribute the US$ 1 million referenced in the Electro Resorts
receipt, it can only be seen, for purposes of this Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection, to
have been for the bare land and hence contributed without investment risk. The Tribunal
notes that Sri Lanka awarded Montrose close to US$ 1 million — approximately

US$ 838,947 — for the undeveloped Montrose Land in December 2016.

30

. Turning from the bare Montrose Land to the planned Hotel Project, the Tribunal agrees
with the Respondent that principles of unity of investment?*? do not elevate Mr Eyre’s
payments and efforts in relation to the potential hotel development and to the contribution
and operational risk necessary to prove a qualifying investment under Article | of the BIT
and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Claimants have not proven, on a balance
of the probabilities, that the Hotel Project was anywhere near a certainty before the
dredging and compulsory State acquisition of the Montrose Land. The record reflects that
Mr Eyre has not obtained formal planning permission and, in fact, there was no evidence
that the suspension of the amended preliminary planning clearance application submitted

on 12 March 2012 had been raised or of any application for it to be raised or for new

282 Exhibit C-44.

283 For example, such as those addressed by the tribunal in Inmaris v Ukraine.

95

284 Memo

285

30

30.

2.

oO

permission. Further, Mr Eyre has not, despite obviously substantial efforts, actually
executed contractual commitments with architects, hotel management firms or financiers.
The Claimants may be right in stating in the Memorial that the Hotel Project was
recognised as “potentially lucrative”,”** but more than potential is necessary. There must
have been substantive commitments and arrangements entered into, involving specific
commitments and financial costs, all of which would entail both certain risks as well as

possible benefits.

The Tribunal can find only that the Hotel Project remained at best aspirational at the time
of the compulsory State acquisition in 2010.78° Consequently, Mr Eyre’s contributions
rose only to the pre-investment level and he did not face the operational risk necessary for
the Hotel Project to qualify as a protected investment for purposes of Article 1 of the BIT
and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

. To conclude, for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal accepts Sri Lanka’s Preliminary
Jurisdictional Objection B (corresponding to Objection 7 in the Respondent’s Reply), and
finds that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over the Claimants’ claim based on the
Montrose Land — whether bare land or as the base for the planned Hotel Project — which

is not a protected investment under the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

(2) The Alleged Investment in the Montrose Share

304. The Respondent’s remaining Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections — Objections C and E

30

a

through H — go to Mr Eyre’s alleged investment in the Montrose Share, which

encompasses his alleged investment in the Hotel Project planned for the Montrose Land.

. All of the remaining Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections are variations on the theme that
Mr Eyre’s shareholder claims are parasitical to claims made by Montrose as the company
through which Mr Eyre must claim, whether as indirect shareholder or beneficial owner
of the Montrose Share. Preliminary Objection C (corresponding most closely to Objection

8 in the Respondent’s Reply) is expressly titled as such: “Any Alleged Shareholder Claim

 

1, para 212.

This is similar to the situation in Romak, see paras 228-231.

96

30

a

Is Dependent Upon the Land Constituting an Asset of Montrose, Which It Is Not”.
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection E (corresponding most closely to Objection | in the
Reply), which focuses on Mr Eyre’s alleged beneficial interest in the Montrose Share,
echoes the Respondent’s arguments relating to indirect ownership of the Montrose Land
in Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection B, complicated by questions as to whether Mr
Fernando and later Montrose Singapore held the Montrose Share on trust for Mr Eyre.
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection F (corresponding to Objection 9 in the Reply) adds
the allegation that, even if Mr Eyre did have a beneficial interest in the Montrose Share
via a trust, that beneficial interest is void as unlawful tax evasion under Sri Lankan law.
Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection G (corresponding most closely to Objections 4 and 5
in the Reply) essentially repeats the argument made in Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objection B that the definition of investment in Article 1(a)(ii) of the BIT does not
expressly include an “interest in shares” in the reference to “[s]hares ... and interests in
property”. Finally, in Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection H (corresponding to Objection
3 in the Reply), the Respondent rejects any reflective loss claim for Mr Eyre based on any
loss in value of the Montrose Share as a result of the alleged expropriation of the Montrose

Land.

Based on the history of the Montrose Land transfer and the planned Hotel Project, and as
the Tribunal has already observed, the Montrose Share could qualify as a protected
investment under Article 1 of the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention only if
Montrose itself had a protected investment in the Hotel Project on the Montrose Land. The
Tribunal has already determined that the Montrose Land, whether alone or with the
planned Hotel Project, does not qualify as a protected investment. Consequently, there is
no need for the Tribunal to address and decide the remaining Preliminary Jurisdictional
Objections. The Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections C, E, F, G and H

(corresponding to Claims 8, 1, 9, 4-5 and 3 in the Respondent’s Reply) are dismissed.

97

IX. COSTS

A. THE CLAIMANTS’ CosT SUBMISSIONS

307. In their Statement of Costs, the Claimants seek total legal and expert costs for the

jurisdictional phase of £418,697.78. This breaks down as follows:

 

Component Amount

 

Solicitor Fees and Expenses (Bird & Bird | £205,297.78
LLP)

 

Counsel Fees £136,920.00

 

Sri Lankan Counsel Fees and Expenses £72,540.00

 

Factual Witness Expenses £3,940.00

 

TOTAL £418,697.78

 

 

 

 

308. The Claimants also seek the Tribunal fees and other arbitration costs for the jurisdictional
phase, including ICSID fees and venue, transcriber and interpreter fees, to be determined

by the Tribunal.

B. THE RESPONDENT’S COST SUBMISSIONS
309. In its Schedule of Costs Relating to Jurisdiction, the Respondent seeks total legal and
expert costs of £1,014,487.01, plus reimbursement of arbitration costs. The legal fees and

expert costs break down as follows:

 

 

 

Component Amount
Solicitor Fees (Clyde & Co LLP) £271,065.65
Solicitor Fees (Allen & Gledhill) £42,264.85

 

 

 

 

98

 

 

 

 

 

Expert Fees (Mazars LLP) £26,056.62
Counsel Fees £651,226.50
Disbursements (travel, hotel, bank £23,873.39
charges, courier, photocopying,

stationary, searches, sundries, USB

devices)

TOTAL £1,014,487.01

 

 

 

The Respondent also seeks costs relating to the substantive proceedings incurred before

the Tribunal’s bifurcation decision, excluding costs of the jurisdiction application, in the

total amount of £176,847.66. This includes solicitor fees, counsel fees, expert fees of Mr

Eric Levy, and other disbursements.

C. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON CosTS

310. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members
of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

311. This provision gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate all costs of the arbitration,

including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems appropriate.

312. The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in US$):

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Prof. Lucy Reed 122,956.76
Prof. Brigitte Stern 102,925.14
Prof. Julian Lew 87,370.19
ICSID’s administrative fees 158,000.00
Direct expenses 42,412.92
Total 513,665.01

313. The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties.”°° As a result,

each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration has amounted to US$ 256,832.51.

314. In exercising its discretion, the Tribunal has considered that, although the Respondent has
prevailed in having the arbitration dismissed for lack of jurisdiction ratione materiae, the
Claimants did prevail on the Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections based on
jurisdiction ratione personae and on the Objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae based
on the MOU. Further, even recognising the necessity for the Respondent to address the
Claimants’ evolving facts, the Tribunal considers Sri Lanka’s legal fees to be excessively
high, in part due to the unnecessarily complicated iterations of the Preliminary

Jurisdictional Objections.

315. For these reasons, the Tribunal has determined that the Claimants and the Respondent
should each bear their one-half of the total arbitration costs, and that the Claimants should
pay the Respondent one-third of the total amount of its solicitors, counsel and expert fees
and disbursements for the jurisdiction phase. The Tribunal denies the Respondent’s claim

for costs pre-dating the jurisdiction bifurcation decision.

?86 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments advanced to ICSID.

100

xX.

AWARD

316. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

qd)

(2)

GB)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae as to the claims of both Claimants,
and the Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection D (corresponding to

Objection 2 in the Respondent’s Reply) is dismissed;

The Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objection B (corresponding to
Objection 7 in the Respondent’s Reply) is granted, and all of the Claimants’ claims

are dismissed for lack of jurisdiction ratione materiae;

The Respondent’s Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections A (corresponding to

Objection 6 in the Respondent’s Reply, respectively) is dismissed;
All other Preliminary Jurisdictional Objections and claims are dismissed;

The Claimants are ordered to pay to the Respondent £338,162.34, which equals one-
third of the total amount of its solicitor, counsel and expert fees, and disbursements

for the jurisdiction phase; and

The Claimants and the Respondent are each to bear their one-half of the total

arbitration costs of US$ 256,832.51.

101

 

[signed] [signed]
Julian DM Rew QC Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
1 MAT
Date: 4 °
ate Date: 28 FEB 2020
[signed]
Lucy Reed
President of the Tribunal

Date: 4“ Ak 2020

102

