Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

In an arbitration between

QUASAR DE VALORES SICAV S.A.

ORGOR DE VALORES SICAV S.A.
GBI 9000 SICAV S.A.
ALOS 34S.L.
Claimants
and
THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Respondent

AWARD

20 July 2012

Before the Tribunal comprising:

Charles N. Brower
Toby T. Landau
Jan Paulsson

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Covington & Burling LLP Baker Botts LLP
©. Thomas Johnson, Jr. (until 31 March 2101) Michael S. Goldberg
Marney L. Cheek Jay L, Alexander
Jonathan Gimblett Samuel Cooper
John P. Rupp Alejandro Escobar
Jennifer Thorton

Cuatrecasas, Goncalves Pereira

Jorge Capel! Novarro Ania Farren

Place of arbitration: Stockholm

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

INTRODUCTION ...,..ccsessessessseeesssesseneesensssnesnessessteneeseee d
OVERVIEW OF THE CLAIM..0.......ccscescscssceseeeseeneeeeee 7
OVERVIEW OF THE DEFENCE...

ROSINVEST AND YUKOS V. RUSSIA .....0:c0sssssssssesseoes 13
JURISDICTION REDUX...

 

6.1 THE REQUIREMENTS OFT THE BIT
6.2. THE ALLEGED ABUSE OF PROCESS
6.3 THESTANDING OF ALOS 34

 
  
 

INDIVIDUAL MERITS ISSUES. ..........:+::sseeeesseeeeeee 23

7.1 WERE THE TAX LEVIES ON YUKOS BEGINNING IN
DECEMBER 2003 ARBITRARY OR
DISCRIMINATORY? «...sessessessessesesssesseesessessesssssecsens 29)

(A) The December 2003 re-audit............. eee 28
(B) The purported legal basis of the revocation of
the tax benefits . 129
(C) The attribution to Yukos of the additional tax
associated with income of the trading

 

COMPANIES ..0ssssssicssscscecscsasssssseecacvisesssesensoense 40
(D) The rejection of the VAT refund .................42
(E) The speedy and robust execution of the

judgment enforcing the

Y¥2000 assessment...

 

7.2. DID THE RESPONDENT PREVENT YUKOS FROM
DISCHARGING THE (DISPUTED) TAX DEBTS? ........+« 44

(A) The 15 April 2004 asset freeze ............1060 45
(B) The failure to consider Yukos’ proposals of
alternative means of paying the tax
ASSESSMEMNS ......scessessseseseeececsesesseeseeneseenerteree 48

(A) The 15 April 2004 asset freeze... 4S

(B) The failure to consider Yukos’ proposals of
alternative means of paying the tax
ASSESSIIENS ssvessccosesissveasesnexscarcescccasssseavened 48

(C) The seizure and sale of Yukos’ shares in YNGS2

(D) Yukos’ alleged imprudence, or bad faith, in
not paying the tax assessments quickly and
thus avoiding further pursuit........................58

 

 

(EB) ‘Conchision ..:........scnnranearncanmaaann 59
7.3. WAS YUKOS’ TAX DELINQUENCY A PRETEXT FOR
SEIZING YUKOS ASSETS AND TRANSFERRING THEM
TO ROSNEFT? .....sescseseseseseesscsessersestesssesereetensees ees OO
(A) Forcing Yukos into bankruptcy ...........006 62
(B) The rejection of the management restructuring
PAM oc eeescecseseseesesecasseseeneecseesssesacsueasanensenseess 65
{C) The liquidation auctions .
(D) Conchsiony su ccssecssevcocsnssiorssvoresvasvensaveevavsnne 71
7.4 THE RELEVANT ENQUIRY......csscsessesesecesesteeteteeeeees 10
7.5 ADEQUATE COMPENSATION.....-::e+cssesseeseceeeerseeeeees 79
(A) The Claimants’ approach... 79
(B) Comparison with Ros/nvest.....
(C). The proper measure sscsccsisssssevssssscscsvesvssaveenas 84
COSTS. si cecsnonsennsdiiii2itisicshannensneneensibsdinsinssenensarnnennenasneses 93
INTEREST cccsavsscassesnnvsnsonscsrsersusvsgssacstuaetaserrenearesscstoess 95

1, GLOSSARY
ADR

BIT

Hearing

Khodorovsky, Mikhail

Menatep

RosInvest

Rosneft

SoC

SoD

American Depository Receipt

Agreement for Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments between Spain and
the USSR, entered into force on 28 November
1991

The hearing on the merits conducted from 17 to
25 October 2011

Yukos’ CEO from May 1996 to November
2003

Group Menatep Limited, or GML, at one time
the direct or indirect owner of a majority of
Yukos’ shares

The award on the merits, dated 12 September
2010, in the case of RosInvest Co UK Ltd v, The
Russian Federation, under the Rules of the
Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber
of Commerce

A state-owned Russian oil company

The Claimants’ Statement of Claim dated
20 November 2009

The Respondent’s Statement of Defence dated
4 June 2010

SoRep

SoRej

T:Day 1:1:1

Tax Ministry

Tax Re-Audit (2000)

YNG

Yukos

Yukos v. Russia

The Claimants’ Reply Memorial dated
29 October 2010

The Respondent’s Statement of Rejoinder dated
25 April 2011

Transcript of the Hearing, Day 1, page 1, line 1

Since mid-2004, renamed the “Federal Tax
Service”

The Russian Tax Ministry’s supervisory audit
report dated 29 December 2003 for Yukos’
Year 2000 tax filings

Yuganskneftegaz, the corporate owner of a
large Siberian oil field

Yukos Oil Company, or OAO Neftyanaya
Kompaniya Yukos, formed in 2003 as a
combination of YNG and
Kuibyshevnefteorgsintez, a refining and
petrochemical concern. Producer of about 17%
of all Russian crude oil in 2002.

The judgment dated 20 September 2011 by the
European Court of Justice in the Case of OAO
Neftyanaya Kompaniya Yukos v. Russia

2. INTRODUCTION

1. This document assumes familiarity with the
Award on Preliminary Objections of 20 March 2009. In
the interest of economy of expression, it will not traverse
the procedure and correspondence, which are a matter of
record and will be referred to only to the extent significant
for the issues resolved in the present Award.

2. The Award on Preliminary Objections upheld
jurisdiction with respect to the claims of four of the seven
original Claimants insofar as those claims seek a
determination of “whether compensation is due by virtue
of claims of expropriation raised in this arbitration” under
Article 10 of the BIT. (Jurisdiction was not accepted with
respect to claims in reliance on Article 5 thereof, which
the Claimants unsuccessfully contended had the effect of
expanding this Tribunal’s jurisdiction through the
mechanism of more favourable treatment.)

3. The Claimants complain of the destruction of the
value of ADRs equivalent to a certain fraction of ordinary
shares in Yukos. At the jurisdictional stage, the
Respondent challenged the Claimants’ proof of ownership
of these ADRs. The Award on Preliminary Objections
indicated that the Claimants’ proof demonstrated a “form
of participation” for the purposes of the BIT, but added
that any misrepresentation in this respect would be
fraudulent. The Respondent has pursued this matter at the
merits stage in light of its latest state of knowledge. This
matter is dealt with in Section 6(2).

4. The subsections of Article 10 of the BIT that are
relevant for the merits read as follows:

Disputes between one Party and investors
of the other Party

A. Any dispute between one Party and an
investor of the other Party relating to the amount or
method of payment of the compensation due under
article 6 of this Agreement, shall be communicated
in writing, together with a detailed report by the
investor to the Party in whose territory the
investment was made. The two shall, as far as
possible, endeavour to settle the dispute amicably.

2. [Subsection 2 provides for arbitration in the
absence of amicable settlement.]

3. The decisions of the arbitral tribunal shail be
based on:

- The provisions of this Agreement;

- The national legislation of the Party in whose
territory the investment has been made, including
the rules of conflict of laws;

- The universally recognized norms and
principles of international law.

5. Article 6 (referred to in subparagraph 1 of Article
10) reads as follows:

Nationalization and Expropriation

Any nationalization, expropriation or any other
measure having similar consequences taken by the
authorities of either Party against investments made
within its territory by investors of the other Party,
shall be taken only on the grounds of public use and
in accordance with the legislation in force in the

territory. Such measures should on no account be
discriminatory. The Party adopting such measures
shall pay the investor or his beneficiary adequate
compensation, without undue delay and in freely
convertible currency.

6. Liability thus requires showing that there has been
a type of “measure” contemplated by Article 6 of the BIT
which, by way of shorthand, may be described as an
“expropriation”. This is necessary but not sufficient; it
must also be found that “adequate compensation” was not
paid. As observed in Paragraphs 41 and 42 of the Award
on Preliminary Objections, the Claimants expressly accept
that the reference in Article 10 of the BIT to “the amount
or method of the compensation due under Article 6” has
the effect of excluding the Tribunal’s authority to decide
whether an expropriation is internationally unlawful under
the first three criteria mentioned in Article 6 (public use,
conformity with law, non-discrimination). Thus the
mission of the present Tribunal is limited to determining
the compensation required under Russia’s international
obligations even under the hypothesis of a lawful
expropriation.

Ts This case has essentially been debated by
reference to documents. There were no witnesses of fact.
The Claimants were passive shareholders in Yukos and
had no involvement in its activities or in the controversies
that underlie this arbitration. The Respondent relies on
the acts of its organs. Each side submitted reports from
experts who commented on the documentary record, and a
number of them were called to testify at the Hearing,
namely: for the Claimants Dr Leon Aron, Prof. Jay
Westbrook, Prof. Peter Maggs, Mr Sergey Shapovalov,
and Prof. Paul Stephen; and for the Respondent Mr Oleg
Konnov, Mr Mikhail Rozenberg, and Prof. James Dow.

8. Entire books have been written about the demise
of Yukos (e.g. Richard Sakwa, The Quality of Freedom:
Khodorkovsky, Putin, and the Yukos Affair, Oxford
University Press, 2009). The materials submitted by the
Parties in this arbitration would easily suffice as research

material for several more. Yet to give an account of every
element of the Parties’ extensively documented competing
narratives would be excessive for present purposes. What
is both necessary and sufficient is for the Tribunal to state
its views of those elements of the story that the arbitrators
consider decisive. Of course the Parties’ views of what
should be significant will not necessarily coincide with
those of the Tribunal.

3. OVERVIEW OF THE CLAIM

9. The Claimants allege that the Respondent
unlawfully dispossessed Yukos of its assets and
expropriated its shareholders by means of a variety of
abuses of executive and judicial power. They affirm that
they are owners of Yukos ADRs and demand
compensation for their loss. The complaint is put in a
nutshell in the first paragraph of the SoC:

“They, like all other owners of Yukos, have been the
victims of a politically-motivated assault by the
Russian Federation, involving the imposition of
massive illegitimate tax levies, the seizure and
transfer of Yukos’ prime asset to Rosneft, a state-
owned oil company, and the liquidation of the
remainder of Yukos’ assets in state-initiated
bankruptcy proceedings. On 18 December 2007,
Claimants were informed by Deutsche Bank, as
depositary, that Yukos had been removed from
Russia’s company register and that Claimants’
ADRs were accordingly now worthless. Today,
approximately 75 percent of what used to be Yukos
is owned by Rosneft.”

10. The Claimants affirm more particularly ({] 4) that
they:

“will show that the massive tax claims brought
against Yukos by the Russian Federation for the tax
years 2000-04 had no basis in law; that Russia
prevented Yukos from paying the tax liabilities in a
manner of its choosing so that it could have a
pretext to seize Yukos’ most valuable asset and to
transfer it to Rosneft; and that Russia was
responsible both for initiating the bankruptcy
proceedings against Yukos and ensuring that they
led — via the rejection of a viable restructuring

proposal advanced by Yukos’ management ~ to the
liquidation of the r inder of the ipany’s
assets. Claimants will also show that Russia’s
actions constitute either a direct or an indirect
expropriation for which Russia must pay
compensation under Article 6 of the Spain-Russia
BIT.”

4. OVERVIEW OF THE DEFENCE

11. The Respondent asserts that the Claimants are
engaged in an abuse of process. In particular (SoRej {
464):

“\.. This arbitration is abusive because it rests on
ulterior purposes that were first disclosed during
the jurisdictional hearing and that are
inconsistent with the Treaty under which this
arbitration has been brought. Claimants are not
the real parties in interest and have no genuine
interest in the arbitration. Claimants have not
presented a_ single party representative.
Claimants have not produced a single internal
document explaining the rationale behind their
original alleged investments or the rationale for
initiating this arbitration. Claimants have likely
spent more on expert witness fees, alone, than the
total amount of their claims. Claimants are not here
to vindicate any alleged right of their own. They
are nothing more than willing shills in Group
Menatep’s “lifetime of litigation.” In this regard,
it is worth remembering that the Claimants’ counsel
has been Group Menatep’s lobbyist for years, and
the head of its international practice remains a
member of Group Menatep Limited’s advisory
board to this day. Group Menatep, however, is not
entitled to invoke the Spain/Soviet bilateral
investment treaty. Nor is that treaty intended to be
used by Claimants as a tool for harassment.”

12. The Respondent adds (SoRej {| 467-9) that the
Claimants’

. abuse is not, however, that they allegedly
purchased ADRs for less than US$ | million after
the alleged expropriation had begun. Anyone is

free to speculate on hopes that Yukos would act
responsibly, pay its debts with the funds that it
had sitting offshore and enjoy a turn of events—all
things Yukos did not do. Rather, their abuse is
allowing this arbitration to be filed in their names
when the only real party-in-interest is Group
Menatep Limited, a Gibraltar entity with no rights
under the Spain/Soviet bilateral investment
treaty.

Claimants, themselves, would never have pursued
this arbitration. Quite apart from the absurd
disproportion between their own, inflated
damages claim and the costs of these
proceedings, Claimants concede that six of the
“nine measures” on which they base their
accusation of expropriation had already occurred
before they completed their purchases on July 7,
2004, of the ADRs allegedly at issue here.
Indeed, by July 7, 2004, Yukos, itself, had warned
it would enter bankruptcy if the Russian
Federation did not forbear—and the Russian
Federation showed no intent of permitting Yukos
to get away with its fraud.

Tribunals, including this one, have recognized
that it is inappropriate to act in a manner that
aggravates existing disputes. Group Menatep, no
doubt, has generated its own dispute with the
Russian Federation. _ Initiating __ satellite
arbitrations for harassment or tactical purposes
is an abuse of process. The fact that Rovime was
so little involved or concerned that it
extinguished itself without even notifying counsel
for Claimants is stark evidence of the abuse being
perpetrated by Group Menatep here.”

13. Even if one were to disregard this abuse and
instead consider the merits of the claim, so the
Respondent argues, the complaint is a baseless attempt to

10

overcome the Russian Federation’s legitimate application
of its tax laws. In particular (SoRej {{][ 470-471):

“There can be no genuine dispute that Yukos was
deliberately engaged in tax fraud. Claimants
would have this Tribunal believe that it was
entirely acceptable to set up shell companies with
no business substance, put them in tax havens,
run all of Yukos’ profits through those
companies, and then abuse the requirement of
local investment that justifies the tax haven’s
existence. Yukos certainly knew better. Its senior
executives wrote memos about the high civil and
criminal risks they were taking by using the
scheme. Claimants knew better too. Such behavior
would be no more acceptable in Russia than it
would be in Spain or any other country.

Yukos was a miscreant. It was the worst of the
worst in the late 1990s and, despite a show of
transparency, it did not change its spots in the
early 2000s. Yukos management repeatedly lied
to its auditors at PwC, leading to a termination of
the audit relationship and eventually revocation of
the audits. Yukos effectively stole from the SocGen
Consortium, admitting it could pay the half billion
dollars it owed from its European assets, but
instead secreting them in Dutch foundations where
they could not be reached. Yukos refused the
opportunity to reduce the liabilities for its tax
fraud by nearly 60 percent, believing it could
continue its historic pattern of obfuscation and
obstruction. The repeated obstruction of the
Russian government's tax enforcement efforts in
which Yukos engaged would not be tolerated in any
civil society.”

14. The Respondent insists that the Claimants are
speculating impermissibly on subjective purposes behind
the Russian tax enforcement measures. Quoting from
Professor G.C. Christie’s often-cited 1962 study on “What

Constitutes a Taking of Property Under International
Law,” the Respondent writes (SoRej J 473) that:

“this Tribunal must look to the facts, and “if the
facts are such that the reasons actually given are
plausible, search for the unexpressed ‘real’
reasons is chimerical.” This, of course, is right.
The Tax Ministry issued extensive findings of tax
fraud, which are entirely consistent with the facts
and Russian law. The Russian courts reviewed the
Tax Ministry’s findings and affirmed them in large
part, also consistent with Russian law. While it is
true that Yukos owed a lot of money, that debt was
legally owed and entirely its own responsibility.”

5. ROSINVEST AND YUKOS v. RUSSIA

15. RosInvest was decided on 12 September 2010 by a
tribunal presided by Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel and
also comprising Lord Steyn and Sir Franklin Berman QC.
After a lengthy analysis of the circumstances, they
concluded at J 621 that:

“[T]he totality of Respondent’s measures were
structured in such a way to remove Yukos’ assets
from the control of the company and the individuals
associated with Yukos. They must be seen as
elements in the cumulative treatment of Yukos for
what seems to have been the intended purpose. The
Tribunal, in reviewing the various alleged breaches
of the IPPA, even if the justification of a certain
individual measure might be arguable as an
admissible application of the relevant law,
considers that this cumulative effect of those
various measures taken by Respondent in respect of
Yukos is relevant to its decision under the IPPA.
An illustration is, as Claimant has pointed out, that
despite having used nearly identical tax structures,
no other Russian oil company was subjected to the
same relentless and inflexible attacks as Yukos. In
the view of the Tribunal, they can only be
understood as steps under a common denominator
in a pattern to destroy Yukos and gain control over
its assets.”

16. One year later, the ECHR handed down its
judgment in Yukos v. Russia, holding broadly — after a
similarly lengthy analysis of the circumstances — that in
many respects Yukos had failed to substantiate its claims
that the Russian Government’s tax claims and subsequent
liquidation of Yukos were pretextual and discriminatory.
On the other hand, the ECHR accepted that Russia had
breached Article 6 of the European Convention on Human

Rights in its timing of the Y2000 tax proceedings, and
breached Article 1/Protocol | with respect to the
imposition of penalties and the enforcement proceedings.
No damages were awarded; the issue of compensation
with respect to the established breaches was held over to a
possible subsequent stage of the proceedings.

17. These two very detailed decisions traverse much
of the same ground as the voluminous memorials of the
Parties in the present case. Yet they come to contrasting
conclusions. The result is that elements of each decision
are favoured by one of the Parties and criticised by the
other.

18. The Claimants argue that RosInvest’s analysis of
the merits is both persuasive and pertinent, and should be
given weight as such by the Tribunal. They view Yukos v.
Russia, on the other hand, as inapposite because it, unlike
RosiInvest, does not involve the same legal standards as an
investment-protection treaty. As Mr Johnson put it in oral
submissions, the ECHR:

“decided whether each of several elements of
Russia’s behaviour toward Yukos individually
violated a provision of the Convention, applying in
each case the so-called “wide margin of
appreciation” always applied by that court in
considering the actions of sovereign governments.
It nowhere considered the cumulative effect of
Russia’s actions towards Yukos, nowhere
considered whether those actions violated a typical
BIT __ prohibition against uncompensated
expropriation.” (T:Day 1:8:9-17)

19. Mr Gimblett pursued this argument by referring to
the ECHR’s use of an “extremely lenient standard ...
[which] is not applicable in this case”, namely the “margin
of appreciation” mentioned in the European Convention
of Human Rights (Protocol 1, Article 1) and recognised
by the Court’s jurisprudence (T:Day 1:50:22). Such a
“margin of appreciation” is “not found in customary
international law”, he said, invoking Siemens v.

Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8 4 354 (2007), and
nothing permits “anything approaching the extreme
deference applied by the ECHR” (T:Day 1:52:19).

20. Mr Gimblett added that although Protocol 1,
Article 1, of the Convention protects individuals from
dispossession “except in the public interest and subject to
the conditions provided for by law and by the general
principles of international law”, the ECHR itself, in the
Case of Lithgow and others v. The United Kingdom 8 July
1986, made clear that:

“the general principles of international law ... are
not applicable to a taking by a State of the property
of its own nationals.” (J 112)

21. The grievances of the complainants in Ros/nvest
and Yukos v. Russia were indeed pursued on the
foundation of different legal texts. The proposition that
foreigners may invoke a higher standard of protection than
nationals does not seem extraordinary, for reasons that
may be encapsulated as follows.

22. For one thing, human rights conventions establish
minimum standards to which all individuals are entitled
irrespective of any act of volition on their part, whereas
investment-protection treaties contain undertakings which
are explicitly designed to induce foreigners to make
investments in reliance upon them. It therefore makes
sense that the reliability of an instrument of the latter kind
should not be diluted by precisely the same notions of
“margins of appreciation” that apply to the former.

23. Moreover, where the value of an investment has
been substantially impaired by state action, albeit a bona
fide regulation in the public interest, one can see the force
in the proposition that investment protection treaties might
not allow a host state to place such a high individual
burden on a foreign investor to contribute, without the
payment of compensation, to the accomplishment of
regulatory objectives for the benefit of a national
community of which the investor is not a member.

24. This Tribunal is not bound by either Rosinvest' or
Yukos v. Russia, which arose under different legal
instruments than the Treaty which is relevant here.
Moreover, the Claimants here had no role in those cases,
and have the right that their claims be heard as they chose
to present them. Nevertheless, the lengthy texts of those
decisions go over much of the same ground that has been
covered in this case, and it is natural to examine them in
the light of many of the arguments made here as well.

25. The arbitrators understand that the same
arguments may be affected not only by differences in the
norms articulated in the relevant legal texts, but also by
the pleadings and evidence put forward in support of those
arguments. Bearing in mind all of these qualifications, the
present Tribunal will nevertheless pay respectful heed to
the analysis and conclusions of the distinguished
arbitrators and judges in these two cases. Indeed they
must do so, as both sides in this case have made
submissions as to their implications and relative
persuasiveness.

 

The arbitrators have been informed that the Stockholm District Court issued
a judgment on 9 November 2011 to the effect that the Ros/nvest tribunal
lacked jurisdiction. That case involves the UK/USSR bilateral treaty. Indeed
the present arbitrators, in paragraph 104 of their Award on Preliminary
Objections, noted that the two treaties were dissimilar, and declined to
comment on Rosiavest’s conclusion. The judgment was issued by defauh.
Above all, what is of interest here is the possible persuasiveness of Ros!nvest
with respect to the merits. not its status as a matter of jurisdiction.

6. JURISDICTION REDUX

6.1 The requirements of the BIT

26. In closing argument, Mr Alexander contended that
“essential criteria to determine whether or not there has
been an expropriation are outside of your jurisdiction in
this case” (T:Day 9:107:22).

27. It should be recalled that the Award on
Preliminary Objections held that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction under Article 10 “to decide whether
compensation is due by virtue of claims of expropriation
raised in this arbitration” ({[ 155).

28. That Award also recalled (at { 65) a familiar
passage from Christie’s seminal article: “[T]here are
certain types of State interference which, from the outset,
will be considered expropriation even though not labelled
as such. Among these are the appointment of a receiver to
liquidate the business or other property.” (See Paragraph
14 above.)

29. Mr Alexander’s argument, upon analysis, is old
wine in new bottles — indeed an attempt to reargue matters
which were settled in the Award on Preliminary
Objections. At the core of the debate at that stage of the
proceedings lay the Respondent’s contention that the BIT
did not vest authority in this Tribunal to determine
whether an expropriation had occurred. It was rejected
after lengthy consideration in Section 2.1 of that Award,
leading to the following final statement in { 67: “The
Claimants have established that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to decide whether compensation is ‘due’ to
them under international law by reason of the conduct of
which they complain (and if so in which amount).”

30. | The Respondent is of course free to believe that
this decision was wrong. What is not open to it, however,

is to come back at the merits stage in these very
proceedings to contend that something it now calls
“essential criteria” for determining whether there has been
an expropriation are beyond the permissible scope of
enquiry of the present Tribunal. The approach taken in
this respect will be reflected throughout this Award,
notably in the introduction to the lengthy Section 7, which
contains the essential treatment of individual issues
relevant to the determination of the fundamental merits of
the Claimants’ case under the BIT. Mr Alexander’s
argument that the Respondent’s objections could not be
foreclosed since “the gravamen of the Claimants’
Propositions could not be fully understood on the merits
until we hear the merits” (T:Day 7:142:23-24) is correct
as far as it goes, but that is not very far at all. It does no
more than to say that the Tribunal, once it gets to the
merits, has no authority to go beyond the limits of its
authority: a tautology. The limits were fixed in the Award
on Preliminary Objections, and the arbitrators have no
intention of exceeding them.

6.2 The alleged abuse of process

31. As seen in Paragraphs 11 and 12 above, the
Respondent has sought to discredit the Claimants by
suggesting that they are not the true parties in interest, and
that the entire arbitration is an abuse of process. At its
core, this argument is a reaction to the Claimants’
disclosure that their costs of prosecuting this case are born
entirely by another party, namely Menatep, in part in
order to establish that portfolio investors in Yukos are
able to recover under BITs to which the Russian
Federation is a party. A multitude of such potential
claimants are, so it seems, waiting in the wings (T:Day
9:213:8-23). In other words, so the Respondent contends,
the Claimants have no stake in this claim, and are not
domini litis in terms of choosing counsel, experts, or other
strategic alternatives in the prosecution of these derivate
claims.

32. This objection is unpersuasive. The Claimants
purchased shares in Yukos (or, in the case of ALOS 34,

stand in the shoes of such a purchaser) and complain
about the destruction of their value. They have mandated
Covington & Burling to prosecute their claim. They will
be the beneficiaries of any award in their favour. Mr
Johnson has represented that this claim has been brought
to safeguard the specific interests of the immediate
Claimants (T:Day 9:211:1-5, 20-24; 212:5-6; 214:5-8),
and that the Claimants have no legal obligation to share
the proceeds with Menatep, and nothing more than a
moral debt of gratitude to consider whether they will
voluntarily pass on a proportion of any proceeds in
recognition of the costs incurred by Menatep (T:Day
9:210:14-25).

33. The Tribunal does not see any element of abuse in
this respect. The Claimants held very small stakes of
Yukos which would scarcely have warranted the
commitment of substantial resources to bring international
proceedings against the Russian Federation. But there is
no reason of principle why they were not entitled to
pursue rights available to them under the BIT, and to
accept the assistance of a third party, whose motives are
irrelevant as between the disputants in this case.
Ultimately, the Respondent’s complaint, in the event its
liability is established, can hardly be raised against the
Good Samaritan, but rather against its own officials who
acted in such a way as to give rise to that liability.

34. | The Respondent raises an associated argument
having to do with the alleged spectre of double recovery.
The Respondent appears to be concerned about statements
emanating from Menatep to the effect that monies it
recovers from the Russian Federation, e.g. as a result of
proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights
or in other arbitrations, will be distributed to injured
shareholders such as the Claimants here. The Tribunal
does not share those professed worries. It has seen no
evidence that the Claimants have some contingent
entitlement to share in other cases than this arbitration.
To the extent that somehow these Claimants were to
receive compensation elsewhere for the harm of which

they complain here, any award in this case could
doubtless be resisted by way of some form of set-off.

6.3 The standing of ALOS 34

35.  Rovime Inversiones Sicav S.A., a Spanish mutual
fund, was one of the original Claimants. For reasons
which have not given rise to discussion in these
proceedings, it was liquidated on 21 May 2010, and its
assets distributed. Rovime’s claim in this arbitration (its
“crédito litigioso”) was not listed among the assets to be
distributed. Rovime’s legal demise and the absence of a
legal successor in interest has given rise to an objection by
the Respondent. The liquidator, D. Emilio Rodriguez
Rodriguez, has certified that the reason for the omission
of Rovime’s claim in the list of assets was that the claim
lacked any accounting value, and that, subsequently to the
objection raised in these proceedings, it appeared proper
to “reaffirm expressly” that Rovime’s crédito litigioso
“had been assigned to the shareholder ALOS 34, the
record owner of 99.99% of the shares of the company.”

36. ALOS 34 now seeks to replace Rovime in this
arbitration, and the Respondent objects.

37. Faced with this challenge, ALOS 34 through its
counsel presented a receipt from the Registro Mercantil de
Madrid dated 28 October 2011 showing that the
liquidator's certification had been duly received by that
official registry, and that this was effective to transfer the
crédito litigioso to ALOS 34, Mr Jésus Mardomingo
Cozas, co-counsel for the Claimants and a Spanish
lawyer, appeared before the Tribunal and explained that as
a matter of Spanish law the steps taken were the proper
(and indeed only) way to deal with so-called "supervening
assets" (T: Day 8:113:25).

38. The Respondent sought to discredit the purported
transfer of the crédito litigioso by pointing out that the
liquidation of Rovime appeared to have occurred without
the Claimants’ counsel having been informed thereof, and
that the Claimants scrambled to establish the
consequences of this development only in reaction to the

happenstance that the SCC Institute requested formal
proof of a power of attorney which Rovime, having been
liquidated, could no longer supply. This may well be so
as a factual matter. Rovime's investment in Yukos, dating
back to 19 December 2003, had not amounted to much
more than US$ 100,000. It was the smallest among all the
Claimants. It seems likely that the investors behind
ALOS 34, as the corporate owner of 99.99% of Rovime's
shares having become the transferees of Rovime assets
upon the latter's liquidation, were not greatly attentive to
the crédito litigioso in this arbitration. If so, that is of no
moment to the Tribunal here; the issue of standing is a
matter of legal formality, and does not depend on the
subjective eagerness with which one of a group of
claimants participates in the case. The Tribunal is not
persuaded by Respondent's contention that ALOS 34's
participation in this case cannot be accepted because of its
lack of true involvement (as it has effectively ceded
control of the prosecution of its claim to Menatep's
lawyers) and it is therefore not a bona fide claimant;
whether Menatep is keener than anyone else to see
findings of liability in this case does not affect the
proposition that ALOS 34's rights are to be examined as
such. This point has effectively been disposed of in
Section 6(B) above.

39. But the Respondent has other complaints as well.
It contends, relying on an opinion letter from a Spanish
lawyer, Mr Clifford Hendel, that the deed filed with the
Registro Mercantil has no legal force under Spanish law:
“It purports to restate the May 21 assignment but it is
undisputed that no assignment occurred that day. Spanish
law does not allow for a restatement of legal acts that have
never occurred in the first place" (T:Day 8:10:9-13).
Moreover, ALOS 34 was not the sole shareholder of
Rovime. And Russia cannot be held under the BIT to
have agreed to arbitrate with ALOS 34. Indeed, absent
the Respondent's consent there is no basis for ALOS 34 to
join the arbitration at this stage. Rovime was dissolved by
means of an individualised liquidation, not a universal
succession, and as a matter of Swedish law ~ as set out in
an opinion letter by Mr Jesper Tiberg, a Swedish lawyer

who the Claimants say, without contradiction, acts for the
Respondent in court proceedings in Stockholm — the
better view is that in such circumstances (a) there is good
reason, notwithstanding a contrary obiter dictum of the
Swedish Supreme Court, that consent should be required,
and (ii) even if consent is held not to be required as a
general proposition it should nevertheless be required
under "special circumstances" which are extant here.

40. In answer to the points raised in the preceding
paragraph, the Tribunal begins by accepting Mr Gimblett's
response to the effect that, in essence, “Rovime has
merged into its owner", which he represented to be a
"family owned investment vehicle" (T:Day 9:215:6-7).
As for the registration of the public deed by the liquidator,
purporting to effect the assignment of the claim in this
arbitration to ALOS 34, from the documents presented to
it (assumed to be genuine), the Tribunal is satisfied that
this has been achieved; Mr Hendel's explanations are not
apposite to counter this simple conclusion. Furthermore,
the Tribunal is not impressed by the contention that the
fact that a single share of Rovime’s stock, out of
2.7 million shares, did not become the property of ALOS
34 (but was rather assigned to a bank custodian) means
that this was not a universal succession. In sum, the
Tribunal considers that (a) it was a universal succession,
(b) if this was not so, ALOS 34 under these circumstances
could nonetheless, given its legal title to the crédito
litigioso, assume Rovime's position irrespective of consent
by the Respondent, (c) there are no special circumstances
that cut the other way; to the contrary, (d) ALOS 34
qualifies under the BIT just as Rovime did.

7. INDIVIDUAL MERITS ISSUES

41. The Claimants insist emphatically that their
success in this case does not depend upon a showing that
the laws of the Russian Federation did not permit the
Respondent to treat Yukos as it did. Although the
Claimants do argue that the Respondent was not allowed
under its own law to carry out the measures by which
Yukos was eventually dismantled, as Mr Johnson put it:
“The central question instead is: why would Russia treat
Yukos as it did if its only interest was the bona fide
assessment and collection of taxes?” (T:Day 1:6:17-19).

42. This point serves to underscore the difference
between the present case and Yukos v. Russia, where the
ECHR resolved a series of contentions about Russia’s
compliance or otherwise with specific provisions of the
European Convention on Human Rights, without
considering whether or not the Respondent’s measures, as
a whole, amounted to an uncompensated expropriation of
foreign investments as forbidden by this BIT and most — if
not all — other BITs.

43. There is thus a fundamental difference between
this case and Yukos v. Russia notwithstanding that both
consider in very considerable detail the narrative of
Yukos’ demise. But the same can also be said about this
case and Rosinvest, because the tribunal in the latter
award held that there had been an unlawful expropriation,
which as the Claimants here concede is an issue which the
present Tribunal is not authorised to resolve under the BIT
which is relevant here.

44, This award decides whether there has been an
uncompensated expropriation of the Claimants’
investment, Any such finding requires a characterisation
of the Respondent’s conduct, and its effects, as falling
within the scope of Article 6 of the BIT (as opposed to

simply the routine exercise of regulatory powers, as per
the Respondent’s case). For the purposes of this enquiry,
the Tribunal will consider the arguments raised by the
Parties as so many elements to be taken into account
before making an overall assessment. No individual
feature of the narrative is necessarily decisive, either as
proof of compliance or otherwise with the law, or as
evidence of an expropriatory effect as a matter of fact.
Indeed, it may not be necessary to come to a firm view as
to all discrete contentions if the totality of the
circumstances point in a firm direction.

45. It should be clearly understood that the Claimants,
while conceding that they may not seek a finding of
unlawful expropriation, have never abandoned the
position that expropriation may be either direct or indirect
— either de jure or de facto. Indirect expropriation, of
course, does not speak its name. It must be deduced from
a pattern of conduct, observing its conception,
implementation, and effects as such, even if the intention
to expropriate is disavowed at every step. The fact that
individual measures appear not to be well founded in law,
or to be discriminatory, or otherwise to lack bona fides,
may be important elements of a finding that there has been
the equivalent of an indirect expropriation, an
expropriation by other means, even though there be no
need to determine whether the expropriation was
unlawful. Of course much overlap is likely, and that is
why the interrogations by the arbitrators in this case are
likely to echo those of Ros/nvest. Indeed in many
situations it may appear to be a distinction without a
difference, to use a phrase that comes to mind when
different analytical frameworks seem unlikely to yield
appreciably different results, but the conceptual approach
is not the same and it is right, in reviewing the Parties”
many disputed contentions, to recall that a critical
examination of whether the appearance of a
non-expropriatory measure in fact covers an expropriatory
effect is not the same thing as deciding whether an
expropriation is unlawful per se.

71 Were the tax levies on Yukos beginning in
December 2003 arbitrary or discriminatory?

46. | From December 2003, six weeks after the arrest of
Mikhail Khodorovsky, the Ministry of Taxation began a
series of re-audits of Yukos’ tax years 2000-1, which
concluded that Yukos had unlawfully underreported
income by routing it through low-tax regions of the
Russian Federation. The Claimants assert that these
audits were extraordinary, coming less than eight months
after an audit of fiscal years 2000 and 2001 in which no
criticism had been raised with respect to Yukos’ tax
“optimization strategy” — and were motivated by the
Government's desire to assert dominance over Yukos and
its managers. The finding of vast tax liabilities, they say,
was based on a specially created legal theory.

47. The Claimants describe the relevant sequence of
events as follows (SoC J 28):

“28 April 2003 Audit of 2000-01 tax years
finds that Yukos has a
small additional tax
liability for those years,
unrelated to its use of
trading companies in low-
fax regions to reduce its
tax burden. Yukos pays
this liability in full.

19 September 2003 Tax Ministry certifies that
Yukos, “as of 01.09.2003,
has no unsettled liabilities
on taxes and other
compulsory payments and
no violations of the tax
legislation”

23 October 2003 Tax Ministry recertifies
Yukos’ compliance with
tax laws.

25 October 2003

17 November 2003

8 December 2003

29 December 2003

14 April 2004

15 April 2004

26 May 2004

29 June 2004

30 June 2004

Mikhail Khodorkovsky
arrested by FSB agents.

Tax Ministry recertifies
Yukos’ compliance with
tax laws.

Extraordinary re-audit of
2000 tax year begins.

Audit report finds that
Yukos owes an additional
99.4 billion roubles ($3.5
billion) for 2000.

Tax Ministry issues
Resolution No,  14-3-
05/1609-1 (the “2000
Resolution”), demanding
payment of 99.4 billion
roubles by 16 April 2004.

Tax Ministry _ petitions
Moscow Arbitrazh Court
for recovery of 99.4 billion
roubles from — Yukos.
Moscow Arbitrazh Court
issues ex parte order
imposing wide-ranging
asset freeze.

Moscow Arbitrazh Court
issues ruling upholding 99
percent of the Tax
Ministry's claim.

Yukos’ appeal is denied by
Moscow Arbitrazh Appeals
Court which upholds 100
percent of Tax Ministry
claim.

Moscow Arbitrazh Court
issues a writ of execution

permitting the Tax
Ministry to enforce the
judgment for 2000 against
Yukos’ assets.”

*.,.Yukos had already paid $1.2 billion in taxes for
the 2000 tax year. When that was added to the
$3.5 billion tax levy generated by the extraordinary
audit, Yukos’ total tax burden of $4.7 billion was
only slightly less than the company’s before-tax
income for the year of $4.9 billion.

The Tax Ministry was to rely on the same theories
of liability for a series of further tax levies covering
the years 2001-04 served on Yukos in the
succeeding months. By the time the Tax Ministry
issued the last of these demands, Yukos faced a bill
of more than $24 billion. To put this tax assessment
in perspective, Yukos’ net income for the entire
period of 2000 through the third quarter of 2003
was approximately $13 billion.”

48. | The questions that arise for the present Tribunal
concern the bona fides of measures taken by the
Respondent. Were these actions taken as part of the
ordinary process of assessing and collecting taxes, or were
they part of an expropriatory pattern? All taxation of
course has the effect of a taking of the taxpayer’s money;
but it is nonsense to say that it is therefore compensable.
The tax is the payment of a debt established by law in
favour of the public treasury (“the price we pay for
civilization”, in Holmes’s famous expression), But if the
ostensible collection of taxes is determined to be part of a
set of measures designed to effect a dispossession outside
the normative constraints and practices of the taxing
powers, those measures are expropriatory and fall within
Article 6 of the BIT. And it is then for the Tribunal to
consider whether such expropriation has been properly
compensated.

{A) The December 2003 re-audit

49. The regular audit of Y2000 had been completed
less than seven months before; no questions had been
raised as to Yukos’ tax optimisation strategy by the use of
intermediary affiliates, including trading companies in
low-tax jurisdictions. There were three reasons why, in
the Claimants’ submission, this could not have been a
normal supervisory audit:

(i) By early 2002, reports of regional tax audits
show that the tax inspectors knew the levels of
investment and tax benefits in the trading
companies, and of those companies’ connection
with Yukos;

(ii) Yukos had disclosed the extent of its tax savings
by use of low-tax jurisdiction vehicles;

(iii) The new audit resulted in a report which
exceeded 100 pages in length within three weeks
(29 December 2009).

50. If the theories developed by the Tax Ministry to
defend the way Yukos was ultimately treated were
correct, the Claimants ask rhetorically, how can it be that
the 2002 regular audits of the trading entities did not
result in claims, or that the 2003 regular audits of Yukos
did not have such an outcome either?

51. | The ECHR did not accept Yukos’ argument that
the Tax Ministry knew of the  tax-optimisation
“arrangement in its entirety on the sole basis off] ... tax
declarations and Requests for tax refunds,” Yukos v.
Russia J 592. Whatever the merits of that conclusion, the
Claimants in this case do not rely on declarations and
refund applications as the “sole basis” for the proposition
that Yukos’ practice was known to the tax authorities. To
the contrary, the Claimants rely on the Ministry’s own
teports of prior audits, involving both Yukos and some of
its more important intermediary trading companies, as

well as on Yukos’ public disclosure in 2002 of its tax
savings. It therefore seems more pertinent to quote the
RosInvest Award, the arbitrators in that case having found
it “unpersuasive that, for one of the largest and most
important companies in Russia, frequently discussed in
the media, the tax authorities nevertheless were not aware
or at least could not have informed themselves” ({ 451)
and furthermore having found no “convincing evidence
that the three week re-audit, or actually other audits,
discovered new facts ....” (in J 494).

52, In conclusion, and having carefully considered all
the evidence in this case, the Tribunal is unconvinced by
the Respondent’s arguments to the effect that it neither
knew nor could easily have determined Yukos’ tax
optimisation strategy, or its use of trading companies in
low-tax jurisdictions, at the latest by April 2003, in the
course of the “regular” Yukos audit. It is notable that the
Respondent, while suggesting that the regular audit might
have been less thorough than the re-audit (an unsurprising
contention in and of itself), has never argued that the
earlier audits were marred by any collusion or other
improprieties.

(B) The purported legal basis of the
revocation of the tax benefits

53. | The preponderance of Yukos’ tax benefits were
granted by the Republic of Mordovia under a law (Law of
the Republic of Mordovia on Conditions of Efficient Use
of the Social and Economic Potential of the Republic of
Mordovia) which gave broad authority to that region. In
particular, Article 4, subparagraph! of this law
established that decisions regarding “application of the
taxation regime envisaged in this Law to specific entities
shall be made by the Republic of Mordovia”, and that
Mordovian authorities were also empowered to identify
the documentation to be furnished by applicants, to
“supervise compliance”, to determine the “special taxation
regime” for a given entity, to define the procedure for
obtaining tax concessions, and to set out the requisite
record-keeping by tax-paying entities.

54. Yukos obtained Mordovian tax concessions. It set
up trading entities in Mordovia which never, as far as the
record shows, fell short of the requirements of the Law
under which the benefits were granted. Yet the
Respondent treated Yukos as a tax delinquent for having
violated an alleged rule of “good faith” in that its tax
benefits were “disproportionate” to the investments it had
made in Mordovia — notwithstanding that Mordovia was
explicitly entitled under the Law to “supervise
compliance”, and had not seen fit to require any particular
level of investment.

55. The ECHR considered that the Respondent's
stance in this respect passed muster under the Court’s
view of the “margin of appreciation”, explaining at J 598
that many laws are perforce “vague” and require “judicial
interpretation” to be developed as “questions of practice”.
This reasoning does not really meet the argument made by
the Claimants in this case to the effect that it is simply
wrong for a citizen to be sanctioned for bad faith when he
has acted in accordance with the rules established by
authorities having explicit statutory authority to supervise
the relevant conduct, and without any criticism by those
authorities.

56. The Respondent’s position is further weakened by
the fact that it cannot point to a precedent where the
putative proportionality rule had been invoked against a
similarly situated taxpayer. In the absence of a sound and
proven legal doctrine to justify itself, it is no answer for
the Respondent to say that the regional tax incentive
system had been shown to result in an unacceptable loss
of aggregate State revenues, and that the correction must
start with someone. The self-evident correction in a legal
regime which is revealed not to contain adequate
constraints is to re-conceive and re-calibrate those limits,
and to enact revisions by legislative amendment, not by ad
hoc administrative determinations based on a nearly
infinitely open-textured notion like that of “good faith”.

57. Indeed an article published by Vladimir
Samoylenko in April 2004 (“Government Policies in

30+

Regard to Internal Tax Havens in Russia” 34 Tax Notes
International, 5 April 2004) captured the point very well,
demonstrating that the tax authorities were quite aware of
the great advantages derived by big business from the
special tax regions, and that they were engaged in debates
about it. (The Claimants have also submitted evidence of
Audit Chamber reports documenting how it was possible
to derive substantial benefits from a region despite an
insubstantial presence there; see, e.g. the Audit Chamber
Bulletin No. 3 (75) (2004), “Report on the Results of the
Review Concerning Implementation of the Decisions
Made by the Collegium of the Audit Chamber of the
Russian Federation following the Results of the Audits in
Respect of Performance of Audit Activities Ensuring
Receipts of the Federal Budget in the Regions of the
Russian Federation”, looking at the period 2001/02 and
concluding at p. 127 that the benefits in Mordovia
“amounted to 16.3 times the Federal subsidiaries”; and
that in Kalmykia the amount of tax benefits was offset by
no more than 5.4% by way of investments of the
beneficiaries.) _Samoylenko made clear that it was
perceived before the year 2000 that the policy was having
deleterious effects, and that the obvious remedy ~
legislative reform — was identified by the Tax Ministry as
early as 2001. Some vested interests sought to preserve
the system as it was, and therefore the ultimate federal cap
on regional benefits did not take effect until January 1“
2004. The following comment by the author is of clear
present relevance:

“The tax authorities must not lose sight of the fact
that the elimination of the regional tax havens is a
policy change. A once favoured means of funding
local budgets has been rejected. As a matter of
fairness, tax authorities should not seek to shift
blame for the undesired policy to Russian
businesses who took advantage of the policy.”

58. | The Respondent did not counter these arguments,
in either its opening or closing oral submissions.
Samoylenko was entirely absent from its presentations,

save in response to a question from the Tribunal, where a
passing reference to Samoylenko was made to the
inconsequential effect that one must “distinguish between
use and abuse” (T:Day 9:158:15).

59. In its written arguments, the Respondent focused
on what it sought to portray as Mr Samoylenko’s views on
a quite different matter, namely the notion that tax
benefits were restricted by a rule of proportionality. This
argument backfired, since the Claimants were able to
point out that the author never made such a statement, but
to the contrary — and repeatedly — observed that the tax
haven practice was to offer generous advantages in return
for fixed fees. Moreoever, the Claimants were quick to
point out that the Rosénvest tribunal flatly rejected the
proportionality argument when it was put to the arbitrators
there ({ 450).

60. Looking at the facts of this case, the salient feature
is undisputed. Yukos developed the practice of using
controlled trading companies as intermediaries for its vast
volume of sales. Sometimes these trading companies
were arrayed in multiple layers, buying and reselling
Yukos’ output from other entities of the Yukos group.
When the intermediary entities were located in a low-tax
region of Russia, they unsurprisingly purchased the goods
at a low price and resold them at a higher price, thus
generating profits taxed at a low rate. The regions’
objective was to attract economic activity; and they were
authorised to grant these tax advantages by dispensation
from the federal government by reason of their special
development needs within the framework of
macroeconomic policy. Some regions were thus in a
position to grant very substantial advantages. For
example, when the Russian Federal profits tax in 2002
stood at a rate of 7.5%, the regional and local profits taxes
were 16.5%. One immediately sees that insofar as a
region was willing to forego a part — or indeed all — of the
16.5%, this raised a number of issues of public policy
within the Russian Federation. For example, if a
profitable enterprise moved its tax domicile from region
X, which had no authority to grant tax concessions, to

region Y, which was prepared not to tax profits at all (thus
contenting itself with prospects of increased employment
or the collection of lesser taxes of a different nature) the
result would not only be starkly negative for region X,
which would lose its tax receipts entirely, but also
possibly for the Federation, which might have to come to
region X’s rescue if this occurred on such a scale as to
compromise the region’s capacity to finance the
maintenance of public services. As for region Y, it might
well say that modest revenues are better than none,
ignoring that the authority to concede tax advantages had
been reserved for relatively unprosperous regions which
required Federal subsidies. To put it simply, ill-conceived
regional concessions would drain the aggregate public
treasury.

61. The Tribunal has seen evidence of tension
between the central State and the regions with respect to
the authority to legislate and to regulate. Regional
overregulation was thought to frustrate State policy (and
naturally create opportunity for corruption), while
regional laxity with respect to special fiscal regimes could
undermine the public treasury. Thus, to take a problem of
present relevance, permissive tax domiciliation in a given
region, when coupled with low tax rates, might allow
schemes having the perverse effect of draining significant
tax revenues from one region without increasing them
elsewhere, as the low-tax region would be happy to take
the 100 thousand it would otherwise not have received
without caring that the corporate migration thus deprived
the original region of 100 million.

62. One form of similarly unintended consequences
might be the failure to disqualify inter-group transfers.
This is a well known challenge to modern fiscal
policy-makers. A multi-national group of companies
which produces goods in a high tax jurisdiction is unlikely
to be able to avoid those taxes by a simple inter-group
transfer to a subsidiary entity located in a tax haven at a
price which reflects nothing but cost, and therefore
attracts no income tax. This is the familiar problem of
transfer pricing, which is cured by the authority to

challenge the price and to deem the taxpayer’s true
income to have been higher.

63. The problem within the Russian Federation was
similar, but in Yukos’ case the approach taken by the
Respondent to rectify allegedly unintended windfalls to
Yukos was, as it explains, quite different. Instead of
simply challenging the transfer prices, with the aim of
reallocating proper revenues to the original
producing/selling entity so as to reflect an arm’s length
transaction, the Tax Ministry developed a concept of
“abuse of right”, with the salient objective of
disqualifying sham transactions. In addition — whether as
alternative or confirmatory theories is not always clear —
the Ministry referred to criteria of “proportionality” of
investments to tax savings, and “real ownership”.

64. Countless words have been written and spoken in
the course of these proceedings about the proper
understanding of the position under Russian law. Indeed,
the debate has included excursions into the realm of
comparative tax law, as the Respondent has sought to
demonstrate that many advanced legal systems include the
concept of “abuse of law” and the disqualification of sham
transactions. The Claimants, for their part, have insisted
that the Respondent’s treatment of Yukos involved
entirely novel and discriminatory legal theories invented
for the sole purpose of covering what was and remains
fundamentally an unlawful dispossession of private
property. In sum, the competing narratives might be
described as “sham transactions” vs “sham taxes”.

65. Erudite expert reports were furnished by both
sides on these issues, and significant time was spent in the
course of the hearings in questioning some of their
authors. To explore all the ground covered by these
arguments and rebuttals, which at times under the
direction of skilled cross-examination involved extended
excursions at a great distance from the facts of this case,
would result in an award of unwarranted length. It should
suffice for the Tribunal to set out its core conclusions:

Since the loss of tax revenues was
evidently attributable to
non-arms’-length inter-group pricing,
the natural correction would be to
disqualify those prices and to
reintegrate into the producing entity’s
tax base an amount which would
restore arm’s length.

The basis for such a correction of the
problem apparently exists under the
applicable tax regime, or by virtue of
Article 40 of the Russian Tax Code.
Even if that were not so, or if there
were found to be a failure of
safeguards in the terms under which
certain regions could grant tax
advantages, such matters fall to be
addressed by legal reform.

To characterise behaviour as violating
a broad concept of “good faith” when
a taxpayer adopts behaviour precisely
to take advantage of tax benefits
created with the intention of inducing
the corresponding conduct seems
quite extraordinary. It is hard to see
why the taxpayer should be blamed
for the generosity of those benefits.
Absent proof of collusion with
officials charged with administering
the tax regime, it is difficult to accept
that the taxpayer should be held to a
duty to conclude, against the text of
the regulations, that the scope of the
tax advantage had been defined as
broader than what the drafters
intended.

66. To counter the observation that what Yukos did
was not only not prohibited, but indeed authorised, the
Respondent invokes a particular type of breach of good
faith, namely that of a “sham” transaction. This concept
was explored at length in the course of cross-examinations
of expert witnesses, notably of Professor Stephan (called
by the Claimants) and Mr Konnov (called by the
Respondent). The proposition advanced by the
Respondent is that tax authorities may disregard
transactions if they have no “reasonable economic or other
purpose” other than the securing of a tax benefit.
Although the discussion was conducted against a
background of impressive familiarity with the relevant
legal texts and cases, and occasionally at a very high level
of abstraction, in the end the Tribunal can summarise its
relevant findings quite simply and succinctly.

67. The Tribunal is unwilling to find that Yukos
engaged in sham transactions with its affiliated trading
entities. For one thing, the notion of a “sham” suggests
something surreptitious, whereas the tax authorities
obviously had access to the tax returns of both Yukos and
the affiliated entities in question and would, or should,
have had little difficulty in seeing that Yukos was
assigning significant revenues to the latter by way of
inter-company transfers. These transfers might be
questioned on the basis of the arm’s length standard
discussed above, but not as shams. (Incidental internal
communications advising staff members not to preserve
documents relating to the arrangements are not, in the
Tribunal’s view, decisive proof of a guilty corporate
conscience; they might just as well suggest a
disinclination to call attention to the tax savings made,
particularly if there were apprehensions of aggressive
audits. At any rate, as said, Yukos’ intragroup practices
were known or could readily have been ascertained.) That
leads to the more significant consideration, namely that a
sham transaction above all involves an attempted
masquerade, attempting to disguise the very nature of
what is being done. An excellent example emerged in the
form of the so-called Sibservis case, Resolution No.
367/96 of 17 September 1996. There the taxpayer

purported to “borrow” money from customers of its
goods, and “repay” the “loans” by delivery of the goods.
The repayment of loans, as opposed to monies received on
account of goods sold, was not subject to VAT. The
transaction was recharacterised by the tax authorities.
This was indeed dissimulation.

68. In the present case, there was nothing of the sort.
The sales transactions were just that: the transfer of title to
goods for a certain price. From the ultimate independent
purchaser, a legal relationship was created between that
purchaser and the intermediary Yukos affiliate. There
was no “fake” transaction. The buyer had a right to
certain deliveries, the duty to make certain payments, and
a right to bring action against the intermediate entity,
notably in the form of an international arbitration — but no
privity to bring an action against Yukos, with which it had
no contractual relations.

69. If one puts to the side the idea of sham
transactions, one is left with the question whether a
taxpayer should not be allowed to conduct its business by
choosing alternative A over alternative B for the sole
purpose of deriving a tax benefit. The answer in Russian
law, as reflected in point 4 of the Supreme Arbitrazh
Court’s Resolution No. 53 of 12 October 2006, is — to use
the phrase employed by Mr Alexander for the Respondent
(T:Day 6:13:5-8) — that “if there are two options, both of
which have the same economic substance, the taxpayer is
entitled to choose between those options.” The true
economic substance of Yukos’ vast business was to sell
into the market to independent purchasers. This could be
done directly, or alternatively through affiliates. The
second alternative was more attractive, due to the
availability of tax benefits precisely designed to stimulate
the establishment of business activity in the Russian
low-tax jurisdictions. The economic substance of the
arrangement was the same; goods produced by Yukos
were purchased by an independent buyer at a market
price. To insist that Yukos should not be allowed to sell
to an affiliate at a below-market price is, once again,
something quite different; that has to do with the

prohibition of the terms of a transaction, not a claim that it
was bogus.

70. Similarly, the plausible notion that tax benefits
must bear some reasonable relationship to the investments
made by the taxpayer seems so self-evidently suitable for
consideration at the time of creating the low-tax regime
that its absence cannot be considered an accident; if in
practice the omission seemed an error, the obvious
remedy is amendment rather than unpredictable judicial
sanctions by reference to an unspecified criterion of
“proportionality”.

71. The same may be said with respect to the use of
intermediary entities which have negligible “economic
substance”. If that were to be a disqualifying factor, it
would surely be a simple matter to make clear that some
quantified “substance” is a requirement, rather than to
leave it to the happenstance of a subsequent judicial
opinion about the matter. In the case of Mordovia, the
investment law specifically listed the wholesale trade in
fuels and lubricants as the type of activity that would
qualify an investor for benefits under the law. Given that
no hydrocarbons are produced in Mordovia, it seems quite
clear that such a wholesaler might do its business with no
physical plant and a very limited staff of traders sitting at
their consoles.

72. The ultimate justification, in the eyes of Mr
Konnov, turned out to be the taxpayer’s “motivation”
(T:Day 6:148:11-25), in the sense that improper
motivation was evidence of abuse, and therefore a ground
on which to disqualify the claimed benefit. Mr Konnov’s
knowledge of Russian tax law and cases was most
impressive, as were his acute perception of nuances in the
questions put to him and his clarity in responding to them.
This is all the more reason to give weight to the fact that
he concluded that it all came down to the distinction
illustrated by two simple hypotheses which he referred to
repeatedly in his answers before the Tribunal. In the first,
Yukos owned no trading companies but decided to hire
professional traders and set them up in a new company;

“if they decide to do that in Mordovia, it is true business
operations, true trading company, then probably I have no
problem with it” (T:Day 6:210:6-9). In the second, “if I
have trading corporations in Moscow and I go to
Mordovia and I set up a company there, what is my
motivation” (T:Day 6:148:14-16).

73. If the taxpayer structures his business with tax
minimisation as the “sole or predominant reason”, “you
have a problem” and “the fact pattern in the Yukos case is
pretty easy ....” (T:Day 6:212:1-10).

74. The Tribunal is unpersuaded. In the first place,
the analysis here shifts appreciably from the notion of
sham transactions and even from that of “no reasonable
economic or other purpose” to that of a dominant motive
of tax savings. The distinctions are decisive. To recall
Mr Alexander’s words, “if there are two options, both of
which have the same economic substance, the taxpayer is
entitled to choose between these options”. In other words,
the choice is exclusively tax driven. It is difficult to see
how it could be otherwise, in a world filled with major
corporations openly structuring their businesses through
low-tax jurisdictions. The distinction between the
hypothesis of a new trading company versus a migrating
trading company, positing the former as acceptable and
the latter not, is not convincing. In the first hypothesis,
the two options are incorporation in a high tax jurisdiction
versus incorporation in a low tax jurisdiction. In the
second, the choice is between remaining in a high-tax
jurisdiction versus migrating to a low tax jurisdiction.
There is no distinction of principle. Business decisions,
once made, are not immutable. They are revised in
accordance with negative and positive developments, such
as increased taxes in the current jurisdiction or tax
benefits in a jurisdiction where it is possible and lawful to
relocate. The notion of abusive motivation simply does
not fit.

(C) The attribution to Yukos of the additional
tax associated with income of the trading
companies

75. ‘It is one thing to say that Yukos remained the
owner of goods which it had purported to sell directly to
its affiliates because its contracts with them were a sham,
but quite another to insist that the result of repudiating
purported sales among entities controlled by Yukos was
that Yukos somehow became the owner of the goods. This
obviously has nothing to do with the proposition that the
sales were sham transactions, but rather with the very
different notion that Yukos, albeit not a party to the
transaction, should be treated as having become the
owner. The adoption of this approach by the Respondent
obviously made it instantly possible for it to view Yukos
itself as a tax debtor by reason of profits which it had not
made, and would benefit from only upon the contingent
payment of dividends.

76. This move raises obvious legal issues as to how
this conclusion might be justified. They were dealt with
comprehensively in writing by Professor Viktor Pavlovich
Mozolin, notably by reference to the unprecedented way
in which the tax authorities used Article 209 of the Civil
Code. Professor Mozolin was not called for
cross-examination by the Respondent, who chose instead
to challenge his opinion by relying on the contrary
arguments of Mr Konnov. It would be perverse if
insightful expert testimony were to be disregarded simply
because the party which disagrees with it chooses not to
confront the author. Indeed the Tribunal is inclined to
give weight to Professor Mozolin’s statement that Article
209 appears in a general part of the Civil Code which
gives way to Chapter 14, dealing with the acquisition of
property in particular. Mr Konnov in fact accepted that
Article 218, which appears precisely in Chapter 14,
properly covers a situation such as that of Tomskneft, a
Yukos producing company, selling oil to Ratibor, one of
the Yukos trading companies (T:Day 6:83:25), Professor
Mozolin went on to conclude that the Tax Ministry’s
unprecedented invocation of Article 209 “to identify

someone other than the title holder as the owner of
property is .... illegitimate” (Opinion, { 9).

77. Professor Mozolin is among the most senior of
Russian academic figures: head of the Civil and Family
Law Department of the Moscow State Academy of Law,
and one of the drafters of the Civil Code of the Russian
Federation. His expert testimony focussed entirely on two
fundamental and over-arching topics, as to which his
reasoning stands challenged — but not confronted. As they
were both at the heart of the putative legal underpinning
of the measures at issue in this case, the decision not to
call him to the stand was quite remarkable. As to the first
of the two topics, his conclusion is uncompromising: “My
frank assessment is that this invocation of Article 209 was
absurd” ({ 6). He explained that “there is no provision of
the Civil Code that operates to transfer ownership of the
oil to Yukos or declare Yukos as the ‘actual owner’ of the
oil and based on the provisions of Article 209.... I have
not encountered the concept of ‘actual owner’ in my more
than 50 years as a legal scholar.”

78. Professor Mozolin’s second topic was to examine
the proposition that there is a distinction between good
and bad faith taxpayers, and that the tax authorities
therefore are justified in seeking to determine to which
category a given taxpayer belongs, and to treat him
accordingly. Professor Mozolin had no truck with this
concept (nor did the Ros/nvest tribunal, at {| 449), and the
Claimants did not have to look far to find authority to
support the proposition that Russian law gives all persons
the benefit of the presumption of good faith, including
taxpayers,

79. Reverting to the issue of Article 209, without
needing to adopt Professor Mozolin’s word illegitimate,
the present Tribunal contents itself with observing that the
tax authorities’ reference to Article 209 seems to have
been rather cavalier, reaching for the nearest available
general legal text — defining the rights of ownership as
possession, use, and disposal — for the sake of appearance,
without explaining how the assignment of ownership to

Yukos could override the transmission of title, as per the
sales contracts, in light of the directly apposite Article
218. Mr Konnov’s defence of the tax authorities’
approach was that “the tax authorities referred to Article
209 not as a standalone/separate concept but in the context
of the anti-abuse theories described above” (2™ witness
statement § 43). This comment rather gives the game
away; if the reference to Article 209 did not “stand alone”,
it was unnecessary; if it was unnecessary, why was it
invoked, if not as a rather jejune fig leaf? Rather than a
part of the foundation of undoing a sham transaction, this
seems to be an indicium of a sham tax assessment. (The
Tribunal is aware that Article 209 may have been invoked
by the Tax Ministry once before Yukos, as a basis for
making an assessment, but there had been no judicial
endorsement of it unti] Yukos.)

(D) ‘The rejection of the VAT refund

80. The unattractiveness of the Respondent’s position
in this connection is readily apparent. The amounts
involved were vast — in excess of $13.5 billion. The
export sales in question undoubtedly qualified for VAT
refunds. The trading company sellers had duly applied for
them. But once the tax authorities had invalidated the
transactions by which the sellers had come into possession
of the goods, they concluded that Yukos was the true
original owner and therefore should be deemed to be the
true export seller. If this was so, one would expect that by
a parity of reasoning under their basic premise, the tax
authorities should have held that the true applicant for the
refund was also Yukos — and that Yukos was therefore
entitled to the VAT credit in the same way as it was
assigned the debit for the profit tax. To try to have it both
ways would surely bespeak unprincipled hostility towards
the taxpayer.

81. Yet that is precisely what the tax officials did —
with the subsequent endorsement of the courts.

82. Unsurprisingly, Ros/nvest viewed this conduct in
the harsh light it deserves:

“The extremely formalistic interpretation of the
VAT tax law regarding Yukos and its trading
companies to the effect that, though exports were
undisputedly not subject to VAT, the documentation
also undisputedly submitted by the trading
companies could not be used in relation to Yukos
and thus Yukos was liable for more than US$
13.5 billion in VAT related taxes is difficult to
accept as a justification for a tax liability the size of
which was sufficient to lead Yukos into
bankruptcy.” (J 452)

The present Tribunal entirely endorses this conclusion,
and agrees with the Claimants that the ECHR appears, in
{{{ 601-602, to have entirely missed the point being made,
namely that if the tax authorities were going to attribute to
Yukos the transactions carried out in the names of its
trading companies, they should also have attributed to
Yukos the submission of normal VAT documentation by
the trading companies. Given that the export transactions
in question were indisputably zero-rated for VAT
purposes, the refusal to do so can only seem confiscatory
to a degree which comes close to validating the claims in
their entirety on this basis alone.

(E) The speedy and robust execution of the
judgment enforcing the Y2000 assessment

83. The Claimants observe that Russian law would
have given an allowance of three years for the execution
of the judgment, and argue that this would plausibly have
led to an arrangement for payment without the need to
seize and sell off YNG.

84. The effective date of the writ of execution of the
Moscow Arbitrazh Court, allowing the Ministry to
enforce its $3.5 billion tax claim, was 30 June 2004. The
Tax Ministry had up to three years to act on the writ, say
the Claimants, but demanded payment within five days.
The Ministry ignored a number of proposals from Yukos
to pay this amount notwithstanding the freeze on its assets
—e.g., by execution against its shareholding in Sibneft.

Instead, on 20 July the Ministry of Justice announced that
it would sell YNG, a Yukos asset the Claimants say was
worth at least $15 billion, to satisfy the 2000 debt. In a
Prospectus dated 14 July 2006, Rosneft was to value its
YNG interests at $57.7 billion.

85. The Claimants argue that since the Respondent
had put into place a freeze on Yukos’ assets and since
interest would run on taxes due, it had no legitimate
reason not to allow Yukos reasonable time to work out
means of payment that would allow the corporate taxpayer
to avoid the loss of its largest producing assets, and indeed
the ultimate dismantlement of the entire enterprise.

86. The Respondent’s counter, to the effect that it
might have been exposed to a charge of abuse of right if it
tarried in enforcing the tax debt, and allowed interest to
accumulate, is feeble indeed. That ostensible worry
would have been neutralised, if indeed it was sincere, by
asking Yukos to waive any such claim as a condition of
reprieve.

72 Did the Respondent prevent Yukos from
discharging the (disputed) tax debts?

87. | The Claimants contend that the Russian Federation
prevented Yukos from discharging or settling its tax
liabilities so that it could seize YNG and sell it to Rosneft
at a bargain price. Yukos specifically takes issue with the
15 April 2004 asset freeze, the Russian authorities’ failure
to consider Yukos’ proposals of alternative means of
paying the tax assessments, and the seizure and sale of
Yukos’ shares in YNG. The Respondent, on the other
hand, defends the propriety of its actions.

88. The question that arises for the present Tribunal is
whether the 15 April 2004 asset freeze, the Respondent’s
failure to consider Yukos’ proposals of alternative means
of paying the tax assessments, and the seizure and sale of
Yukos’ shares in YNG prevented Yukos from discharging
its tax debts. If the answer is in the affirmative, the
question arises whether in bringing about this result the
Respondent acted in a manner normally to be expected of

a taxing authority truly seeking to collect lawfully levied
taxes, or whether instead Respondent’s actions were so
antithetical to ordinary means of achieving that objective
as to indicate that it had another goal in mind. The latter
conclusion would support the Claimants’ theory that the
Russian Federation’s goal was to expropriate Yukos, and
not legitimately to collect taxes.

(A) The 15 April 2004 asset freeze

89, According to the Claimants, Yukos could have
paid the 2000 tax levy of some $3.5 billion and survived
as a healthy company, but was prevented from doing so
by an order, issued the day after the Tax Ministry’s
demand, to freeze its assets. The initiative led to the
following sequence of events (SoC J 31):

“15 April 2004 — Moscow Arbitrazh Court issues
ex parte order imposing wide
ranging asset freeze to secure
alleged liability of $3.5 billion
for 2000.

16 April 2004 Deadline for voluntary payment
of tax assessment expires.

22 April 2004 Yukos petitions Moscow
Arbitrazh Court protesting the
freeze as unlawfully
disproportional and requests
that the court instead freeze
Sibneft shares held by Yukos
worth more than the $3.5 billion
claim.

23 April 2004 Moscow Arbitrazh Court denies
Yukos’ request.

17 May 2004 Yukos appeals the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court’s decision.

2 July 2004 Yukos’ appeal to the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court of Appeal is
rejected.”

90. The Russian Federation allegedly made it
impossible for Yukos of its own accord to discharge the
liabilities imposed on it by the Tax Ministry: “the only
way for Yukos to discharge its tax liabilities in full was to
sell or borrow against assets that were subject to the 15
April 2004 asset freeze.” (SoRep J 289.) But, as
recounted below in Section 7.2(B), Yukos’ repeated
requests to do so were purportedly ignored by the bailiffs.

91. The Claimants contend that “[i]f the scope of the
asset freeze was genuinely within the discretion of the Tax
Ministry and Moscow Arbitrazh Court, the decision to
exercise that discretion in such a disproportionate manner
was arbitrary in nature and expropriatory in effect.” (SoC
q 140.)

92. The Respondent answers that the asset freeze did
not prevent Yukos from discharging its tax liabilities;
rather, Yukos simply did not want to pay. (SoRej { 226.)
The Respondent suggests, contrary to the Claimants’
contention, that the asset freeze did not cover the “assets
or activities” of Yukos’ subsidiaries or affiliates; did not
affect Yukos’ principal activity of the production,
processing, and sale of oil; and did not preclude Yukos
from selling non-Russian assets. (SoRep {J 285-87,
SoRej J 227.) The Respondent also points to comments
made by Yukos’ management and representatives that the
15 April 2004 asset freeze did not have a significant effect
on the company’s operations. (SoRej J 224.)

93. The Respondent further pleads that the asset freeze
was a reasonable response to the risk that Yukos would
further evade its fiscal obligations:

“The motion for injunction by the tax authorities
was reasonable and justified when it is considered
the amounts at stake, the clear indications by
YUKOS' management that YUKOS would not settle
its tax liability voluntarily, the decision of the tax
authorities to take a more conservative approach
with respect to enforcement of 2000 tax arrears and
interest through court proceedings, a[s] well as the

prior history of YUKOS' tax evasion.” (Konnov
First Report, J 180.)

94, The Tribunal observes that the lawfulness of the
asset freeze was reviewed and confirmed by the Russian
courts, as noted by the ECHR. (Yukos v Russia, J 641.)
While the Tribunal is mindful that it is not an appellate
body to scrutinize the decisions of domestic courts, the
Tribunal notes that it is not bound to accept such decisions
to the extent that they sanction “actions [that] breached
international law by depriving the claimants of adequate
compensation for the dispossession of which they
complain.” (Award on Preliminary Objections, {| 45(ii.))

95. The Tribunal is of the view that the asset freeze
did not by itself “breach[] international law by depriving
the claimants of adequate compensation for the
dispossession of which they complain.” The Tribunal
therefore will not scrutinize and opine upon the decisions
of the Russian courts upholding the asset freeze. But, as
discussed below, the Tribunal finds that the timing and
comprehensive scope of the asset freeze were among
several factors that substantially contributed to preventing
Yukos from paying its tax debts.

96. The timing of the asset freeze must be viewed in
context, against the backdrop of the Tax Ministry's
demand for $3.5 billion in back taxes. The ex parte freeze
on Yukos’ assets took place on 15 April 2004, when the
day before the Tax Ministry had demanded $3.5 billion in
taxes and the day after had been set as the deadline for
voluntary payment. The timing of the asset freeze
undoubtedly was a hindrance to Yukos in accomplishing
the already vast task of paying the alleged $3.5 billion tax
debt within two days.

97. The difficulties associated with this extremely
short deadline were compounded by the fact that the
Russian Federation froze substantially all of Yukos’ non-
cash assets. The Respondent argues that the asset freeze
did not cover the “assets or activities” of Yukos’
subsidiaries and, therefore, Yukos could have caused its
subsidiaries to sell off their assets and pay the proceeds as

dividends to Yukos. It is, however, implausible to
contemplate that the Russian authorities would have
allowed the value of the very assets that were frozen to be
diluted in this fashion. The Tribunal is also sceptical of
the relevance of the comments by Yukos’ management
and representatives that the 15 April 2004 asset freeze did
not have a significant effect on the company’s operations.
For Yukos to say at that point that its “operations” would
not be affected would be understood by the average
business executive to mean exactly that: the search for,
exploitation, extraction and sale of petroleum products
remain unhindered and will continue. Normal business is
not interrupted by a freeze on non-cash assets. Even were
such “statements against interest,” as Respondent
characterizes them, construed more broadly, however,
they must be considered as of the time they were made, in
April, May and July 2004 before certain significant events
in the Yukos saga unfolded: before Yukos’ multiple
settlement offers were ignored by the Respondent, before
the Respondent seized and auctioned YNG, and before
bankruptcy proceedings were commenced and Yukos was
liquidated. These comments were made by Yukos’
management and representatives with the reasonable
belief (or at least legitimate hope) that the Russian
Federation would act in good faith in its tax dispute with
Yukos. As this turned out not to be the case, the Tribunal
attributes little weight to this attempt by the Respondent to
minimize the significance of the 15 April 2004 asset
freeze.

(B) The failure to consider Yukos’ proposals
of alternative means of paying the tax
assessments

98. The 15 April 2004 asset freeze effectively gave the
Russian Federation the power to decide how Yukos’ tax
liabilities would be satisfied because it required Yukos to
propose assets against which the bailiffs should enforce
the levies. Under Russian law, the final decision on the
assets against which enforcement would be made was
reserved to the bailiffs.

99. | The Claimants contend that the Tax Ministry’s
failure to respond to Yukos’ numerous offers to settle or
discharge its tax debt demonstrated that the Russian
Federation had no interest in allowing Yukos to resolve its
liabilities. It points to the following sequence of events

(SoC J 33, 141, 146):
30 June 2004

1 July 2004

2 July 2004

6 July 2004

Moscow Arbitrazh Court issues
writ of execution. The Tax
Ministry asks the _ First
Interdistrict Office of the Court
Bailiffs of the — Central
Administrative District of
Moscow (“Bailiffs Service”) to
execute the judgment against
Yukos and the Bailiffs issue an
order giving Yukos five days to
pay $3.5 billion.

Yukos attempts to deliver to the
Bailiffs a package of documents
permitting execution against
Yukos’ 34.5 percent
shareholding in Sibneft valued
at $4.6 billion. The Bailiffs
refuse to accept the package.

Yukos writes to the Bailiffs
Service requesting information
on how to transfer the Sibneft
stake. The Bailiffs do not
respond.

Former — Canadian Prime
Minister Jean Chretien writes to
Prime Minister Fradkov on
Yukos’ behalf, proposing a
payment of $8 billion as a
global settlement for the 2000-
03 tax years. No response is
received.

14 July 2004

15 July 2004

16 July 2004

30 July 2004

17 Aug. 2004

30 Aug. 2004

16 Sept. 2004

Bailiffs seize Yukos’ shares in
YNG. Yukos petitions the
Moscow Arbitrazh Court to
declare unlawful the Bailiffs’
failure to execute against the
Sibneft shares.

Mr. Chretien writes again to
Prime Minister _ Fradkov,
reiterating Yukos’ 6 July 2004
settlement offer.

Steven Theede, Yukos’ CEO,
writes to the Minister of Finance
requesting deferral of tax debt
for six months or payment in
instalments.

Mr. Chretien writes to President
Putin, reiterating Yukos’ 6 July
2004 settlement offer.

Moscow Arbitrazh Court
upholds the failure of the Bailiffs
to execute against the Sibneft
shares.

Deputy Minister of Finance
writes to Yukos rejecting
deferral request of 16 July 2004.

Yukos writes a letter to the
Ministry of Justice proposing
that the Bailiffs execute against
Yukos’ shareholdings in a
number of companies, including
Sibneft OJSC and Tomskenergo
OJSC. The Russian Federation
does not respond. Yukos
reiterates its request on 24
November 2004, 25 November
2004, and 16 December 2004.

The Russian Federation does
not respond.

100. The Claimants emphasize that “Russia did not
refuse or reject any of Yukos’s 2004 proposals, it simply
ignored them.” (SoRep J 298.)

101. The Respondent, however, contends that it had
good reasons not to accept Yukos’ purported settlement
offers. First, Russian law does not require the bailiffs to
execute against assets proffered by the debtor. Second,
the Tax Ministry had no authority to grant Yukos’ 16 July
2004 request to defer payment on the tax debt. Third,
“[nJone of Yukos’s offers were adequate or credible”
because they would have required the Tax Ministry to:
(i) accept the disputed Sibneft shares; (ii) accept a fraction
of what was owed; or (iii) offset substantial VAT refunds
that were not specified. (SoRej { 240.)

102. The Tribunal is mindful that the Russian Tax
Ministry, like tax authorities in other countries, had the
discretion to decide whether to settle with Yukos. Indeed
the ECHR has found that the Russian tax authorities “had
a decisive freedom of choice” and “should have given
very serious consideration to other options.” ({ 654.) The
Tribunal is also sympathetic to the Respondent’s
contention that Yukos’ settlement offers might not have
been as appealing as Yukos had claimed; for example,
questions linger regarding Yukos’ title to the disputed
Sibneft shares. Nevertheless, the Russian Federation’s
failure even to respond to the multiple offers by Yukos,
the largest private taxpayer in Russia, in the view of the
present Tribunal, raises significant doubts as to whether
the Respondent acted in good faith in attempting to
resolve its tax dispute with Yukos, and whether its actions
were really taken as part of an ordinary process of
assessing and collecting taxes. While ignoring multiple
settlement offers by an ordinary taxpayer might seem odd,
the failure of a tax authority to respond to multiple
settlement offers by the State’s largest private taxpayer is,
in the Tribunal’s view, highly suspicious; such treatment

of a major force of the national economy could not
reasonably have been a matter of inadvertent clumsiness.

103. The Tribunal notes that “in February and March
2008, Rosneft was able to negotiate with the federal,
regional, and local tax authorities an agreement that
permitted it to pay off YNG’s tax liability (assumed by
Rosneft when it acquired YNG) over a five-year period
starting in March 2008.” (SoC { 145.) In light of the fact
that the Russian Tax Ministry had entertained and
negotiated repayment plans with other large taxpayers,
including Rosneft, the Tribunal accepts the Claimants’
common sense argument that “[i]f the Russian
Federation’s true intent in the tax cases against Yukos was
to collect legitimately-owed taxes, it would have worked
with Yukos to find a way for the company to discharge its
obligations that did not involve liquidation.” (SoC {| 34.)
The failure of the Russian Tax Ministry to work with
Yukos, or to even respond to Yukos’ multiple settlement
offers, is disturbing to say the least.

(C) The seizure and sale of Yukos’ shares in
YNG

104. The Russian Federation seized and sold YNG to
discharge Yukos’ tax liabilities. The following events
surrounded the YNG auction (SoC 36):

6 Oct. 2004 Russia’s appraiser, Dresdner
Kleinwort Wasserstein
(“DrKW”) delivers a report to
the Ministry of Justice valuing
YNG at $15.7-$18.3 billion.

7 Oct. 2004 Press reports that the Ministry
of Natural Resources is
questioning the status of YNG’s
production licenses.

18 Noy. 2004 Bailiffs Service announces that
YNG will be auctioned to satisfy
Yukos’ outstanding tax debt.

19 Nov. 2004 = Russian Federal Property
Service issues formal auction
notice, setting a starting price of
246 billion roubles ($8.65
billion) for YNG.

19 Dec. 2004 -YNG sold at auction for $9.3
billion to BaikalFinansGroup
(“BFG”.)

22 Dec. 2004 — BFG purchased by Rosneft.

105. As a preliminary matter, the Claimants contend
that the seizure of YNG was disproportionate because, as
noted by the ECHR, it “was capable of dealing a fatal
blow to [Yukos’] ability to survive the tax claims and to
continue its existence.” (Yukos v Russia, J 653.) The
decision to auction YNG, so the Claimants say, “made
sense only if the objective of the exercise was to place a
crown jewel of the Russian oil industry under state
control.” (SoC { 133.) According to the Claimants:

“If the Russian Federation's true intent was to
collect taxes from Yukos, it had up to three years to
do so. Waiting would have cost Russia nothing
since interest would have continued to accrue on
the Yukos liabilities. Nor would delay have entailed
any additional collection risk, inasmuch as Yukos
had the ability to pay in a reasonable time and the
15 April 2004 asset freeze gave Russia complete
control over substantially all of Yukos’s assets.
There being neither a requirement nor a need for
Russia to enforce its judgment against Yukos
immediately, one is left to conclude . . . that the
purpose of Russia’s rapid use of the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court's execution writ to seize YNG was
motivated by a simple desire to put YNG into
government hands, not by a wish to collect taxes.”
(SoRep J 279.)

106. The Claimants further allege that the YNG auction
was conducted in a manner inconsistent with a bona fide
exercise of the Russian Federation’s taxation,

enforcement, and regulatory powers. They raise four
series of complaints.

107. First, the Russian Federation did not attempt to
maximize the price fetched by YNG at auction. To the
contrary, the Federation tried to force down the auction
price of YNG by imposing on it an additional $4.6 billion
in new tax liabilities and raising questions about the
validity of YNG’s licenses. The additional tax liabilities
were carried forward to Rosneft, but were ultimately
reduced 84% by the Russian courts to $760 million.

108. Second, the Russian Federal Property Service did
not use the standard procedure applicable to auctions of
seized property, which would have required Russia to set
YNG’s starting price in line with DrKW’s valuation of
$15.7-$18.3 billion. Instead, the Russian authorities set
the starting price of the YNG auction at $8.65 billion,
significantly below the valuations in the DrKW report.

109. Third, the Russian Federation effectively barred
privately-owned Russian oil companies and foreign oil
companies from participating in the YNG auction by
holding the auction only one month after announcing it,
and by failing to encourage potential buyers to participate
(see generally the Osterwald Report, who opined that a
transaction such as this would normally have required a
year or more in order to maximise revenue from the sale).
The Tribunal notes that the Respondent chose not to
cross-examine Mr Osterwald.

110. Fourth, the YNG auction was rigged: the sole
bidder at the auction was BFG, “an unknown company
with ‘no telephone number, no office, [and] no corporate
logo,’ whose address is registered at ‘a dilapidated
building housing an off-license, a grocery, a mobile phone
shop and the London Café, a favourite hangout of
alcoholics and homeless people.’” (SoRep { 349.) The
auction lasted no more than 10 minutes, with BFG
acquiring YNG with an uncontested bid for $9.3 billion.
A few days after the auction and before payment of the
purchase price was due, BFG was acquired by Rosneft.

111. The Respondent, however, disagrees with the
Claimants’ characterization of the YNG auction. As an
initial matter, the Respondent emphasizes that the Russian
courts have already reviewed and dismissed the
Claimants’ objections with respect to the YNG auction in
upholding, inter alia: the Bailiffs’ decision to enforce
against Yukos’ shares in YNG; the starting price of the
YNG auction; that both BFG and Gazpomneft were bona
fide participants in the YNG auction; and BFG’s purchase
of the YNG shares.

112. The YNG auction, according to the Respondent,
was conducted professionally and in accordance with law.
First, the Bailiffs complied with Yukos’ request by
choosing an auction procedure; the Bailiffs could have
sold the YNG shares directly to a willing purchaser, at a
potentially lower price. The Respondent therefore posits:
“{I]f the Claimants’ conspiracy theory had any substance,
the Russian authorities would have simply sold the YNG
shares directly to Rosneft, or any state-controlled
company, in a negotiated deal not subject to any auction
requirements. But the Bailiffs did not proceed by private
transaction.” (SoD J 287.)

113. Second, Yukos is to blame for its own media
campaign that “scare[d] potential bidders away from the
auction of Yukos assets by threatening all bidders that
were not frightened off that the winner would be plagued
by a ‘lifetime of litigation.’” (SoD 276.) The temporary
restraining order (“TRO”) issued by the Yukos-initiated
U.S. bankruptcy court proceedings also deterred potential
bidders. In other words, “Yukos, instead of maximising
or trying to maximise the value of the YNG auction, []
actually minimis[ed] the value of the YNG auction.”
(T:Day 9:90: 14-16.)

114. Third, the YNG auction was a public and
legitimate auction (SoD 310):

“BFG did not bid against itself. It opened with a
pre-emptive bid which, in a single move, placed its
bid at half a billion dollars above the Starting
Price. It is counterintuitive that an auction in

which the participants were colluding would
generate a bid US$500 million in excess of the
Starting Price. If BFG was bidding against itself, it
would have had no reason to raise the price at all,
let alone significantly.”

115. The present Tribunal endorses the findings of the
RosInvest Tribunal regarding the YNG auction. (| 522-
24.) On the one hand, the Tribunal is receptive to the
Respondent’s argument that some of the blame associated
with the poor turnout and low winning bid at the YNG
auction should be attributed to the Claimants for their
media campaign threatening a “lifetime of litigation” and
for initiating bankruptcy proceedings in the United States
that led to the TRO. The Tribunal accepts the
Respondent’s argument that Yukos’ actions reasonably
could have deterred potential bidders from participating in
the YNG auction.

116. On the other hand, the Tribunal finds many
aspects of the YNG auction more than suspect. First, the
Tribunal questions the Respondent's decision to seize and
auction YNG. In light of the fact that the comprehensive
asset freeze was in place and that interest would continue
to accrue on Yukos’ tax debt, the seizure of YNG seems
to have been a drastic measure that, as the ECHR
observed, “was capable of dealing a fatal blow to
[Yukos’] ability to survive the tax claims and to continue
its existence.” (Yukos v Russia, {| 653.) The Respondent
had less extreme alternatives at its disposal.

117. Second, the Respondent’s decision to hold the
YNG auction only one month after announcing it and the
Respondent’s apparent failure to solicit and encourange
the participation of potential buyers in the auction seem to
have affected the number of buyers and the corresponding
number of bids. Mr Osterwald, a consultant with
extensive experience with oil companies facing
privatisation, market liberalisation, and restructuring,
explained persuasively that the auction procedure was
highly irregular in a number of ways that all relate to the
extraordinary speed in which it was conducted. For assets

of this magnitude of value, Mr Osterwald observed, one
would expect a number of professional advisers on
valuation, a painstaking information memorandum,
marketing materials and communication procedures with
prospective buyers, a data room, more than one round of
bidding to identify the more serious potential acquirers
who would then be offered yet more comprehensive
information, and throughout it all a sustained effort to
generate interest on the international markets. Once a
winner emerged, the ordinary practice would then be to
engage in complex negotiations before ultimate closing.
However, very little of this happened, which explains,
doubtless, how the auction could have been carried out
with such speed. Mr Osterwald opined that a transaction
such as this would normally have required a year or more
in order to maximise revenue from the sale. The
Respondent has little to say in response, and chose not to
put any question to Mr Osterwald, Tellingly, as it turned
out only one company placed a bid at the YNG auction.

118. Paramount among the Tribunal’s concerns relates
to this sole bidder: BFG, an unknown entity, placed a
$9.3 billion, uncontested winning bid for YNG, the largest
oil production company in Russia, and was then acquired
a mere three days later by state-owned Rosneft, even
before payment of the purchase price was due. The
Respondent has been unable to answer these key points,
save to state that BFG is duly legally constituted as a
corporate entity, and to rely upon subsequent
endorsements by the Russian courts. The Respondent's
argument, as summarized above, to the effect that YNG
auction was of a public nature, and that BFG bid $500
million above the starting price, are insufficient to remove
the suspicion of collusion, particularly when BFG was
quickly taken over by Rosneft before payment of the
purchase price was due.

119. Having carefully considered all the evidence and
submissions on this issue, the Tribunal is unable to accept
the legitimacy of this transaction, as pleaded by the
Respondent.

120. Overall, the present Tribunal arrives at a
conclusion consistent with the holding of the RosInvest
Tribunal, namely that “there remain doubts whether the
YNG auction can be seen as bona fide and non-
discriminatory or as an expropriation for the public
interest.” ({[ 524.) Indeed, reviewing the sequence of
events, the arbitrators in RosInvest were blunt, concluding
in J 620 that “the Tribunal is convinced that the auction of
YNG was rigged.” The Respondent has had more than a
year since that conclusion was reached to adduce more
persuasive evidence or argument before this Tribunal to
rebut that finding. It has failed to do so.

121. Importantly for this Tribunal’s enquiry, these
findings lead once again to the conclusion that the conduct
in question did not form part of an ordinary process of
assessing and collecting taxes.

(D) Yukos’ alleged imprudence, or bad faith,
in not paying the tax assessments quickly
and thus avoiding further pursuit

122. This is a Leitmotif in the Respondent’s pleadings.
If Yukos had quickly complied with the assessments
instead of paying out vast sums in dividends for its
shareholders, or securing its cash on hand behind the
ramparts of off-shore legal entities, it would have been
able to pay off its tax debt and ensure its survival — or so
the Respondent argues.

123. The response to this argument can be very
succinct. If Yukos’ owners and management concluded
that the Russian Government had set its face against them
and was pursuing an objective of confiscation, they would
hardly have been encouraged to keep profits sitting nicely
where they could be taken by state power. If the storm
clouds were so ominous, there was no reason to invest in
assets within the jurisdiction (because they would be
susceptible to dispossession by force) and the perfectly
understandable reaction would be to save what could be
saved of what is, after all, presumptively the property of
any corporate entity’s owners.

124. As for whether such apprehensions were justified,
the present Tribunal, which has no mandate and no need
to make a finding to that effect, nevertheless observes that
the RosInvest Tribunal unambiguously found Russia’s
measures to have been “confiscatory.” (1 574.) Whatever
else might be said about the reactions of Yukos’
management, there was nothing outlandish or exaggerated
about its fear of abuse.

(E) Conclusion

125. The Tribunal recalls that the ECHR found that
notwithstanding the “wide margin of appreciation,” the
Russian Federation prevented Yukos from discharging its
tax debt and violated Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 by
“fail[ing] to strike a fair balance between the aims sought
and the measures employed in the enforcement
proceedings.” ({i{] 651, 658.) The ECHR specifically took
issue with “the pace of the enforcement proceedings, the
obligation to pay the full enforcement fee and the
authorities’ failure to take proper account of the
consequences of their actions.” (| 657.) The ECHR
refused, however, to find that Russia had misused the
enforcement proceedings intentionally to destroy Yukos
and take its assets. (J 665-66.)

126. On the other hand, the Ros/nvest Tribunal, not
being bound by Protocol No. 1’s “wide margin of
appreciation,” but rather by the terms of the applicable
BIT, found that Russia’s actions “must be seen as a
treatment which can hardly be accepted as bona fide.” (]
567.)

127. The present Tribunal has arrived at a conclusion
consistent with the finding of the RosInvest Tribunal. As
mentioned above, the timing and comprehensive scope of
the asset freeze hindered Yukos’ ability to pay its tax debt.
Furthermore, the Russian Federation’s failure even to
respond to the multiple settlement offers by Yukos, the
largest private taxpayer in Russia, raises significant
doubts as to whether the Respondent acted in good faith in
attempting to resolve its tax dispute with Yukos. More
suspicious are the circumstances surrounding the seizure

and auction of YNG. The Respondent failed to take a
number of actions that would have, according to the
undisputed expert testimony of Mr Osterwald, increased
the number of bidders and the corresponding bids.
Tellingly, the YNG auction was won by the sole bidder,
an unknown entity that placed a $9.3 billion, uncontested
winning bid for YNG, the largest oil production company
in Russia, and was then acquired a mere three days later
by state-owned Rosneft before payment of the purchase
price was due.

128. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the 15
April 2004 asset freeze, the Russian authorities’ failure to
consider Yukos’ proposals of alternative means of paying
the tax assessments, and the seizure and sale of Yukos’
shares in YNG demonstrate that the Respondent
intentionally prevented Yukos from discharging its tax
debt. As discussed above, this conclusion supports the
Claimants’ allegation that the Russian Federation’s goal
was to expropriate Yukos, and not legitimately to collect
taxes.

73 Was Yukos’ tax delinquency a pretext for
seizing Yukos assets and transferring them to Rosneft?

129. Yukos was liquidated through involuntary
bankruptcy proceedings, and its remaining assets sold in a
series of auctions. The bankruptcy proceedings were
closed on 15 November 2007, and Yukos removed from
the Unified Register of Companies on 23 November 2007.

130. The Claimants allege that — as for each of the
preceding steps — Yukos’ tax delinquency was a pretext
for this process, and for the ultimate seizing of Yukos
assets and their transfer to entities controlled by the
Russian Federation:

‘{T]he Yukos bankruptcy proceedings were
unnecessary and inappropriate if the goal of the
Russian Federation was to collect taxes while at the
same time protecting the collective interests of
Yukos’s creditors and shareholders. Under the
circumstances that existed in 2006 — a single

creditor of any significance, a freezing order that
prevented dissipation of assets, and asset values
that plainly would have allowed Yukos to pay all of
its tax assessments without going through forced
liquidation - the only plausible explanation for
initiating bankruptcy proceedings and then
liquidating, rather than reorganizing, Yukos was to
facilitate and expedite the taking of Yukos’s
remaining assets and the transfer of them to new
state-controlled owners. And the only plausible
explanation for conducting the auctions as they
were conducted — with no effort to create interest
on the part of major foreign oil companies or to
indicate even that they would be welcome as
purchasers of the assets — was a desire on the part
of the Russian Federation to ensure that the assets
in fact were transferred to the designated state-
controlled entities.” (SoRep { 373.)

131. Specifically, the Claimants take issue with the
initiation of the bankruptcy proceedings, the rejection of
Yukos management’s restructuring proposal, and the
conduct of the liquidation auctions:

“Using the Société Générale consortium as cover . .
. the Russian Federation — acting through Rosneft —
instigated a bankruptcy proceeding designed to
transfer title to the remainder of Yukos’s assets to
selected state-controlled owners. With Rosneft and
the Tax Ministry as Yukos’s two largest creditors,
the Russian Federation drove the bankruptcy
proceeding, ensuring that Yukos management’s
proposal to restructure the company and pay off the
remaining debts was rejected in favour of
liquidation. The company’s remaining assets were
sold off in a series of questionable auctions. By the
end of the process, Rosneft held 75 percent of what
had formerly been Yukos, including all of its
production properties.” (SoC J 164.)

132. The Respondent, however, maintains that the
Russian bankruptcy and liquidation proceedings were

commenced and conducted in accordance with Russian
law and procedure by Yukos’ creditors.

133. As explained earlier, the question that arises for
the present Tribunal is whether Yukos’ tax delinquency
was a pretext for the seizing of Yukos assets and the
transfer of them to Rosneft or one of its affiliates. An
affirmative answer would support the Claimants’ theory
that the Russian Federation’s real goal was to expropriate
Yukos, and not legitimately to collect taxes.

(A) Forcing Yukos into bankruptcy

134. The relevant sequence of events with respect to the
bankruptcy proceedings was as follows. As a result of the
asset freeze that took place on 15 April 2004, Yukos
defaulted on a one billion-dollar loan issued by a
consortium led by Société Générale. That consortium
obtained an English court judgment for the outstanding
amount of that loan, namely $472 million. On 8
September, the consortium applied for enforcement of that
judgment by the Russian courts. But it did so in an
unusual manner, entering into an agreement with Rosneft
by which the latter would pay the $472 million in full in
exchange for the consortium’s promise to pursue
bankruptcy proceedings against Yukos. As the Claimants
ask rhetorically: Why not simply let the consortium get its
judgment, assign it to Rosneft, and let Rosneft put Yukos
into bankruptcy? The answer, according to the Claimants,
is that this could only have been for the sake of
appearances, instead of a sequence in which an entity
owned by the very State which had prevented Yukos from
making the payment in the first place then proceeded to
the liquidation of the company:

“{B]y March 2006, both the Tax Ministry and
Rosneft itself (by virtue of claims asserted against
Yukos by YNG, now part of Rosneft) could have
taken steps to initiate bankruptcy proceedings
against Yukos. Instead, the Russian Federation
engaged in an elaborate subterfuge to create the

impression that it was private creditors, not the
Russian state, that were responsible for initiating
the bankruptcy of Yukos.” (SoC J 168.) “...the
only explanation for that requirement [that the
Société Générale consortium initiate bankruptcy
proceedings against Yukos] is that the Russian
Federation wished to obscure who was behind the
initiation of the bankruptcy.” (SoRep { 359.)

135, Once the Moscow Arbitrazh Court had accepted
the consortium’s bankruptcy petition, Rosneft assumed
Yukos’ debt from the consortium and, with the court’s
approval, stepped into the shoes of the consortium in the
bankruptcy proceedings. Rosneft’s purchase of the
consortium loan left it and the Russian Federation as the
only creditors of any significance. As the Claimants
observe, and as the Tribunal agrees, this sequence of
events was at odds with the underlying purpose of the
bankruptcy law — it was “more consistent with the use of
insolvency as a device for gaining control of assets rather
than satisfying debt.” (Westbrook Report, {J 11-12, 23.)
In the Claimants’ words:

“With the Tax Ministry and Rosneft together
holding virtually all of Yukos’s external debt, a
bankruptcy proceeding was not needed to protect
any collective interest. Nor did the Russian
Federation need a bankruptcy in order to secure
Yukos's assets: the asset freeze of 15 April 2004
and subsequent orders already prevented Yukos
from disposing of its assets without the authorities’
permission . . . The only plausible purpose served,
then, by bankruptcy proceedings dominated by the
Tax Ministry and Rosneft was to facilitate the
taking of Yukos’s remaining assets and their
transfer to new state-controlled owners by
replacing an uncooperative Yukos management
with an administrator effectively appointed by the
Tax Ministry and Rosneft.” (SoC J 173.)

136. The Respondent, on the other hand, defends the
initiation of the bankruptcy proceedings, asserting that:

“there was no subterfuge or impropriety in connection
with the Russian bankruptcy proceeding, which was
conducted in full conformity with Russian bankruptcy
law.” (SoD { 332.)

137. First, neither the Claimants nor Professor
Westbrook “cite[d] a single legal provision or procedural
requirement of Russian law that might have been
violated.” (SoD J 343.)

138. Second, Yukos’ bankruptcy was inevitable
because Yukos was unable to meet its debts as they came
due. Indeed, Yukos’ management had filed a voluntary
petition for bankruptcy in the United States on
14 December 2004.

139. Third, Rosneft’s obligation to purchase the
consortium’s debt was not dependent on the Société
Générale consortium initiating bankruptcy proceedings
against Yukos. The purchase price was payable on the
earlier of either 28 April 2006 or the second business day
following the initiation of bankruptcy proceedings against
Yukos. (As it later turned out, the bankruptcy
proceedings were initiated on 9 March 2006.)
Furthermore, the decision of the Société Générale
consortium to trigger Yukos’ bankruptcy was reasonable:

“The logic of the Assignment Agreement is clear.
Yukos was in default on a half billion dollar
obligation to western banks. The SocGen
Consortium had proceeded to obtain a court
judgment recognizing that obligation. That court
judgment was a necessary predicate to instigating
Yukos's bankruptcy. Thus, because the SocGen
Consortium (but not Rosneft) had a judgment in
hand, Rosneft apparently agreed to acquire the
credit more quickly if the SocGen Consortium
placed Yukos in bankruptcy (thereby avoiding any
need for Rosneft to seek a court judgment itself in
order to be in a position to initiate a bankruptcy
against Yukos.)” (SoD ] 351.)

140, Fourth, the Rosneft-Société Générale consortium
agreement was not confidential: it was “an open, arms-
length deal” that was disclosed by Rosneft in its US
GAAP financials. (SoD {[ 352.) Although the agreement
contained a confidentiality clause, such clauses are normal
in commercial agreements and this one was temporary in
nature,

141. The Tribunal has carefully considered each of the
Respondent’s defences, but is ultimately unpersuaded by
them. The issue here is not one of the legality of the
bankruptcy proceedings, nor their conformity with
Russian bankruptcy regulations. Rather, it is whether the
steps that were taken can properly and fairly be
characterised as part of an ordinary process of collecting
taxes. In the Tribunal’s view, they cannot fairly be so
characterised, particularly when viewed against the
broader chronology of which they form part (as
summarised later in this section). This conclusion is not
overcome by the Respondent’s various technical analyses
of the consortium agreement.

(B) The rejection of the management
restructuring plan

142. The Tax Ministry and Rosneft were Yukos’ largest
creditors, between them controlling 94 percent of the
votes at the first meeting of creditors, which took place on
20 and 25 July 2006.

143. Even at this late stage, Yukos proposed a
restructuring pursuant to which it would immediately sell
off $15.7 billion worth of core assets, and use $1.5 billion
held in the Netherlands to pay off other creditors —
including Rosneft as the Société Générale consortium’s
assignee. This would have left Yukos with core assets
valued at $20.5 billion, which the Yukos management
team explained could generate some $3 billion per year to
pay off the remaining recognised claims.

144. The Claimants maintain that Russia used its
control of the meeting of creditors to ensure that this
restructuring proposal put forward by Yukos’
management was rejected, and instead that the decision
was taken to liquidate the company’s remaining assets:

“The restructuring proposal was considered at the
meeting of creditors held on 20 and 25 July. Out of
@ total of 23 creditors represented at the meeting, 6
cast ballots in favour of accepting the restructuring
proposal and three abstained. The proposal was
nonetheless rejected by an overwhelming majority
of the debt-weighted votes because it was opposed
by the Tax Ministry, Rosneft and YNG, together
with one minor creditor. This decision was upheld
by the Moscow Arbitrazh Court on 5 August 2006,
and opened the way for the distress sale at auction
of Yukos’s remaining assets between June 2006 and
November 2007.” (SoC J 177.)

145. The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s
proffered reasons for the creditors’ rejection of the
restructuring proposal are simply “post hoc
rationalization[s].” (SoRep JJ 364-65, 367, 370.)

146. The Respondent, however, maintains that the
decision to liquidate fully complied with Russian law.
Furthermore, there were reasonable grounds for Yukos’
creditors to prefer immediate liquidation and recovery of
their claims to a plan that left their fate in the hands of
Yukos’ management. In particular, the management
restructuring plan: (i) proposed to pay Yukos’ debts over
two years, but there was no assurance that Yukos would
succeed; (ii) proposed to allow Yukos to retain its core
assets, leaving the creditors to satisfy themselves with
low-value and high-risk assets; and (iii) lacked
appropriate evidence to support Yukos’ valuation of its
assets. (SoD 9] 363-64.) The creditors also feared that
“Yukos’s management would continue their dissipation of
assets if left in charge of Yukos.” (SoRej ¥ 292.) In
short, there was nothing unusual about the creditors’

decision to reject Yukos’ rehabilitation plan, as illustrated
by Russian practice:

“In Russia, only a de minimis number of Russian
bankruptcy filings ever enter _ financial
rehabilitation procedures. For instance, in 2002, of
the 94,531 insolvency claims successfully filed in
the Russian Federation, none entered financial
rehabilitation. In 2003, only 10 of the 9,695
insolvency cases filed entered rehabilitation. In
2004, the statistic is just 29 out of 10,093. And in
2005, the year before the Yukos creditors’ meeting,
only 32 out of 25,643 insolvency cases entered
financial rehabilitation. Of all the cases that
entered rehabilitation between 2002 and 2005, only
three resulted in the debtor actually discharging its
debt. Rehabilitation plans are only accepted in the
most extraordinary circumstances—and certainly
not when the company’s plan is based on
speculative, unrealistic figures, presented by a
management that had repeatedly acted in an openly
hostile manner towards its creditors.” (SoRej

q{ 285.)

147. Once again, the issue is not whether the rejection
of the management restructuring plan, and the decision to
liquidate, fully complied with Russian law or practice as a
technical matter. Rather, the issue is how these events are
fairly to be characterised. Judged in abstract, the
Respondent’s submissions to justify the preferences of the
Yukos creditors (i.e. immediate liquidation and recovery
of their claims) are understandable. But the Tribunal’s
enquiry cannot be compartmentalized in this way and, as
set out later in this section, once set against the wider
context, the choices and actions of Yukos’ main creditors
clearly appear part of an overall confiscatory scheme.

(C) The liquidation auctions

148. The Claimants maintain that the Russian
Federation manipulated the liquidation auctions to ensure

that it paid an effective price of zero for Yukos’ remaining
assets. The starting prices at the liquidation auctions, say
the Claimants, were set lower than the independent
valuations that the court-appointed manager was required
by law to obtain. Furthermore, there was an absence of
genuinely competitive bidders at the liquidation auctions:

“In an insolvency auction properly advertised and
conducted, with neither collusion nor intimidation
to affect the bidding, one would expect the presence
of a number of qualified bidders from among the
major oil companies as well as from some of the
numerous large independent companies in the
industry. One would anticipate vigorous bidding.
In the Yukos case, however, very few bidders
appeared at the auctions; those who did appear
were largely unknown to the industry’s expert
observers; and the bidding was short and generally
finished near the opening price. The end result of
the auctions was that the greater part of the value
of these assets was acquired, directly or indirectly,
by the Russian state petroleum instrumentalities.
This outcome is not what one would expect in a
properly conducted insolvency _ auction.”
(Westbrook Report, {] 18.)

149. At the merits hearing, Ms. Cheek further
elaborated on the significance of the absence of
competitive bidders:

“Many of the auctions... weren’t highly contested.
The ones for Transneft and Samaraneftegaz, the
two most valuable assets coming out of the
bankruptcy, the only bidders were Rosneft and
previously unknown entities that appeared to be set
up just so that there was a second bidder at the
auction. So by dollar value... Rosneft ends up
owning 75 per cent of Yukos’s assets that were
seized in auction by the state.

But that doesn’t tell the complete picture... [AJn
unknown company named Prana wins the auction
for Yukos’s headquarters but Rosneft basically

purchases these assets shortly after the auctions
take place, increasing Rosneft’s ownership to 84
per cent of Yukos’s former assets .. .

[Yukos’ Sibneft] shares were auctioned off as part
of the bankruptcy process and while they were
purchased by Italian company ENI, ENI had
executed an agreement with Gazprom, Russia’s
state gas company, whereby Gazprom could
exercise its option to buy that 20 per cent stake in
Sibneft. It ultimately exercised that option.
Therefore, those assets as well end up in the hands
of the Russian state.

So when you add up these various pieces at the end
of the day .. . the Russian Federation has ended up
with 93 percent of Yukos Oil Company.” (T:Day
1:192:5-25, 193:1-10.)

150. The Claimants also contend that Yukos’
shareholders received no benefit from the sale of the
company’s assets because the Russian Federation
manufactured liabilities sufficient to absorb all of the
revenue generated by the liquidation auctions. The
Claimants posit that “Russia ensured that it paid a net
price of zero for Yukos: whatever Rosneft and Gazprom
paid for Yukos assets in the auctions found its way back
into the Russian Federation’s pockets as repayment for
fictional liabilities.” (SoC J 185.)

151. The Respondent, however, insists that the
liquidation auctions complied with both Russian law and
international practice.

152. First, the starting prices used at the liquidation
auctions were, in accordance with Russian law, based on
the market value of the auctioned property as determined
by the Roseko Consortium.  Tellingly, the Roseko
Consortium’s conclusions and methodologies were never
challenged by Yukos’ creditors or shareholders.

153. Second, the price achieved at each liquidation
auction was higher than the starting price. Moreover, the

auctions cumulatively produced approximately $2.3
billion more in proceeds than the estimate in the Yukos
management rehabilitation plan.

154. Third, there was in fact genuine competition at the
liquidation auctions. Russian law requires a minimum of
two participants, and this requirement was met for all of
the liquidation auctions. Furthermore, the court-appointed
bankmptcy manager took the following actions to
promote auction attendance: (i) he publicly announced
the auctions thirty days in advance; and (ii) he placed no
restrictions on participation in the auctions. By contrast,
the Claimants are to blame for their “threats to impose a
lifetime of litigation on the successful bidders” that
contributed to the poor turnout and correspondingly low
bids. (SoD ¥{ 375.)

155. Finally, the significance of the fact that Rosneft or
Rosneft affiliates won the majority of the liquidation
auctions is unclear:

“To win approximately one-half of the auctions,
Rosneft borrowed US$22 billion from world
leading financial institutions and paid for the assets
acquired. The fact that Rosneft succeeded in
approximately one-half of the auctions simply
means it valued the assets more highly than others.
It also means Rosneft did not participate or prevail
in the other half. The remaining eight (out of
seventeen) auctions were won by private bidders —
including Enineftegaz, Monte Valle, JVP
Investments, Novatek, Prana, Tsentrinvest-Tradig,
and Promneftstroy — who collectively paid a total of
RUR 276,265,364,044 for the assets they
acquired.” (SoD J 378.)

156. The Tribunal is unpersuaded, as a technical matter,
that the liquidation auctions were conducted in breach of
Russian law or practice, and accepts the various and
detailed submissions of the Respondent in this regard.

157. But the Tribunal also notes that, as a result of
these auctions, “at the end of the day . . . the Russian

Federation has ended up with 93 percent of Yukos Oil
Company.” (T:Day 1:193:1-10.)

158. As summarised below, the overall chronology of
which the liquidation auctions form part, casts them and
their outcome in a particular light. After careful
consideration of the entire record, the Tribunal concludes
that, as with the preceding events, the liquidation auctions
were part of the same overall scheme of confiscation. In
this regard, the Tribunal’s findings are consistent with
those of the RosInvest Tribunal (| 567, 574.) The
ECHR’s finding to the contrary — i.e., that Yukos failed to
prove that the Russian Federation “had misused those
[enforcement] proceedings with a view to destroying the
company and taking control of its assets” — must be
understood as based on a heightened requirement of
“incontrovertible and direct proof,” given the “wide
margin of appreciation” a State enjoys under Protocol No.
1 to the European Convention on Human Rights. ({[] 659,
663, 665-66.)

(D) Conclusion

159. The present Tribunal endorses the conclusion of
the RosInvest tribunal, which was unable to “find any
evidence on file sufficiently showing that these
[liquidation] auctions were either breaching Russian law
or even breaching the higher standards to be applied under
the IPPA.” ({ 535.) This Tribunal agrees. The Claimants
in this proceeding have failed to demonstrate that the
manner in which the bankruptcy and _ liquidation
proceedings were commenced or conducted violated
Russian law.

160. But as already noted several times, that is not the
present issue. The Tribunal in this case is concerned with
whether Yukos’ tax delinquency was actually a pretext for
the seizing of Yukos’ assets and the transfer of them to
Rosneft or one of its affiliates. And on this point, the
Tribunal must take into account all the circumstances of
this case.

161. Some of the key features of this part of the
chronology which have been emphasised by the
Claimants, and which have persuaded the Tribunal in its
characterisation of the Respondent’s conduct, may be
distilled, briefly, as follows.

162. Yukos managed (under protest) to pay nearly two-
thirds of the initial $3.5 billion levy by the end of August
2004. Given the disparity between the residual amount
due and the value of YNG, which accounted for 60% of
Yukos’ production and had been seized in mid-July, the
Tax Ministry set about raising new tax claims. These
were assessed in tranches of multiple billions of dollars,
e.g., on 16 November, when Yukos was ordered to pay
$6.8 billion the next day. Meanwhile, Yukos’ staff
lawyers and independent counsel were arrested and
charged with embezzlement.

163. YNG was ultimately sold at auction for $9.3
billion, not much more than half of the value appraised by
the Respondent’s own advisers, Dresdner Kleinwort
Wasserstein, to an unknown company (BFG).

164. But even with the loss of YNG, Yukos’ remaining
assets were capable of producing more than half a million
barrels of oil per day - a value of macroeconomic
dimensions. Bankruptcy is conventionally understood as
the resolution of conflicting claims by creditors. Yet
Yukos had only one creditor that counted: the Russian
Federation, with 94% of the vote in the debtor’s
collegium. The bankruptcy resulted in the eviction of
Yukos’ management and its replacement by a bankruptcy
administrator, Mr Rebgun.

165. Not only did the Respondent then reject the
management restructuring plan, but Mr Rebgun, the
administrator, chose not to file the paperwork which
would have entitled Yukos, under the very requalification
of intergroup transfers which had led to such massive tax
assessments, to recover in excess of $10 billion in VAT
refunds from exports now attributed to it.

166. Nor did Mr Rebgun seek to test yet another tax
assessment, this one on account of FY2004 in the amount
of $3.7 billion. He simply added it as an additional debt
to the Tax Ministry.

167. By mid 2006, of course, the international oil
markets were forcefully ascendant and Yukos’ book value
was vastly understated. Yet Yukos’ remaining assets
were auctioned off in August, with Rosneft successfully
bidding in 9 of the 17 auctions; these were the important
ones, representing 75% of the value, including the two
remaining large Yukos-producing assets, Transneft and
Samaraneftegaz. One of the other successful bidders was
an unknown company by the name of Prana, which
acquired Yukos’ headquarters buildings ~ but promptly
resold them to Rosneft with the result that Rosneft in fact
ended up with 84% of the assets in bankruptcy.

168. On 23 November, Yukos was removed from the
register of companies; its shares were legally
extinguished.

169. In due course, another State-owned entity,
Gazprom, acquired a final major Yukos asset, namely its
20% share in Sibneft, which had been purchased by a
third party and in turn had granted an option to Gazprom
to resell them. That option was exercised. In the end, the
result of Yukos’ bankruptcy was to put 93% of its assets
into the hands of State-owned entities.

170. This sequence of events took place in
circumstances where (1) the Tax Ministry had no
competing creditors with whose interests a reconciliation
was necessary, and (2) the interests of the Russian
Federation were at any rate protected by the asset freeze.
Had Yukos been given a moment to catch its breath and to
encumber or disperse of its assets in an orderly fashion, it
appears that it could have paid its tax bills, since its
fundamental asset portfolio was sound. That is how a
legitimately operating tax authority would have
proceeded.

171. Further, under the law (Article 321 of the
Arbitrazh Procedure Code) the tax authorities had three
years to enforce its assessments, That would have given
Yukos a respite until some time in 2007. Instead, its
prime asset - YNG — was seized and sold at an auction by
December 2004. As the ECHR put it, at JJ 656-7 of its
judgment in Yukos v. Russia:

“\.. the authorities were unyieldingly inflexible as
to the pace of the enforcement proceedings, acting
very swiftly and constantly refusing to concede to
the applicant company’s demands for additional
time .... the Court finds that the domestic
authorities failed to strike a fair balance between
the legitimate aims sought and the measures
employed.”

The ECHR did not reach this conclusion without having
given some weight to Russia’s arguments to the effect that
the tax authorities were operating under procedural
constraints. The present Tribunal is not persuaded, having
had the benefit of extensive debates and documentation,
that there was a need to recognise such constraints. On
any view, the enforcement of the tax assessments was a
complex operation involving massive financial stakes,
which any tax collection agency anywhere, if operating
rationally and respectfully of the taxpayer’s rights, would
have conducted with the greatest care to maximise both
recovery and preservation of enterprise value. The
Respondent’s suggestion that it was necessary to operate
with utmost speed by reason of its own regulations is
powerfully counter-intuitive, and in fact not born out by
the evidence.

172. The timing of key events bears repeating. The ex
parte freeze on all of Yukos’ assets took place on 15 April
2004, the very day after the Tax Ministry’s demand for
$3.5 billion in taxes on account of FY2000. The next day
was imposed as the deadline for voluntary payment. A
writ of execution was issued on 30 June, and on 14 July
Yukos’ shares in three subsidiaries, first and foremost
YNG, but also Samaraneftegaz and Tomskneft, were

seized by execution officials. Within days (in fact on 20
July) the Ministry of Justice announced its intention to sell
YNG to satisfy the tax judgment.

173. This announcement was obviously something of a
bombshell in the industry, in terms of suggesting to the
market that Yukos was collapsing. It was so precipitate,
in the Tribunal’s view, as to exclude any innocent
explanation. This treatment of a major force of the
national economy could not reasonably have been a matter
of inadvertent clumsiness.

174. The three-year limit, the Respondent argues,
should not be understood as a brake on enforcement
proceedings. The question it put to its Russian law expert,
Mr Rozenberg, was whether under Article 321 the Tax
Ministry “could and should have waited up to three years
before commencing the execution procedure against
Yukos.” But this is not the issue at all. The Tribunal
takes for granted that tax authorities in a good system of
governance could seek to collect monies due to the
Treasury with expeditiousness — but also with rational
care and respect for the rights of the taxpayer.

175. Such a rational arrangement was in fact worked
out with Rosneft, whose own tax liabilities were, as
appears from its consolidated financial statements,
consensually scheduled for repayment quarterly over five
years. Yukos contends today that it had cash flows
sufficient to pay the assessed taxes. (In hindsight, this
assertion is made all the more plausible having regard to
the evolution of oil prices since then.) Whatever the
arguments might have been as to Yukos’ solvency, the
fact is that it was a gigantic enterprise whose valuation
would have required extensive study. The Respondent
may have marshalled arguments since then as to why
Yukos was not as solid as is contended by its old owners,
but what is missing — and thus supports the plain inference
that the Respondent’s objective was the subjugation of
Yukos, not the orderly collection of normal taxes — is its
inability to show such an investigation preceding its
decision, in effect, to dismantle Yukos. Indeed, as the

Claimants stress, Yukos had almost entirely paid off the
2000 tax assessment, i.e. the raison d’étre of the seizure in
the first place, by the time YNG was auctioned off. The
valuation commissioned by the Respondent itself
suggested that YNG was worth many multiples of the
Yukos assessment on account of TY2000.

176. The Respondent argues today that Yukos could
have solved the problem by causing its subsidiaries to sell
off their assets and pay the proceeds as dividend to Yukos.
It is however implausible to contemplate that the Russian
authorities would have allowed the value of the very
assets that were frozen to be diluted in this fashion.

177. Based on the extensive record in this proceeding,
the Tribunal concludes that Yukos’ tax delinquency was
indeed a pretext for seizing Yukos assets and transferring
them to Rosneft. As discussed above, this finding
supports the Claimants’ contention that the Russian
Federation’s real goal was to expropriate Yukos, and not
to legitimately collect taxes.

7.4 The relevant enquiry

178. The debate in this case is not about whether the
Respondent engaged in an illegal expropriation, but
whether its measures were in fact expropriatory, within
the scope of Article 6 of the BIT. If so, the BIT
recognises the duty of compensation, and sanctions its
failure through the decisions of tribunals such as the
present one.

179. The notion that states have a considerable margin
of discretion in enacting and enforcing tax laws should not
lead to any confused idea that they have a discretion as to
whether or not to comply with an international treaty.
True enough, as Rosinvest put it, “States have a wide
latitude in imposing and enforcing taxation laws even if
resulting in substantial deprivation without compensation”
{{ 580). Yet there is a world of difference between
incidental detriment, even of a substantial nature, and
purposeful dispossession. It is no answer for a state to say
that its courts have used the world “taxation” — any more

than the word “bankruptcy” — in describing judgments by
which they effect the dispossession of foreign investors.
If that were enough, investment protection through
international law would likely become an illusion, as
states would quickly learn to avoid responsibility by
dressing up all adverse measures, perhaps expropriation
first of all, as taxation. When agreeing to the jurisdiction
of international tribunals, states perforce accept that those
jurisdictions will exercise their judgment, and not be
stumped by the use of labels.

180. Moreover, in contradistinction to Yukos v. Russia,
which arose in a forum which recognises the minimum
human rights that exist irrespective of specific promises to
the plaintiff, and indeed allows actions by a national
against his own State, in this case it behoved the
Respondent to consider that its treatment of Yukos would
affect the rights of Spanish nationals, protected by specific
treaty obligations.

181. The preceding observations are not meant to
suggest that international tribunals should quickly reach
the conclusion that ostensible tax measures are in fact
compensable takings. To the contrary, the presumption
must be that measures are bona fide, unless there is
convincing evidence that, upon a true characterisation,
they constitute a taking. Given the infinite variety of
forms which can be given to a process having the result of
expropriation, the effectiveness of the rule of international
law in this regard necessarily requires, in each case, a
comprehensive assessment of the factual circumstances
that have led to the loss of which a claimant complains.

182. As Professor Christie wrote in his familiar article
in 1962 (“What Constitutes a Taking of Property under
International Law?” 1962 BYIL 307):

“it is evident that the question of what kind of
interference short of outright expropriation
constitutes a ‘taking’ under international law
presents a situation where the common law method
of case by case development is pre-eminently the

best method, in fact probably the only method, of
legal development.”

183. In recent years, the texts of investment treaties
illustrate the concrete implications of this. For example,
the identical Annexes on Expropriation to the RTAs
concluded between the US and Australia, Chile, Central
America, Morocco, and Singapore, as well as to the 2004
US Model BIT, which provide that:

“the determination of whether an action or series of
actions by a Party, in a specific fact situation,
constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a
case-by-case, fact-based inquiry .....”

184. The Tribunal has noted the distinguished
RosInvest arbitrators’ overall conclusion to the effect that:

“the totality of Respondent’s measures were
structured in such a way as to remove Yukos’s
assets from the control of the company and the
individuals associated with Yukos. They must be
seen as elements in the cumulative treatment of
Yukos for what seems to have been the intended
purpose (J 112) ... [Yukos] was subjected to
relentless and inflexible attacks ... [that] can only
be understood as stages under a common
denominator in a pattern to destroy Yukos and gain
control over its assets” ({ 621).

185. This key passage led the arbitrators to conclude
that the Respondent’s measures, “seen in their cumulative
effect towards Yukos, were an unlawful expropriation”
under the relevant treaty.

186. In this case, the Tribunal’s mandate is not to
decide whether there has been an unlawful expropriation,
but whether there has been an expropriation at all. This
conclusion does not require findings of subjective intent
or animus, as suggested by the words “purpose” and
“relentless”, Clearly the Ros/Invest holding comports a

finding of expropriation — qui peut le plus peut le moins —
and the conclusion of the present award, which is
constrained to answer only the lesser question, is therefore
consistent both with Ros/nvest’s conclusion and the
aggregating approach of its analysis of the relevant events.

75 Adequate compensation
(A) The Claimants’ approach

187. The Claimants argue that they should be
compensated in an amount equal to their proportionate
share of Yukos’ market value on 23 November 2007 as it
would have been but for the Respondent’s expropriatory
measures. The Claimants together held 73,000 shares (or
more precisely their equivalent in ADRs); Yukos as a
whole had some 2.2 billion outstanding shares. Yukos’
overall value, they say, would have been $83 billion,
leading to proportionate compensation to them in the
amount of $2,625,810, plus interest.

188. This compensation purports to be consonant with
the customary international law standard for recovery in
the event of lawful expropriation and Article 6 of the BIT.
(The Claimants conceded in the jurisdictional phase of
this arbitration that they could not, under the terms of the
BIT, seek compensation for unlawful expropriation. See
Section 6.1.)

189. The date of 23 November 2007 corresponds to the
“time of the taking” or, in this case, the date when Yukos
was removed from the Unified Register of Companies in
the wake of the end of the bankruptcy proceedings as
pronounced by the Moscow Arbitrazh Court.

190. The Respondent questions the date of 23
November 2007, asking “how Claimants can argue that
the alleged expropriation occurred in November 2007,
which was several years after most of the alleged
expropriatory events of which they now complain, and
over a year after they gave notice of their expropriation
claim.” (SoRej ] 443.) The Respondent further asserts
that as it denies that “any expropriation occurred at all, it

is certainly not incumbent on the Respondent to put
forward alternative dates on which such a non event may
have occurred.” (SoD J 477, n. 822.) If the Respondent
could propose more appropriate dates, it might prudently
have advanced such contentions in the alternative, rather
than simply denying that its measures had the effect of an
expropriation. Having rejected that denial, the Tribunal
accepts the Claimants’ logic in putting forward the date as
23 November 2007.

191. The notion of “expected” value refers to the fact
that the market value on 23 November 2007 was nil, and
therefore must be compensated by reference to what one
may conclude the valuation of Yukos as a going concern
would likely have been if the business had been
unimpeded by the Respondent’s expropriatory conduct.
Compensation “should exclude any decline in value
attributable to the threat of a taking”, so the Claimants
argue, and therefore “the appropriate methodology is for
the Tribunal to base its valuation on the last price before
the threat of a taking rendered the stock price an
unreliable indication of Yukos’ worth.” (SoC J 217).

192. The Claimants put forward 14 April 2004 as the
date of the “last reliable stock price” for Yukos, $14 per
share, because this was immediately before the news of
the Tax Ministry’s tax claim for Y2000 and the asset
freeze of 15 April, resulting in a significant departure in
the trend of Yukos’ stock price.

193. The Claimants rely on the expert evidence of
Professor Richard S. Ruback of the Harvard Business
School, who proposed a value of $35.97 on 23 November
2007 by considering the relationship between the
evolution of Yukos’ share price as compared to a cohort
of four of its Russian oil and gas competitors prior to 14
April 2004, and then projecting that relationship from 14
April 2004 to 23 November 2007 in order to estimate
Yukos’ share value in the absence of the Respondent's
measures.

194. Professor Ruback also “confirmed” his estimate by
looking to the value of Rosneft, which went public in July

80

2006 and which acquired most of Yukos’ assets. His use
of three different metrics suggests to him that the market
value of “legacy-Yukos assets owned by Rosneft” was
somewhere between $72-$91 billion at the valuation date,
to which should be added the proceeds from the
liquidation auctions of other Yukos assets, leading to a
valuation of Yukos in the range of $83-$102 billion.

{B) Comparison with RosInvest

195, The Tribunal finds it somewhat difficult to follow
RosInvest’s reasoning with respect to the discount applied
to the valuation of the investors’ shareholding inasmuch
as it focused on their having made a “speculative
investment.” (| 668 et seq.) The word “speculative” has
no defined meaning that allows one to identify
“non-speculative” investments. All investments are in
some sense ultimately speculative. Investors’ appetites
depend on how much they are putting at risk, how much
may be gained, and the chances of success. Even though
the odds are identical, more people are willing to “invest”
$1 for a remote chance at winning $10,000 than are
willing to “invest” $10,000 for an equally minute chance
at winning $100 million.

196. On the other hand, putting aside the word
speculative and focusing on the analysis in RosInvest, one
returns to familiar territory. As that tribunal indicated in ]
666, the arbitrators accepted “Claimant’s assertion that it
made an investment at such a point in time when the
market had in fact overreacted to transient events and the
price of the shares was unjustifiably low” but rejected its
overly “optimistic expectations regarding the future
development of the value of the investment.” This is a
straightforward reflection of the commonplace
phenomenon that claimants tend to place a high value on
the property of which they have been deprived.

197. In RosInvest, the final claim was for US$232.7
million (excluding interest), being the alleged loss of
shareholding value as of 15 August 2007, which the
Claimants identified as the date on which the
Respondents’ expropriation of Yukos’ assets was

complete. That case involved a number of features which
are different from those of this arbitration, such as the
manner of RosInvest’s acquisitions of its Yukos shares,
and possible others which are not apparent without full
access to the record in that case. Still, it is evident that the
claim essentially posited a pro-rata share of the
hypothetical value of Yukos but for the Respondent’s
measures. RosInvest argued, as the Award puts it in J
645, that to allow the Respondent to “retain more than
96% of Claimant’s share of the value of Yukos assets . . .
would simply reward Respondent for its unlawful
actions”. Still, after noting that the dates of RosInvest’s
two purchases of Yukos shares — in the total amount of
7,000,000 shares— were 16 November and | December
2004, when “the market had ‘priced in’ the likelihood and
effect of the Russian Federation’s actions in respect of
Yukos” ({ 665), the Tribunal limited its award to the
principal amount of $3.5m, which is what the arbitrators
found to be its undisputed purchase price for the shares
(paid only on 24 January 2007, for reasons not relevant
here). (§[ 675.)

198. If one applies his approach in the present case to
RosInvest, Professor Ruback would apparently have
valued RosInvest’s shareholdings at $251,790,000 (albeit
as of 23 November 2007, rather than 15 August 2007 as
the Ros/Invest arbitrators did). In other words, the actual
RosInvest award was only 1.39% of what Professor
Ruback suggested was correct. Contrariwise, it might be
said that the RosInvest Tribunal’s approach to valuation, if
applied to the present case, would have led to the very
modest recovery of $663,050 — simply taking the present
Claimants’ purchase price for their shares as “the best
reflection of the damages.” (4 675.)

199. The reason why it would be improper to apply
Professor Ruback’s approach to the Rostnvest situation
(an approach which Professor Ruback himself has of
course not endorsed) may be expressed in a single word:
timing. At the time of Roslnvest’s purchases, Yukos was
all but doomed and retained only the residual value of
hope for recovery through a process of legal claims. At

the time of the present Claimants’ purchases, on the other
hand, significant events leading to Yukos’ demise had not
yet occurred. For example, the Claimants purchased all of
their Yukos stock before Russia seized Yukos’ shares in
YNG; before Russia announced that it would sell YNG;
before Yukos exhausted its appeals against the $3.5
billion tax claim for 2000; and before the tax authorities
imposed billions of dollars in additional tax liabilities
against Yukos for the 2001 to 2003 tax years. (SoRep
464.) It is a familiar tenet of international law that
compensation cannot be reduced on the basis that
anticipation of expropriating conduct has depressed the
market value of the asset.

200. RosInvest bought its Yukos’ shares for an average
price of less than US$1 per share in November and
December 2004. The last of the present Claimants’
purchases was on 7 July that year. Those months made a
large difference.

201. By way of perspective, in early 2002, Yukos’
shares had traded at around $10. The first of the various
Claimants’ purchases was made on 19 December 2003
and the price was still at $10.80. Despite clouds on the
horizon, Quasar de Valores’ purchases on 20 February
2004 were at $12.45, and the price climbed further, to
around $15, in the following two weeks. Although the tax
claims against Yukos depressed the price to around $6 by
early June, an announcement by President Putin on
17 June that there was no intent to bankrupt Yukos
resulted in a 35% share increase on 17 June. Two other
Claimants bought shares on 7 July, but the announcement
by the Ministry of Justice on 20July _ that
Yuganskneftegaz would be auctioned led to a 17% drop.
Still, the bottom did not fall out until December, when the
auction was actually carried out. Since then the share
price has been an almost flat line, sloping slowly in the
downward direction from $1 until 23 November 2007.
The last price at which it was possible to purchase Yukos
shares was $0.23.

202. In sum, the RosInvest purchase in December 2003
was very much of a different nature than those of the
Claimants here. The former involved a bet that something
might be salvaged, somehow, from the Yukos carcass —
perhaps buying at $.50 to sell at $1 — with no prospect of
resuscitating Yukos as a going concern, but might still be
generate 100% profit. The Spanish purchases, on the
other hand, assumed that Yukos would not be treated
unlawfully by the State, and that Yukos’ assets and
potential as an enterprise could overcome the losses
caused by its exceptional tax debts as of that date. This
assumption they were entitled to make, and to rely upon
as a matter of international law by virtue of the BIT.

203. Put another way, the Claimants’ purchases came at
a time when the Respondent’s series of actions against
Yukos was still far from having run its course. The
Claimants cannot be faulted for having relied on the
proposition that the Respondent would in the end adopt a
different course than the de facto expropriation of Yukos.
What they bought (Yukos shares in the December
2004-July 2004 period) was assuredly not a stake in an
untroubled concern managed in unimpeded fashion by a
cohort of stellar managers, successfully exploiting a
dazzling array of hydrocarbon assets. Yukos’ managers
were under indictment and its debts were mounting. The
market reflected that bitter change in fortunes. But what
was left was still of considerable potential value,
assuming the corporate body was allowed to mobilise its
remaining resources without unlawful interference. The
value of that residual potential is what the Claimants were
free to seek to capture; and when that legitimate
expectation was defeated by the ultimate completion of an
uncompensated expropriation their BIT’s protection was
enlivened.

(C) The proper measure

204. The above discussion suggests that further analysis
is required to answer the central, deceptively simple
question: what was the value of the “investment”
destroyed?

205. This determination cannot be made by simple
reference to the underlying value of the assets owned by
Yukos. The Claimants were minority shareholders with
exceedingly little power to make the policy decisions,
such as dividends versus investment, that would enable
them individually to access that underlying value. Their
value was derived from those assets only in an indirect
fashion, ie. the prospect of dividends or share
appreciation resulting from the corporate  entity’s
successful exploitation of its assets. Those prospects
could be affected, for better or worse, by factors such as
the quality of Yukos’ management, the effect of
governmental economic policies of legislation, and
obviously the vicissitudes of international markets.

206. One can therefore agree with Professor Ruback’s
basic premise that the value of a portfolio investment is
simply given by the market. One can also agree with the
Respondent’s criticism of Professor Ruback’s proposed
understanding of what “the market” here means, since it
involves both the selection of a reference date as being
that of “the last reliable stock price” and projections as to
the future market evolution.

207. Professor Ruback’s putative “last reliable stock
price”, the Respondent argues, was necessarily arbitrary.
There is force in this objection. True enough, 14 April
2004 was the day before an important event, but on what
basis could it be concluded that the selection of this
moment would purge the narrative of all improper conduct
of the Respondent? Why not 8 December 2003, when the
te-audit of Yukos’ Y2000 began? Why not 25 October
2003, when Mr Khodorkovsky was arrested? Why not the
much-discussed February 2003 meeting of oligarchs with
Mr Putin in the Kremlin, which Mr Aron testified was the
start of the personal “animosity” between him and
Mr Khodorkovsky? (T:Day 3:73:16.) Would not early
2002 be the safest “reliable price”, ie. before the earliest
of any arguable indications of Yukos being targeted by
official antagonism?

208. These questions are far from idle, because the
price of Yukos’ shares was well below $10 as of the
beginning of 2003. If one goes along with the $14 price
as of 14 April 2004 notwithstanding the presumably
adverse effects of Mr Khodorkovsky’s travails and the
gathering storm clouds of a major tax problem, need one
infer that there had been some significant unrelated
positive development which did much more than offset
them? The present Tribunal has not in fact been presented
with evidence of such a factor.

209. As for tracing a trajectory of the value of Yukos’
shares but for the Respondent’s conduct, one finds one’s
self in the familiar quandary of all who dream of
predicting the future value of publicly traded shares, Of
course Professor Ruback’s analysis is not a projection into
the future, because he wrote his opinions well after the
date of his valuation (23 November 2007), but it is still a
pure hypothesis, because it seeks to determine what would
have happened in a different past than that of reality.

210. It takes no great macroeconomic insights to
surmise that investors would have been attracted to a
major oil company at a time of rising international prices,
but this plausible assumption is hardly satisfactory as a
basis for establishing the quantum of damages. Professor
Ruback instead referred to a cohort of four of Yukos’
Russian competitors (LUKoil, Surgutneftegas, Tatneft,
and Bashneft). He established a ratio (“coefficient”)
between the returns of this cohort and those of Yukos over
the two years preceding 14 April 2004, and then (to
simplify) applied that ratio by comparison with the returns
actually earned by the cohort from 14 April 2004 to
23 November 2007.

211. The conceptual construct is impressive, but as the
Respondent points out involves a number of choices
which are matters of judgment rather than science. For
example, why a two-year period rather than any other
length of time to establish the relative profitability
coefficient? What is one to make of a major oil discovery
by one of the cohorts in the post-14 April 2004 period;

does it not give the extrapolated Yukos “price” an
unavoidable and undeserved boost? And what is to be
inferred from the omission of a constant term, one of the
“most obvious and widely used explanatory variables in
asset return models,” according to Professor Dow. (SoD
491.) The Respondent has ably articulated these
objections to the Claimants’ demonstration. The
Claimants, for their part, recognize that the Tribunal may
adjust Professor Ruback’s model by subtracting any taxes
that were legitimately owed by Yukos and any Yukos
assets that were removed from Russia by Yukos’ majority
shareholders and managers. (SoRep 9] 471-72.) (The
Tribunal notes that the Respondent and its expert,
Professor Dow, disagreed with the Claimants’
suggestion.) The Claimants also acknowledge that the use
of a constant term would decrease the predicted Yukos
stock price on 23 November 2007 from $35.97 to $33.22
using a 2-year window or $17.67 using a 1-year window.
(Second Expert Report of Professor Ruback, ¥ 12.)

212. These salvos cast doubt on the accuracy of the
forecast which is at the core of the Claimants’ quantum
analysis. Yet the Respondent’s presentation itself has a
critical flaw: it does not set forth an alternative, more
reliable forecast. The likely reason is obvious: while the
very nature of Professor Ruback’s approach leaves it open
to challenges as to its precision, macroeconomic
indicators make it overwhelmingly clear that the value of
Yukos’ shares would have substantially increased over the
relevant time frame. The required certitude is not as to a
precise number, but as to the reality of a substantial
deprivation for which the wrongdoer cannot escape
liability by insisting on its lack of detailed exactitude —
and a fortiori when it presents no better alternative
analysis.

213, Thus, there is no warrant to be dismissive of
Professor Ruback’s particular interest in Rosneft, which
after having acquired a preponderance of Yukos’ assets
was transformed into a publicly traded company in 2006,
and in connection therewith published an evaluation of its
assets. By reference to that valuation, Professor Ruback

finds concordance with his projection of what should have
been Yukos’ share value on 23 November 2007. This is
neither irrelevant nor unrealistic. Professor Dow, the
Respondent’s expert, testified very fairly that “sometimes
the market gives different valuations to apparently quite
similar assets inside different companies or even identical
assets inside different companies.” (T:Day 6:87:2.) This
limited criticism in fact confirms that the comparison is of
interest. It is a conventional wisdom of portfolio investors
that they go to great length to establish the value of
underlying assets as an indication of the true worth of
investments, finding advantage in thus seeking to avoid
the errors of perception and mood in the market.

214. There is nothing untoward about compensation
that reflects a profit to the Claimants by reference to their
price of acquisition. It is but the confirmation of
compelling market realities. In the spring of 2003, the
leading crude oil benchmarks reflected a price per barrel
of around US$20. By the end of the year 2007, the
number had shot up to $100. Half a year later, it had
further increased to $160. Although it has subsequently
fallen (and risen) over the intervening years, the US$20
benchmark seems of a distant age. In short, the year 2003
was a good year to have purchased shares in oil
companies at an advantageously low price. It would thus
also have been a good year for a state to expropriate an oil
company, looking at the matter from the sole perspective
of minimising the compensation. This the Respondent
could have done by a plain and simple decree to that
effect, duly motivated by governmental policy. Instead, it
engaged in a series of measures over many months,
resulting in the consummation of Yukos’ dismantlement
and effective expropriation at a time when the value of the
Claimants’ shareholdings had plainly appreciated. The
Respondent suffers no loss by virtue of the present award,
which comprises no element of a penalty for illegal
expropriation, which is beyond the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal (see Paragraph 45 above), The Respondent is
simply ordered to pay for what it took, valued at the time
of the taking, and without any consideration of the
benefits it may since have enjoyed by reason of its actions

~ whether in terms of pure revenue or in the achievement
of policy objectives. The Tribunal recognizes that certain
of the Claimants (i.e., Rovime and Quasar) purchased
their shares prior to 15 April 2004, the day of the “threat”
of expropriation, while the remaining Claimants (i.e.,
Orgor and GBI) purchased their shares after this date. But
this does not mean that “[nJeither Rovime/Quasar’s failure
to divest, nor Orgor/GBI’s making of their purchases in
the face of alleged expropriation, is compensable.” (SoD
4 473.) The Tribunal finds instead that the Claimants
“cannot be denied compensation for failing to predict
Russia’s expropriation of the company.” (SoRep { 462.)

215. In light of this discussion, it remains to attach a
number to the claim. It is trite law that an international
tribunal which has found liability and loss is not impeded
from granting compensation only because the latter cannot
be computed with certitude. One must simply admit that
one does not know exactly what the Claimants’
shareholding would have been worth had it not been
destroyed by the compensable measures in this case, and
then do one’s best to make a fair assessment that does not
penalise either side. (It is recalled that the claim is for
simple uncompensated expropriation, not unlawful
expropriation.) With the tools available to it, the Tribunal
effects a downward adjustment of the claim which is
intended to take into account the various challenges raised
against the claims. It does so — all the while admitting
that Professor Ruback’s model may well have been
validated by events but for the Respondent’s actions — by
replacing his $14 starting point (Yukos’ share price on 14
April 2004) with $10.80 (Yukos’ share price on 19
December 2003 when the Claimants made their first
purchase), leading to a predicted Yukos share price of
$27.76 as at 23 November 2007. This downward
adjustment of approximately 23% does not claim to
satisfy the rigours of corporate financial accounting; it
does not, for instance, reassess Professor Ruback’s
“competitors’ index” on the basis of the longer time frame
thus established. But under the present circumstances,
where the Respondent did not offer an alternative forecast
and the Claimants recognized the Tribunal’s authority to

adjust Professor Ruback’s model, it is the Tribunal’s view
that this downward adjustment more properly represents
the actual value of the Claimants’ shares but for the
Respondent’s expropriatory measures.

216. The Tribunal, as alluded to above, rejects the
Respondent’s argument that Professor Ruback’s valuation
of Yukos is “speculative” because “[a]fter Claimants
purchased their ADRs . . . the Yukos share price never
went close to US$35.97.” (SoD {| 492.) While it is true
that the Yukos share price never increased to $35.97 (or
$27.76, accounting for the Tribunal’s downward
adjustment), the reason is straightforward: the
Respondent never gave Yukos the opportunity. The
Tribunal refuses to ignore Professor Ruback’s economic
analysis simply because the Respondent’s drawn out
actions in expropriating Yukos suppressed the stock price,
particularly when the Respondent failed to present an
alternative valuation approach. Instead the Tribunal relies
on Professor Ruback’s model, while imposing a
downward adjustment anchored on a fixed date (and
corresponding Yukos stock price) in the record: 19
December 2003, when the Claimants made their first
purchase of Yukos stock, at a price of $10.80.

217. To be clear, the Tribunal has not made a finding
that 19 December 2003 is the date of the “last reliable
stock price.” Nor is 19 December 2003 the date that all of
the Claimants purchased all of their Yukos shares. It is
rather the date when the Yukos stock price was $10.80,
which was approximately 23% lower than the $14.00
stock price on 14 April 2004. (Arguably the Tribunal
could have selected 23 or 29 December 2003 when the
Yukos stock price was also $10.80.) While this
downward adjustment might lack precision, it is the
Tribunal’s view that under the present circumstances its
approach adequately compensates the Claimants for the
expropriation of their investments and avoids awarding a
windfall.

218. Based on their respective holdings (the equivalents
of their ADRs in ordinary shares); the Claimants’
individual recovery is therefore as follows, at

Qasar de Valores SICAYV S.A.

(11,000 shares) $305,360
Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A.

(34,000 shares) $943,840
GBI 9000. SICAV S.A. $499,680
(18,000 shares)

ALOS 34 S.L. $277,600
(10,000 shares)

219. The Respondent’s final objection to the claim is
that the quantum of recovery in this case must in any
event be reduced by reference to the evidence of the
Claimants’ behaviour as investors, which was said to be
focused upon speculation in distressed stock, with the
investors manifestly willing to dispose of or reacquire
their shares at a moment’s notice (so-called “flipping”).
Although there is evidence of some of the Claimants
having gone in and out of a position in Yukos prior to
purchasing the final contingent of shares which were
rendered worthless by the extinction of Yukos, there is
nothing about such investments — once made — that
requires a different approach to the quantification of
damages. In other words, once an investment qualifies for
protection under the treaty (an issue upon which all
Parties have previously made their submissions, and
which was addressed in the Tribunal’s Award on
Preliminary Objections), there is no basis then to import
some alternative method of quantification of damages, by
reference to the assumed future intentions of the owners
of the property rights in question, Shareholdings in
corporate entities represent stakes in their assets and
goodwill, valued by reference to the anticipation of
income streams going into the indefinite future. The
possibility that individual shareholders, for an infinite
variety of reasons, may choose to trade their holdings

does not change the value of such rights for the time
being, or the approach as a matter of law to the
quantification of loss. Indeed, if anything, the liquidity of
the assets in question, in and of itself, is likely to be a
significant element in their value.

8. COSTS

220. The Claimants seek an award of costs in the
overall amount of US$14,572,671.57. The Respondent
asks for US$9,412,260.73. (The unusual proportionality
between these claims and the claim on the merits - of
some $2.6 million — is to be understood by reference to
the circumstances described in Paragraphs 31-34 above).

221. The Claimants have, broadly, prevailed. One
might look at isolated incidents in the arbitration in
connection with which the Claimants were either
unsuccessful or created unnecessary complications, and
effect reductions on account thereof. Still, the overall
result is a finding of liability and an order for
compensation. Articles 43 and 44 of the SCC Rules, as
well as Section 42 of the Swedish Arbitration Act 1999,
provide support for the proposition that the prevailing
party is entitled to recover costs incurred by it. The
Claimants’ petition for costs may thus be considered as
advanced in the ordinary way.

222. But this is no ordinary case, since it is admittedly
entirely financed by a third party, Menatep.

223. The usual arguments about the recoverability of
costs where a party’s participation in a case has been
financed by a third party are inapposite here, because such
third-party financing is typically part of a legally
enforceable bargain under which the prevailing party in
the arbitration has given up something in return for that
support. Here, it is conceded that there is no legal duty on
the part of the Claimants to hand over any recovery on
account of costs to Menatep. The argument that the latter
could successfully sue the Claimants in Spain under the
theory of unjust enrichment does not lie comfortably in
the mouth of the Claimants’ own counsel, who in fact also
acts for Menatep and indeed made it quite clear that while

the latter would be pleased to receive some recompense
from the Claimants, this would depend on the latters’
sense of moral obligation rather than a legal entitlement.
Indeed the unjust enrichment argument is hopelessly
circular; the duty to pay compensation cannot arise
because the Claimants would incur an obligation if
compensation were ordered.

224. The Respondent’s position is this: “{The
Claimants] have incurred no costs in this case. Stipulation
from counsel: they don’t have to pay a penny of any
recovery to counsel or to Menatep. It is a total free ride.”
(T:Day 9:13:1-4.) This straightforward proposition must
be right. On the one hand, the Claimants have neither
expended money nor incurred obligations on account of
the costs of pursuing their claims. On the other, Menatep,
the Claimants’ Good Samaritan (as it were), has no
standing before this Tribunal or indeed more generally
under the BIT.

225. The SCC has determined the costs of the
arbitration as follows: Mr Paulsson, fee of EUR 400,000
and reimbursable expenses of EUR 17,483; Judge Brower,
EUR 240,000 and EUR 13,216, respectively; Mr Landau,
EUR 240,000 and EUR 6,830, respectively; SCC
administrative fee, EUR 60,000. A party may bring an
action against the determination of the fees of the
arbitrators within three months from the date upon which
it receives the award. Such action shall be brought before
the District Court of Stockholm. The arbitrators have been
informed that in view of the failure of the Respondent to
provide the full half of the advance payments required to
meet these costs, the advances made on behalf of the
Claimants represent some 86% of the total, and that after
payment of these costs there remains a credit of EUR
134,043. Seeking to maintain consistency, as far as
possible, with the conclusion reached in Paragraph 224
with regard to the claim for direct costs, the arbitrators
have decided, not without some reluctance given the
Respondent's failure to meet what is in principle a joint
duty to provide equal advances, not to order payment by
the Respondent of the shortfall of its contribution. But

given that the Respondent has consented to these
proceedings under the terms of the BIT, and given the
outcome of the case, the arbitrators consider, in the
exercise of their discretion, that the partial advance made
by the Respondent shall be applied as a contribution to the
costs of the arbitration as detailed above (since this
amount will not be recovered by the Claimants, and since
the arbitrators would consider it wholly improper to
allocate the entirety of these costs to them as the
prevailing parties), with the effect that the parties’ liability
for costs is allocated in the amounts of EUR 837 655 to
the Claimants and EUR 139,874 to the Respondent, and
that the credit balance shall remitted to the Claimants.

9. INTEREST

226. The Claimants seek pre-award interest on the sums
awarded to them from 23 November 2007 until the date of
this Award. The BIT is silent on the subject of interest.
Nor do any of the provisions of Russian law relied upon
by either side address this matter. In these circumstances,
the Tribunal considers that the Claimants’ position should
prevail on the footing that the proper measure of
compensation under general principles of international
law should put them into the position they would have
been in if there had been compliance with the BIT, that is
to say compensation would have been paid to the
Claimants upon the expropriation of Yukos and they
would have been in a position to earn interest thereon.
The Tribunal accepts that as a matter of realism this
includes the compounding of interest; see John Gotanda,
“A study on Interest”, VI Dossiers of the ICC Institute of
World Business Law 19-28 (2008) and authorities cited
therein. The Respondent has not questioned the
Claimants’ assertion that as of 23 November 2007,
Russian sovereign medium-term dealt in US Dollars had a
yield of 6.434%, The date (which corresponds to the
expurgation of Yukos from the Russian United Register of
Companies) and the rate are therefore adopted by the
Tribunal.

-98-

10. ORDER

227. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal hereby
orders the Respondent to make the following immediate
payments:

US$305,360 to Quasor de Valores SICAV S.A.
US$943,840 to Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A.
US$$499,680 to GBI 9000 SICAV. S.A.

US$277,600 to ALOS 34 S.L.

228. Interest shall run on these four amounts at a rate of
6.434 % , compounded annually, from 23 November 2007
until the date of effective payment.

Done on the 20" day of July 2012.

Qheduw, Beane (GL.

Charles N Brower Toby T Landau

an Paulsson

