(8) FRESHFIELDS BRUCKHAUS DERINGER

Avocats a la Cour

PARIS.
2 rue Paul Cézanne
75008 Paris
TH33 144 56 44 56
Mr O. Thomas Johnson, Jr. Direct " 3 : a °° a 0
Covington & Burling LLP me t
1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Palais 007
Washington, D.C., 20004-2401 E_jan.paulsson@freshfields.com
W freshfields.com
poco PARI687699/1+
Mr Jay L. Alexander ourrer JASP/vIh
Baker Botts LLP YOUR REI

IR REF
. CLIENT MATTER NO. 103845-0147
The Warner, 1299 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW MENT MATTERS

Washington D.C., 20004-2400

20 March 2009

Dear Sirs,
Arbitration V (024/2007): Renta 4 S.V.S.A., et al v. The Russian Federation

As announced, please find enclosed executed copies of the Final Award rendered in this
arbitration (two for the Claimants and two for the Respondent), together with a separate
opinion by one of the arbitrators.

Yours faithfully,

Jan Paulsson

ce: Hon. Charles N. Brower
Mr Toby T. Landau
Ms Natalia Petrik

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered
number 0C334789, It is regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority and by the Conseil de I’Ordre des avocats a la
Cour de Paris in France.

A list of the members (and of the non-members who are designated as partners) of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP and
their qualifications is available for inspection at its registered office, 65 Fleet Street, London EC4Y 1HS or at 2 rue Paul
Cézanne, 75008 Paris. Any reference to a partner means a member, or a consultant or employee with equivalent standing
and qualifications, of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP or any of its affiliated firms or entities.

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP has taken over the practice of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer with effect from 1 May
2008. Please refer to www.freshfields.com/support/legalnotice for information on the transfer of the business and regulatory
information.

Amsterdam Barcelona Beijing Berlin Bratislava Brussels Cologne Dubai Diisseldorf
Frankfurt am Main Hamburg Hanoi Ho Chi Minh City Hong Kong London Madrid Milan
Moscow Munich New York Paris Rome Shanghai Tokyo Vienna Washington

Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

RENTA 48.V.S.A.

AHORRO CORPORACION EMERGENTES F.I.
AHORRO CORPORACION EUROFONDO F.I.
ROVIME INVERSIONES SICAV S.A.
QUASAR DE VALORS SICAV S.A.

ORGOR DE VALORES SICAV S.A.

GBI 9000 SICAV S.A.
Claimants
and
THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Respondent
20 March 2009
Before the Tribunal comprising:
Charles N. Brower
Toby T. Landau
Jan Paulsson
Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Covington & Burling LLP Baker Botts LLP
O. Thomas Johnson, Jr. Michael S. Goldberg
Marney L. Cheek Jay L. Alexander
Jonathan Gimblett Katya Akkush
John P. Rupp Johannes Koepp

Devashish Krishan

Cuatrecasas Abogados, S.R.L.
Jorge Capel Novarro

Place of arbitration: Stockholm

BACKGROUND ....

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

JURISDICTION.....sssssesssessessseessssesseesessvecseesscenseseesessseesessecesees 7
2.1 Does Article 10 allow arbitration of this

claim?..
2.2 Does Article 5 expand this Tribunal’s

jurisdiction on the foundation of a more

favourable treaty?.........
2.3 Are the Claimants “investors” covered by

the Spanish BIT?....... cesses OL
2.4 Is ownership of Yukos-related ADRs an

investment covered by the Spanish BIT? ............... 57
2.5 Have the Claimants sufficiently

demonstrated Ownership? ........s.ssssseseeeeeeeee OL
ADMISSIBILITY ..0.eecescesceseesessessesseesesessessesseaessestsaseaneaeenesnes 63
DECISION ....essecssssssesseesssessesseeoneesesseesesesessscsscnssenecseessessnesseess 65

1. BACKGROUND

1. Renta 4 S.V.S.A. identifies itself as the parent
corporation and depositary of the Spanish investment fund
(fondo de inversion) Renta 4 Europa Este FI. The two
“Ahorro” entities identify themselves as Spanish
investment funds. The four remaining Claimants identify
themselves as Spanish variable stock companies
(sociedades anénimas de capital variable). All act jointly
in this case through Covington & Burling LLP and
Cuatrecasas Abogados SRL.

2. The Russian Federation (“Russia’’) is represented
by its Ministry of Justice. The First Deputy Minister
executed a power of attorney dated 15 May 2007 (renewed
on 26 September 2008) authorising attorneys in Baker
Botts LLP to act in this case.

3. The Claimants allege that Russia unlawfully
dispossessed Yukos Oil Company (“Yukos”) of its assets
and expropriated it from its shareholders. They state that
they are owners of Yukos American Depository Receipts
(ADRs) and demand compensation for their loss. Their
claim is that the dispossession was achieved by means of a
variety of abuses of executive and judicial power. The
narrative of these alleged abuses is lengthy. For the
purposes of this Award it is sufficient to note the general
nature of the allegations.

4. The Claimants rely on the Agreement for
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments
between Spain and the USSR which entered into force on
28 November 1991 (“the Spanish BIT”). The authentic
languages of the BIT are Russian and Spanish. Quotations

herein are taken from the translation into English published
in the United Nations Treaty Series. Both sides have relied
on that translation. Neither has argued that either of the
two authentic texts differs materially.

5. Article 10 of the Spanish BIT reads as follows:

Disputes between one Party and investors
of the other Party

1, Any dispute between one Party and
an investor of the other Party relating to
the amount or method of payment of the
compensation due under article 6 of this
Agreement, shall be communicated in
writing, together with a detailed report by
the investor to the Party in whose territory
the investment was made. The two shall,
as far as possible, endeavour to settle the
dispute amicably.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled thus
within six months of the date of the written
notification referred to in paragraph I of
this article, it may be referred to by [sic]
either of the following, the choice being
left to the investor:

- An arbitral tribunal in accordance
with the Regulations of the Institute of
Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce
in Stockholm;

- The ad hoc arbitral tribunal
established in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL).

3. The decisions of the arbitral tribunal
shall be based on:

- The provisions of this Agreement;

- The national legislation of the Party
in whose territory the investment has been
made, including the rules of conflict of
laws;

- The universally recognized norms
and principles of international law.

4. The decisions of the arbitral tribunal
shall be final and binding on the Parties
involved in the dispute. Each Party shall
undertake to abide by such decisions in
accordance with its national legislation.

6. The Claimants separately wrote letters to the
Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the period between
10 July 2006 and 9 November 2006 by which they gave
notice of their claims. They lodged a joint Request for
Arbitration before the SCC Institute on 25 March 2007.

7. Russia submitted an Answer dated 16 May 2007 to
the SCC Institute. It took the position that the SCC
Institute “manifestly lacks jurisdiction over the dispute”
and should therefore dismiss the case. The SCC Institute
determined otherwise and proceeded to constitute the
present Arbitral Tribunal.

8. Russia asserts that the Arbitral Tribunal has no
jurisdiction. Its objections to that effect were explained in
a Memorial on Preliminary Objections dated 18 February
2008 and amplified in a Reply Memorial dated 27 June
2008. The Claimants answered these Memorials in a
Counter-Memorial and a Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections dated respectively 21 April 2008 and 8
September 2008.

9. The Claimants initially took the position that to
survive a preliminary jurisdictional challenge they needed
only to allege ownership of Yukos ADRs. Their argument
was that factual determinations are matters for the merits
phase. Russia objected. The Arbitral Tribunal agreed with
Russia in principle. It accepted that the factual bases of a
claim may be assumed pro tem when jurisdiction is at
issue. The factual basis of a claimant’s standing should
nevertheless in principle be demonstrated at that stage.
Otherwise the very purpose of a preliminary determination
could be defeated. Accordingly the Arbitral Tribunal
instructed the Claimants to give proof of their ownership
prior to the hearing of Preliminary Objections. The
Claimants did so in the form of a Submission Concerning
Proof of Ownership dated 22 August 2008. It included a
number of documents as well as a Declaration by Mr Jesus
Mardomingo Cozas (an “expert in the Spanish law on
collective investment institutions”). Russia responded by
letter dated 24 September 2008 to the effect that the
Claimants’ submission was “inadequate” and “failed to
document their standing”.

10. A hearing on the Preliminary Objections was held
in Washington D.C. on 27 and 28 September 2008. The
Claimants did not offer any witnesses. They made
Mr Mardomingo available to answer any questions with
respect to his Declaration but no questions were put to him.
The hearing therefore consisted of oral submissions by
counsel.

ll. The Tribunal sees no need to burden this text with
a recital of correspondence with counsel. Nor is it
necessary to set out the content of procedural orders. They
have all been reduced to writing. Suffice it to say that at
the end of the hearing on the Preliminary Objections the
Parties explicitly confirmed that they considered the
objections were “ripe for adjudication” (T:453-4).

12. The Arbitral Tribunal assumes pro tem that the
conduct imputed by the Claimants to Russia is correctly
described and characterised. Nothing in this decision
should be construed as a prejudgment of those allegations.

13. Some of Russia’s objections are properly
understood as arguments that the claims are inherently
beyond the scope of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Other objections are to the effect that the claims are
inadmissible due to alleged defects in their presentation. A
tribunal having jurisdiction over given claims has the
plenary authority to decide whether they have been
properly presented and are in that sense admissible. This
distinction explains the division of the matters decided
herein.

14, Russia has moreover raised an issue as to the
Claimants’ possible disqualification by virtue of the rule of
continuous nationality. The Claimants answer that any
sales of ADRs have not been accompanied by
corresponding assignments of claim against Russia. They
readily concede that the timing of such sales may be
relevant to the calculation of prejudice. This matter is not
ripe for decision. The Tribunal sets it aside for now
without prejudice to the Parties’ various past and future
contentions.

15. The sources of law applied by the Tribunal are
defined in Article 10 of the BIT itself (see Paragraph 5
above). It is an international instrument that if necessary
falls to be interpreted in accordance with the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. Both Spain and Russia
are parties to that Convention.

16. The Tribunal is not obliged to adopt the
conclusions of other courts or tribunals. The elements of
the present arbitration are not identical to those of other
cases brought to the attention of the arbitrators. The
present Parties are entitled to a decision based on the
arbitrators’ examination of the facts and arguments
presented in this case. The arbitrators do not in any event
operate in a hierarchical and unitary system which requires
them to follow precedents. They are nevertheless attentive
to prior decisions brought to their attention. They are
bound to do so as part of their basic duty to consider the
Parties’ arguments. Moreover they are inclined to do so on
the premise that there is value in considering the reasoning

of decision-makers who have given careful attention to
issues similar to those that arise here. The arbitrators
would be hesitant to depart from a proposition followed in
a series of fully-reasoned decisions reflecting a
jurisprudence constante.

2. JURISDICTION

17. The oral arguments were dominated by a debate
concerning the scope of Article 10 of the Spanish BIT
(quoted in Paragraph 5 above). This debate concerns two
fundamental issues. The first is the inherent ambit of the
Article. The second is the possibility of extending that
ambit by reference to the Treaty’s promise of treatment
equivalent to that accorded to most-favoured nationals
(“MFN”). These two matters were given more attention in
the course of the hearing than all others combined. They
will therefore be considered first. The Tribunal will then
turn to three issues of standing.

18. Russia had also argued in its written pleadings that
specific consent was required for any individual case to be
arbitrated under Article 10 due to its non-mandatory nature:
“{BJoth parties must agree to refer arbitrable disputes to
arbitration before the proceedings can be commenced.”
This contention viewed the words “may be referred” in
Article 10(2) as insufficient consent to arbitration. It was
withdrawn by letter dated 20 October 2008.

21 Does Article 10 allow arbitration of this claim?

19. Article 10 of the Spanish BIT (quoted in Paragraph
5 above) covers investor-State disputes “relating to the
amount or method of payment of the compensation due
under Article 6 of this Agreement”. Article 6 reads as
follows:

Nationalization and Expropriation

Any nationalization, expropriation or any
other measure having similar
consequences taken by the authorities of
either Party against investments made
within its territory by investors of the other
Party, shall be taken only on the grounds
of public use and in accordance with the
legislation in force in the territory. Such
measures should on no account be
discriminatory. The Party adopting such
measures shall pay the investor or his
beneficiary adequate compensation,
without undue delay and in freely
convertible currency.

20. Russia argues that Article 10 plainly does not
encompass all conceivable disputes under the Spanish BIT
and that the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration was
therefore misguided when it relied on Articles 4 to 6.
Article 4 proscribes “unjustified or discriminatory
measures affecting investments”. Article 5 warrants fair
and equitable treatment as well as MFN- benefits.
International investor-state arbitration is ~ expressly
accessible under the. Treaty only with respect to claims
under Article 6. Even such claims are subject to the further
limitation that they must relate to disputes about the
amount or the method of payment of the compensation due.
Russia considers that there is continuing disagreement as to
whether any of the criticised measures were expropriatory
in the first place. That controversy must therefore (in
Russia’s contention) be resolved in some other proper
forum before matters of quantum may go to international
arbitration under Article 10. The present claims therefore
perforce fall outside the scope of Article 10.

21. It is important to survey the layers of limitation
Russia places on Article 10. Russia seeks not just to
restrict arbitration to disputes concerning “compensation”.
That might leave the door open to disputes whether there
should be any compensation at all. Russia considers that

the words “amount or method of payment” allow nothing
but a narrow debate about quantum or timing and currency.
Even that might leave a door open to say that “amount”
includes “no amount” (e.g. because the asset has nil value
or because no expropriation has occurred). Yet Russia
contends that it has a further rampart: the dispute must
concern amounts already established as “due” under
Article 6. The measures of nationalisation and
expropriation dealt with in that Article are subject to
familiar requirements of lawfulness and non-
discrimination. Those requirements may naturally lead to
debate. Russia asserts that such matters may be heard in
one of two types of fora. There may be litigation in
Russian courts. Spain might act on behalf of its nationals
under the Spanish BIT. But Article 10 does not allow
investor-State arbitration of disputes as to compliance with
Article 6.

22. Vladimir and Moise Berschader v. Russian
Federation (2006) involved a claim by Belgian nationals
under the 1989 BIT entered into by the
Belgium/Luxembourg Economic Union and the Soviet
Union. It is relied upon by Russia in the present case
because the arbitrators in Berschader faced a virtually
identical conjunction of treaty provisions. Article 5 of that
BIT defined the elements of permissible expropriation and
nationalisation. Those elements included compensation
reflecting “the real’ value” of the investment to be paid
promptly in convertible currency. Article 10 gave investors
the right to arbitrate disputes “concerning the amount or
mode of compensation to be paid under Article 5”.
(Nothing apparently turns on the choice between the
English words “method” or “mode” in the translations.)
Berschader considered that this limitation excluded
“disputes concerning whether or not an act of expropriation
actually occurred under Article 5” (para. 153).

23. The impact of Berschader’s consideration of this
point is attenuated by the fact that its conclusion was
superfluous. The arbitrators gave primary attention to what
they deemed to be an unprecedented feature of the case:
whether “the sole claimants are foreign shareholders in a
foreign incorporated company seeking to rely on the terms

of a BIT without having made any direct investment on
their own part” (para. 135). They devoted 26 paragraphs of
the award to this issue. Their conclusion was that there
was no jurisdiction with respect to the claimants’ indirect
investment. The door had therefore already been shut on
the claimants by the time the arbitrators next turned to
consider the phrase “amount or mode of compensation”.
Their conclusion in this regard may be considered obiter.
It is-explained in seven short paragraphs. It cannot be
adopted by the present arbitrators because it does not do
justice to the extensive and refined debate which has
emerged in the present case. There is no way of knowing
from their award how the Berschader arbitrators would
have reacted to the points raised here. (Berschader was
decided by a majority but the dissenting arbitrator did not
take issue with these seven paragraphs.)

24. Berschader basically repeats that “the ordinary
meaning” of the limitation “is quite clear[ly]” to the effect
that only disputes “concerning the amount or mode of
compensation” may be subject to arbitration. This is no
more than a restatement of the problem. It is necessary to
determine whether these words exclude disputes over
entitlement to compensation (with the effect of limiting
jurisdiction to mere quantification or mode of payment).
The. quoted words do not exclude that a claimant may react
to a respondent’s refusal to accept that any “amount” is due
by bringing into play the substantive predicate of arbitral
jurisdiction: an expropriation carried out in such a fashion
as to create an entitlement to compensation pursuant to
Article 6.

25. Berschader’s only conceptual treatment of this
issue is contained in para. 153. The arbitrators there state
that they were “satisfied” that Article 10 excluded
“disputes concerning whether or not an act of expropriation
actually occurred under Article 5”. This is a simple
affirmation. It does not appear to be supported by analysis.
The rationale is set down in two sentences. They are
founded on an explicit assumption:

-10-

From the ordinary meaning of Article 10.1,
it can only be assumed that the
Contracting Parties intended that a dispute
concerning whether or not an act of
expropriation actually occurred was to be
submitted to dispute resolution procedures
provided for under the applicable contract
or alternatively to the domestic courts of
the Contracting Party in which the
investment is made. It is only a dispute
which arises regarding the amount or
mode of compensation to be paid
subsequent to an act of expropriation
already having been established, either by
acknowledgement of the responsible
Contracting Party or by a court or arbitral
tribunal, which may be subject to
arbitration under the Treaty.

26. The words “it can only be assumed” will not do for
present purposes. The “assumption” is certainly not
inevitable. Words may have an “ordinary meaning” as
units of language. It does not follow that their import is
self-evident when viewed in context.

27. Russia invites the arbitrators to conclude that
Article 10(1) lexically excludes the Claimants’ reading.
The words “compensation due” are said to modify
“amount” or “method” (T:56). That grammatical inference
is less than convincing. The plainest proposition to be
derived from Article 10(1) is that it allows arbitration with
respect to debates about the amount or method of such
compensation as may be due under Article 6. The
difficulty begins precisely once one asks: Who determines
whether compensation is indeed “due” under Article 6?

28. Consideration of this question leads the Tribunal to
conclude that the word “due” in fact disfavours Russia.
The reference to disputes relating to “compensation due
under Article 6” is found in Article 10 itself. The logical
progression seems straightforward. Article 6 establishes
that there shall be no expropriation unless it is lawful by

-ll-

reference to criteria set out in that Article. Article 10 gives
an investor the right to seek arbitration with respect to
“Tajny dispute ... relating to the amount or method of
payment of the compensation due under Article 6”. The
Claimants allege expropriation. Russia denies any
obligation under this head. There is therefore a dispute as
to whether compensation is “due”. The force of this simple
proposition is buttressed by the open texture of the
introductory words: any disputes ... relating to.

29. Russia argues that there is no dispute as to
quantification. It does not assert that the value of the
putative investment is zero. For jurisdictional purposes it
need not deny that the assets have whatever value the
Claimants seek to ascribe to them. The Claimants are in
Russia’s view really seeking to debate whether
expropriation occurred. Russia submits that Article 10
does not allow them to do so.

30. The flaw in Russia’s argument is that there is more
than one basis on which a respondent State could say
“zero”. One might indeed be a divergence as to

quantification. Another could be a denial of any obligation
on account of alleged expropriation. The first raises no
problem. Russia would accept (purely hypothetically) that
the Tribunal could decide whether the value of allegedly
expropriated. assets was zero or some higher number as a
matter of proper valuation. But the second is different.
Russia denies that the Tribunal is empowered to decide that
the basic predicate to its jurisdiction has arisen: an event of
such a nature as to require the compensation
unquestionably to be assessed by the arbitrators.

31. An investor seeking an award of compensation
under Article 10 may thus face more than one conceptual
building block. It may face a disagreement as to
quantification. But it may also (or only) face a challenge as
to whether an obligation has arisen under Article 6. Such
an obligation is the evident predicate to any amount being
“due” and thus the object of the type of debate allowed
under Article 10. The existence of the basic predicate of a
remedy under Article 10 cannot be deemed outside the

-12-

purview of a tribunal constituted under that very Article.
Russia correctly observes that “international courts and
tribunals must decline jurisdiction over prerequisite
cognate issues that are outside the bounds of the parties’
consent” (in footnote 22 of Russia’s Memorial on
Preliminary Objections). But this principle does not apply
here: It is precisely Article 10 that defines the bounds of
the State-parties’ consent. The present Tribunal is both
empowered and obligated to construe the scope of authority
thereby created.

32. The arbitrators have considered whether their
conclusion contradicts the familiar canon of interpretation
which holds that all expressions in an agreement should if
possible be given meaning. It is not always evident how
isolated the relevant expression must be. Article 10
contains some 200 words arranged within four paragraphs.
Its purported overall effect is to create. international arbitral
jurisdiction. It is constructive; its raison d’étre is not to
limit a pre-existing jurisdiction. The search to give
meaning to the eight (or eleven) words that follow “relating
to” in Article 10(1) simply cannot be allowed to deprive the
remaining text of its essential positive meaning.

33. There is more. Article 10(1) does not inevitably
identify a narrower mandate than would have been the
result of a simpler text referring curtly to “disputes
concerning Article 6”. Consider the case of an
expropriation which has led to payment in an amount
established by a municipal administrative or judicial body.
There is no issue of legality or discrimination. The investor
wishes to challenge the amount of compensation. The
State retorts that the adequacy of compensation was
established in accordance with law and should not be
questioned internationally. An international tribunal may
be reluctant to exercise jurisdiction to second-guess a
procedure presenting prima facie regularity. _ Such a
scenario is a central concern of investors who are averse to
allowing the host State to act as judge and party in
measuring the monetary extent of its own liability. The
wording of Article 10(1) would give comfort in these
circumstances: “any dispute ... relating to the amount” of
“compensation due” would be internationalised. These

-13-

words would certainly not be perceived as superfluous. A
similar example is plainly conceivable with respect to
“method” (currency and timing).

34, Both sides sought to derive support from the
judgment rendered by the English High Court in The Czech
Republic v. European Media Ventures SA (2007). The BIT
in that case limited jurisdiction to disputes “concerning
compensation due” by virtue of “dispossession”. An
UNCITRAL arbitral tribunal had found jurisdiction to hear
a claim for indirect expropriation. The High Court rejected
a challenge to that jurisdictional finding. The Claimants
rely on the judgment because it interprets the arbitration
clause to extend to “entitlement as well as quantification”.
Russia counters a contrario that the arbitration clause did
not contain the words “amount or method of payment”
which it says further limits the concept of compensation.

35. What the High Court would have decided if these
additional words had been found in the BIT relevant in the
European Media Venture case must remain a matter of
conjecture. Yet it should be noted that the presence of the
word “due” did not dissuade the High Court from finding
that the arbitrators had jurisdiction to determine
entitlement. Indeed the word “due” was relied upon as
establishing a linkage between the provisions concerning
dispossession and arbitration in the BIT in question. That
linkage brought within the purview of arbitral authority a
range of matters concerning the application of .the
dispossession provision itself (as notably explained in the
Judgment in para. 45). It was not necessary that
entitlement be preestablished under the provision relating
to dispossession to which the arbitration clause referred.

36. Counsel for Russia were asked on the first day of
the hearing whether the simple denial that an expropriation
had taken place would have the result of “an
insurmountable loss of jurisdiction without qualification”.
They confirmed that this was indeed Russia’s position and
proposed the following illustration:

37.

38.

The Spanish investor buys a farm. And
Russia comes in and they take the farm,
and they don’t tell the investor why, but
they say, “You’re not due any
compensation; you have no right to this,”
period, end of story, and they don’t even
say “well, can this panel then have
jurisdiction?” The answer is no, because
you don’t know whether that taking was
lawful or not. You don’t know if it was
taken because Claimants never had
property rights. You don’t know whether
they didn’t pay their taxes. You don’t
know whether there was a_ regulatory
matter that they were growing marijuana.
You just don’t know. And that’s an area
that the state may have the right to come
after the host country, but not an
individual investor to come in, as with
every single taxing matter, every single
taking. This treaty is to go to the issue
where there is a dispute over the amount of
compensation due under the treaty. And if
there’s a situation where there is not
simply the fight on the amount of
compensation due, then you have,
respectfully, no jurisdiction in this case.
(T:26-27.)

They later added that:

if there’s a dispute as to whether there was
an expropriation, then you have no
jurisdiction. (T:31.)

They confirmed that this meant that even if there
had been a decree of expropriation a subsequent denial that
the event had been properly characterised would prevent a

claim under Article 10 (T:32).

39.

On the second day of the hearing counsel for
Russia seemed to retreat. They stated that arbitrators acting

-15-

under Article 10 of the Treaty could “proceed” in the
presence of a “final court order” acknowledging that there
has been a compensable event as defined in Article 6.
They were asked whether this was so “no matter what
we’re told by the Russian Federation with respect to it”.
They then assented (T:320). One can hardly resist the
impression that this wavering posture reflects the difficulty
of maintaining Russia’s rather extreme stance. The
Tribunal does not believe that the text allows a curtailment
of the international tribunal’s authority to decide whether
compensation is “due”. That perforce entrains the power to
determine whether there has been a compensable event in
the first place.

40. Indeed counsel for Russia also observed
straightforwardly that “Article 10 limits you to some
aspects of Article 6” (T:82). The arbitrators do not rush to
attribute decisive effect to one utterance among many. But
they are struck by the tension between this plainly sensible
remark and Russia’s insistence that the Tribunal must treat
Article 6 as a locked and inviolable strongbox to which the
present arbitrators have no key. This cannot be so. Article
6 defines the precondition of compensation being “due” for
the purposes of Article 10. It is an “aspect” of Article 6
which cannot be beyond the arbitrators’ reach.

41. The Claimants also submitted that the wording of
Article 10 allows the Tribunal to deal with only certain
aspects of Article 6. Their analysis proceeds as follows.
“Nationalization or expropriation” is compliant with the
BIT (according to Article 6) if four requirements are met:
(1) existence of grounds of public use; (2) conformity with
legislation in force in the territory; (3) absence of
discrimination; (4) payment of “adequate compensation
without undue delay and in freely convertible currency”
(see Paragraph 19 above). The first three of these
requirements constitute criteria of international lawfulness.
A State-party which satisfies each of them ensures that the
measure of compensation can be only that set out under the
fourth element of Article 6. But a failure of compliance
with those three criteria would open the door to a measure
of compensation which is not so restricted. This leads the
Claimants to say that the reference in Article 10 to “the

-16-

amount or method of the compensation due under Article
6” serves the specific function of excluding the Tribunal’s
authority to decide whether an expropriation is
internationally unlawful — e.g. to adjudicate upon any of the
first three criteria in Article 6. Article 10 would thus leave
only the possibility of determining the monetary
concomitant of internationally /awful expropriation.

42. This analysis was advanced by the Claimants in
conjunction with an important specific concession to the
effect that Article 10 of the BIT “precludes jurisdiction
over disputes arising from ... three of four conditions
imposed on the contracting parties by Article 6 when they
expropriate property” (T:183).

43. Russia maintains that this analysis undercuts the
Claimants’ own position. It explains that the last sentence
of Article 6 defines an agreed standard of compensation.
Standards of international law pertaining to unlawful
expropriation would be inapplicable even if Article 10
allowed a full inquiry into compliance with all
requirements of Article 6. Hence (so Russia argues) the
Claimants’ position impermissibly renders superfluous the
phrase “the amount or method of the compensation due
under Article 6” in Article 10.

44, The Tribunal finds this argument to be hyper-
technical and unpersuasive. Russia views the Claimants’
position as more intricate than it is. There can be no
expectation (let alone certainty) that an international
tribunal would — in the absence of the restrictive words of
Article 10 — read the last sentence of Article 6 to exclude
international norms as to the measure of compensation. It
seems equally clear that the restrictive language has
potential weight as regards the issue whether international
norms relating to unlawful expropriation are excluded (and
by the same token whether the Tribunal may adjudicate
upon the first three criteria in Article 6).

45, It is convenient to articulate succinctly the
Tribunal’s conclusions so far:

-17-

(i) The arbitrators are not asked to determine whether
Russia has acted discriminatorily or without the
justification of public purpose. Nor would they be
entitled to do so given the Claimants’ concession
(see Paragraph 42 above). It is unnecessary to
consider issues that might have arisen if this
concession had not been made. (A familiar feature
of this area of international law is precisely the
proposition that the lawfulness or otherwise of a
measure of dispossession may affect the amount of
compensation.)

(ii) The arbitrators are therefore not entitled to
determine generally whether Russia’s actions
contravened its “legislation” on nationalisation and
expropriation. They may however assess whether
Russia’s actions breached international law by
depriving the claimants of adequate compensation
for the dispossession of which they complain.

46. The textual analysis above is sufficient to decide
the issue at hand. There is strictly speaking no need to
consider whether extraneous considerations confirm the
conclusion. Nevertheless the Tribunal believes it
appropriate to explain why it finds that both evidence of the
purported intentions of the parties and inferences as to the
object and purpose of the Spanish BIT validate . the
arbitrators’ conclusion.

47. Berschader asserts that “support” for its contrary
conclusion is to be found in other BITs signed by the
Soviet Union at the time of the Belgian/Luxembourg BIT.
It expresses the view that these other treaties reflect a
policy of limiting the arbitral option open to investors
under BITs to “disputes concerning the amount or method
of compensation to be paid on foot [sic] of an expropriatory
act” (para. 155). This of course does no more than restate
the issue. Moreover the award notes that two BITs (those
concluded in 1989 with France and Canada) allowed
arbitration with respect to the “consequences” of host state
measures. The very exemplar cited for the policy of
limitation (the BIT signed in 1989 by the UK and the

-18-

USSR) refers to “the amount or payment of compensation”
and therefore appears to put into question the very
predicate of any payment at all.

48. It is true that Ros/nvestCo v. Russia (2007) did not
accept that the UK BIT’s formulation conferred jurisdiction
to rule whether expropriation had occurred. But that award
does not consider whether the word “payment” may lead to
consideration of the reality of its predicate: expropriation.
This may be because it was not argued. Nor does the
formulation in that treaty include the word “due”. It is also
noteworthy that the tribunal at any rate found that it had
jurisdiction on another ground (MFN). Lastly one cannot
overlook the following unusual declaration by one of the
arbitrators in para, 123 of the award: “J would not want our
common conclusion that Article 8 does not confer
jurisdiction in this case to be taken in any way as an
expression of opinion on how that article or other similar
treaty clauses relate to other claims that might be brought
forward in other cases based on an allegation of
expropriation.”

49. Russia made eight jurisdictional objections in
Sedelmayer v. Russia (1998). The claim there was brought
under the USSR/FRG BIT. One of Russia’s objections was
to the effect that there had been no expropriation. Russia
argued that the claimant’s activities had been declared to be
illegal by two court orders. Thereafter property was
“returned” to the Russian State under a lawful order. This
contention was submitted to the arbitral tribunal for
decision., The treaty limited the scope of investor-State
arbitration to disputes relating either to “the amount of
compensation or the method of its payment” or to “freedom
of transfer” of funds invested or repatriated. Yet no point
was apparently made that (as Russia has put it in the
present case; see Paragraph 37 above) “if there’s a dispute
as to whether there was an expropriation, then you have no
jurisdiction.” The failure to take this point in Sedelmayer is
by no means decisive here. Yet it is natural to reflect that
the alleged non-arbitrability of expropriation appears to
have been less than striking and fundamental. This
observation is even more clearly supported by the fact that
BITs signed by the Soviet Union present significant textual

-19-

variations in this respect. It is difficult to say that the
USSR had a single objective of public policy in negotiating
the scope of its consent to international adjudication as
expressed in BITs.

50. Indeed a paper on BITs published in 1991 by a
member of the USSR’s negotiating team (MrR.
Nagapetyants) referred to the “special practical
significance” for foreign investors of the “opportunity to
appeal” to international arbitration in cases of expropriatory
measures. The author did not mention the proposition now
being advanced by Russia to the effect that the existence of
a compensable expropriation is beyond international
jurisdiction. Such a restriction would have had vast
“practical significance”. The failure to mention it would
have been inexplicable if such had indeed been the author’s
understanding of the USSR’s approach. (Russia complains
that Mr Nagapetyants’ statement is taken out of context
inasmuch as his paper elsewhere mentions the restrictive
language in Article 10. The arbitrators do not see it that
way. The recitation of the terms of Article 10 simply
restate the problem. The comments about the “special
practical significance” of international arbitration shed light
on treaty objectives.)

51, The premise that one may consider the intentions
of one of the parties to a BIT is questionable in the first
place. The preceding paragraphs confirm that even if one
did so in this case the result would be inconclusive. The
alleged policy of the Soviet Union did not find a consistent
expression in the various BITs concluded at the relevant
time. Nor is it persuasive to suggest that socialist doctrines
upheld for many decades should lead to a presumption
against the acceptance of international determinations of
whether state measures are expropriatory. A series of BITs
were signed by the USSR in the years of perestroika
shortly before the dissolution of the Union. They may with
at least equal logic be viewed as a rupture with past dogma
and the acceptance of an international regime intended to
reassure investors.

-20-

52. It was one thing for the BIT not to give access to
international arbitration with respect to the other terms of
Article 6. It is understandable that a State might agree to
international arbitration with respect to its duty to pay
compensation for expropriation but not with respect to
allegations that its measures were wrongful under
international law due to discrimination or lack of public
purpose. Investors would surely prefer assurance that
expropriations be non-discriminatory and for a public
purpose. Yet they might tolerate such violations as long as
they were confident that takings would be followed by
compensation. This has been the central desideratum of
investor protection for two centuries of international
arbitration. As counsel to the Claimants put it: “the threat
of one’s property being taken without compensation is
existential” (T:215). It cannot seriously be thought that
investors would be attracted by a regime that gave them
access to international arbitration of the issue of the
quantum of compensation but not of whether any
compensation is due at all.

53. It moreover appears equally relevant (or irrelevant)
to give weight to the objectives or understanding of the
other party to the BIT. The Tribunal has not had access to
any official Spanish comment directly on point. The
Spanish BIT and the Belgium/Luxembourg BIT are
virtually identical with respect to this matter. Evidence is
available of Belgium’s understanding. The Belgian
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade explained
to their Parliament in an official Exposé des motifs of 28
February 1990 that the treaty they were recommending for
ratification allowed arbitration “in all areas covered by
Article 5”. Berschader notes this fact and recognises that
the Ministerial statement envisaged that the issue to be
arbitrated could therefore also include whether or not there
had been an expropriation. The tribunal explicitly rejected
the statement.on the footing that the language of the BIT is
“quite clear” and “could not. possibly” lend itself to the
interpretation given by the two Ministers. This is the very
last word on the subject to be found in Berschader. It leads
the reader back to the starting point: a simple assertion that
the words are clear. Berschader’s treatment of this matter
is essentially to endorse an assumption. That simply

-21-

cannot be decisive either way. As the same arbitrators put
it with respect to a different issue:

When, as in the Genin case, an arbitral
award provides no reasons for the course
of action [sic] chosen by the tribunal, such
an award has very little relevance as a
persuasive source of law (para. 134).

54. It is instructive to consider the relevant terms of the
Belgian Ministers’ statement:

There was a difference of views between
the Belgian and Soviet delegations
concerning both field of application and
procedure, the Soviets refusing to accept
the idea of a_ state submitting to
international arbitration at the beginning
of the negotiations.

Eventually, the Soviet delegation accepted
“ad hoc” arbitration before the SCC in all
matters covered by article 5.

It should be underlined that the concept of
nationalization in this article extends to
“all other measures having similar
effects,” thereby rendering Article 10’s
field of application extremely broad.

The middle paragraph is of course debatable. Article 10 of
the Belgian BIT would not (if the Claimants’ concession
noted in Paragraph 41(i) above is correct) allow SCC
arbitration with respect to disputes as to whether an
expropriation is for public purpose or whether it is
discriminatory. But as seen above (in Paragraph 52) these
are undoubtedly secondary considerations as compared to
the principle that expropriation must in any event be
compensated (see Paragraph 52 above). In this respect the
two Ministers’ explanation emphasises both the importance

-22-

of international arbitration (which the USSR negotiators
had initially resisted) and their perception that the scope of
Article 10 was “extremely broad” with respect ‘to
nationalisations and all other measures having similar
effect. It would be unimaginable in this light that the
Ministers had understood that the respondent State could
avoid Article 10 by claiming that it did not allow arbitrators
to determine whether there had been a compensable event
at all.

55. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention is frequently
debated in the context of BITs. It provides that treaties are
to be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose”.
Article 31 must be considered with caution and discipline
lest it become a palimpsest constantly altered by the
projections of subjective suppositions. It does not for
example compel the result that all textual doubts should be
resolved in favour of the investor. The long-term
promotion of investment is likely to be better ensured by a
well-balanced regime rather than by one which goes so far
that it provokes a swing of the pendulum in the other
direction.

56. Yet some considerations of purpose have a solid
foundation. It must be accepted that investment is not
promoted by purely formal or illusory standards of
protection. It must more specifically be accepted that a
fundamental advantage perceived by investors in many if
not most BITs is that of the internationalisation of the host
state’s commitments. It follows that it is impermissible to
read Article 10 of the BIT as a vanishingly narrow
internationalisation of either Russia’s or Spain’s
commitment. Yet that would be the consequence if Russia
— taken at the international level as a state composed of all
of its organs including national courts — could determine
unilaterally and conclusively whether the very predicate of
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction were operative or not. That
predicate is the existence of an obligation to make
compensation. If there is no obligation to make
compensation the arbitration clause would never operate.
The dispute would not be internationalised if the

-23-

respondent State could simply declare whether there is an
obligation to compensate. _ Either signatory State could
thus by its fiat (including that of its courts given the State’s
responsibility for their acts under international law) ensure
that there would never be an arbitration under Article 10.
This would be an illusion which the Tribunal cannot accept
as consonant with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention if
ever that Article is to be given full weight.

57. The tribunal in SGS v. Philippines (2004) wrote:

The BIT is a treaty for the promotion and
reciprocal protection of investments.
According to the preamble it is intended
“to create and maintain favourable
conditions for investments by investors of
one Contracting Party in the territory of
the other”. It is legitimate to resolve
uncertainties in its interpretation so as to
favour the protection of covered
investments.

This paragraph was cited with approval by the English
Court of Appeal in Ecuador v. Occidental (2007). To
“favour the protection of covered investments” is not
equivalent to a presumption that the investor is right (cf.
Paragraph 55 above).

58. Russia contends that two relevant fora may be
available to determine whether compensation is due: the
Russian courts or State-to-State arbitration. Yet each of
these avenues is problematic. Remedies by means of
diplomatic protection are from the investors’ perspective
notoriously unreliable in practice. It is moreover
implausible that States would want to provide for inter-
State arbitration of controversies as to whether an
expropriation had occurred at the same time as they carve
out the possibility of separate investor-State arbitration
with respect to the amount and method of compensation.
Such pointless and unprecedented complications would be
absurd. The notion of actions before the courts of the host
country are problematic in principle. Courts are on the

-24-

international level equivalent to other organs of the State.
This means that the predicate of obtaining any amount of
compensation according to any method would be hostage
to the host State’s self-determination as to whether it is due
at all.

59. The present Tribunal does not deny that such a
provision could be given effect if such was the clear import
of the Treaty. Article 6 might have explained how
entitlement is to be determined. Article 10 might have
stipulated that the proposition that compensation is “due”
may be established only by an authority identified in
Article 6. But there is nothing of the kind. The present
Tribunal is more inclined to give weight to the Belgian
Foreign Ministers’ unequivocal explanation (see Paragraph
54 above) of their understanding of an identical text — not
so much as an expression of intent as the reflection of a
proper reading to the effect that an international tribunal
could decide whether there was a duty to compensate for an
expropriatory measure. The Claimants have provided the
text of an opinion by the Spanish Council of State in 1991
concluding that the Spanish BIT called for “special
arbitration” with respect to “disputes arising from
expropriation” and noting that this constituted a departure
from the “general” Spanish regime. The absence of any
reference to the limitation of arbitral jurisdiction now
argued by Russia would be curious if. the Spanish
understanding had been to similar effect.

60. Article 10 of Russia’s Federal Law No. 160-F2
provides: “Foreign investments in the USSR shall not be
subject to nationalisation except for instances when it is
effectuated in accordance with legislative acts of the USSR
and republics”. Counsel for Russia relied on the following
gloss added in a published commentary: “By its very nature
nationalisation is always a measure which cannot be taken
other than by the adoption of some sort of legislative act”
(T:308). The commentary surely goes further than the law.
Nevertheless it is the proposition advanced by Russia and
falls to be assessed as such.

-25-

61. Russia’s posture is not easily reconciled with its
argument as to the restricted scope of the Spanish BIT.
Article 6 of the Treaty establishes protections not only in
the event of nationalisation; it also covers “any other
measures having similar consequences”. Such a broadly-
defined category of governmental measures is not limited
to legislation. Indeed it would be peculiar to find a
legislative act proclaiming itself to have consequences
“similar” to those of other texts. National lawmakers do
not generally draft in simile. But anyone familiar with
practice and commentary in the field of investment treaties
is well aware of the frequent use of the broad criterion of
similarity. Its purpose is precisely to establish an
international norm that transcends the peculiarities of
national classifications of governmental acts. It gives rise
to a strong inference that the reality of the compensable
event was understood to be within the purview of
international control. Whether the Claimants here are
claiming explicit dispossession (nationalisation or
expropriation) or a “measure having similar consequence”
is immaterial in this respect. The point is that Article 6 of
the Treaty naturally suggests susceptibility to international
control under Article 10.

62. The Claimants explicitly allege expropriation and
not indirect or regulatory acts equivalent to expropriation.
They affirm that there is therefore no need when examining
this particular jurisdictional objection for a debate as to
whether the state’s actions gave rise to a compensable
taking. Whether this allegation succeeds is a matter for the
merits. In the arbitrators’ view it suffices at this stage and
with respect to this aspect of the jurisdictional debate to say
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the
compensation which is due on the pro tem assumption that
there has been an expropriation.

63. Russia argues that the Claimants’ position is
“ideological” rather than “legal” in that they insist that all
forms of dispossession are perforce expropriations. The
effect would be to disavow (for example) the widely
accepted notion that dispossession in the exercise of police
powers need not trigger a duty of compensation as it would
in the case of expropriation. The Tribunal does not accept

-26-

this characterisation of the Claimants’ case. The fact that
an international tribunal may consider whether
compensation is “due” does not prejudice the ultimate
determination of such issues. It is as simple as that. The
debate may become complex in due course. It concerns the
merits of the case. In sum: the Tribunal has jurisdiction
under the BIT to hear the contention that there has been a
compensable expropriation.

64. The Claimants have an alternative defence to the
challenge. They argue that measures taken by Russia
constitute an obvious and direct expropriation with respect
to which Russia has effectively acknowledged that
compensation is due. In the Claimants’ view these
measures. therefore inherently pass the Article 6 threshold
and “require[e] no exercise of judgment on the part of this
Tribunal ...” (T:139).

65. The Claimants cite the OECD Working Paper on
International Investment 2004/4 to the effect that:
“International law is clear that a seizure of legal title of
property constitutes a compensable expropriation” (p. 3).
They add the following proposition as formulated by
G.C. Christie in an oft-cited article:

[T]here are certain types of State
interference which, from the outset, will be
considered expropriation even though not
labeled as such. Among these are the
appointment of a receiver to liquidate the
business or other property. “What
Constitutes a Taking of Property under
International Law?” 38 Brit. YB Int. Law
307 (1962).

Against the background of these principles the Claimants
make their argument succinctly thus:

Beginning with the seizure and sale of
[Yuganskneftegas in 2004], every asset of
Yukos was seized by order of Russian

-27-

courts and other agencies of the Russian
state, and then sold to third parties,
principally the state-owned oil company,
Rosneft, and to other state-owned
enterprises. This process resulted in the
complete liquidation of Yukos, as a legal
entity.

Respondent has not challenged any of
these facts. They are now part of the
common ground in this case. As Christie
observed, there are certain types of state
interference which, from the outset, would
be considered expropriation, even though
not labelled as such. And among these are
the appointment of the receiver to liquidate
the business or other property.

In addition — and this is what I think is
somewhat — surprising about  what’s
happened here — in addition to explicitly
taking all assets of Yukos and liquidating
the company, Russia, in fact, . has
compensated Yukos for this taking, and it
has done this by applying the proceeds of
each sale to the satisfaction of Yukos’ tax
assessments and other debts. (T:147-148.)

66. Russia rejects the characterisation and significance
attributed by the Claimants to the relevant governmental
measures. The debate is entangled within the vaster web of
circumstances of Yukos’s demise. The arbitrators are
reluctant to make conclusive factual findings without the
benefit of insights likely to emerge in the course of the
merits phase of the arbitration. They have in mind the
Claimants’ explanation: “We have not put in at this stage
all of the evidence that might be put in concerning the
nature of the seizure of the assets. There’s a lot of
documentation that could come in concerning the way in
which the assets were received” (T:167). Naturally such
evidence might be countered by what Russia will present.

-28-

67. What suffices for now is this. The Claimants have
established that the Tribunal. has jurisdiction to decide
whether compensation is “due” to them under international
law by reason of the conduct of which they complain (and
if so in which amount).

2.2 Does Article 5 expand this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction on the foundation of a more
favourable treaty?

68. The promise of most favoured nation (“MFN”)
treatment is found in Article 5(2) of the Spanish BIT. It is
necessary to read all of Article 5. It is entitled “Treatment
of Investments” and provides as follows:

1. Each Party shall guarantee fair and
equitable treatment within its
territory for the investments made by
investors of the other Party.

2. The treatment referred to in
paragraph I above shall be no less
favourable than that accorded by
either Party in respect of investments
made within its territory by investors
of any third State.

3. Such treatment shall not, however,
include privileges which may be
granted by either Party to investors
of a third State, by virtue of its
participation in:

- A free trade area;
- A customs union;

A common market;

- An organization of mutual
economic assistance or other

-29-

agreement concluded prior to the
signing of this Agreement and
containing conditions comparable
to those accorded by the Party to
the participants in said
organization.

The treatment granted under this
article shall not include tax
exemptions or other comparable
privileges granted by either Party to
the investors of a third State by virtue
of a double taxation agreement or
any other agreement concerning
matters of taxation.

4. In addition to the provisions of
paragraph 2 above, each Party shall,
in accordance with its national
legislation, accord investments made
by investors of the other Party
treatment no less favourable than that
granted to its own investors.

69. The Claimants argue that Article 5(2) would entitle
them to bring their case before this Arbitral Tribunal even
if Article 10 did not. They observe that Russia is a party to
BITs with third States containing liberal arbitration clauses.
They invoke notably Article 8(1) of the Denmark-Russia
BIT. Its definition of the scope of disputes susceptible of
being brought before an SCC Institute tribunal is
unquestionably broader than that of Article 10 of the
Spanish BIT. Article 8(1) does not limit arbitration to
disputes “relating to the amount or method of payment of
the compensation due under Article 6”. It refers to:

Any dispute which may arise between an
investor of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party in connection with
an investment on the territory of that other
Contracting Party ....

-30-

70. Russia objects preliminarily that the Claimants
forfeited the possibility of invoking the Danish BIT
because they did not do.so in their Request for Arbitration.
Article 2 of the SCC Arbitration Rules requires that the
Request include “a copy or description” of the relevant
arbitration agreement. Article 25 allows the amendment of
claims only if it is “comprised by the arbitration
agreement”. Russia therefore argues. that it was
impermissible for the Claimants to invoke a new or
expanded jurisdictional foundation as late as the Counter-
Memorial on Preliminary Objections. Russia adds that
unawareness of a MFN-based jurisdictional assertion could
lead to the constitution of a tribunal without proper
consideration of issues of conflict of interest by reason of
the identity of the third country in question. Moreover an
extension of jurisdiction “in the midst of an arbitration”
would prejudice the respondent’s “right to challenge
unfounded assertions of jurisdiction”.

71. The Tribunal observes that the Request for
Arbitration included a copy of the Spanish BIT. The
Claimants sought relief “in accordance with the terms of
the treaty”. They are entitled to seek to establish that those
terms incorporate benefits accorded by Russia by virtue of
the promise of MFN treatment. The Tribunal is unwilling
to infer that the SCC requirement would implicitly extend
to a duty to “include or describe” the Danish BIT. The
Claimants are not in fact seeking arbitration under the
Danish BIT at all; they are drawing the full consequences
(as they see them) of the terms of the Spanish BIT.

72. These observations are sufficient to defeat this
formal objection. It may be added that Russia’s complaint
of prejudice is unpersuasive in light of the fact that the
Claimants gave notice in the Request for Arbitration of
their “intention to rely as necessary on the MFN clause” in
the Spanish BIT (notably in footnote 1 on page 14 of the
Request for Arbitration). The Request also claimed
breaches of Articles 4 and 5 of that BIT. It is common
ground that Article 10 cannot encompass claims of
breaches of the material provisions of those two Articles. It
should therefore have been passably clear that the
Claimants were envisaging a jurisdictional foundation

-31-

which could have been derived only from the MFN
provision. Russia did not press for clarification.

2B. The Tribunal’s conclusion with respect to this
objection is consonant with RosInvestCo. That case was
conducted under the 1999 SCC Arbitration Rules. They
were not materially different from the 2007 SCC Rules
relevant here.

74. Russia also argues preliminarily that the Danish
BIT is automatically excluded from application here
because it states in Article 11(3): “The provisions of this
Agreement shall not apply to taxation.” The present
Claimants could therefore not have proceeded even if they
were Danish investors because they complain precisely of
tax measures taken with respect to Yukos. This argument
was not pursued with great insistence. Nor should it have
been. The Claimants allege that Russia imposed a bogus
reassessment of taxes in order to effect a spoliation of
Yukos assets. To think that ten words appearing in a
miscellany of incidental provisions near the end of the
Danish BIT would provide a loophole to escape the central
undertakings of investor protection would be absurd.
Complaints about types and levels of taxation are one
thing. Complaints about abuse of the power to tax are
something else. A “decree” to the effect that “all tax
inspectors are henceforth instructed to collect everything
they can get their hands on from Danish investors” would
not be insulated because of Article 11(3) of the BIT.
Abuse and pretext are at the heart of the Claimants’
allegations. Whether they are true is a matter for the
merits.

75. Russia’s final preliminary argument is that the
Claimant’s invocation of MFN treatment in respect of
jurisdiction breaches a prior arbitration agreement (namely
Article 10 of the Treaty). This contention appears. to
presume that the arbitration provisions of the Spanish BIT
excluded the possibility of invoking an expanded scope of
consent by virtue of third-country BITs. And so the
argument seems to proceed on the footing that claims under

the Spanish BIT cannot conceivably be brought to SCC
arbitration outside the constraints set down in Article 10.

76. That premise is unsustainable. Consider the effect
of a stipulation in Article 5 (however oddly placed) that
“any investor complaints about fair and equitable treatment
may be brought to SCC arbitration”. There is no reason
why such a claim would fail on jurisdictional grounds
merely because Article 10 itself does not encompass
matters of fair and equitable treatment. The stipulation is
made by the same respondent State; the beneficiary is the
same presumptively qualified investor. There is no logical
leap from this hypothesis to the jurisdictional foundation
asserted by the Claimants here. Their argument is that
Article 5(2) in effect contains an: inchoate’ stipulation
having the very same effect of broadening the possibility of
recourse to investor-State arbitration. (Notionally: “any
investor may bring the same types of complaint to the SCC
as the host State has agreed may be brought by investors of
a third State”.) Article 5 was thus precisely so enlivened
the moment the Danish BIT came into effect. Spanish
investors too could accordingly seek SCC arbitration of
claims within the broad ambit of the subsequent Treaty.
Whether access to arbitration may in principle fall within
the scope of the MFN undertaking is a different issue (see
Paragraphs 86-102 below). Whether such an effect flows
from a proper reading of the terms of Article 5 is yet
another (see Paragraphs 103-119 below). But there is no
substance to the thesis that Article 10 is an inherently
exclusive portal to investor-State arbitration under the
Treaty. Otherwise the debate as to whether MFN treatment
may ever include matters of dispute resolution would be
over before it began; in all cases the original arbitration
provisions would self-evidently not be those sought to be
invoked by reference to MFN.

77. The stage is now set to consider the substance of
the MFN debate. Some first principles need to be recalled.
The treaty that contains the MFN promise is conventionally
referred to as the “basic treaty”. The treaty invoked as
evidence of more favourable treatment may be referred to
as the “comparator treaty”. The party asserting a MFN
entitlement is a stranger to the comparator treaty and is

-33-

therefore in no position to make any claim under it. The
claim can arise only under the basic treaty. Article 9(1) of
the International Law Commission’s 1978 Draft Articles on
MEN Clauses defines the mechanism thus: “the beneficiary
State acquires, for itself or for the benefit of persons or
things in a determined relationship with it,” a right to the
more favourable treatment accorded to third states or their
nationals. The third-party treaty is incorporated by
reference into the basic treaty without any additional act of
transformation.

78. These basic points should be kept in mind as the
substantive discussion begins with the broadest of Russia’s
objections: that the Claimants simply have no warrant to
invoke the Danish BIT. If this were true there is no reason
to examine whether it (as the comparator treaty) contains
any element of MFN as contrasted with the Spanish BIT.

79. Russia relies in this respect on the Anglo-lranian
case. Iran’s unilateral declaration of acceptance of ICJ
jurisdiction had been expressly limited to disputes under
future treaties. The United Kingdom nevertheless sought to
invoke two longstanding treaties it had entered into with
Iran that contained MEN clauses (but no ICJ jurisdiction
clause). The alleged more favoured nation again happened
to be Denmark; it had a treaty with Iran that allowed access
to the ICJ for complaints of breach. The ICJ rejected the
UK’s claim as an impermissible attempt to rely on
instruments — i.e. “basic treaties” — which were not extant
at the date of Iran’s acceptance of compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction. The UK could not rely on its old treaties for
the purposes of establishing ICJ jurisdiction. There was
therefore no basis on which the ICJ could either rule on the
scope of the MEN clauses or on the material terms of the
Danish treaty. Russia relies on this holding to support its
argument that Article 10 of the Spanish BIT simply does
not allow an inquiry into Article 5(2) and its promise of
MEN treatment.

80. The Tribunal is unpersuaded. The starting point of
its analysis is to observe that Russia cannot deny the
Tribunal’s authority to decide whether it has jurisdiction to

-34-

deal with a claim under Article 5(2) of the Spanish BIT. A
constant attribute of international tribunals (one of the
“universally recognized norms and pprinciples of
international law” referred to in Article 10(3) of the Treaty)
is that they have the authority to rule on questions
pertaining to their own jurisdiction. Abundant citations
could be given. It seems sufficient to recall the ICJ’s
reference in Nottebohm (1953) to:

a rule consistently accepted by general
international law in the matter of
international arbitration: Since the
Alabama case, it has been generally
recognised, following the — earlier
precedents, that, in the absence of any
agreement to the contrary, an international
tribunal has the right to decide as to its
own jurisdiction and. has the power to
interpret for this purpose the instruments
which govern that jurisdiction. (1953 ICJ
Reports 119; this passage was explicitly
recalled in paragraph 46 of the ICJ’s 1991
judgment in the Case Concerning the
Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-
Bissau v. Senegal).

Such authority is specifically established in Article 2 of the
Swedish Arbitration Act which applies to these
proceedings. The Tribunal. needs no further warrant to
consider and dispose of jurisdictional arguments. It may
well be that its jurisdictional rulings are susceptible to
challenge before another authority. This alters nothing. It
would mean only that the other authority has the capacity
to review the scope of arbitral jurisdiction and not that the
present Tribunal lacked the power to make the initial
determination.

81. The consequence should be manifest when one
considers the mighty debate about the scope of jurisdiction
created by Article 10 (see Section 2.1 above). Russia
argues that the arbitrators may decide only some
controversies arising with respect to Article 6. This is a

-35-

debate about the terms of Article 10. It is a debate which
Russia unreservedly asks the Tribunal to decide in its
favour. Russia makes no issue of the fact that Article 10
does not stipulate that a dispute about its own terms may be
decided by the arbitrators. Nor could Russia seriously
make such an argument; it is foreclosed by Article 2 of the
Arbitration Act.

82. No difference in principle arises when the debate
focuses on the jurisdictional consequences of Article 5 of
the Spanish BIT. There is no rule that the entirety of
arbitration agreements must be contained in a single article
of an instrument. There is no rule that elements of arbitral
jurisdiction may not’be defined in an article (like Article 5)
which also contains substantive provisions. These are
trivial observations. The important question is whether
there has been consent to arbitrate the claims raised in this
case. The Claimants say that the scope of jurisdiction in
the Spanish BIT is derived from both Article 5 and Article
10. This contention is denied by Russia. It may be true or
false. But the Tribunal has the right to decide (subject to
such review as may be available). There was no need for
Article 10 to stipulate that controversies with respect to
jurisdictional implications of particular provisions of the
BIT may be decided by the Tribunal — whether those
provisions appear in Article 10 or elsewhere. In the end the
matter is thus quite simple.

83. To be clear: the Claimants are not seeking to
establish that Russia breached an obligation under the basic
treaty (the Spanish BIT) by failing explicitly. to grant to
Spanish investors the same access to international
arbitration as the access the Claimants say is enjoyed by
Danish investors. The question is instead simply whether
Article 5(2) of the Spanish BIT evidences Russia’s consent
that this Tribunal’s jurisdiction should have an ambit
beyond that of Article 10.

84. The Anglo-Iranian case turned on a fundamentally
different point. The ICJ of course also has power to decide
its own jurisdiction (Article 38(6) of the ICJ Statute). It
was asked to rule on the consequences of treaties that

-36-

predated Iran’s consent to ICJ jurisdiction. That consent
was limited to disputes arising out of future treaties entered
into by Iran. They were the “basic treaties” (see Paragraph
77 above). It followed that the UK could not invoke the
antecedent treaties before the ICJ. Invocation of a
“comparator treaty” could not alter that basic jurisdictional
fact. The ICJ held: “A third-party treaty, independent of
and isolated from the basic treaty, cannot produce any legal
effect as between the United Kingdom and Iran: it is res
inter alios acta.” (1952 ICJ Reports 109.) The ICJ had no
warrant to consider the basic treaties because they were
antecedent to consent. Had they been subsequent the UK
may have prevailed. It would have come down to the
content of the comparator treaty. Access to ICJ jurisdiction
granted to Denmark might have been imported into the UK
treaties; that is the equivalent of the present question; what
the ICJ would have thought of it will never be known.

85. The Claimants argue that Article 5(2) of the
Spanish BIT contains no restriction as to the date when
more favoured nation treatment may be established. They
are right. Article 5(2) does not in fact prevent the right to
MEN treatment from arising out of undertakings to third
nations which are given in the future. That is typically how
MEN promises are enlivened. It is therefore open to the
Claimants to invoke the Danish BIT. Anglo-Iranian is
simply inapposite.

86. What remains is of course to determine what the
Claimants are able to derive from the Danish BIT. And so
the analysis moves to the more specific issue of the
possibility of expanding investor-State arbitration via MFN
provisions. It is a familiar topic. Yet it comes in a great
variety of guises. The answers may change as the
questions become more refined. May one conclude that
qualifying “investments” under the Spanish BIT are given
less favourable treatment than such investments enjoy
under the Danish BIT if the latter are given greater access
to international arbitration? Is such access an element of
the types of treatment that may be compared for purposes
of assessing compliance with the MFN standard? These
questions are at the heart of a current debate on this aspect
of investor-state arbitrations. Yet they are not decisive in

-37-

this case. It is to the contrary indispensable to understand
that in light of the wording of the Spanish BIT either of
them may be answered affirmatively without defeating
Russia’s objection.

87. The Tribunal approaches this matter against a
normative background which merits a brief overview.

88. The International Court of Justice in the Rights of
US Nationals in Morocco (1952) considered the effects of
MEN clauses contained in a treaty of 1836 with respect to
the “footing” of “commerce” with the United States and to
the entitlement of US nationals to “whatever indulgence, in
trade or otherwise” were granted to nationals of certain
other States. The UK subsequently became entitled under
an 1861 treaty to insist that its nationals must be brought
before consular jurisdictions to the exclusion of local
courts. The ICJ was satisfied that the MFN provisions in
the basic treaty created an entitlement to the same
advantage for US nationals. It was not necessary that there
be explicit mention of jurisdictional advantages. (1952 JCJ
Reports 190.) This was however the statement of a premise
rather than a conclusion. The decisive issue in the case was
different: whether the entitlement to MFN treatment
expired with the renunciation of the UK treaty (as well as
that of a treaty involving Spain). The ICJ answered
affirmatively.

89. The 1956 case of the Ambatielos Claim (23 ILR
306) is seminal. It examined the ejusdem generis principle:
“the most-favoured nation clause can only attract matter
belonging to the same category of subject as that to which
the clause itself relates”. The field of application of the
relevant treaty containing a MFN clause was defined as “all
matters relating to commerce and navigation”. Greece
sought to derive a jurisdictional extension by virtue of
MEN rights. The UK countered that scope of jurisdiction
was not among the matters that could be considered
common objects of the treaties under comparison. The
commissioners rejected the UK’s argument:

-38-

“It is true that “the administration of
justice”, when viewed in isolation, is a
subject-matter other than “commerce and
navigation”, but this is not necessarily so
when it is viewed in connection with the
protection of the rights of traders.
Protection of the rights of traders naturally
finds a place among the matters dealt with
by Treaties of commerce and navigation.

Therefore it cannot be said that the
administration of justice, in so far as it is
concerned with the protection of these
rights, must necessarily be excluded from
the field of application of the most-
favoured-nation clause, when the latter
includes “all matters relating to commerce
and navigation”. The question can only be
determined in accordance with the
intention of the Contracting Parties as
deduced from a reasonable interpretation
of the Treaty.

90. It is undoubtedly fair to compare BITs for the
purpose of assessing compliance with promises of MFN
treatment given their congruent objective: the promotion
and protection of investments. Yet such a general
statement is insufficient to decide any particular case. It is
a matter of the wording of the relevant instruments. This is
one of the reasons awards under BITs are of variable
relevance and value in subsequent cases.

91. There are other reasons why alleged precedents
may be of limited normative applicability. Quotations of
incidental comments are not entitled to be considered as
precedents at all; they are not part of the ratio decidendi
and thus are not part of the reasoning by which the
arbitrators fulfil their mandate to decide. That is where
they exercise personal responsibility. Obiter dicta are
commentary. They may be persuasive but are a priori of
less weight.

-39-

92. Speculations as to policy desiderata thought to
favour one reading or another of an instrument should be
considered with care. An example is the occasional
reflection that access to different types of dispute resolution
mechanism should not be held to be part of “treatment” for
MEN purposes because it would lead to forum shopping.
That proposition may have adherents but may equally well
be rejected. The use of the expression “forum shopping” in
a derogatory sense is but the assertion of an opinion. It
does not deal with the countervailing consideration to the
effect that dispute resolution mechanisms accepted by a
State in various international instruments are all legitimate
in the eyes of that State. Some may be inherently more
efficient. Others may be more reliable in a particular
context. Having options may be thought to be more
“favoured” for MFN purposes than not having them. It is
not convincing for a State to argue in general terms that it
accepted a particular “system of arbitration” with respect to
nationals of one country but did not so consent with respect
to nationals of another. The extension of commitments is
in the very nature of MFN clauses. Drafters wishing to do
so would have little difficulty in defining restrictions that
would go further than the general esjudem generis
constraint. Some BITs exhaustively enumerate acceptable
MFN extensions. Others explicitly exclude dispute
resolution from the reach of MFN provisions. Absent such
stipulations it is the task of international tribunals to
determine whether arbitration clauses in comparator
treaties in fact comport more favoured treatment.

93. To choose one of the contending policy theses as
the reason to read a BIT in a particular way may be
presumptuous. The stakes are high and the policy
decisions appertain to the State-parties to the treaties.
Speculations relied upon as the basis of purposive readings
of a text run the risk of encroachment upon fundamental
policy determinations. The same is true when
“confirmation” of hypothetical intentions is said to be
found in considerations external to the text. The duty of
the Tribunal is to discover and not to create meaning.

94. A considerable number of awards under BITs have
dealt with the jurisdictional implications of MFN. Many of

-40-

them have been invoked in the present arbitration. They
are of uneven persuasiveness and relevance. The present
Tribunal would find it jejune to declare that there is a
dominant view; it is futile to make a head-count of
populations of such diversity. What can be said with
confidence is that a jurisprudence constante of general
applicability is not yet firmly established. It remains
necessary to proceed BIT by BIT.

95. Two contrasting awards are nevertheless of
particular interest: Berschader and RosInvestCo. Each
involved a BIT to which Russia is a party. Berschader
refused to extend the scope of investor-state arbitration in
the USSR/Belgium-Luxembourg BIT notwithstanding an
MFN clause which guaranteed MFN “in all matters
covered by this Agreement”. The majority of the
arbitrators relied on the jurisdictional decision in Plama v.
Bulgaria (2005). They were persuaded by the view
expressed in that decision (at para. 223) that there should
be a presumption that a MFN provision “does not
incorporate by reference dispute settlement provisions in
whole or in part set forth in another treaty”. This was
dictum since Plama upheld jurisdiction under alternative
grounds. (Berschader so acknowledged in para. 171.)
Plama also suggested elliptically that the expression “with
respect to all matters” is insufficient to overcome this
presumption. Yet the only authority cited in support of this
significant hardening of the presumption was Siemens v.
Argentina (2004). But that decision upheld an extension of
arbitral authority on the basis of an. MFN undertaking
which did not refer to “all matters”. The Berschader
majority thus seems to have relied on a dictum which in
turn had relied on another dictum.

96. The contrary reasoning of Ambatielos (set out in
Paragraph 89 above) strikes the present Tribunal as more
persuasive. Ambatielos had been preceded by an attempt to
bring the matter before the ICJ. That Court held (1953 JCJ
Reports 10) that (i) it had no jurisdiction to deal with the
merits of the claim but (ii) directed the UK to submit to the
jurisdiction of an arbitration commission. That gave rise to
the award quoted above. The Court’s judgment (rendered
by a 10:4 majority) said nothing about the scope and

-41-

applicability of the MFN clauses relied upon by Greece.
The four dissenting judges opined on the other hand that a
clause referring to “matters of commerce and navigation ...
cannot be extended” to cover aspects of “the administration
of justice”. This brief conclusion appears to be pure
affirmation. It was of course known to the commissioners
whose reasoned conclusion was to opposite effect.
Moreover all BITs were unknown in 1953. What the four
dissenters would have thought of the relationship between
“favoured treatment” of foreign investment and access to
neutral arbitration cannot be divined.

97. The reasoned view of the commissioners who
finally decided Ambatielos have found echoes (half a
century later) in a number of modern investor-State cases.
Thus the unanimous arbitrators in RosInvestCo adopted a
similar position in the following passages:

For it is difficult to doubt that an
expropriation interferes with the investor’s
use and enjoyment of the investment, and
that the submission to arbitration forms a
highly relevant part of the corresponding
protection for the investor by granting him,
in case of interference with this “use” and
“enjoyment”, procedural options of
obvious and great significance compared
to the sole option of challenging such
interference before the domestic courts of
the host state. ...

While indeed the application of the MFN
clause ... widens the scope of Article 8 and
thus is in conflict to its limitation, this is a
normal result of the application of MFN
clauses, the very character and intention of
which is that protection not accepted in
one treaty is widened by transferring the
protection accorded in another treaty.

If this effect is generally accepted in the
context of substantive protection, the

-42-

Tribunal sees no reason not to accept it in
the context of procedural clauses such as
arbitration clauses. Quite the contrary, it
could be argued that, if it applies to
substantive protection, then it should apply
even more to “only” procedural
protection. However, the Tribunal feels
that this latter argument cannot be
considered as decisive, but that rather, as
argued further above, an arbitration
clause, at least in the context of
expropriation, is of the same protective
value as any substantive protection
afforded by applicable provisions such as
Article 5 of the BIT. (Paragraphs 130-132.)

98. This reasoning is similar to that of paras. 19-20 of
the dissenting opinion in Berschader. It contrasts with that
of Plama (of which the RosInvestCo arbitrators indicated
they had taken note; see para. 136). Plama reasoned that it
may be “argued with equal force” that the fact that the
identified exceptions to MFN treatment made in the
relevant basic treaty related to “privileges” demonstrated
that the MFN treatment involved “substantive protection to
the exclusion of the procedural provisions relating to
dispute settlement” (para. 191). Yet this assertion of “equal
force” depends on the premise — stated but not
substantiated — that there is a significant distinction
between procedural and substantive protection.

99, It may be that some international lawyers
reflexively adopt the dichotomy of primary/secondary
obligations made familiar by the International Law
Commission. This might explain the temptation to
consider “treatment” a matter of primary or substantive
rules and thus distinct from “secondary” rules — such as
remedies — in the event of alleged breach. Perhaps this idea
merges into that of a substance/procedure distinction. Yet
there is nothing normative about the primary/secondary
dichotomy; it has simply been the classification by which
the ILC determined its field of work on State responsibility:

-43-

The law relating to the content and the
duration of substantive State obligations is
as determined by the primary rules. The
law of State responsibility as articulated in
the Draft Articles provides the framework
— those rules, denominated “secondary”,
which indicate the consequences of a
breach of an applicable primary
obligation. (James Crawford, The
International Law Commission’s Articles
on State Responsibility 16 (2002).)

100. There is no authority for the proposition that MFN
is limited to “primary” obligations. The established proper
criterion is rather ejusdem generis. That criterion resounds
through the quotations in the preceding paragraphs — from
Ambatielos onward. Nor can it be doubted that access to
international arbitration has been a fundamental and
constant desideratum ‘for investment protection and
therefore a weighty factor in considering the object and
purpose of BITs. The arbitrators are aware of the concern
that “it would be invidious for international tribunals to be
finding (in the absence of specific evidence) that host State
adjudication of treaty rights was necessarily inferior to
international arbitration”. This is how Messrs McLachlan
Shore & Weiniger put it in their monograph Jnternational
Investment Arbitration (at p. 257). It is however possible
that the invidiousness rather lies in this way of articulating
the issue. Investors who desire access to a neutral
international forum are not “necessarily” denigrating
national justice. They do no more than make clear that
their comfort is greater knowing that the international
alternative is open to them. This is a rational concern. Nor
is there anything illegitimate about the desideratum of an
option to seise a neutral forum. History is replete with
examples of investment disputes which have overwhelmed
the capacity of national institutions — in countries of all
stages of development — for dispassionate judgment.

101. Under Ambatielos both of the questions noted
under Paragraph 86 above therefore in principle could be
answered in the affirmative. Rights and obligations may be
classified as substantive or jurisdictional or procedural.

Such classifications are not watertight and in any event
primarily of pedagogical use. There is no textual basis or
legal rule to say that “treatment” does not encompass the
host state’s acceptance of international arbitration.
Whether MFN treatment is stated in the relevant BIT to
relate to investors rather than investments is in principle of
no moment. Investors will not claim access to international
arbitration by way of MFN treatment in the abstract. They
will assert a breach and harm in connection with a
qualifying investment under the relevant BIT. The
investor’s gateway to MFN treatment is the status of
protected investor and ownership of a _ qualifying
investment in terms of the BIT as the “basic treaty”. This
is the position the Claimants here seek to establish under
the Spanish BIT. There is nothing unsound about the
general proposition they seek to vindicate.

102. Yet the general proposition is not a laser beam
pointing to an answer (see Paragraph 90 above). To move
from broad purposive considerations to a specific
determination of what has been agreed requires coming to
grips with the singular features of the case at hand. Russia
has invoked a specific textual impediment to expanding the
scope of arbitral jurisdiction. That decisive argument now
moves centre-stage.

103. The MEN promise affects only matters within the
scope of Article 5(2) of the Spanish BIT which in turn
covers: only “treatment referred to in paragraph 1 above”.
The treatment in question is “fair and equitable treatment”
(“FET”). FET is a substantive standard of treatment.
Russia insists that access to international arbitration is not
an inherent part of FET. This is confirmed by the existence
of BITs guaranteeing FET without any recourse to
international arbitration whatever. A promise to match the
level of FET extended to third-party nationals therefore
cannot in Russia’s submission widen the scope of arbitral
jurisdiction.

104. | One immediately perceives that the present case is
unlike Berschader in that the latter involved a promise of
MEN “in all matters covered by this Agreement” (see

-45-

Paragraph 95 above). That is simply not the case with the
Spanish BIT. (Nor did the UK BIT under consideration in
RosInvestCo have such breadth. Given the dissimilarities
between the UK BIT and the Spanish BIT it is unnecessary
for the present Tribunal to comment on how Ros/nvestCo
nevertheless concluded that the MFN clause in that case
expanded arbitral jurisdiction.)

105. | This then becomes the crux of the matter: the
Spanish BIT does not contain an MFN clause entitling
investors to avail themselves in generic terms of more
favourable conditions found “in all matters covered” by
other treaties. Instead it establishes the right to enjoy a no
less favourable level of FET. The obvious questions arise
immediately: is access to international arbitration a
necessary part of FET? May it be said that a BIT which
does not give access to international arbitration provides
for less FET than one that does? Negative answers to these
questions would be fatal to the Claimants’ attempt to
enlarge arbitral jurisdiction.

106. Notwithstanding the existence of a BIT it may be
the case that an investor has no other avenue for the
enforcement of its rights except through the national courts
of the host State. There is no legal authority known to the
present Tribunal in support of the proposition that this state
of affairs would violate an FET undertaking in the treaty.
Instances of denial of justice by such courts may assuredly
trigger the State’s international responsibility. Yet that
possibility does not mean that access to international
arbitration per se implies a higher level of FET. The
neutrality of an international tribunal may legitimately be
said to enhance investor protection. Access to it may be
more favourable than lack of access. But that does not
mean that failure to give access to such a tribunal is unfair
or inequitable. The implications of a contrary inference
would be extraordinary. (For one thing it would plainly
justify the objection of Messrs McLachlan et al quoted in
Paragraph 100 above.)

107. The Claimants argue that FET is an invariable
standard and that it would be nonsense to speak of more or

- 46 -

less favourable FET treatment. The purpose of this
argument was to suggest that the word “treatment” in
Article 5(2) should not be qualified by the adjectives “fair
and equitable” found in Article 5(1) (reproduced in
Paragraph 68 above). The implication would be that the
MEN clause in Article 5(2) should be construed broadly so
that the Claimants could invoke all types of advantage
stipulated in other BITs. The importance of this point
hardly needs to be emphasised. It was much debated in the
hearings.

108. The proposition that FET should have a universal
meaning has an undeniable cogency. if one considers FET
as part and parcel of a general minimum standard of
international law. That standard may evolve over time. It
is nevertheless a single standard. The notion of a “variable
general standard” would be oxymoronic. Yet international
legal standards may also be created by treaties that bind
only the parties to that particular instrument. It is true that
the use in individual treaties of heterogeneous. ad hoc
definitions of expressions which are also used elsewhere to
denote a general principle may give birth to confusion and
therefore be undesirable. But nothing can prevent its
occurrence if States so decide. Indeed it has happened.

109. | One well-known example is the “interpretation”
proclaimed in 2001 by the three NAFTA State-parties to
the effect that FET (for NAFTA purposes) does not require
“treatment in addition to or beyond that, which is required
by the customary international law minimum standard of
treatment of aliens”. This initiative of the three
governments was sharply criticised by Sir Robert Jennings
in an opinion delivered in Methanex v. United States in
which he challenged “the impropriety of the three
governments making such an intervention well into the
process of the arbitration, not only after the benefit of
seeing the written pleadings of the parties but also virtually
prompted by them”. What matters here is not whether the
three governments were right to act as they did. What is
significant is rather that a former President of the ICJ
perceived that the three governments were agreeing to
amend general principles. Such was indeed also the
opinion of the arbitral tribunal whose interim award

-47-

apparently triggered the “interpretation” (see Pope &
Talbot v. Canada at paras. 47-59 (2002)). Other examples
could be given. One instance arising in the BIT context is
that of MTD v. Chile (2004). An MEN clause contained in
the Chile-Malaysian BIT was expanded by reference to two
other BITs concluded by Chile which contained more
detailed treaty language on “fair and equitable” treatment.
The basic treaty was thus enlarged to encompass
obligations (i) to grant permits subsequent to approval of an
investment and (ii) to fulfil contractual obligations.

110. Of particular relevance for present purposes is the
fact that Russia itself has elsewhere explicitly stipulated
that FET may be more or less favourable. Thus Article
3(1) of its Danish BIT provides:

Each Contracting Party shall accord
investments made by investors of the other
Contracting Party in its territory fair and
equitable treatment no less favourable than
that which it accords to investments of its
own investors or to investments of
investors of any third state, whichever
treatment is more favourable.

This text unmistakably contemplates variable levels of
FET. Investors would therefore find it meaningful to be
assured that they may invoke the most favourable level of
FET. Other equally clear instances may be imagined apart
from the example of treaty practice. A State may
unilaterally take a formal position that FET has a particular
meaning with respect to nationals of a particular country.
An investor entitled to MFN treatment would be in a
position to insist that that State could not legitimately treat
it in a less favourable manner.

111. The Tribunal finally turns to some lexical
difficulties. Article 5 (reproduced in Paragraph 68 above)
uses the word “treatment” at least once in each of its four
subparagraphs. Moreover the pronoun “that” in
subparagraph 2 replaces “treatment”. The result is not
ideal in terms of understanding the quite different senses

- 48 -

which the word may carry in its various iterations. It is
best to consider the uses as they occur. This involves
rather arid yet indispensable parsing.

112. Subparagraph 1 speaks of “fair and equitable
treatment”. Subparagraph 2 begins by referring to the
“treatment referred to in paragraph 1 above”. So far so
good. The difficulty begins with the pronoun that which
appears next in Subparagraph 2. If Article 5 contained only
two Subparagraphs there would be no problem; one would
conclude that the pronoun simply avoids a third iteration of
“fair and equitable treatment”. But then comes
Subparagraph 3. It begins: “Such treatment shall not,
however, include privileges” of certain types: advantages
created e.g. by membership in a free trade area or a
customs union. The fact that an import duty may be set at
x% or y % is naturally not a matter of FET. This strongly
suggests that the pronoun “such” in Subparagraph 3 cannot
be read to stand for “fair and equitable treatment” but
rather for “treatment” simpliciter.

113. The exception made for negotiated tax advantages
in the final section of Subparagraph 3 is to similar effect. It
may indeed be described as even more troubling since it
refers to “treatment under this article’. One might infer
that every time the word “treatment” appears throughout
Article 5 it is intended to have the same meaning. Tax
advantages are like customs tariffs in that they are not
ordinarily matters of FET.

114. | The Claimants say this proves that “treatment” is
generic and not limited to FET. The focus of Subparagraph
2 is of course the hypothetical treatment accorded to a
third-party national under a “comparator treaty”. If this is
broad treatment (the Claimants reason) it gives them access
to investor-State arbitration.

115. | Now that the lexical ground has been traversed the
problem may be restated in simpler terms. One logical
sequence is the following. Subparagraph 1 explicitly
concerns FET. Subparagraph 2 equally unmistakeably
refers back to FET. Subparagraph 2’s promise of MFN

-49-

therefore does not encompass access to investor-State
arbitration.

116. Yet if MFN treatment is restricted to FET
Subparagraph 3 was unnecessary. One should if possible
avoid the conclusion that treaty provisions are superfluous.
Therefore the MFN clause should be understood in a broad
sense. It captures investor-State arbitration. Thus
Subparagraph 2 seems to envisage MFN treatment which is
simultaneously restricted and broad.

117. | Something has to give. The choice is between an
explicit stipulation and a revelation by grammatical
deconstruction. The Tribunal naturally prefers the former.
Why then would the drafters have included Subparagraph 3
unless they understood the pronoun “such” to stand for
broader treatment? The arbitrators believe the answer lies
ready to hand. The drafters were conscious of the
ramifications of the MFN promise. They were determined
to ensure that it would not encroach on their freedom to
extend special privileges in the context of regional
integration or other arrangements envisaged in
Subparagraph 3. Such exceptions to MFN clauses are
commonplace in BIT practice. This may have led to a
reflexive insertion of the clause in the Spanish BIT. A
searching exegetical endeavour would have revealed that
this was unnecessary in this. particular instance. The
drafters may not have realised this. Or they may not have
wished to rely on others — including trade representatives or
tribunals — to reach the same recondite conclusion. Either
way the attribution. to Subparagraph 3 of sophisticated
implications simply cannot dislodge the qualifying
adjectives “fair and equitable” in Subparagraph 1. Even
less can it undermine the unambiguous reference in
Subparagraph 2 to “treatment referred to in paragraph 1
above”.

118. The final Subparagraph 4 presents its own
difficulty. It contains a promise of “treatment no less
favourable than that” granted to nationals. Here there are
no qualifying adjectives. Nor is there a cross-reference
having that effect. Arguably this is therefore “treatment”

-50-

writ large. So imagine that Russia were to offer
international arbitration to its own citizens making claims
against the State. The Claimants too would then be entitled
to international arbitration by virtue of this Subparagraph.
Such a provision is as far as the Tribunal knows unheard of
in international treaty practice. It would be odd indeed if
national treatment were in this respect sharply more
favourable than MFN. One might therefore wonder if the
drafters of the Spanish BIT truly applied their minds to the
issue of arbitration when drafting Article 5. The doubt may
be justified. Yet it hardly advantages the Claimants. The
Treaty must be taken as it is written.

119. The conclusion must be that the specific MFN
promise contained in Article 5(2) of the Spanish BIT
cannot be read to enlarge the competence of the present
Tribunal. This conclusion (and the analysis in Paragraphs
105-118 upon which it is built) is that of a majority of the
Tribunal. The separate opinion appended hereto is viewed
with full respect by the majority. They agree that “more
favourable” may in principle include accessibility to
international fora. Ultimately however their view is that
the terms of the Spanish BIT restrict MFN treatment to the
realm of FET as understood in international law. This in
the majority view relates to normative standards and does
not extend to either (i) the availability of international as
opposed to national fora or (ii) “more” rather than “less”
arbitration (as the separate opinion puts it).

120. The Claimants have also invoked Russia’s BITs
with other countries. The Tribunal’s conclusion makes it
superfluous to analyse them, since the impediment to
expansion of arbitral jurisdiction via the MFN avenue lies
in the Spanish BIT itself and cannot be overcome by the
texts of such other instruments.

2.3 Are the Claimants “investors” covered by the
Spanish BIT?

121. This objection pertains to three of the Claimants.
Two. of them are challenged for an identical reason. It is
convenient to begin with them.

-51-

122. Russia argues that Emergentes and Eurofondo are
not corporate bodies. Spanish law (specifically: Article 3
of Law 35/2003 of 4 November 2003) treats them as
collective investment funds without legal personality. It
follows in Russia’s submission that they are not investors
as defined in the Spanish BIT. Article 1 of the Treaty
states:

1. The term “investor” shall mean:

(a) Any individual having the nationality
of either Party and entitled under the
relevant legislation of that Party to
make investments in the territory of
the other Party;

(b) Any corporate body established in
accordance with the legislation of
either Party, domiciled in its
territory, and allowed under the
legislation in force there to make
investments in the territory of the
other Party.

123. — An opinion letter on Spanish law dated 25 April
2008 produced by the Claimants contains the following
statements by Antonio Hierro of the Cuatrecasas law firm:

I have analyzed the definition of investor
under article I of the Spain/USSR BIT.
Although it is clear that [Eurofondo] and
[Emergentes] are not a corporate body
(“persona juridica”), it is also clear that
they are capable of acquiring rights and
obligations of a contractual nature. They
can own property .... They were
authorized to operate by the Spanish stock
market regulator (Comisién Nacional del
Mercado de Valores — CNMV) and are
registered entities, as required under
section 10 of the above act .... In the

ordinary course of business, these. and
similar investment funds sometimes
become involved in legal actions, both as
claimants and respondents, regarding the
rights and obligations they acquire during
their activities. When. these situations
arise, the Funds’ claims are asserted on
their behalf by their management
companies, following the same pattern
established by our civil system to have
represented by a court the interest of
minors or of other entities that can own
rights and obligations, but cannot act
directly at Court.

124. The Parties derive quite different conclusions from
the propositions articulated in the Cuatrecasas letter.
Russia’s position is exceedingly simple: an entity which is
not a corporate body is not covered by the Spanish BIT.

125. The Claimants counter that the Spanish system
under which Emergentes and Eurofundo operate involves
three different entities that have an “organic”
interrelationship. Assets are owned by the fund. The fund
is managed by a company capable of bringing claims in
relation to the assets. The assets are held by the depository
as custodian. The latter conducts purchases and sales of the
assets. The Claimants insist that it was proper for
Emergentes and Eurofundo to be put forward as claimants
through the initiative of their management company
(Ahorro Corporacion Gestion SGIIC). Thus the
“attributes” of ownership and legal personality are joined.

126. The somewhat metaphysical notion of “joined
attributes” has been given no legal definition. The
difficulty here is obvious. The Treaty requires that “the
investor” be a “corporate body”. The Claimants answer
that this tripartite Spanish system was in place when the
Spanish BIT was signed and it would be “hair-splitting”
(T:277) not to consider that investments generated under
that system were not intended to be covered.

-53-

127. It is a vexing issue. No rational basis has been
proposed to explain why either of the State-parties to the
Spanish BIT should have desired to promote and protect
the investments. of physical persons and corporate bodies
but not those of entities that are able to mobilise capital but
lack legal personality. Yet the words of the Treaty are
what they are. Apparently Spanish law considers that
investment funds may be “corporate bodies” for some
purposes (e.g. as beneficiaries of authorisation to operate
granted by the CNMV) although not for others (e.g.
standing to sue or be sued). But it is difficult to overlook
Mr Hierro’s unambiguous disqualification of the funds as
corporate bodies while explicitly referring to Article 1 of
the Spanish BIT. It requires a juridical leap to allow the
funds to qualify as investors by absorbing a corporate
identity which is not their own.

128. In fact the English words “corporate body” are
vaguer and thus possibly broader than the official Spanish
“persona juridica”. One might debate the meaning of
“body” in the abstract sense of “entity”. A fund might well
be thought of as an entidad. That word was indeed used by
the Barcelona Court of Appeal in its decision of 26 July
2006 in Case 59/2006. Yet it immediately went on to
qualify the fund involved in that case as being sin
personalidad. Having the status of a “body” or “entity”
clearly does not (necessarily) imply legal personality.
International law does not contain a definition of “legal
personality” capable of being applied to constructs of
national law. One must look to Spanish law. The letter
from counsel for the Claimants to the Russian Minister of
Foreign Affairs on 17 October 2006 “on behalf of our
client” Ahorro Corporacién Gestion SGIIC S.A. identified
Emergentes and Eurofondo (“managed by Ahorro”) as
“Spanish Investors under the Treaty”. This simply cannot
be; Article 1(b) of the Spanish BIT excludes it.

129. Purpose does not overcome text. . A servant
corrects the command “toss out the baby and put the water
to bed” not by dint of purposive interpretation but by an
instant and proper understanding of the plain (though
jumbled) meaning of the words in context. The literal
syntax is absurd but is corrected without pause. The

-54-

problem of the Spanish funds is quite different. The
Spanish. BIT’s disqualification of corporate entities bereft
of legal personality may well have been inadvertent. Yet as
long as it does not lead to absurdity it must be accepted as
the expression of the will of the State-parties.

130. | One may ask how Spanish law characterises these
funds other than by making clear what they are not. Law
35/2003 refers to them as patrimonios separados.
Patrimonios may best be understood as “estates” or
“assets”. (The word “equities” that appears in the
translation provided by the Claimants seems misleading. It
was probably inferred from the expression patrimonio
social — shareholders’ equity.) This is not of great
assistance. One might speculate that the State-parties
simply did not wish to protect investors who did not have
legal personality. This would parallel the possible
disqualification of minors or other incompetent persons
under Article 1(a). Why this was desirable leads to further
speculation. The exercise is futile; it is what was agreed.

131. . With respect to Renta 4 S.V.S.A. Russia argues
that it does not qualify as an investor because the Yukos
ADRs on its books are held in custody for an investment
fund named Renta 4 Europa Este FIM. Once again the
Claimants answer by reference to the tripartite Spanish
system described in Paragraph 125 above. Once again the
Tribunal understands that the owner of the asset that
constitutes the investment is not a corporate entity. The
named Claimant (Renta 4) is in this instance the depository.
It seems to have an undisputed right to act on behalf of its
client. But the problem is that the fund (i.e. Renta 4 Europa
Este FIM) lacks the formal requisite to be an investor under
the definition of the Spanish BIT.

132. The Claimants have suggested in the alternative
that the Tribunal could “recognise” the management
companies as Claimants (T:277). The Tribunal has
considered that hypothesis. For that purpose it put to the
side any formal difficulties that might arise under Swedish
law or the SCC Rules. It also assumed that the suggestion
might-extend to Renta 4 as depository. The reasoning then

progresses as follows. It may well be that each of the three
entities pass muster under Article 1(b) as Spanish corporate
bodies allowed under Spanish law to “make investments”
in Russia. But did they do so in this case? The
Cuatrecasas letter does not allow that inference. To the
contrary it describes the main “activity” of the funds as
“buying, selling and owning all types of assets, including
commodities, securities and real estate, both in Spain and
abroad”. It is difficult on this footing to consider that the
management and depository companies (albeit, potential
qualified investors) actually made investments. The
investments were as far as the Tribunal can see made by
funds insusceptible of qualifying as investors under the
Spanish BIT.

133. The management and depository companies are not
named parties to this arbitration. It is not clear that the
present decision could bind them. They may have their
own arguments to invalidate the reasoning of Paragraph
132. The Tribunal finds that it cannot in the circumstances
“recognise” substitute claimants.

134. This conclusion may seem formalistic but is
unavoidable. It bears similarity to L:E.S.T.-Dipenta v.
Algeria (2005) which involved an attempt by a two-
member consortium to act as a sole claimant although the
case was brought by reference to a contract that was signed
by them separately. The tribunal declared that it had no
jurisdiction to consider the dispute as engaged. This
decision was naturally without prejudice to the possibility
that the individual consortium members might bring a new
action (as indeed they did). The Claimants seek to rely on
the Jurisdictional Award rendered in SCC Case 21/1999 in
support of their proposal that the Arbitral Tribunal might
“recognise” substitute claimants. That case however
illustrates rather than solves the Claimants’ problem; an
unincorporated consortium was dismissed as a claimant but
its members were retained on the footing that they had been
named parties “from the outset”.

-56-

2.4 Is ownership of Yukos-related ADRs an
investment covered by the Spanish BIT?

135. The arguments in this respect involve two
provisions of the Spanish BIT. The first is the following
definition of investment in Article 1(2):

The term “investments” shall apply to ail
types of assets, and particularly but not
exclusively to:

Shares and other forms of participation
in companies;

Rights deriving from any type of
investment made to create an economic
value;

Immovable property as well as any
other rights relating thereto,

Intellectual property rights, including
patents, trade marks, appellations of
origin, trade names, industrial designs
and models, copyrights and technology
and know-how;

- Concessions, accorded by law or by
virtue of a contract, for engaging in
economic and commercial activity,
including concessions for prospecting,
tapping, mining and managing natural
resources.

136. . The second is the definition of the scope of the
Treaty that appears in Article 2:

Scope of Agreement

-57-

This Agreement shall be applicable in the
territory over which either Party exercises
or may exercise jurisdiction or sovereign
rights, in accordance with international
law, in particular for the purposes of
prospecting, tapping, mining and
managing natural resources.

This Agreement shall apply to investments
made by investors of one Party in the
territory of the other Party, in accordance
with the legislation in force there as of 1
January 1971.

137. Russia contends that the Claimants’ alleged
investments were not made “in the territory” of Russia. It
submits that the characterisation of investments as “assets”
is necessary but not sufficient. The notion of investment
“has its own core meaning” to be derived from prior
awards or “just common sense” (T:113). American
Depository Receipts are by necessity issued by US banks or
trust companies. Russia has no “prescriptive jurisdiction”
over the ADRs in this case notwithstanding that the value
of Yukos may be reflected in them. In Russia’s view they
constituted a “commercial transaction” rather than an
“ownership interest” in Yukos and are therefore not
investments.

138. Russia goes on to observe that the shareholder in
Yukos was a Deutsche Bank affiliate incorporated in New
York. Its relationship with ADR holders was contractual.
The holders could not vote at a Yukos assembly. That was
the formal prerogative of Deutsche Bank. There may have
been a contractual duty on Deutsche Bank to follow ADR
holders’ instructions. Its failure to do so would raise a
contractual issue “completely outside of the Russian
territory” (T:120). The same would be true if Deutsche
Bank failed to credit the ADR holder with dividends paid
by Yukos by reference to the shareholding reflected in the
ADRs. The ADR holders’ right to sell was likewise
governed by a contract subject to New York law rather than
by the Russian regime applicable to Yukos shareholders.

-58-

139. . It should be noted from the outset that Russia’s
reference to Gruslin v. Malaysia (2000) is inapposite.
There the Belgian investor purchased shares in a
Luxemburg mutual fund. The fund was specialised in
Asian equities. It purchased those equities in various
national markets as it saw fit. Some of its holdings were
traded on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. The investor
considered that the Malaysian government had taken
measures in violation of a BIT which had the effect of
depressing the value of his investment. Of course the value
of his investment reflected the aggregate value of the
Luxemburg mutual fund. The issue whether his was an
investment in Malaysia is clearly very different from
asking whether the present Claimants invested in Russia.
A Yukos ADR perforce reflects an investment in that
Russian company. Mr Gruslin’s mutual fund invested in
many countries and had no duty to invest in Malaysia at all
if it deemed it more propitious to invest elsewhere.

140. Russia’s argument in this case is inconsistent with
statements made by Russian officials. A guidance letter
issued on 7 February 2005 by Russia’s Ministry of Finance
states that a depository share evidences “a property interest
in a Russian organization”. To similar effect is a letter
issued on 25 July 1996 by the State Committee of the
Russian Federation for Management of State-Owned
Property. The letter set forth “Recommendations for
Preparation of Actions for Sale of Securities in the
International Equity Markets”. It contains this statement:

[I]t virtually makes no difference (from the
point of view of the actual raising of the
capital) as to how it will be implemented
from the technical standpoint - in the form
of ADRs, GDRs, through bonds,
conversion, directly in the form of shares
or a combination thereof.

141. Article 1(2) of the Spanish BIT defines
“investments” as “all types of assets”. It immediately gives
a non-exhaustive list of examples which includes not only
“shares and other forms of participation in companies” but

-59-

also “rights deriving from any type of investment made to
create an economic value”. This denotes very broad
acceptance of unspecified vehicles of investment (“other
forms”). To assert that Yukos ADRs are not investments in
Russia is not sustainable in light of this liberal text and the
statements of Russian governmental bodies. ADRs are
internationally well-known securities. They were obvious
candidates to fit under the Article 1(2) definition and
equally obvious forms of investments designed to be
encouraged by the BIT. The “property interest”
represented by ADRs naturally runs with their ownership.
The fact that formal share ownership may be recorded as
that of the depository is of no moment. To follow Russia’s
invitation to apply “common sense” to this question is to
decide it in favour of coverage under the Treaty.

142. This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that
Article 6 of the Spanish BIT refers to the duty to
compensate “the investor or his beneficiary”. Counsel for
Russia adroitly suggested that this expression was intended
to cover the case of subrogees (T:362). That is certainly
credible in light of the Treaty’s specific provisions about
beneficiaries of subrogation (Article 8). But there is no
limiting cross-reference. The language seems broad
enough to encompass holders of ADRs as well. It is true
that on-selling’ may raise issues of causation. Double
recovery is obviously not allowed. But both of these
reservations also apply to shareholders. In either case they
raise issues of substance rather than of jurisdiction.

143. Russia’s arguments about the — essentially
contractual nature of ADR holders’ rights (as: well as their
extraterritorial locus) are unpersuasive. Such a conclusion
would doubtless invalidate holders of shares of Russian
enterprises which chose to trade on any foreign bourses.
Formal shareholdings are routinely in the hands of third
party custodians. It would be astonishing to think that a
BIT excluded such familiar vehicles for capital
mobilisation. Official Russian communications (as seen)
are to the opposite effect. The suggestion that these
communications were intended to amalgamate various
forms of investments only for limited purposes (such as
taxation) does not in the Tribunal’s view have a credible

-60-

textual foundation. Moreover it contradicts Article 1(2) of
the Spanish BIT. Even if ADRs are not (contrary to the
arbitrators’ view) to be considered “other forms of
participation” they are most certainly “rights deriving
from” an investment.

144. . Nor is the Tribunal convinced by Russia’s reliance
on the requirement in Article 2 that investments must be
“made ... in the territory of the other Party”. The nexus
required by this Article between “investment” and
“territory” must be understood by reference to the types of
investments encompassed by Article 1. They are
exceedingly broad: “other forms of participation” and
“tights derived”. The contractual relationship here surely
qualifies.

2.5 Have the Claimants sufficiently demonstrated
ownership?

145. | The Claimants responded to Russia’s challenge by
submitting seven statements of depositaries detailing
transactions concluded for various Claimants. Claimant
Renta 4 S.V.S.A. submitted a similar statement on behalf of
Renta 4 Europa Este FI. The Claimant also provided a
declaration of Mr Mardomingo (see Paragraph 9 above)
“explaining features of Spain’s regulatory system relevant
to proof of ownership of ADRs and other securities” by
collective investment institutions.

146. The exit of Renta 4 S.V.S.A. and the two “Ahorro”
entities from these proceedings makes it unnecessary to
consider this issue with respect to them.

147.. The four remaining claimants are all sociedades
anonimas de capital variable. The Tribunal is satisfied
with the depository statements furnished on their behalf as
well as the statement of Mr Mardomingo. Russia questions
the reality of their rights as “beneficiaries” vis-a-vis the
formal “holders” of the relevant ADRs. The Tribunal
considers that beneficiaries possess a “form of
participation” for the purposes of the Spanish BIT. Any

-61-

misrepresentation of their status would be fraudulent.
Fraud is not to be presumed. Russia may pursue its
inquiries if it wishes. But its bare challenge to the evidence
of these four Claimants’ ownership is inadequate to defeat
their standing.

-62-

3. ADMISSIBILITY

148. Two issues of admissibility were raised in Russia’s
written pleadings: adequacy of notice and exhaustion of
local remedies. The latter was explicitly abandoned at the
hearings (T:103). Only adequacy of notice remains.

149. Russian maintains that the “detailed report”
required under Article 10(1) of the BIT (see Paragraph 5
above) was not provided by the Claimants.

150. Russia was entitled to a “detailed report”. This
means it could have insisted on greater specificity. It does
not mean that it could keep silent and then complain about
its ignorance of matters which the Claimants would
certainly have had every reason to be willing to clarify if
asked. The words “detailed report” are not self-defining.
The Claimants’ notices were succinct but nonetheless
contained much detailed information about the
circumstances of their investment and the fact that their
interest in Yukos had been adversely affected by
governmental measures. The Claimants could reasonably
have expected that this matter was not unfamiliar to the
Government.

151. The issue is not whether Russia (as the point was
put in its pleadings) “is expected to negotiate with an
undocumented American lawyer on the basis of some
random demand letter”. The notion that the host State
could simply cross its arms and disregard any
communications which it deems to be formally insufficient
is hardly consonant with the attitude to be expected of
officials of a government which has encouraged foreign
investors. Nor can it be said that a claimed treaty violation

-63-

relating to the Yukos controversy — front-page news around
the world — was a trivial matter which the central organs of
a State could reasonably ignore. Russia should have stated
that it considered the notice to be incomplete or
incomprehensible if. it believed that it did not fulfil its
purposes or did not give Russia (as its counsel now puts it)
“an opportunity to investigate the bona fides of the
purported investors’ claims”.

152..  Russia’s challenge adds one degree of specificity
with respect to two of the Claimants. It denies that a letter
from the manager of Emergentes and Eurofondo qualifies
as a notice by them. The discussion in Section 2.3 should
have made clear that the role of the managing company is
precisely to bring claims in relation to a fund’s assets. The
point is however academic in light of the Tribunal’s
conclusion that these two funds are not qualified investors.

153. The objection of inadequacy of notice must fail
with respect to the four Claimants concerned.

154. This award and the separate opinion attached to it
follow extensive and collegial deliberations. The
arbitrators have had numerous oral and written exchanges
with respect to the challenging issues raised by the Parties.
The result has been a refinement of the views of each
arbitrator and the emergence of the fullest possible
consensus.

155.

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

156.

DECISION

The Tribunal hereby decides that:

it has subject matter jurisdiction under Article 10
of the Spanish BIT to decide whether
compensation is due by virtue of claims of
expropriation raised in this arbitration;

it has no subject matter jurisdiction under Article 5
of the Spanish BIT;

its jurisdiction is limited to the claims of the
following four entities:

- Rovime Inversions SICAV S.A.

- Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A.

- Orgor de Valores SICAV S.A.

- GBI 9000 SICAV S.A.

the claims of the four corporate entities identified
in Subparagraph (iii) are admissible within the
scope of Subparagraph (i).

Costs are reserved.

-65-

o
Done onD March 2009.
howled Braeg_—

Charles N. Brower Toby T. Landau

Jan Paulsson

- 66 -

