[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION]

REPSOL YPF ECUADOR, S.A.
v.

EMPRESA ESTATAL PETROLEOS DEL ECUADOR
(PETROECUADOR)

ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10
Annulment Proceeding

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 1

 

I. PROCEEDINGS

1. On September 14, 2004, the ICSID Secretariat constituted, in accordance
with Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc Committee (the
“Committee”) to decide on the application for annulment filed by Petroecuador,
on the Award rendered in ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10 favoring Repsol YPF
Ecuador, S.A. (“Repsol”).

2. The members of the Committee appointed in this annulment proceeding
were Mr. Judd Kessler, President, Mr. Piero Bernardini, and Mr. Gonzalo
Biggs.

3. Pursuant to Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Committee
invited the parties, by letters from the Secretariat of September 22 and October
26, 2004, to file their observations on the stay of enforcement of the arbitral
award. Both parties filed their observations on this issue by October 15, 2004.

4, The Committee scheduled its first session with the parties to be held on
November 9, 2004, in Quito, Ecuador. However, such session was not held
as the applicant did not deposit the ICSID fees and expenses required by
Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3) and that had been fixed at
US$100,000.00.

5. After a number of communications between the Committee and the parties,
Petroecuador paid the Centre the fees and expenses on November 16, 2005. On

629

630 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

November 28, the Committee informed the parties that, in accordance with
Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3), it had decided to accept the
payment and continue with the case.

6. In view of the unusual delay, and although the parties had already submitted
their observations with respect to the stay of enforcement of the award, the
Committee gave the parties the opportunity to submit additional observations
by December 12, 2005. These observations were duly submitted by both
parties. Petroecuador maintains that Repsol’s claim had no basis and, even if
it did, there was no doubt the parties would be fully able to comply with the
results of the proceeding. Repsol points out that the unusual delay of the case,
the weight of ICSID jurisprudence, and the opinions of qualified jurists would
indicate that the Committee should refrain from staying the enforcement of the
arbitral award or stipulate that Petroecuador should post a bond, through bank
guarantee issued by a reputable international bank.

II. DISCUSSION

7. The issues relating to the stay of enforcement of an award and posting of
a bond have been raised in a number of arbitration cases before ICSID and
have been analyzed by prominent legal commentators. Some of the more recent
decisions are: CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/14 (14 July 2004); Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the
Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7 (9 February 2004); Wena Hotels Ltd.
y. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4 (5 February 2002).
See also Schreuer: The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001), pp. 1056-
60; Friedland: “Stay of Enforcement of the Arbitral Award Pending ICSID
Annulment Proceedings,” pp. 177 et seg. in: Galliard and Bonifatemi, Editors,
Annulment of ICSID Awards (2004).

8. Thus, the rule emerging from earlier arbitration proceedings is that the
party requesting the annulment of an award may obtain its stay of enforcement
for the duration of the proceeding, upon the posting of a bond for the total
amount of the award.

9. The Committee acknowledges that in a minority of cases before ICSID,
the stay of enforcement of the award was maintained without a bond being
required. Without going into a detailed analysis of these decisions, we consider
that these decisions could be justified by the fact that they entailed relatively
small sums, or because there were special circumstances which were not present
in this case. The Committee considers that the practice of requiring a bond

CASES 631

is correct in order to prevent a party from applying for an annulment for the
purposes of delaying or extending the enforcement date for the arbitral award. In
this case, Petroecuador has already benefited from a long stay of enforcement of
the award without incurring any costs; a situation that was, however, evidently
prejudicial to Repsol.

III. DECISION
Thus, the Committee decides that:

The stay of enforcement of the arbitral award of February 20, 2004 will
remain in effect for the duration of these Annulment Proceedings on condition
that Petroecuador post an unconditional and irrevocable bond for the total
amount of the award plus the corresponding interest. This bond will be delivered
to the Committee, represented by its President, in the form ofa guarantee from
a solvent and reputable international bank, and will be collectable in its entirety
by Repsol in the event that Petroecuador’s application is completely rejected. If
the request is only partially accepted, Repsol may collect the guarantee for that
portion of the award not annulled by the Committee, without prejudice to the
possible continuation of the stay allowed by ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3) or
by a new arbitral tribunal under ICSID Arbitration Rule 55(3).

If Petroecuador fails to provide a guarantee deemed satisfactory by the
Committee in accordance with the above terms by January 15, 2006, the
stay of enforcement of the arbitral award shall become null and void on that
date. The resolution adopted here does not suspend the first session of this
Committee with the parties, which will take place in Quito on January 31,
2006, as previously agreed.

This order has been signed on behalf of the Committee by its President.

JUDD L. KESSLER
President of the ad hoc Committee

Washington D.C
December 22, 2005

