[UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION]

REPSOL YPF ECUADOR, S.A.

EMPRESA ESTATAL PETROLEOS DEL ECUADOR
(PETROECUADOR)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10
Annulment Proceedings)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 4

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Judd L. Kessler, President
Prof. Piero Bernardini

Prof. Gonzalo Biggs

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Claudia Frutos-Peterson

February 22, 2006

638

CASES 639

PROCEEDINGS

1. On February 20, 2004, the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal composed of Messrs.
Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, Alberto Wray Espinosa and Eduardo Carmigniani
Valencia, rendered an arbitral award in ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10 with
regards to a request filed by Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. (“Repsol”) against
Empresa Estatal de Petrdleos del Ecuador (“Petroecuador”). Repsol’s request
pertained to a dispute over amounts owed for services, according to the terms
of an oil exploration and production contract in the Republic of Ecuador. The
arbitral award favored Repsol and ordered Petroecuador to pay the sum of
US$13,684,279.23 plus interest as of the date of the award.

2. On June 7, 2004, Petroecuador filed an application for annulment of the
above-mentioned arbitral award and, on July 15 of the same year, the Secretary-
General of ICSID, in the exercise of the powers vested in him by ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54(2), stayed the enforcement of the award.

3. On September 14, 2004, an ad hoc Committee (“Committee”) was
constituted pursuant to Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention to rule on the
application for annulment filed by Petroecuador against to the above-mentioned
arbitral award of February 20, 2004.

4, The members of the Committee appointed to rule on the above-mentioned
annulment application were Messrs. Judd Kessler, from the United States of
America (President), Piero Bernardini, from Italy, and Gonzalo Biggs, from

Chile.

5. Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(1), the Committee invited the
parties to file their observations on the stay of enforcement of the arbitral award.
Petroecuador filed its observations on October 4, 2004, and Repsol on October
15, 2004.

6. The Committee scheduled its first session with the parties for November 9,
2004 in the city of Quito. However, such session was not held as the applicant
did not deposit the sums to cover the fees and expenses on time, as required
by Regulation 14(3) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations.
These sums were paid on November 16, 2005.

7. Once the above-mentioned deposit was made, the Committee invited the
parties to present additional observations before December 12, 2005, which were
duly received. In summary, Petroecuador maintained that Repsol’s complaint
had no basis and that even if it did, there was no doubt that the parties would
be fully able to comply with the results of the proceeding. Repsol pointed out

640 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

that the unusual delay of the case, the weight of ICSID jurisprudence, and the
opinions of qualified jurists indicated that the Committee should terminate the
stay of enforcement of the arbitral award or stipulate that Petroecuador post a
bond, through a bank guarantee issued by a reputable international bank.

8. The Committee reviewed the observations presented by the parties, ICSID’s
jurisprudence on the stay of enforcement of an award and the posting of a bond,
and the opinions of prominent legal commentators. With regard to ICSID’s
jurisprudence, some of the decisions analyzed were the following: i) CDC Group
PLC v. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14 (July 14, 2004);
ii) Mr. Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/7 (November 30, 2004); and iii) Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic
of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4 (January 28, 2002). The Committee also
analyzed, inter alia, the commentaries by Schreuer: The ICSID Convention:
A Commentary (2001), pp. 1056-60; and Friedland: “Stay of Enforcement of
the Arbitral Award Pending ICSID Annulment Proceedings,” p. 177 et seg. in:
Gaillard and Banifatemi, Editors, Annulment of ICSID Awards (2004).

9. Based on the above, the Committee concluded that the weight of rulings and
expert opinions consulted indicate that the party requesting the annulment of
an award may obtain its stay of enforcement for the duration of the proceedings
upon the posting of a bank bond for the total amount of the award.

10. Without prejudice of the above, the Committee acknowledged that in
a minority of cases before ICSID, the stay of enforcement of the award was
maintained without a bond being required. The Committee concluded that
such decisions could be justified by the fact that they entailed relatively small
sums, or because there were special circumstances which were not present in
this case. The Committee considered that the practice of requiring a bond was
correct in order to prevent a party from applying for an annulment for the
purposes of delaying or extending the enforcement date for the arbitral award.
Tt was further noted that in this case, Petroecuador had already benefited from
a long stay of enforcement of the award without incurring any costs; a situation
that was, however, evidently prejudicial to Repsol.

11. In light of the above, the Committee decided in its Procedural Order No. 1
of December 22, 2005 that:

The stay of enforcement of the arbitral award of February 20, 2004 will
remain in effect for the duration of these Annulment Proceedings on
condition that Petroecuador post an unconditional and irrevocable bond
for the total amount of the award plus the corresponding interest. This

CASES 641

bond will be delivered to the Committee, represented by its President,
in the form of a guarantee from a solvent and reputable international
bank, and will be collectable in its entirety by Repsol in the event that
Petroecuador’s application is completely rejected. If the request is only
partially accepted, Repsol may collect the guarantee for that portion of
the award not annulled by the Committee, without prejudice to the
possible continuation of the stay allowed by Rule 54(3) or by a new
arbitral tribunal under Rule 55(3).

12. The Committee further resolved that if Petroecuador failed to post a
satisfactory bond in accordance with the above terms and conditions prior
to January 15, 2006, the stay of enforcement of the arbitral award would
be immediately terminated as of that date. It was further resolved that the
Procedural Order adopted would not affect the first session of the Committee
with the parties in Quito, on January 31, 2006, as provided in Procedural Order
No. 1 of the Committee of December 22, 2005.

13. On December 30, 2005, Petroecuador requested the reconsideration of
Procedural Order No. 1, claiming that the order for a guarantee to stay the
enforcement of the award would be absolutely void since it is not provided
for in the ICSID’s Rules, the Convention or Treaty; additionally the order
was not applicable to Petroecuador or the Ecuadorean State since it violated
its internal order and could even constitute an offence which may result in
different liabilities.

14. In its Procedural Order No. 2 of January 9, 2006, the Committee indicated
that the following provisions of the ICSID Convention and of its Arbitration
Rules were relevant to the matter at hand:
a) The last sentence of Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention, which
establishes that:
The Committee shall have the authority to annul the award or
any part thereof on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph
(1).
b) The first sentence of Article 52(5) of the Convention, which
establishes that:
(i) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances
so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision.

c) The first sentence of Article 54(3), of the Arbitration Rules, which
establishes that:

642 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Ifa stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph
(1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or
Committee may at any time modify or terminate the stay at the

request of either party. (Emphasis added).

15. The Committee concluded that the above provisions of the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules demonstrated that it had
sufficient authority, when considering an application for annulment, to order or
deny the stay of enforcement of the arbitral award challenged. Furthermore, it
added that, as maintained in the consistent jurisprudence of ICSID, just as the
Committee had the authority to decide whether or not to stay the enforcement,
it also had the authority to establish the requirements necessary to allow the stay
to continue.

16. Therefore the Committee issued its decision to:

a) Deny PetroEcuador’s request for reconsideration, of December 30,
2005 and confirm all the terms and conditions of Procedural Order No.
1 of December 22, 2005;

b) Continue the stay of enforcement of the arbitral award of February
20, 2004, subject to PetroEcuador’s posting of an unconditional and
irrevocable bond under the terms and conditions indicated in Procedural
Order No. 1; and

c) Confirm the date and place for the first hearing of the Committee
and the parties for January 31, 2006 in Quito, Ecuador.

17. On January 25, 2006, after receiving Procedural Order No. 2 from the
Committee, Petroecuador requested a seven-day extension of the time limit for
posting the bond ordered by Procedural Orders 1 and 2.

18. In light of the importance of the bond for both parties, and considering
the short extension requested the Committee, in its Procedural Order No.
3 of January 27, 2006, accepted the request and extended the period for the
posting of the bond until February 1, 2006. The other terms and conditions of
Procedural Orders Nos. 1 and 2 remained the same.

19. However, the extension granted elapsed without the Committee receiving
the bond requested or any other communication from Petroecuador.

With regard to the above-mentioned considerations the Committee noted that:

a) The stay of enforcement of the arbitral award of February 20, 2004 has
continued until February 1, 2006 on condition that Petroecuador post

CASES 643

an unconditional and irrevocable bond under the terms and conditions
indicated in Procedural Order No. 1; and

b) Petroecuador did not post the bond requested within the period
established by the Committee.

THEREFORE, THIS COMMITTEE HEREBY DECIDES:

a) That according to the powers provided in Rule 54(3) of ICSID’s Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, the stay of enforcement of the arbitral
award is terminated; and

b) According to Rule 54(5), the Secretary-General of ICSID shall promptly
notify both parties of this decision.

JUDD L. KESSLER
President

PIERO BERNARDINI GONZALO BIGGS
[Member] [Member]

