PCA Case No. 2016-13

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (‘NAFTA’) AND
THE 1976 UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

between

RESOLUTE FOREST PRODUCTS INC.

(Claimant)

and

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

(Respondent)

 

DECISION ON J

 

ISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

 

January 30, 2018

Arbitral Tribunal:
Judge James R Crawford, AC (Presiding Arbitrator)
Dean Ronald A Cass
Dean Céline Lévesque

Registry:
Permanent Court of Arbitration
Ms Judith Levine, Tribunal Secretary

Il.

iil.
IV.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. vy Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION. 1
A. THE DISPUTING PARTIES 1
B. OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3

THE UNCONTESTED FACTUAL BACKGROUND ....
RELIEF SOUGHT.
THE ARGUMENTS OF THE DISPUTING PARTIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

A. BURDEN OF PROOF 11
1. Introducti 11
2. The Resp 's Ar 12
3. The Claimant’s Ar 13
4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis. 16

B. THE TIME-BAR OBJECTION. 17
1. Introducti 17
2. The Resp 's Ar 18

(a) Rigidity of the time limit established by Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of
NAFTA

(b) Conditions for triggering the time limits under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).19

(c) When did the Claimant first acquire (or should have first ed)
knowledge of its loss or damage’ 21

(d) Whether the Nova Scotia Measures constitute a continuing breach.

(e) The alleged breaches that took place after December 30, 2012.....

3. The Claimant’s Ar 28
(a) Conditions for triggering the time limits under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).28
(b) When did the Claimant first acquire (or should first have acquired)

knowledge of its loss or damage? .... weld
(c) Certain NAFTA breaches were only known to the Claimant after December
30, 2012 34
4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis 37

 

(a) General considerations 37

 

(b) Knowledge (actual or constructive) of the alleged breaches...

 

(c) Knowledge (actual or constructive) of losses incurred......

DECISION

Resolute Forest Products Inc. vy Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

 

 

THE SCOPE OBJECTION 44
1. Introd 44
2. The R 's Ar 45

 

 

(a) Interpretation of the words ‘relating to’ under Article 1101(1)

(b) Whether a ‘legally significant connection’ exists between the Nova Scotia

 

 

 

 

 

Measures, and 's invest s 47
3. The Claimant’s Ar 51
(a) Interpretation of the words ‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1)...
(b) Whether the Nova Scotia Measures ‘relate to’ Resolute and Resolute’s
investments. 54
4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis 58

 

(a) The ‘relating to’ requirement: general considerations

  

(b) Application and critique of Methanex in subsequent cases

(c) The Tribunal’s conclusion on the licable test 63

 

(d)Application to the present claim.

 

THE PROVINCIAL TREATMENT OBJECTION: NAFTA ARTICLE 1102(3)....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Introducti 65
2. The Resp 's Ar 66
3. The Claimant’s Ar 68
4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis 72
(a) The legal framework 72
(b)NAFTA jurisprudence 75
(c) The Tribunal’s conclusions 77
JURISDICTION OVER THE EXPROPRIATION CLAIM UNDER THE OIL PLATFORMS TEST 78
1. Introducti 78
2. The Oil Platforms Test and its Application to NAFTA Chapter Eleven
Proceedings. 79
3. The Tribunal’s Analysis. 83
THE TAXATION MEASURES OBJECTION..... 12083
1. Introducti 83
2. The Resp 's Ar 84
3. The Claimant’s Ar 85
4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments 200085,
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis 86
87

 

Article 1128
Submissions

C$
Canada
CCAA

Claimant

Counter-Memorial
Disputing Parties
Draft NOI

Expropriation
Objection

Federal Measures

Hausman Statement

Laurentide mill

Memorial
Mexico

Monitor

NAFTA

Non-Disputing
NAFTA Parties

Notice of Arbitration
and Statement of
Claim

Nova Scotia

Nova Scotia Measures

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

LIST OF DEFINED TERMS

Submissions filed by the United States and Mexico pursuant to Article 1128
of NAFTA on June 14, 2017

Canadian Dollars
The Government of Canada
Companies’ Creditor Arrangement Act, R.S.C. 1985, ch. c-36 (Exhibit R-025)

Resolute Forest Products, Inc. (or ‘Resolute’ ), a company incorporated in the
State of Delaware, United States of America

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction filed by the Claimant on February 22, 2017
The Claimant and the Respondent

Draft Notice of Intent to submit a claim to arbitration under NAFTA Chapter
Eleven (Exhibit R-081)

Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction based on the argument that the
questioned measures are not tantamount to expropriation of the Laurentide
mill

Measures taken by Canada in respect to the investigation by the United States
Department of Commerce in relation to the Canadian supercalendered paper
industry

Expert Witness Statement of Jerry Hausman, Ph.D., filed by the Claimant
with its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on February 22, 2017

The Laurentide supercalendered paper mill owned by the Claimant located at
Shawinigan, Québec

Memorial on Jurisdiction filed by the Respondent on December 22, 2016
The United Mexican States

Ernst & Young, as appointed by the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia to monitor
the business and financial affairs of NPPH during the CCAA proceedings and
monitor the sales process of NPPH

North American Free Trade Agreement

The United States of America and the United Mexican States

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim filed by the Claimant on
December 30, 2015

The Government of Nova Scotia (or ‘the Province’)

The measures implemented by Nova Scotia in 2012 of which the Claimant
complains

iii

NPC
NPPH
NSPI

Opposition to
Bifurcation

PCA
PHP
Plan

Port Hawkesbury
mill
Province

Provincial Treatment
Objection

PWCC
Rejoinder Memorial
Reply Memorial

Request for
Bifurcation

Resolute
Respondent

Scope Objection
Statement of Defence

Taxation Measures
Objection

Time-Bar Objection

UARB

UNCITRAL Rules

US ITC

USTR

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

NewPage Corporation
NewPage Port Hawkesbury Corp.
Nova Scotia Power Inc.

Opposition to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation filed by the Claimant on
October 13, 2016

The Permanent Court of Arbitration
Port Hawkesbury Paper Inc.

The Plan Sponsorship Agreement entered into by PWCC and NPPH on July
6, 2012

A supercalendered paper mill located in Port Hawkesbury, Nova Scotia

The Government of Nova Scotia (or ‘Nova Scotia’)

Respondent's objection to jurisdiction based on Article 1102(3) of NAFTA

Pacific West Commercial Corporation

Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction filed by the Claimant on May 3, 2017
Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction filed by the Respondent on March 29, 2017
Request for Bifurcation filed by the Respondent on September 29, 2016

Resolute Forest Products, Inc. (or the ‘Claimant’)

The Government of Canada (or ‘Canada’)

Respondent's objection to jurisdiction based on Article 1101(1) of NAFTA.
Reply Statement filed by the Respondent on September 1, 2016

Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction in relation to taxation measures
implemented by Nova Scotia based on Article 2103 of NAFTA

Respondent's objection to jurisdiction based on Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)
of NAFTA

Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Arbitration Rules
(1976)

The United States International Trade Commission

United States Trade Representative

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

INTRODUCTION
A. THE DISPUTING PARTIES

The Claimant in this arbitration is Resolute Forest Products Inc., a corporation incorporated in the
State of Delaware, United States of America (the ‘Claimant’). The Claimant’s address is
1209 Orange Street, Wilmington, Delaware 19801, United States of America. The Claimant
brings this arbitration as an investor on its own behalf and on behalf of Resolute FP Canada Inc,
a corporation incorporated in Canada that is directly owned and controlled by the Claimant. The
address of Resolute FP Canada Inc is 111 Duke Street, Suite 5000, Montréal, Québec H3C 2M1,
Canada. The Claimant is represented in these proceedings by Dr Elliot J Feldman, Mr Michael
Snarr and Mr Paul M Levine of Baker Hostetler LLP, 1050 Connecticut Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20036, United States of America; and Mr Martin J Valasek, Ms Jenna Anne
de Jong and Mr Jean-Christophe Martel of Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP, 1 Place Ville
Marie, Suite 2500, Montréal, Québec H3B 1R1, Canada.

The Respondent in this arbitration is the Government of Canada (‘Canada’ or the ‘Respondent’ ).
The Respondent is represented in these proceedings by Mr Mark Luz, Mr Rodney Neufeld,
Ms Jenna Wates and Ms Michelle Hoffmann of the Trade Law Bureau (JLT), Global Affairs
Canada, 125 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G2, Canada.

B. OVERVIEW OF THE DISPUTE

A dispute has arisen between the Claimant and Canada in respect of which the Claimant
commenced arbitration pursuant to Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade Agreement

CNAFTA’).

The dispute concerns the Claimant’s investment in the Laurentide supercalendered paper mill
(‘Laurentide mill’) in Québec, Canada, as well as the Dolbeau and Kénogami mills, also located
in Québec, Canada.' According to the Claimant, it was forced to close the Laurentide mill because
it was unable to compete with another supercalendered paper mill located in Port Hawkesbury,
Nova Scotia (the ‘Port Hawkesbury mill’). The Claimant alleges that the Nova Scotia
Government implemented a series of measures in 2012 (the ‘Nova Scotia Measures’) to ‘ensure

that the Port Hawkesbury mill would have competitive advantages above any other

Supercalendered paper is a glossy paper used for such things as newspaper supplements and advertising
brochures.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

[supercalendered] paper producer, including Resolute.’* Specifically, it is alleged that Nova
Scotia preserved the Port Hawkesbury mill so that it could be sold as a going concern, provided
electricity to the Port Hawkesbury mill at a discounted rate and provided the Port Hawkesbury
mill with more than C$124 million in assistance to ensure its competitiveness. The Claimant
alleges that these measures are tantamount to the expropriation of the Laurentide mill, in violation
of Article 1110 of NAFTA, and also constitute a violation of the minimum standard of treatment

and national treatment standards of NAFTA (Articles 1105 and 1102, respectively).

The Claimant further alleges that officials of the Government of Canada discriminated against the
Claimant by excluding it from a joint defence group in respect of an investigation by the United
States Department of Commerce in relation to the Canadian supercalendered paper industry

(the ‘Federal Measures’).

The Claimant claims compensation for: (a) the direct losses caused by the measures of Canada
and Nova Scotia that amount to a violation of NAFTA; (b) consequential damages arising as a
result of the offensive measures; (c) the costs of the proceedings, including the costs of the

arbitration; and (d) interest.

The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s allegations in respect of the measures taken by Nova
Scotia are time-barred under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of NAFTA (the ‘Time-Bar
Objection’). Alternatively, the Respondent also argues that the Nova Scotia related claims fall
outside the scope of application of NAFTA under Article 1101(1) of NAFTA (the ‘Scope
Objection’), that the Claimant’s national treatment claims are inadmissible under Article 1102(3)
of NAFTA (the ‘Provincial Treatment Objection’), and that the questioned measures are not
tantamount to expropriation of the Laurentide mill (the ‘Expropriation Objection’ ). Finally, the
Respondent also considers the Tribunal to lack jurisdiction in respect of the Nova Scotia claims
insofar as they relate to taxation measures implemented by Nova Scotia (the ‘Taxation Measures

Objection’).

In addition to its arguments on jurisdiction and admissibility, the Respondent rejects the
Claimant’s claims on the merits and requests the Tribunal to dismiss the claims in their entirety

and order the Claimant to bear all the costs of the arbitration.

This Decision deals with the Time-Bar Objection (in Part V.B), the Scope Objection (in Part V.C),
the Provincial Treatment Objection (in Part V.D), the Expropriation Objection (in Part V.E), and

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 4.

Il.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the Taxation Measures Objection (in Part V.F). Either the Time-Bar Objection or the Scope
Objection, if upheld by the Tribunal, would entirely dispose of Claimant’s claims in relation to

the Nova Scotia Measures, whereas the other Objections would dispose of the claims in part.

These Objections relate only to the Nova Scotia Measures. The Disputing Parties agree that the
Objections relating to the Federal Measures fall to be dealt with in a subsequent phase of this

arbitration.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On September 30, 2015, the Claimant served on Canada its Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to
Arbitration pursuant to Article 1119 of NAFTA.

On December 30, 2015, the Claimant served its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim
(‘Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim’) under Chapter Eleven of NAFTA on Canada.
Pursuant to Article 1120(1)(c) of NAFTA, the Claimant also indicated its election to proceed with
the arbitration pursuant to Article 3 of the United Nations Commission on international Trade

Law Arbitration Rules of 1976 ((UNCITRAL Rules’).

On February 9, 2016, pursuant to Article 7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and Article 1123 of
NAFTA, the Claimant notified the Respondent of its appointment of Dean Ronald A Cass as
arbitrator. Dean Cass is Dean Emeritus of Boston University School of Law and a national of the

United States of America.

On March 18, 2016, pursuant to Article 7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and Article 1123 of
NAFTA, the Respondent notified the Claimant of its appointment of Dean Céline Lévesque as
arbitrator. Dean Lévesque is Dean of the Faculty of Law, Civil Law Section at the University of

Ottawa and a national of Canada.

On May 25, 2016, pursuant to Article 7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and Article 1123 of NAFTA,
the Disputing Parties appointed H.E. Judge James R Crawford, AC as the presiding arbitrator by
mutual agreement. Judge Crawford is a judge of the International Court of Justice and a national

of Australia.

Each arbitrator duly provided the Disputing Parties with a Statement of Independence.* The

Disputing Parties have both confirmed that ‘the Tribunal has been duly constituted in accordance

Procedural Order No 1, June 29, 2016, para 3.2.

20.

21.

22.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

with Article 1123 of the NAFTA. The Disputing Parties have no objections whatsoever to the
constitution of the Tribunal or to the appointment of any Member of the Tribunal in respect of

matters known to them’ as at June 2016.4

On June 28, 2016, the Tribunal convened a preliminary procedural teleconference with the

Disputing Parties.

Following the teleconference, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 on June 29, 2016.
Among other things, Procedural Order No. | recorded the Disputing Parties’ confirmation that
the Tribunal had been duly constituted in accordance with Article 1123 of NAFTA, and their
agreement that the 1976 version of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules would apply to this
arbitration, that the place of arbitration would be Toronto, Ontario, that the languages of the
arbitration would be English and French, and that the Permanent Court of Arbitration (‘PCA’)
would act as registry in relation to this arbitration. Procedural Order No. | also set out procedural

rules and a date for Canada to file its Statement of Defence (‘Statement of Defence’).

By letters of July 27, 2016 and August 8, 2016, the Claimant and Respondent respectively
presented an agreed procedural calendar for the Tribunal to decide on bifurcating any
jurisdictional and admissibility objections in a preliminary phase. The Disputing Parties noted
their agreement that the Claimant would indicate whether it consented to bifurcation by
September 15, 2016. By the same correspondence, the Disputing Parties also outlined their
respective positions in relation to the timing of submissions under Article 1128 of NAFTA by
Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties and Amici Curiae. The Claimant provided further comments on

the timing of the Article 1128 Submissions in a letter of August 11, 2016.

In accordance with Articles 7.1 and 8.1 of PO1, on September 1, 2016 the Respondent filed its

Statement of Defence and accompanying documents.

By letter of September 14, 2016, the Claimant explained that it was unable to consent to

bifurcation on the basis of the proposal set out in the Respondent’s Statement of Defence.

By letter of September 22, 2016, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the Disputing Parties
had reached agreement on a Procedural Order regarding procedures to be followed during
document production. The Respondent also informed the Tribunal that the Disputing Parties had
largely agreed to the text of a confidentiality order, however, there were a number of outstanding

issues to be decided by the Tribunal. The Respondent's letter also enunciated the Respondent’s

Procedural Order No. 1, June 29, 2016, para 3.3.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

position on the areas of disagreement regarding the confidentiality order.

The Claimant provided its comments on the outstanding issues regarding the draft confidentiality

order on September 22, 2016.

On September 29, 2016, the Respondent filed its Request for Bifurcation (‘Request for

Bifurcation’) and accompanying documents.

On October 13, 2016, the Claimant filed its Opposition to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation
(‘Opposition to Bifurcation’).

On October 14, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 dealing with document
production. On the same date, the Tribunal issued a Confidentiality Order, which the Disputing
Parties signed on October 27, 2016.

On November 3, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, setting out two alternative
schedules, one in the event that the Tribunal decided to bifurcate the proceedings and one in the

event that bifurcation was refused.

On November 7, 2016, the Tribunal held an oral hearing on bifurcation via teleconference.

On November 18, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 by which the Tribunal
decided to bifurcate these proceedings for the purpose of hearing the Respondent’s objections to
jurisdiction and admissibility under Articles 1116(2), 1117(2), 1101(1), 1102(3) and 2103(6) of
NAFTA as preliminary questions. Having decided to bifurcate the proceedings, the Tribunal also
adopted Schedule A of Procedural Order No. 3.

On December 12, 2016, having considered the Disputing Parties’ correspondence, the Tribunal
issued Procedural Order No. 5 setting out a revised schedule for the jurisdictional phase of the
proceedings. The Tribunal reserved any decision in respect of the scheduling for the merits phase

of these proceedings.

On December 22, 2016, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction (‘Memorial’) and

accompanying documents.

By email of January 25, 2017, the Claimant informed the Tribunal on behalf of the Disputing
Parties that they had agreed to hold the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility at Arbitration

Place in Toronto, Canada.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

On February 22, 2017, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (‘Counter-
Memorial’) and accompanying documents including an Expert Witness Statement of Jerry
Hausman, Ph.D. on the issue of whether the management of the Claimant could have known of

the damage to its supercalendered paper business prior to Q1 2013 (the ‘Hausman Statement’).

By email of March 2, 2017, the Claimant designated: (a) the entire Hausman Statement; and
(b) Exhibits C-026 and C-038 as confidential information.

By letter of March 3, 2017, the Respondent consented to the confidentiality designations in
respect of Exhibits C-026 and C-038, but objected to the Claimant’s designation of the entire
Hausman Statement as confidential. Pursuant to Section 12.1 of PO1, the Respondent also sought

the data and information relied upon by Dr. Hausman in the preparation of his report.

On March 8, 2017, the Claimant provided the source information for the Hausman Report sought

by the Respondent and proposed more specific confidentiality designations.

On March 29, 2017, the Respondent filed its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction (‘Reply Memorial’)

and accompanying documents.

On May 3, 2017, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction (‘Rejoinder

Memorial’) and accompanying documents.

On May 8, 2017, the PCA published on its website a Press Release in both English and French
inviting submissions from the Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties and potential amici curiae by

May 31, 2017.

On May 31, 2017, an application to participate as amici curiae was submitted jointly by

Professor Robert Howse and Mr Barry Appleton.

On June 14, 2017, following an extension of time granted by the Tribunal, the United States of
America (‘United States’) and the United Mexican States (‘Mexico’) submitted Non-Disputing

Party submissions pursuant to Article 1128 (the ‘Article 1128 Submissions’).

On June 21, 2017, Canada submitted its objection to the participation of Professor Howse and
Mr Appleton as amici curiae. On June 23, 2017, Resolute confirmed that it ‘has no comments

regarding the amicus application.”

On June 29, 2017, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of

Professor Robert Howse and Mr Barry Appleton as amici curiae, rejecting their joint application.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

On July 12, 2017, the Disputing Parties filed their comments on the Article 1128 Submissions of
the Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties.

A pre-hearing conference was held amongst the Disputing Parties and the Presiding Arbitrator on

July 19, 2017.

Pursuant to paragraph 22.2 of Procedural Order No. 1, on July 21, 2017, the Tribunal provided a
number of questions in writing for the Disputing Parties to address in their oral submissions during

the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

At the instruction of the Tribunal and having consulted with the Disputing Parties, the PCA issued
a Press Release on August 1, 2017 with information for the public live-streaming of the

forthcoming Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

The Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility was held at the Arbitration Place in Toronto,
Canada on August 15 and 16, 2017. The following individuals were present:

Tribunal

Judge James R Crawford, AC (Presiding Arbitrator)
Dean Ronald A Cass

Dean Céline Lévesque

 

The Claimant’s Representatives

Mr Elliot J Feldman (Baker Hostetler LLP)

Mr Michael S Snarr (Baker Hostetler LLP)

Mr Paul M Levine (Baker Hostetler LLP)

Mr Martin J Valasek (Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP)

Mr Jean-Christophe Martel (Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP)
Ms Jenna Anne de Jong (Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP)
Mr Jacques Vachon (Resolute Forest Products Inc)

Prof Jerry Hausman, PhD (Expert Witness)

The Respondent’s Representatives

Mr Mark A Luz (Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada)

Mr Rodney Neufeld (Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada)

Ms Jenna Wates (Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada)

Ms Michelle Hoffmann (Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada)

Ms Shawna Lesaux (Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada)

Ms Shamali Gupta (Investment Trade Policy Division, Global Affairs Canada)
Mr Daniel Hill (Canadian Forest Service of Natural Resources Canada)

Mr Andrew Weatherbee (Nova Scotia Department of Justice)

The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Representatives
Mr Matthew Olmsted (United States of America)

PCA
Ms Judith Levine (Tribunal Secretary)

Oral submissions were made on behalf of the Claimant by Mr Elliot J Feldman and Mr Martin J

iil.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Valasek and on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Mark A Luz, Mr Rodney Neufeld and Ms Jenna
Wates. With the agreement of the Disputing Parties, the Tribunal decided that no post-hearing

briefs were necessary.

THE UNCONTESTED FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Claimant is a company incorporated under the laws of Delaware, United States of America.
It was created in 2007 following the merger of two forest product companies,
Abitibi-Consolidated Inc and Bowater Inc.* The Claimant describes itself as ‘an integrated forest
products company that manufactures and markets a diverse range of wood and paper products,
including a product known as supercalendered paper, or ‘SC paper’.’°

The Claimant’s Canadian subsidiary, Resolute FP Canada, owns three SC paper mills located in
Canada: the Dolbeau and Kénogami mills located in Québec and the ‘now-defunct’ Laurentide

mill, also located in Québec.”

The Port Hawkesbury mill, located in Nova Scotia, also produces SC paper and competes with
Resolute in the North American SC paper market. In 2007, a US company, NewPage Corporation
(‘NPC’) acquired the Port Hawkesbury mill which was then operated by its wholly-owned
Canadian subsidiary NewPage Port Hawkesbury (‘NPPH’).* However, following losses of C$4

million per month, NPPH announced that it was shutting down the mill in August 2011.°

On September 6, 2011, NPPH sought creditor protection under the Companies’ Creditor
Arrangement Act (‘CCAA’), pursuant to which the Port Hawkesbury mill would be sold as part
of a court supervised sale process.'° The Supreme Court of Nova Scotia appointed Ernst & Young
(the ‘Monitor’) to ‘monitor the business and financial affairs of NPPH during the CCAA

proceedings’ and the sales process of NPPH.!!

During the time that NPPH was seeking creditor protection, Nova Scotia implemented measures
so as ‘to support the sale of the Port Hawkesbury mill in a way that would improve the chances it

would be purchased as a going concern, which would result in continued employment for workers

Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 21; Respondent’s Statement of Defence, para 20.
Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 22.

Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 23.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 12; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 27.
Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 25. Respondent’s Memorial, para 13.
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 27; Respondent’s Memorial, paras 12-14.
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 27; Respondent’s Memorial, para 14.

55.

56.

57.

58.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

712

in the Cape Breton region, rather than the mill be dismantled for scrap.’'* Two measures are

relevant to this period.

First, Nova Scotia agreed with NPPH to create a ‘$14-million Forestry Infrastructure Fund’
pursuant to which ‘NPPH would serve as an intermediary between [Nova Scotia] and the
approximately 350 independent contractors who would provide forestry services’ as part of Nova
Scotia’s forest management activities and forestry strategy.'? Nova Scotia provided an ‘additional

$12 million in funding to the FIF’ on March 16, 2012.'*

Second, Nova Scotia provided up to C$5 million in funding for the Port Hawkesbury mill to
remain in ‘hot idle’ so that it could be sold as a going concern once NPPH’s cash ran out and it
was no longer able to maintain the Port Hawkesbury mill in ‘hot idle’ on its own.'> At the same
time that Nova Scotia announced the additional funding to the FIF, Nova Scotia also announced

a further C$5.8 million in hot idle funding for the Port Hawkesbury mill.!°

The Monitor published public notices of the sales process and directly contacted 110 parties who
might be interested in acquiring the Port Hawkesbury mill, including the Claimant.” Four bidders
submitted final offers in December 2011, two intended to acquire the Port Hawkesbury mill as a
going concern with the other two proposing liquidation. '* Ultimately, the Monitor recommended,
and NPPH accepted, a bid from Pacific West Commercial Corporation (‘PWCC’) for the

acquisition of the Port Hawkesbury mill.'°

On July 6, 2012, PWCC and NPPH entered into the Plan Sponsorship Agreement (the ‘Plan’)
pursuant to which ‘PWCC would act as the sponsor of a plan of compromise and arrangement for
NPPH under the CCAA’ and acquire Port Hawkesbury for C$33 million.” An amended and
restated version of the Plan was sanctioned by the Court following creditor approval on

September 25, 2012.7!

The sale to PWCC was conditional on ‘certain support [being] provided by Nova Scotia.’”? The

Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 39; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 29.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 41; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 37.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 42; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 37.
Respondent’s Statement of Defence, paras 44-46; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
paras 33, 37.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 47; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 37.
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 30; Respondent’s Memorial, para 15.
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 30; Respondent’s Memorial, para 15.
Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 31; Respondent’s Memorial, paras 15-16.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 17; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 43.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 17; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 43.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 18; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 32.

60.

61.

62.

IV.

63.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Respondent observes that these conditions ‘are a matter of public record’ and notes the following:

Among these conditions was the requirement for PWCC to have entered into certain
agreements with Nova Scotia, including a Sustainable Forest Management and Outreach
Program Agreement in respect of achieving sustainable harvest and forest land practices in
woodlands in Nova Scotia, a Forest Utilization License Agreement in respect of access to
fibre on Crown Lands, a Letter of Offer Agreement in connection with the provision of certain
financial assistance by Nova Scotia to PWCC and a Real Property Agreement with respect
to the purchase and sale of certain real property owned by NPPH.

 

PWCC also conditioned the implementation of the restructuring and sale transaction on the
Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board (the “UARB” or “Board”) approving a Load Retention
Tariff (“LRT”) Pricing Mechanism governing the mill’s electricity rates, which was the
subject of a private agreement between PWCC and the mill’s privately-owned electricity
supplier, Nova Scotia Power Inc (“NSPI”).23

Once the conditions were met, the sale between NPPH and PWCC was completed on

September 28, 2012.74

Following the Court’s approval for the sale of the Port Hawkesbury mill to PWCC, the United
States Trade Representative (‘USTR’) investigated the support provided by Nova Scotia to the
Port Hawkesbury mill.? In late 2012, the Government of Canada responded to questions
regarding Nova Scotia’s support for the Port Hawkesbury mill from the USTR and the United
States raised during a meeting of the WTO Committee on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures

on October 23, 2012.76

At the beginning of 2015, two US SC paper producers ‘submitted a CVD petition to the US
[Department of Commerce] and the United States International Trade Commission [(‘US ITC’)]
requesting the initiation of an investigation into SC paper imports from Canada.’?” The US
Department of Commerce formally initiated an investigation into these allegations in March

2015.°8

RELIEF SOUGHT

In its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, the Claimant has sought the following relief:

i. Damages exceeding US$70 million or such other amount to be proven in these
proceedings in compensation for the direct losses caused by the measures of Canada

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 19-20; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, paras 31-42.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 17; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 43.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, paras 56-57; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
paras 57 ff.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 57; Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 37.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 60; Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
paras 57 and 68.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, paras 61-63; Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
para 68.

 

64.

65.

66.

67.

30
31

2

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

and Nova Scotia that are inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under Section A of

NAFTA Chapter Eleven;

ii. Additional consequential damages arising as a result of the illegal measures, in an
amount to be proven in these proceedings;

iii. the full costs associated with these proceedings, including all professional fees and
disbursements, as well as the fees of the arbitral tribunal and any administering
institution;

iv. pre- and post-award interest at a rate to be fixed by the Tribunal; and

 

v. such further relief as counsel may advise and the Tribunal may deem just and
appropriate”?

Within the jurisdictional phase, the Claimant has requested the Tribunal to ‘issue a Partial Award

commencing the Merits and Quantum Phases of this arbitration’ and order Canada ‘to pay

Resolute’s costs and legal fees for this phase.’*” It submits that the ‘Tribunal should confirm that

it does have jurisdiction over Resolute’s claims and that the claims are admissible’ and therefore

the Tribunal ‘should convene the Parties and move on to the next phase of this arbitration to

determine liability and damages.’ *!

In its Statement of Defence, the Respondent has requested the Tribunal to (a) dismiss the
Claimant’s claims in their entirety; (b) require the Claimant to bear all costs of the arbitration,

including legal costs and Tribunal costs; and (c) grant any other relief it deems appropriate.”

Within the jurisdictional phase, the Respondent requests this Tribunal to issue an award:

i. dismissing the Claimant’s Nova Scotia Claims under Articles 1102, 1105 and 1110 in
their entirety and with prejudice on grounds of lack of jurisdiction;

ii. dismissing the Claimant’s Nova Scotia Claims under Article 1102 in their entirety and
with prejudice on grounds of admissibility;

iii. ordering the Claimant to bear the costs of this preliminary phase of the arbitration in
full and to indemnify Canada for its legal fees and costs in the preliminary phase of
this arbitration; and

 

iv. granting any further relief it deems just and appropriate under the circumstances.*?
THE ARGUMENTS OF THE DISPUTING PARTIES
A. BURDEN OF PROOF
1. Introduction

The Disputing Parties have competing views as to who bears the burden of proof, in particular in

Claimant's Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 121.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 217.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para 147.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 106.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 141. See also Reply on Jurisdiction, para 171.

11

68.

69.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

respect of the Time-Bar Objection. Some of their arguments touch upon the proof of jurisdictional
and admissibility requirements more broadly. The Respondent considers time-bar to go to this
Tribunal’ s jurisdiction and that the burden of proof falls on the Claimant. However, the Claimant
considers time-bar to be an issue of admissibility, not jurisdiction, and thus, it argues, the burden
of proof falls on the Respondent. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties both support the
Respondent's position that the question of time-bar goes to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal and is

for the Claimant to prove.

2. The Respondent’s Arguments

The Respondent submits that the Claimant ‘bears the burden of proving that the respondent has
consented to arbitration and that the tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute’ since it is the one
bringing the claim under NAFTA.™ The Respondent argues that a NAFTA Party’s consent to
arbitrate under Article 1122 is only engaged when certain requirements are met ‘by a claimant.’ *°
The Respondent refers to numerous NAFTA cases, such as Bayview, Grand River and Gallo as
authority for the proposition that ‘it is for the claimant to establish that its claims fall within NAFTA
Chapter Eleven and the tribunal’s jurisdiction.’*° By reference to the decisions in Methanex and
Feldman, the Respondent submits that Article 1122(1) establishes the time bar provisions of
Article 1116 and 1117 of NAFTA as jurisdictional hurdles, not matters affecting the admissibility

of the claim, since the time bar concerns the NAFTA Parties’ advance consent to arbitrate.*”

The Respondent also considers the Claimant to have ‘overstat[ed] the extent to which its
allegations are to be accepted as true pro tem for the purposes of this jurisdictional phase’ and
submits that the Claimant is nonetheless required to prove the existence of facts on which it relies
in the jurisdictional phase.** The Respondent refers this Tribunal to a number of NAFTA and
other investor-state cases where, it says, ‘the principle that a claimant bears the burden of proving
all facts necessary to establish a tribunal’s jurisdiction is [...] well established.’* In particular, it
cites the following paragraph from the Interim Award in Spence International Investments v Costa
Rica:
It is for a party advancing a proposition to adduce evidence in support of its case. This applies

to questions of jurisdiction as it applies to the merits of a claim, notably insofar as it applies
to the factual basis of an assertion of jurisdiction that must be proved as part-and-parcel of a

 

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 10.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 11, referring to Methanex Corporation v United States of America,
UNCITRAL, Partial Award (Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction and Liability), August 7, 2002, para 120
(CL-001) and (RL-018) (‘Methanex, Partial Award’).

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 13.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 155:11-157:20; see also 162:12-165:11.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 12.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 14.

 

70.

71.

72.

73.

40

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

claimant’s case. The burden is therefore on the Claimants to prove the facts necessary to
establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”
The Spence tribunal went on to explain that only once a claimant proffers that proof does the
burden shift to a respondent to show why the tribunal lacks jurisdiction.*' The Respondent notes
that this rule ‘makes perfect sense’ in the context of this case where it would be unfair, for
example, to put the burden on the Respondent to disprove the Claimant’s state of knowledge, a

matter on which the Claimant would have more extensive evidence.”

The Respondent also submits that the Claimant ‘misinterprets’ Article 24(1) of the 1976
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in order to attempt to shift the burden of proof onto the
Respondent. Article 24(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:

Each party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied on to support his claim or defence.

The Respondent submits that this provision should be understood as referring only to the burden
applicable to ‘affirmative defences’ raised by the Respondent and does not absolve the Claimant
of its obligation to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.“ The Respondent submits that the Pope
& Talbot decision incorrectly determined that jurisdictional objections constitute an ‘affirmative
defence’ and has since been ‘overtaken by the more recent decisions in Methanex, Apotex,

Bayview, Grand River and Gallo.’ **

3. The Claimant’s Arguments

The Claimant accepts that it bears the burden of proof in respect of establishing this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.“° The Claimant considers itself to have satisfied this burden in respect of the relevant
jurisdictional elements, i.e., that Resolute is an American company doing business in Canada and
had an investment in Canada at the relevant time that the impugned measures were adopted.”
However, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s time-bar objection does not affect the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, only the admissibility of the claim; consequently, the Claimant

maintains that it is the Respondent which bears the burden of proof in respect of the time-bar.“*

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 14, citing Spence International Investments, LLC, Berkowitz, et al. v
Republic of Costa Rica, UNCITRAL, Interim Award, October 25, 2016, para 239 (RL-028)
‘Spence, Interim Award’).

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 15, referring to Spence, Interim Award, para 239.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 17.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 18.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 19, referring to D Caron & L Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules: A Commentary (2" ed, OUP 2012), 558 (RL-078).

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 20.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 12.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 13.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 15.

74.

75.

76.

50

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

The Claimant notes that there have been ‘complementary theories’ as to whether the time-bar
objection is ‘a defence against asserted claims’ or ‘pertain[s] to the admissibility of claims’, but
either theory is unrelated to the Respondent’s consent to arbitration or the Tribunal’s authority
and so the burden falls on the moving party, in this case, the Respondent.*” The Claimant cites
the Pope & Talbot decision which considered Canada’s timeliness objection in that case to be ‘in
the nature of an affirmative defence’; therefore the burden fell on Canada.*°

The Claimant refers to the decision in Feldman as well as scholarly writings and domestic court
decisions from the United States and Canada in support of the proposition that a time-bar
objection does not relate to the tribunal’s jurisdiction.*' The Claimant submits that the only
NAFTA case on point is Pope & Talbot where ‘that tribunal recognized the time bar as an
affirmative defence, and as an affirmative defence, it carries with it a different consequence.’*”
By comparison, the Claimant considers the Respondent's reliance on Methanex, Apotex, Bayview,
and Grand River to be misconceived since none of those cases considered the question of whether
a timeliness objection goes to jurisdiction or admissibility.** The Claimant also cautions this
Tribunal from relying on the decision in Spence v Costa Rica since that case was under the
DR-CAFTA ‘whose terms are notoriously different from NAFTA’s’ and whose tribunal itself
‘caution[ed] any reading of this Award that would give it wider “precedential” effects.’ * In fact,
other non-NAFTA decisions, including Tecmed have similarly determined that time limitation
objections are not related to the tribunal’s jurisdiction but should be considered as admissibility

objections.

In any event, the Claimant considers sufficient proof to have been provided that it has brought its
claims within time. Specifically, the Claimant points to the fact that the Respondent's case, at its

highest, ‘speculates that Resolute should have anticipated losses that Canada claims were incurred

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 17.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 18-19 referring to Pope & Talbot Inc v Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL, Award by Arbitral Tribunal in relation to Preliminary Motion by Government of Canada to
Strike Paragraphs 34 and 103 of the Statement of Claim from the Record, February 24, 2000, paras 11-12
(CL-002); see also Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 24, referring to Respondent’s Reply Memorial,
para 20.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 20-23; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
293:10-297:6.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 297:7-15

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 25-28; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
297:16-300:8.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 29, citing Spence, Interim Award, para 166 (RL-028); Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 303:5-23.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 31, referring to Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v The
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, May 29, 2003 (CL-038) (‘Tecmed,
Award’).

77.

78.

79.

60
6

oe

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

756

in a price drop in January 2013.

4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments

The United States submits that a NAFTA Party’s consent to arbitrate is ‘limited by the procedural
conditions set out in Chapter Eleven’ including, inter alia, the requirements of Articles 1116(2)
and 1117(2).*” The time-bar imposed by these Articles, it says, ‘impose a ratione temporis
jurisdictional limitation on the authority of a tribunal to act on the merits of the dispute.’* It
submits that ‘NAFTA Parties consistently raise, and tribunals generally address, the time bar
defence as a jurisdictional objection’ and cites Glamis Gold, Apotex I & II and Spence

International Investments v Costa Rica as examples of such a consistent approach.*”

Mexico expresses its agreement with the Respondent that the Claimant ‘bears the burden of
proving that the respondent has consented to arbitration and that the tribunal has jurisdiction over
the dispute.’© Mexico also recalls the decisions in Methanex, Apotex, Spence International
Investments v Costa Rica and Emmis International Holding v Hungary as cases where the
respective tribunals each found that the claimant bears the burden of proof in respect of the
tribunal’s jurisdiction, with the Methanex and Spence tribunals specifically noting that time-bar

provisions (under NAFTA and DR-CAFTA, respectively) go to the jurisdiction of the tribunal.*!

The Respondent submits that the Article 1128 submissions of Mexico and the United States
should be given ‘considerable weight’ when the NAFTA Parties ‘express concordant, common

and consistent views on how to interpret NAFTA, they create subsequent agreement and practice
within the meaning of Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention’ .© The Respondent points out that
both the United States and Mexico support its position that the time bar is in the nature of a

jurisdictional objection for which the Claimant bears the burden of proof.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 33.
Submission of the United States, para 2.

ion of the United States, para 3.

ion of the United States, para 4, citing Glamis Gold, Ltd. v United States of America, UNCITRAL,
Procedural Order No. 2 (Revised), May 31, 2005 (‘Glamis Gold, PO2’); Apotex Inc. v United States of
America, ICSID Case No. UNCT/10/2, Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, June 14, 2013 (RL-023)
‘Apotex, Award on Jurisdiction and Admi: ity’); and Spence, Interim Award.

ion of Mexico, para 2, citing Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 10.

ion of Mexico, paras 3-5, citing Methanex, Partial Award; Apotex, Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, para 150; Spence, Interim Award; Emmis International Holding, B.V., Emmis Radio
Operating, B.V., and MEM Magyar Electronic Media kereskedelmi ésSzolgdltaté Kft. v Hungary, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/12/2, Award, April 16, 2014 (Emmis, Award’).

Reply of the Government of Canada to the NAFTA Article 1128 Submissions of the Governments of the
United States and the United Mexican States, July 12, 2017 (‘Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions’),
paras 6-8; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 165:12-167:9.

Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 15-25.

  
 

 

 

 

15

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

The Claimant prefaces its comments on the Article 1128 submissions by observing that all the
NAFTA Parties ‘can be expected to express similar interpretations of NAFTA because all are cast
as respondents in Chapter Eleven proceedings, and all would prefer to limit the occasions when
they have to defend their respective governments against foreign investor claims.’* The Claimant
acknowledged during the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility that the interpretation of
NAFTA by the NAFTA Parties through their Article 1128 submissions ‘must be valued by the

tribunal for its persuasive authority.’ ®

The Claimant did, however, note that just as the Tribunal
has been asked to take into account the agreement of the NAFTA Parties as to the interpretation
of the treaty, the Tribunal should also pay serious attention to areas where the NAFTA Parties

disagree with one another.

With respect to the burden of proof, the Claimant reiterates its view that the time bar goes to
admissibility and that Canada bears the burden. The Claimant argues that the United States’
submission in this respect fails to distinguish between admissibility and jurisdiction, and that the

United States incorrectly characterizes Pope & Talbot as wrongly decided.”

5. The Tribunal’s Analysis
Section B of Chapter Eleven of NAFTA deals with settlement of disputes between investors and

States Parties. Its central provision, jurisdictionally speaking, is section 1122 (‘Consent to
Arbitration’), paragraph | of which reads:
Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement.
The clear inference is that arbitration of a claim not submitted in accordance with those procedures
is not consented to and that the tribunal lacks jurisdiction. Although the time limit specified in
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) is not itself a procedure, compliance with it is required for the
bringing of a claim, which is certainly a procedure. This is enough to justify the conclusion that

compliance with the time limit goes to jurisdiction.

Even if it did not, and was to be classified (as time limits in other contexts are often classified) as
a matter of admissibility, it would not necessarily follow that the onus of proof in that regard was
on the respondent party. Article 24(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, which are applicable here by
virtue of Article 1120(1) of NAFTA, imposes on the relevant party ‘the burden of proving the

Comments on the Article 1128 Submissions of Mexico and the United States, July 12, 2017 (‘Claimant’s
Reply to Article 1128 Submissions’), para 1.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 306:4-12.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 306:16-307:1.

Claimant’s Reply to Article 1128 Submissions, paras 6-15.

16

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

facts relied on to support [its] claim or defence’. The Tribunal does not see any reason to limit
Article 24(1) to matters of substance, and the facts necessary to establish that a claim has been
brought in accordance with Section B of Chapter Eleven are, in its view, facts relied on in support

of the claim.

The Tribunal does not agree with the Pope & Talbot dictum that time bar objections under
NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) constitute an ‘affirmative defence’. The language of
NAFTA treats the 3-year time limit as one among a number of requirements that a claimant under
Chapter Eleven has to meet to attract jurisdiction over a claim. The Tribunal agrees with later
tribunals, and with the United States and Mexico in their Article 1128 submissions, that the

claimant has to establish its case on this and other points.

The Tribunal would however add that too much importance should not be attached to the onus of
proof in international arbitration. In the end, the question is whether one or the other party has
done enough to persuade the tribunal of its case. It is relevant that the fact in question is one

which is peculiarly within the knowledge of one or the other party.

B. THE TIME-BAR OBJECTION

1. Introduction

Turning to the substance of the time-bar objection, the Respondent argues that the Claimant’s
claims relating to the Nova Scotia Measures are time-barred under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and

1117(2). NAFTA Article 1116(2) provides:

An investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from the date on
which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged
breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.

NAFTA Article 1117(2) is couched in similar terms:

An investor may not make a claim on behalf of an enterprise described in paragraph | if more
than three years have elapsed from the date on which the enterprise first acquired, or should
have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the enterprise has
incurred loss or damage.
It is common ground between the Disputing Parties that the present dispute was submitted to
arbitration on December 30, 2015, making December 30, 2012 the critical date for present
purposes. The Respondent contends that the Claimant knew or could not have been unaware of
the enactment of the Nova Scotia Measures which constitute the alleged NAFTA breach in this
case, and that the Claimant had incurred loss or damage prior to that critical date of December 30,

2012. As such, the Claimant's case relating to the Nova Scotia Measures is, in the Respondent’s

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

68
6
10

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

submission, time-barred.

The Claimant, on the other hand, argues that it did not and could not know of its loss or damage
as a result of the Nova Scotia Measures before the first quarter of 2013. Therefore, the Claimant

submits that it referred this dispute to arbitration in a timely manner.

As the Tribunal noted in its Decision on Bifurcation, ‘if successful, the time bar objection could

dispose of all claims relating to the Nova Scotia Measures.’°*

2. The Respondent’s Arguments

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s claims related to the Nova Scotia Measures are time-
barred in their entirety on the basis that the Claimant knew or ought to have known of its damage
or loss more than three years before the submission of its claim to arbitration, i.e., before
December 30, 2012. The Respondent raises five arguments in relation to this submission. First,
the Claimant alleges that Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) impose a strict time limit on the initiation
of arbitration under NAFTA. Second, the time limits are triggered once the Claimant has either
actual or constructive knowledge of loss or damage. Third, the Claimant does not need to know
the full extent of its loss or damage to trigger the time-bar period. Fourth, the Claimant in this
case did in fact have knowledge of the alleged NAFTA breaches and its loss or damage prior to
December 30, 2012. Fifth, the Claimant’s reliance on a ‘continuing’ breach so as to renew the

limitation period is misconceived in law and fact.

(a) _ Rigidity of the time limit established by Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of
NAFTA

The Respondent submits that NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) ‘impose a strict three-year
time limit for a claimant to submit a claim to arbitration in its own behalf or on behalf of an
769

enterprise that it owns or controls.

In the Respondent’s submission, the rigidity of the time limit established by the text of Articles

1116(2) and 1117(2) is ‘not subject to any suspension [...], prolongation or other qualification.’””
The Respondent submits that compliance with the time limits set out in these provisions is a pre-

condition to a NAFTA Party’s consent to arbitration. In this respect, the Respondent relies on

Procedural Order No. 4, Decision on Bifurcation, November 18, 2016, para 4.10.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 25.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 26 citing Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v United Mexican States, CSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award, December 16, 2002, para 63 (RL-021) (‘Feldman, Award’).

18

96.

97.

98.

99.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

NAFTA Article 1122(1) which provides that each NAFTA Party ‘consents to the submission of

a claim to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in [NAFTA].’7!

Accordingly, the Respondent submits that initiation of this arbitration after the three-year time
limit specified by Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) means that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
temporis.”” The Respondent points to the awards in Grand River,” Apotex™ and Bilcon™ as
instances where tribunals have dismissed claims following a strict application of the three year

time limit.”°

(b) Conditions for triggering the time limits under Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2)

The Respondent submits that the plain words of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) establish two
possible points in time from which the time limit may commence running: (1) the moment when
an investor or enterprise ‘first acquired’ knowledge of the alleged breach and loss, or (2) the
moment when an investor or enterprise ‘should have first acquired’ knowledge of the alleged

breach and loss.” Thus either actual or constructive knowledge of the alleged breach and loss

would be sufficient to trigger the time limit.”

By reference to the decision in Grand River, the Respondent argues that Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2) require investors to exercise a measure of ‘reasonable care’ and ‘diligence’, thereby
preventing a claimant from ‘feign[ing] ignorance of facts it should reasonably have been aware
of had it conducted appropriate due diligence’ so as to circumvent the time limitation established

under the NAFTA.”

The Respondent refers this Tribunal to a series of NAFTA decisions in Grand River, Mondev,
and Bilcon, as well as the Canada-Venezuela BIT decision in Rusoro Mining v Venezuela, in

support of the proposition that Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) do not require a claimant to know

Respondent’s Memorial, para 23 citing Methanex, Partial Award, para 120.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 28.

Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd v United States, of America, UNCITRAL, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction, July 20, 2006 (RL-022) (‘Grand River, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction’

Apotex, Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

William Ralph Clayton, William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon of
Delaware, Inc v Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, March 17, 2015 (RL-025)
(Bilcon, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability’).

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 29-31; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 153:24-
154:3.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 32; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 153:4-11.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 32; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 153:12-23.
Respondent’s Memorial, paras 34, 36 citing Grand River, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, paras 44-
2B.

 

 

101.

102.

80

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the full extent of the damage or loss. Rather, the time limit begins to run from the time the claimant

knew or ought to have known that some loss or damage to it has been caused.*”

The Respondent considers the Mondeyv tribunal to have been unequivocal when it stated that ‘a
claimant may know that it has suffered loss or damage even if the extent of quantification of the
loss or damage is still unclear.’*! Such a position is necessary because, as the Bilcon tribunal
explained, requiring knowledge of the full extent of damage or loss ‘might prolong greatly the
inception of the three-year period and add a whole new dimension of uncertainty to the time-limit
issue.’°?
The Respondent considers the Claimant’s interpretation of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2), which
would require the loss or damage to be sufficiently precise before the claimant could know of it,
to be incorrect since it would ‘allow claimants to ignore the fact that they have already incurred
a loss or damage simply because the amount of that loss or damage will not be measured and
reported to the claimants’ investors and the public until the end of the relevant financial reporting
period.’** This, the Respondent submits, is ‘directly contrary to the ordinary meaning of
“incurred” which was considered in Grand River and where that tribunal found:

A party is said to incur losses, debts, expenses or obligations, all of which may significantly

damage the party’s interests, even if there is no immediate outlay of funds or if the obligations

are to be met through future conduct. Moreover, damage or injury may be incurred even
though the amount or extent may not become known until some future time.**

 

 

The Respondent submits that non-NAFTA tribunals arrived at a similar interpretation of time-bar
provisions in Rusoro Mining v Venezuela, Corona Materials vy Dominican Republic, Spence
International Investments v Costa Rica, and Ansung Housing v China.** The Respondent contends
that the only case cited against it on this point, Pope & Talbot, was incorrectly decided and

inconsistent with the NAFTA and non-NAFTA cases to which it has referred.*°

Respondent’s Memorial, para 42 citing Rusoro Mining Limited v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/12/5, Award, August 22, 2016 (RL-030).

Respondent’s Memorial, para 38 citing Mondev International Ltd v United States, of America (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, October 11, 2002, para 87 (RL-029) (‘Mondev, Award’); Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 173:4-14.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 39 citing Bilcon, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, para 275.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 97.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 97, citing Grand River, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, para 77.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 98-101.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 103.

20

103.

104.

105.

106.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

(c) When did the Claimant first acquire (or should have first acquired)
knowledge of its loss or damage?

The Respondent explains that since this arbitration was submitted on December 30, 2015, the
‘critical date’ is December 30, 2012.*’ If the Claimant had actual or constructive knowledge of
its loss or damage prior to December 30, 2012, then the Respondent submits that the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis.

The Respondent considers it uncontested that the Nova Scotia Measures were all adopted between
September 2011 and September 2012, that is, before the ‘critical date’ of December 30, 2012.**
The Claimant has not denied that it knew of the implementation of the Nova Scotia Measures at
the time and, in any event, could not have been unaware of them given that they were a ‘matter
of public record’ and ‘the subject of numerous news releases issued by Nova Scotia, [...] court
filings in the CCAA’ and legislative debate in Nova Scotia.’*? Additionally, the Respondent
alleges that ‘the Claimant publicly acknowledged the adoption of the Nova Scotia Measures in

November 2012,’ during an Earnings Conference Call.°°

The Respondent submits that the Claimant, with the knowledge of the Nova Scotia Measures by
November 2012 at the latest, must have known or could not have been unaware of its loss or
damage on the basis of ‘an abundance of market data and analysis available prior to December 30,
2012, which confirmed the impact on Resolute’s market share and SC paper prices.’*! Since the
‘damage to the Claimant’s competitive position is [...] the only loss or damage that the Claimant
attributes directly to the Nova Scotia measures’, it ‘should have known about this alleged
competitive disadvantage on September 28, 2012, when the last of the measures were adopted

and the sale of the Port Hawkesbury mill to Pacific West closed.’°?

Specifically, the Respondent refers to press reports and industry analysis in October 2012
regarding the capacity of the newly re-opened Port Hawkesbury mill and the effect it would have
on market share and prices.” For example, one report in November 2012 assessed that ‘Resolute’s

market share would fall from 20.1 per cent at the end of 2011 to 13.5 per cent at the end of 2012.4

Respondent’s Memorial, para 43.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 45.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 49.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 49, referring to CQ Transcriptions, transcript, ‘Q3 2012 Resolute Forest
Products Inc. Earnings Conference Call — Final’ (November 2, 2012), 9 (R-096).

Respondent’s Memorial, para 52.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 220:21-221:10.

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 63-64.

Respondent’ s Memorial, para 64, referring to Verle Sutton, Reel Time, Special Edition (November 8, 2012),
7 (R-102).

21

107.

108.

100
101

102
103

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Similarly, market data and reports were noting a fall in SC paper prices as a result of the increased

capacity due to the reopening of the Port Hawkesbury mill.°°

The Respondent additionally submits that it is ‘not credible’ for the Claimant to argue that it was
unaware of its loss or damage until the First Quarter of 2013 since ‘prices for shipments of SC
paper are contracted at least a month in advance.’* The Respondent points out that the Claimant’ s
expert, Professor Hausman, accepts that it is industry practice to contract at least a month in
advance” and considers it conclusive that the Claimant has not led any evidence to contradict
either the Respondent’s submission or Professor Hausman’s testimony on this point.°* The
Respondent refers to the findings of the US ITC that ‘lead times between order and delivery dates
range from 35 to 45 days for US producers and 28 to 45 days for US importers,’ which took into
account Resolute’s firm-specific lead times that have not been put into evidence by the Claimant
before this Tribunal.°” The Respondent, therefore, concludes that the Claimant must have known
‘in November or December 2012 what its January 2013 prices were going to be.’' The
Respondent submits that this was widely reported in industry publications and data at the time
and acknowledged simultaneously by Resolute’s competitors.'! The Respondent notes that even
though the Claimant criticizes these market data and forecasts as ‘speculation and
prognostication,’ the Respondent considers that ‘they were accurate’ and ‘the Claimant has not

cited a single divergent opinion from the industry publications at that time.’ !°?

The Respondent also points to five instances where, it alleges, the Claimant acknowledged that it
had incurred loss or damage starting in 2012. The Respondent submits that any one of these five
facts alone would ‘be sufficient to establish Resolute’s knowledge of the alleged loss or damage
before the critical date.’ '°? First, the Respondent refers to a draft notice of intent to submit a claim
to arbitration under NAFTA Chapter Eleven presented to it on February 24, 2015 (the ‘Draft
NOD) which alleged that ‘Resolute’s market share for all SC Paper has declined from 2012 to

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 65-67.

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 66, 68; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 69-70.

Respondent's Reply Memorial, para 71, referring to Hausman Statement, para 7 and fn. 29.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 72.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 70, 72; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
229:16-230:14.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 72.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 74-91; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
197:13-18.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 233:5-11.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 198:20-23.

 

22

109.

110.

111.

104

105

106
107

108
109

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

2014’ as a result of the Nova Scotia Measures. '** The Respondent asks this Tribunal to disregard
the Claimant’s description of this document as a ‘non-paper’ and ‘rough internal draft’ and instead
characterises the Notice as ‘a carefully crafted document which the Claimant’s President and
CEO, Mr Richard Garneau, presented to Canada’s Minister of International Trade during an in-
person meeting in order to threaten legal action against Canada.’ !°°

The Respondent also considers the Claimant’s allegation that it has ‘misread’ the Draft NOI as
‘hollow’.!°° Contrary to the Claimant’s allegation, the meaning of the word ‘from’ used in the
Draft NOI can only be understood as ‘starting in’, therefore revealing a decline in market share
“starting in’ 2012, not merely noting a drop in market share in 2014 vis-a-vis market share held
in 2012.'"’ The Respondent also considers the Draft NOI to have ‘significant probative value’

given the time at which it was prepared and submitted to the Canadian government.'®

Second, the Respondent alleges that the Claimant did not have to wait until the reopening of the
Port Hawkesbury mill in September 2012 to know of its loss or damage. The Respondent refers
to a transcript of a conference call relating to Resolute’s 2012 second quarter results and

Mr Garneau’s comment that the restart of the Port Hawkesbury mill would ‘certainly have an

impact on the market’ and it would be ‘impossible not to have an impact on the market.’ !”

Third, the Respondent points to the Claimant’s decision to shut down a paper machine at its
Laurentide mill in November 2012 based on both a drop in demand and increase in market
capacity elsewhere as evidence that the Claimant knew of the impact of the Port Hawkesbury
mill’s restart.''® The Respondent alleges that references by senior management of the Claimant
to ‘increased market capacity’ could only refer to the re-opening of the Port Hawkesbury mill
since: (a) the only other increase in capacity at the relevant time was from another Resolute mill

in August 2012; and (b) a public statement by Mr Pierre Choquette (a spokesman for the

Respondent’s Memorial, para 54, referring to Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration Under
Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade Agreement (February 24, 2015), para 19 (R-081);
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 26, 30.

Respondent's Memorial, para 55; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 223:15-
224:16.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 31.

Respondent’ s Reply Memorial, para 31; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15,2017, 196:8-
197:12.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 32-33.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 56, referring to Resolute Forest Products Inc., Form 8-K (August 1, 2012),
Exhibit 99.2: Transcript of Earnings Conference Call Held on August 1, 2012, p. 10 (R-097); Respondent’ s
Reply Memorial, para 26.

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 58-61.

23

112.

113.

114.

115.

112
13
14
us
116
7
18

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Claimant) directly referred to the restart of a competitor mill in Nova Scotia.!"!

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s allegation that Line #10 at the Laurentide mill closed
down due to the reopening of the Dolbeau mill ‘contradicts its earlier contemporaneous public

> 112

statements’!!? as well as the public record.'? In the Respondent’s view, this contradiction and

the lack of corroborating evidence ‘destroys the credibility of a claimant’s assertions’ .''4

The Respondent submits that it would be irrelevant if the Claimant could establish other reasons
for the closure of Line #10 since it has already cited ‘the reopening of Port Hawkesbury as one of
its main reasons.’!'> The Respondent considers irrelevant the Claimant’s suggestion that there
was uncertainty about the reopening of Port Hawkesbury since Line #10 was not closed until
November 6, 2012, over a month after Port Hawkesbury was reopened in September 2012.!'° The
Respondent points to a number of public statements throughout 2011 and 2012 where the
Claimant expressed uncertainty about the reopening of Dolbeau and the effect that might have on
its other operations; it submits that as late as August 2012, when the Dolbeau mill was finally
reopened, Mr Garneau made public statements in reassurance that the reopening of Dolbeau

would not affect the Laurentide mill.'!”

Fourth, the Respondent also points to public statements surrounding the temporary shutdown of
Line #11 at the Laurentide mill on December 19, 2012, one month after the permanent shutdown
of Line #10, which ‘explicitly cited the reopening of the Port Hawkesbury mill as one of the

reasons for this decision.’ !'*

By contrast to the publicly available evidence relied on above, the Respondent considers the
Claimant to have ‘failed to provide any direct or credible response in its Counter-Memorial to

refute its past admissions’ and finds it ‘remarkabl[e]’ that the Claimant has not presented a witness

Respondent’s Memorial, para 60, referring to Radio-Canada, ‘Shawinigan: 111 emplois perdus A l’usine
Laurentide’ (November 6, 2012) (R-101); Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 26, 36, referring to ‘Résolu
va mettre & pied 111 travailleurs’, Le Journal de Montréal, November 6, 2012 (R-115), and ‘Résolu va
mettre pied 110 travailleurs’ TVA, November 6, 2012 (R-116) ; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
August 15, 2017, 197:19-198:8, 236:25-238:25.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 34.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 43.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 44.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 45.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 46.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 48-60.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 41, referring to Guy Veillette, ‘Un marché difficile, répte Produits
forestiers Résolu’, Le Nouvelliste, December 19, 2012 (R-120); Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
August 15, 2017, 239:1-15.

 

 

24

116.

117.

118.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

of fact ‘who is willing and able to attest to what it actually knew during the relevant period.’ !!”

The Respondent submits that these uncontested contemporaneous statements from Resolute
‘demonstrat[e] that Resolute actually knew that the reopening of Port Hawkesbury had caused it
the loss or damage that it claims in this arbitration’ and the statements therefore have great

probative value.!7°

By comparison, the Respondent submits that Professor Hausman’s report has ‘no probative value’
since: (a) he conceded during cross-examination ‘that he has no experience working in sales or
marketing of supercalendered paper’ and so ‘can’t offer an opinion on what a reasonable producer
should have known and when based on specialized industry knowledge or expertise’; (b) the
report is not based on interviews with Resolute’s employees or managers about their actual
knowledge; (c) the report ‘relies on a limited amount of data which was curated by Resolute’; (d)
his regression analysis used a market price index instead of prices from Resolute or, more
specifically, Laurentide; and (e) he considered the weighted average price of three Resolute mills

combined, rather than the Laurentide mill in isolation. '7!

Fifth, the Respondent considers the Claimant to have selectively cited statements of PHP during
an Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Investigation pursued by the US International Trade
Commission and says the Claimant has taken those statements out of context.'” For example, the
Claimant is alleged to have omitted the fact that the US ITC did not accept PHP’s submission that
it was ‘impossible for PHP to cause any injury in 2012.’!” Similarly, the Claimant is said to have

omitted PHP’s testimony that it had customers ‘willing and able to start business with us shortly

124

after we restarted’ leading to a production in 2012 of 72,000 metric tonnes.'** This amounted to

‘20 per cent of the Port Hawkesbury mill’s total annual production capacity [...] and [...] as much

as the average quarterly production capacity and actual sales tonnage of Resolute’s Laurentide

7125

and Dolbeau mills combined.

The Respondent concludes on the basis of the above that the Claimant was not, and could not
have been, unaware that ‘a loss or damage in the form of decreased market share, lower prices

and a competitive disadvantage’ would be incurred as soon as the Port Hawkesbury mill reopened

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 27-28; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
20:22-22:13.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 19
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 204:
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 61.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 62, referring to In Re Supercalendered Paper from Canada, Inv. No.
701-TA-530, Final Determination Commission Opinion, p. 25 (C-054).

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 64, citing October US ITC Transcript p. 240:14-24 (C-052).
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 64-66.

     

, August 16, 2017, 422:18-423:17.
1-207:14.

   

25

119.

120.

121.

122.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

on October 3, 2012 with the support of the Nova Scotia Measures.'?° Accordingly, the time-bar
clock started to run from October 3, 2012 and as such, the Claimant’s submission of this
arbitration on December 30, 2015 is out of time insofar as it concerns the Nova Scotia

Measures. '?7

The Respondent submits that if the Tribunal nonetheless determines that it has insufficient
evidence to make a determination on this matter, the Tribunal should dismiss the claim on the
basis that the Claimant has failed to meet its burden to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Alternatively, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal should join the time bar issue to the merits
so as to avoid a decision at this stage that would be res judicata.'? Finally, the Respondent
suggested that the Tribunal should order a targeted production of documents on the part of the
Claimant directed at disclosing the internal state of knowledge of its senior executives.'*°
In any event, the Respondent observes that if the Claimant succeeds on the time bar issue, that
establishes a ‘jurisdictional dilemma that [...] prevents the expropriation claim from proceeding’
to the merits phase since:

If the substantial deprivation was unknown and unknowable until the intervening actions of

Port Hawkesbury [...] then the Nova Scotia measures did not relate to the Claimant, and the

expropriation was not a measure adopted or maintained by Canada. But if the substantial

deprivation was known or should have been known by Nova Scotia, then Resolute also knew
and so did everyone else in the market. '*!

(d) Whether the Nova Scotia Measures constitute a continuing breach

The Respondent asks the Tribunal to reject the Claimant’s contention that the Nova Scotia
Measures are ‘ongoing measures’ that constitute ‘continuing violations’ of NAFTA and so are

not time-barred.'** The Respondent raises two arguments in this respect.

First, the Respondent submits that the notion of ‘continuing breach’ would disregard the plain
wording of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) which provide that the time-bar starts to run once the
Claimant ‘first acquired, or should have first acquired knowledge of the alleged breach and

loss.’ To interpret Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) otherwise would go against the consistent

Respondent’s Memorial, para 69; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 93-94.

Respondent’s Memorial, paras 70-71.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 189:12-19
i ction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 422:4-11.

ction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 190:5-191:15; August 16, 2017, 422:1-3.

ction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 219:5-18.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 72.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 73 (emphasis in original).

  
   
  

 

August 16, 2017, 421:12-422:3.

   

 

   

26

123.

124.

125.

126.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

findings of NAFTA tribunals and the practice of the NAFTA Parties themselves. '**

Second, the Respondent submits that a continuing breach argument is not sustainable as a matter
of fact since the Nova Scotia Measures were all concluded prior to the ‘critical date’ of December
30, 2012.'*5 The Respondent draws a distinction between ‘continuing acts and completed acts that
continue to cause loss or damage’, with the Nova Scotia Measures possibly falling into the latter

category, but certainly not the former.!*°

(e) The alleged breaches that took place after December 30, 2012

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s reliance on a January 2013 electricity regulation
allegedly granting a C$6-8 million yearly benefit to Port Hawkesbury did not appear in its Notice
of Arbitration and Statement of Claim and was introduced in its Counter Memorial.'*’ The
Respondent submits that the Claimant’s submissions only on this topic are ‘outside of the scope
of claims that Resolute submitted to arbitration’ and, unless the Claimant is permitted to amend

its claim under Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules, should be ignored.'**

In any event, the Respondent submits that any claim based on the January 2013 Renewable
Energy Regulations is also time-barred since any arbitration based thereon would have had to
have been submitted by January 2016.'*° Since this claim was omitted from the Claimant’s Notice
of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, it would be out of time even if the Tribunal allowed the
Claimant to amend its claim.”

The Respondent also considers it ‘specious’ for the Claimant to contend that its expropriation
claim under Article 1110 is brought within time because the expropriation did not occur until
October 2014, i.e., the date the Claimant shut down the Laurentide mill.'*! It is uncontested that
the Nova Scotia Measures were all adopted in 2012, therefore they could not give rise to a case
of ‘creeping expropriation’ here since the Claimant cannot point to any conduct in 2013 or 2014
that forms the basis of an expropriation claim.'? Rather, the Claimant’s current formulation of its

case demonstrates that no legally significant connection exists between the Nova Scotia Measures

Respondent’s Memorial, para 73.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 74.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 75.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 105.

Respondent’ s Reply Memorial, paras 104, 109; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admi
194:15-18, 208:11-210:12.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 109.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 109-110.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 111-112.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 112.

 

bility, August 15, 2017,

27

127.

128.

129.

130.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

and its investment."

The Respondent also notes that part of the Claimant’s allegedly expropriated property included
its sales and market share. While the Respondent denies these are assets capable of expropriation,
it submits that if the Claimant were right on this point, it must have first acquired knowledge of
the alleged breach as well as its loss and damage prior to December 30, 2012 and so would also

be time-barred under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).'4

Finally, the Respondent argues that acceptance of the Claimant’s argument regarding the date of
expropriation and the consequent effect on time-bar would lead to an absurd result in NAFTA
arbitration. For example, the Respondent recalls that the Claimant reserved the right to claim
expropriation in the event its Dolbeau and Kénogami mills closed as a result of the Nova Scotia
Measures. The Respondent argues that permitting a claimant to rely on the date it decided to close
its mill up to six or more years after the impugned measures were adopted would render the time

limitation under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) irrelevant. 45
3. The Claimant’s Arguments

(a) Conditions for triggering the time limits under Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2)

The Claimant submits that the three-year time limits established under Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2) are triggered upon the Claimant having actual or constructive knowledge of both (a) a
breach of NAFTA and (b) loss or damage that has been incurred as a result of such a breach.'*°
Contrary to the Respondent’s submission, the Claimant argues that its knowledge must relate to
losses or damages that have been ‘incurred’; knowledge of the probability or likelihood of
damages being insufficient to trigger the time limit.'*’ In this respect, the Claimant relies on the
decision in Pope & Talbot where the tribunal held ‘the critical requirement is that the loss has
occurred and was known or should have been known by the Investor, not that it was or should
have been known that loss could or would occur.’ '“8

The Claimant characterises the Respondent’s argument that the time period runs even if a claimant

does not know the ‘full extent’ of its loss or damage as an obfuscation and seeks to distinguish

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 111.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 115.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 113.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 56; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
258:19-24.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 57.

Claimant’ s Counter Memorial, para 57.

28

131.

132.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the Mondev, Grand River and Bilcon decisions relied upon by the Respondent.'*” The Claimant
points out that in Mondey, the tribunal found that the claimant knew of its damage in 1992 when
it brought proceedings in US courts, this was seven years before it filed its NAFTA claim and the
claimant was therefore clearly out of time.'*° In Grand River, the statutory obligation to make
payment into a 25 year escrow was sufficient to constitute ‘loss or damage’ under Articles 1116
and 1117 despite the fact that the payments were not yet due.'*! Finally, in Bilcon, the tribunal
determined that damages arising from the Claimant’s loss of quarry operations as of May 2004
were sufficiently certain although not precisely quantified and therefore out of time since the
arbitration was only commenced in June 2008. This finding was in spite of the fact that the
relevant Canadian federal minister did not accept the results of the Joint Review Panel until
December 2007.'*? The additional non-NAFTA decisions referred to by the Respondent in its
Reply Memorial are, according to the Claimant, also distinguishable since ‘in each case, there
was no serious dispute that the incurred damage was caused by the breaches.’ !**

By contrast, the Claimant submits that Pope & Talbot is ‘factually similar to the instant dispute’
and therefore the more persuasive authority." In that case, the Canadian government
unsuccessfully argued that the investor knew or should have known of its loss or damage at the
time the relevant regulation was enacted, four years prior to the investor submitting the dispute to
arbitration.'*> A similar outcome should be reached in this case since Canada here, like in Pope
& Talbot, ‘relies upon uncertain market responses’ to ‘retrospective[ly] speculate’ without
affirmative evidence that the Claimant knew or ought to have known of its loss or damage in

2012.'6

(b) When did the Claimant first acquire (or should first have acquired)
knowledge of its loss or damage?

Contrary to the Respondent’s contention that Resolute knew or could not have been unaware of
the effect of the re-entry of the Port Hawkesbury mill on the market following the implementation
of the Nova Scotia Measures, the Claimant submits that ‘there was great uncertainty as to the

immediate likely effects of Port Hawkesbury’s re-entry into the market, and the statute of

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 58; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 89.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 60-61.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 62; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 57.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 63.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 90.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 64.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 64.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 65-66; Claimant’ s Rejoinder Memorial, para 91.

29

133.

134.

135.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

limitations is not triggered by probability, anticipation, fear or speculation.’ '*’ The Claimant
maintains that it did not know of any loss or damage until the first quarter of 2013 and makes six

submissions in support of this contention. '**

First, the uncertainty surrounding the Port Hawkesbury mill reopening, longevity and the effect
of its entry into the market is critical, in the Claimant’s view, in demonstrating that it could not
have known of its loss or damage prior to December 30, 2012. The Claimant submits that the US
ITC proceedings regarding Port Hawkesbury confirm the uncertainty surrounding the re-opening
of the mill and that losses could not have been incurred before 2013. Counsel for PHP stated that:
“PHP didn’t really get into the market until 2013. As such, it’s impossible for PHP to cause any
injury in 2012.’!° Additionally, PHP’s counsel noted that upon its re-entry in the market, PHP
deliberately sought to avoid disrupting the US market by exporting its product.'® Similarly, the
American petitioners noted the uncertainty surrounding the re-entry of PHP in the market, the
volume of sales it might make and the effect it would have on the market.'®! All of this
demonstrates that PHP was not ‘in the market’ in any significant way before 2013.’' These
statements, the Claimant says, ‘are consistent with Prof. Hausman’s findings that PHP did not

affect the market (or cause Resolute to incur damages) in 2012.’'

The Claimant acknowledges that ‘after September 28, 2012 [...] PHP had reopened and would
have some effect on the market, but no thoughtful or responsible observer was certain what the
effect might be.’'® Accordingly, the Claimant regards as implausible the Respondent’s argument

that the Claimant knew or should have known of its loss or damage immediately upon the

reopening of Port Hawkesbury mill.!°

Second, the Claimant relies on the expert report of Professor Jerry Hausman asserting that
“Resolute could not have concluded that the firm’s SCP operation had been financially harmed
by the reopening of the PHP mill prior to the first quarter of 2013.’'° Professor Hausman

concludes that given Resolute’s 2012 results ‘showed no harm caused by Port Hawkesbury’,

jaimant’s Counter Memorial, para 67.

jaimant’s Counter Memorial, para 68.

jaimant’s Counter Memorial, para 71, referring to March 18, 2015 US ITC Transcript at 14:7-9 (R-083);
aimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 60.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 61, referring to March 19, 2015 US ITC Transcript at 14:22-15:2
(R-083).

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 73.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 73.

laimant’ s Rejoinder Memorial, para 62.

laimant’ s Rejoinder Memorial, para 58.
I
I

Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl

aimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 59.
aimant’s Counter Memorial, para 74, citing Hausman Statement, para 14.

30

136.

137.

138.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

“Resolute would not have been able to determine the negative effects of PHP’s reopening until at
least Q2 2013.’ !©7 The Claimant relies on its own data and Professor Hausman’s analysis to show
that prices and sales quantities in the fourth quarter of 2012 were not affected by Port
Hawkesbury’s reopening. '®* However, a price decrease was observed from the first quarter of
2013 and diminution in Resolute’s sales quantities after Q1 2013, although these sales volumes
were ‘consistent with sales in [QI 2012].’!

Third, the Claimant submits that the Respondent has failed to meet its evidential burden regarding
the potential market effects of the reopening of the Port Hawkesbury mill and accuses the
Respondent of selectively and misleadingly quoting certain statements of the Claimant’s CEO.'”
For example, in relation to an August 2012 conference call quoted by the Respondent, the
Claimant points to other extracts in which its CEO ‘pushed back against the notion that it was
going to incur loss or damages’ and expressed a desire to compete with Port Hawkesbury, even
foreseeing ‘some improvement’ in Q4 2012.'7! Similar confidence in Resolute’s ability to
compete was expressed in a November 2012 Earnings Conference Call, this portion having been

omitted by the Respondent. !””

Fourth, the Respondent's selective reliance on various market forecasts is misplaced given that
these forecasts are necessarily speculative and the forecasters in this case have acknowledged that
their forecasts were incorrect.'” For example, predictions regarding a surge in imports and price
fall were ultimately proved to be incorrect with PHP ‘mov[ing] “seamlessly into the market”
instead.'”* The Claimant considers these forecasts to be ‘legally irrelevant’ for determining when

the Claimant knew or ought to have known of its loss or damage.'”°

Fifth, the Claimant submits that the Respondent erroneously relies on its February 2015 Draft
Notice of Intent to submit a claim to arbitration.'”° For one thing, the Claimant notes that this

document was merely a ‘Draft Only’ and ‘Strictly Confidential’ paper that was intended to

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 74, citing Hausman Statement, para 27; Hearing on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 48:9-22.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 75-77; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
259:19-260:7.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 78-79.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 82-83.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 84.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 85.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 87-88.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 88, referring to PHP Post. Conf. Br. At Attachment D (C-044); March.
2013 Reel Time Report, pp. 4-5 (C-026).

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 89.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 94-97.

31

139.

iii.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

‘initiate a conversation that might lead to compensation for Resolute.’'”’ Additionally, this
document does not, as the Respondent believes, reveal that the Claimant knew of its loss or
damage in 2012, but only specifies that ‘Resolute’s market share for all SC Paper has declined
from 2012 to 2014.’ !”* That is to say, ‘Resolute’s market share for SC paper was less in 2014 than
it was in 2012.’'” The Claimant rebuffs the Respondent’s assertion that the word ‘from’ in the
draft NOI must be understood as a ‘starting point’ for the loss of market share.'*° The Claimant
points to the Respondent’s own Reply Memorial as conflating ‘from December 2012’ with ‘in
January 2013’ as a demonstration that the phrase ‘from 2012’ in the draft NOI does not have the

meaning ascribed to it by the Respondent.'*!

The Claimant considers the Respondent’s focus on the supercalendered paper price forecasts

between 2012 and 2014 to be defective for five key reasons:

despite the Respondent's assertions, the Claimant’s volumes and profits did not decline between
December 2012 and January 2013, which are insufficient in any event to constitute a broader

trend; !*?

the Respondent has not presented evidence that prices decreased in December 2012, rather it

accepts they held firm, so the Claimant had not incurred loss in December 2012;'**

the seasonality of prices means that ‘it is not uncommon for prices to go down in January’ and
no causal link has been demonstrated between the reopening of Port Hawkesbury and any price

decrease in January 2013. In fact, the prices recovered in February 2013;'84

the Respondent's assertion that the Claimant must have known of the price decrease in January
2013 because of its 28-45 day contract conclusion lead time disregards the fact that the
Claimant’s prices actually rose in February 2013 and this upcoming increase would have been

known at a similar time;'*° and

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 96, referring to Letter from Richard Garneau to Minister Ed Fast
(March 2, 2015) (R-082).

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 95, citing Resolute Draft Notice of Arbitration, para 19 (R-081).
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 95.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 38-40.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 41, referring to Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 86.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 43.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 44; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
66:20-67:1.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 45, 51-52; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15,
2017, 260:8-261:3.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 46; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
73:13-77:15.

32

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

there continued to be uncertainty surrounding the long term viability of Port Hawkesbury and
the later increase in market prices in 2013 demonstrates that Port Hawkesbury’s reentry in the
market did not have such a dramatic effect.'*° In this regard, the Claimant argues ‘a lot of people
at the time said — and a customer said at the ITC in the hearing, “This place failed before. It lost
its customers. Will the customers come back and trust it again?” Nobody knew for sure. And
that was the underestimate, as I tried to suggest, of just how committed the Nova Scotia

government was to make it succeed.’ !*”

140. Sixth, the Respondent's assertion that the Claimant closed Line #10 at its Laurentide mill because

141.

186

of the reopening of Port Hawkesbury is factually incorrect. The Claimant points out that it
attributed the closure of Line #10 to the reopening of the ‘more modern and efficient Dolbeau
plant’ throughout 2011 and 2012, with the reopening of Port Hawkesbury not being certain until
September 2012.'** The Claimant does acknowledge that the closure of Line #11 was attributable
to Port Hawkesbury. '*? However, the Claimant disagrees with the Respondent that the temporary
shutdown of Line #11 in 2012 was to be attributed to PHP, but was rather scheduled to coincide

with the seasonal downturn in demand. '*°

The Claimant considers the Respondent’s reliance on a particular statement by Resolute’s
spokesman, Pierre Choquette, regarding the closure of Line #10 to be misconceived.!*! In fact,
M. Choquette referenced the opening of Port Hawkesbury as potentially just one of ‘several
factors’ leading to the closure of Line #10, and M. Garneau had elsewhere unambiguously
referred to the fact that the reopening of Dolbeau would lead to the closure of another Resolute
mill or machine. '*? Elsewhere, M. Choquette repeated the CEO’s message that the closure of Line
#10 related to the decision to reopen Dolbeau and was unrelated to Port Hawkesbury.'** At the
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Claimant also explained that ‘the decision [to close
Line #10] had been taken a full year earlier [...] but a company doesn’t show fully its hand when
it has workers who are going to be very distressed in a town that depends completely on that

mill.’!

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 47; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15,2017, 95:7-
98:20, 274:14-275:2.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 279:12-22.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 98-107; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 64, 66-83.
Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 64, 68.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 79.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 71.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 71-73.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 76, referring to Guy Veillette, ‘11 emplois perdus chez Laurentide’,
Le Nowvelliste, November 7, 2012 (R-117).

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 283:24-284:5.

33

142.

143.

200
201
202

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

(c) Certain NAFTA breaches were only known to the Claimant after
December 30, 2012

While the Claimant acknowledges that certain breaches (but not loss or damage) were known by
it by September 28, 2012, it submits that other breaches were not known to it until after December
30, 2012.'° The Claimant refers to two breaches that arose after December 30, 2012: the
expropriation of the Laurentide mill which only occurred after the mill closed in October 2014,
and a January 2013 Nova Scotia Measure relating to a biomass facility providing Port
Hawkesbury with a C$6 to 8 million benefit.'°° These two claims remain timely notwithstanding

the outcome of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection in relation to the other claims.'””

First, in relation to the Claimant’s expropriation claim, the Claimant submits that it could not have
known of the Respondent’s breach of NAFTA Article 1110 until it had been substantially
deprived of its investment in the Laurentide mill.!°* This, the Claimant says, did not occur until
the Laurentide mill closed in October 2014, after the critical date of December 30, 2012 and
therefore within time for the purposes of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).!°? The Claimant explained
during the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility that the Laurentide mill had been sold in
January 2016, and that ‘it’s no longer owned at all by Resolute. It’s in other hands, and, therefore,

the mill could not possibly be restored or reopened.’?”

The Claimant submits that the closure of Line #10 — which, in any event, was not attributable to
the reopening of Port Hawkesbury — would not constitute a ‘substantial deprivation’ of its
investment so as to amount to a breach of Article 1110.7 The Claimant considers the
Respondent's policy arguments regarding the operation of the time bar in relation to expropriation
claims to be more prejudicial to investors than the NAFTA Parties if accepted since a ‘claimant
could be forced to bring an unripe NAFTA expropriation claim’ that would necessarily be
dismissed.” The Claimant also disavows the Respondent’s allegation that the expropriation
claim considers sales and market share to have been expropriated, explaining instead that these

are cognizable damages even if they are not capable of expropriation. Its claim instead relies on

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paral 08.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 109.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 109.

 
   

ility, August 25, 2017, 36:20-23.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 111-113; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
290:23-291:2.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 37:23-38:9, 285:11-24.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 114.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 97.

34

145.

146.

147.

203
208
205
206
207
208
209
210
au

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the closure of the Laurentide mill in 2014.7

Second, the Claimant refers to the fact that Port Hawkesbury ‘used steam provided by a Nova
Scotia Power biomass facility to make its paper.’?* The Claimant alleges that the biomass facility
needed to run full time to power Port Hawkesbury, but Port Hawkesbury was only required to pay
for the amount of energy it used, i.e., 24 per cent, with the remaining 76 per cent being passed on
to ratepayers.””> The passing down of costs was approved by the Nova Scotia Government by a
regulation it passed in January 2013.2” This regulation constituted a C$6-8 million benefit to Port
Hawkesbury and occurred after the critical date of December 30, 2012 so is nonetheless
admissible.” Contrary to the Respondent’s contention that this argument was raised for the first
time in the Claimant’s Counter Memorial and is therefore out of time, the Claimant submits that
these measures formed part of the ‘electricity benefits received by PHP and identified by Resolute
in its Statement of Claim.’?°* In the event that the Claimant is required to amend its claim (which
it does not believe it ought), the Claimant submits that the Tribunal should permit such an
amendment as no prejudice would accrue to the Respondent; the arbitrators would only need to
address this claim in the merits phase of this arbitration, there being no identified jurisdictional

objection to this claim.””

4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments

The United States supports the Respondent’s contention that the limitation period established by
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) are ‘clear and rigid’ and ‘not subject to any “suspension”,
“prolongation”, or “other qualification”.’?!”

Further, the United States agrees with the Respondent's interpretation of the plain text of Articles
1116(2) and 1117(2) regarding the start of the time limitation under those Articles. The United
States recalls that the Articles require a ‘claimant to submit a claim to arbitration within three
years of the ‘date on which the’ investor or enterprise ‘first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge’ of the alleged breach and its loss or damage.”!! Contrary to the Claimant’s theory
regarding continuing breach, ‘an investor or enterprise first acquires knowledge [...] at a particular

moment in time [...] such knowledge cannot first be acquired at multiple points in time or on a

aimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 98.
aimant’s Counter Memorial, para 115.
jaimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 115-116.
aimant’s Counter Memorial, para 116.
aimant’s Counter Memorial, para 117.
aimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 99-102.
Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 102.
United States Subm
United States Subm

Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl

  
  

35

148.

149.

150.

151.

212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

recurring basis.’?!?

The United States further submits that knowledge of ‘incurred loss or damage’ pursuant to Article
1116(2) and 1117(2) does not require ‘the financial impact of the loss [to be] realized’ but instead,
the word ‘incur’ should be understood to refer to when the investor ‘become[s] liable or subject

to’ such loss, even if ‘that loss or damage is not immediate.’?!*

In respect of the time a claimant acquires knowledge of an alleged breach of the expropriation
standard under NAFTA Article 1110, the United States submits that ‘a claimant has actual or
constructive knowledge of the ‘alleged breach’ once it has (or should have had) knowledge of all
elements required to make a claim under Article 1110 — including that the destruction of, or
interference with, the economic value of the investment is sufficient to constitute a taking.’?'* In
cases where a series of measures are impugned as being expropriatory, knowledge of the
expropriation can exist prior to the enactment of the last government measure.?'> Additionally,
the United States submits that ‘a claimant may have actual or constructive knowledge that the
interference with the economic value of its investment is sufficient to constitute a taking before

that investment has lost all of its value.’?!®

In a similar vein, Mexico agrees with the Respondent’s submission that ‘the plain language of
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) does not require a claimant to acquire knowledge of the full extent
of the loss or damage resulting from the alleged breaches in order to start the time limitation to
submit a claim to arbitration.’?!” In this regard, Mexico refers to the finding in Mondev where the
tribunal determined that ‘a claimant may know that it has suffered loss or damage even if the

extent or quantification of the loss or damage is still unclear.’?!*

The Respondent points out these areas of agreement amongst the NAFTA Parties, and the
authorities that they cite in common, including the statement of the Mondev tribunal that a
‘claimant may know that it has suffered loss or damage even if the extent of the quantification of
the loss or damage is still unclear.’?!? The Respondent agrees with the United States that the

holdings in Pope & Talbot and Grand River are not necessarily incompatible ‘as a loss occurs

United States Submi:

  

United States Submission, para 11.
Mexico Submi
Mexico Submission, para 6, citing Mondev, Award, para 87.
Canada’s Reply to Article 1128 Submissions, paras 10-14.

36

152.

153.

154.

220

22

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

when it is incurred, rather than when the financial impact of the loss is realized.’?”°

The Claimant considers that the distinction drawn by the United States between when a loss may
be incurred and when the financial impact of the loss may be experienced, is irrelevant to the facts
of the present case. That is because Resolute did not know and had no persuasive reason to know

that it had either incurred or experienced injury prior to December 30, 2012.
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis
(a) General considerations

The relevant language of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) is identical: ‘if more than three years have
elapsed from the date on which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.”
The triggering event is the knowledge, actual or constructive, that an alleged breach has occurred
and that loss or damage has been incurred as a result. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent,
and with the other NAFTA Parties in their Article 1128 submissions, that this time limit is strict,
not flexible. There is no provision for the Tribunal to extend the limitation period, and there is
no question here of any waiver on the part of the Respondent. On the other hand, the specified
conditions must be fulfilled: the alleged breach must actually have occurred, the resulting damage
must actually have been incurred, and the claimant must know, or be in a position such that it

should have known, of these facts.

As to the requirement of breach, one cannot know of a breach until the facts alleged to constitute
the breach have actually occurred. It is not enough that a breach is likely to occur: paragraph (2)
deals with allegations, no doubt, but not with contingencies.” There may thus be a difference
between the date of different breaches arising from a given course of governmental conduct. The
Claimant alleges breaches of Articles 1102(3) (national treatment), 1105(1) (unfair and
inequitable treatment), and 1110(1) (expropriation). Breaches of Articles 1102(3) and 1105(1)
occur when the governmental conduct complained of occurs. By contrast a breach of Article
1110(1) occurs when the expropriation (as there defined) occurs and not before. The gist of an

expropriation is the loss of the property in question, as a result of a governmental taking (direct

Canada’s Reply to Article 1128 Submissions, para 14.

Claimant's Reply to Article 1128 Submissions, paras 16-18.

In certain cases, tribunals have been prepared to overlook technically premature claims, provided the
relevant requirements have subsequently been satisfied: e.g. Ethyl Corporation v Canada, Award on
Jurisdiction, June 14, 1998, paras 85-88 (where the legislation complained of had not been passed or come
into force). The question here is a different one: it is whether a strict 3-year limit for bringing a claim has been
exceeded. The 3-year limit is counted from the date of actual (putative) breach and knowledge of harm.

37

155.

156.

157.

158.

223

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

or indirect). Only when the investor is substantially or completely deprived of the attributes of

property in an investment can there be an expropriation under Article 1110(1).?3

(b) Knowledge (actual or constructive) of the alleged breaches

In the present case, the essential acts alleged to constitute breaches of Articles 1102(3) and
1105(1) were completed by September 2012, three months before the critical date. It was in
September 2012 that the sale of the Port Hawkesbury mill was finalised, along with the associated
promises of support. Moreover, the Claimant was well aware of this at the time. It had previously
declined to bid for the mill, and the proposed sale was covered in the trade press. Indeed, the
Claimant, subject to an argument as to continuing breach, did not really argue otherwise. Its
principal argument was that it did not suffer loss or was, reasonably, not aware of having done so

until, at the earliest, January 2013, after the critical date.

In its written pleadings, at least, the Claimant also sought to argue that the Nova Scotia Measures
were continuing breaches of Articles 1102(3) and 1105(1), breaches which continued after the
critical date and which consequently were not caught by the 3-year time limit. In oral argument,

this argument was not pressed, and in the Tribunal’s view rightly not.

The core point is that in the present case, the Nova Scotia measures were taken within a short
space of time and were effectively complete when taken. It is true that they eventually had a
continuing effect on the Claimant (from what date is disputed), but that does not suffice to qualify
them as continuing wrongful acts. There is a distinction between a continuing breach of an
obligation and a perfected breach which continues to have injurious effects. Decisions to provide
support to the Port Hawkesbury mill were taken and implemented in September 2012, and with
one possible exception (as to which see paragraph 160 below) they did not call for further

measures to be taken.

Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of NAFTA refer to the time when the breach ‘first’ occurred.
According to the ordinary meaning of the terms used and the object and purpose of the provision
(under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties), whether a breach definitively
occurring and known to the claimant prior to the critical date continued in force thereafter is
irrelevant. In terms of Article 14(2) of the Articles on State Responsibility, ‘[t]he breach of an

international obligation by an act of a State having a continuing character extends over the entire

‘The essence of the matter is the deprivation by state organs of the right of property either as such, or by
permanent transfer of the power of management and control’: Brownlie’s Principles (8th edn, ed Crawford,
2012) 621.

38

159.

160.

161.

162.

204

225

226

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

period during which the act continues and remains not in conformity with the international
obligation.’?* But the breach nonetheless occurs when the State act is first perfected and can be
definitively characterized as a breach of the relevant obligation. Here the reopening of the Port
Hawkesbury mill on favourable terms — alleged by the Claimant to constitute a breach of Articles

1102(3) and/or 1105(1) — first occurred not later than September 2012.

In these circumstances the Tribunal does not need to attempt to reconcile the apparent

discrepancies between various NAFTA tribunals concerning continuing wrongful acts.”°

A possible exception to this conclusion concerns the January 2013 electricity regulation granting
a further benefit to Port Hawkesbury (see paragraph 124, 145 above). At the oral phase the Parties
spent very little time on this argument. It was not (and in the Tribunal’s view, could not have
been) pleaded as giving rise to a new claim under Chapter Eleven; it was, if anything, a
continuation of conduct already in operation. If necessary, the Tribunal would have permitted an
amendment to the Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, but in essence the 2013
electricity regulation was not more than an ancillary factor, linked to the original Measures. As

such, it does not affect the operation of the time-bar.

The position is different, in the Tribunal’s view, in respect of the alleged breach of
Article 1110(1). The gist of an expropriation claim is the actual loss of property or (in the case
of conduct tantamount to an expropriation) of control over it. In the words of the tribunal in

Glamis Gold:

Claims only arise under NAFTA Article 1110 when actual confiscation follows, and thus
mere threats of expropriation or nationalization are not sufficient to make such a claim ripe;
for an Article 1110 claim to be ripe, the governmental act must have directly or indirectly
taken a property interest resulting in actual present harm to an investor.?”°

The Claimant summarized its case on expropriation in closing as follows:

an expropriation is a measure that causes the substantial deprivation of my property. And if
you, as a government, take measures, knowing that you will be supporting an entity in a way
that will harm a limited number of other competitors in a shrinking market, I think that there
is a very good basis to claim that that measure may cause the expropriation, indirect,
constructive expropriation, of one of the other market players. It results in the substantial

 

International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Re bility of States for l ionally Wrongful Acts
2001, Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of Its Fifty-third Session, UN GAOR, 56th
Sess, Supp No 10, 43, UN Doc. A/56/10 (2001).

Cf, on the one hand, United Parcel Service of America Inc (UPS) v Government of Canada, ICSID Case
No. UNCT/02/1, Award, May 24, 2007, para 28 and, on the other, Apotex Inc v Government of the United
States, ICSID Case No. UNCT/10/2, Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, June 14, 2013, paras 325-7;
Glamis Gold, Ltd v United States of America, UNCITRAL Award, June 8, 2009, para 348; Grand River
Enterprises Six Nations Ltd v United States, Award, ICSID Case No ARB/10/5, IIC 481 (2011),
January 12, 2011, para 74.

Glamis Gold, Ltd. v United States of America, UNCITRAL, Award, June 8, 2009, para 328.

39

163.

164.

165.

166.

207

229

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

deprivation of my asset... 7?”

In accordance with this submission, the expropriation did not occur until 2014, when the
Claimant’s Canadian subsidiary decided to close down the Laurentide mill and the Claimant was
thereby deprived of the benefit of its investment.”** As will appear, there are difficulties with this
claim for breach of Article 1110(1), but in the Tribunal’s view, the timing requirements of Articles

1116(2) and 1117(2) have not been infringed in respect of the expropriation claim.

(c) Knowledge (actual or constructive) of losses incurred

This conclusion concerning expropriation makes it unnecessary for present purposes to decide
when the Claimant became aware that it had suffered loss as a result of the alleged breach of
Article 1110(1), or should have done so. But that question does arise with respect to the losses

incurred by the Claimant as a result of the alleged breaches of Articles 1102(3) and 1105(1).

On this issue the Disputing Parties agreed that it is not necessary for this purpose that the full
extent of losses incurred be known. As the tribunal said in Mondev, ‘a claimant may know that

it has suffered loss or damage even if the extent or quantification of the loss or damage is still

+229

unclear.’ **

Beyond this point the Disputing Parties’ positions diverged. The Claimant did not call its
spokesman at the time, or its senior management, to testify as to their knowledge of present losses.
Rather it called expert evidence in the person of Professor Hausman, who asserted that any
adverse impact of the breaches did not occur until, at the earliest, the first quarter of 2013. The

Respondent for its part contested Professor Hausman’s evidence, although it did not call any

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 458:19-459:4.
There is an extensive case-law on the question when an expropriation occurs, much of it concerned with
‘creeping’ expropriation (which is not this case) and with issues of valuation rather than (as here) with
jurisdiction. A typical finding is that of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal that:
When the alleged expropriation is carried out by way of a series of interferences in the
enjoyment of property, the breach forming the cause of action is deemed to take place on the
day when the interference has ripened into a more or less irreversible deprivation of the
property rather than on the beginning date of the events
International Technical Products Corporation v Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Award
No. 196-302-3, October 28, 1985, para 49, Iran-USCTR 206, 240-1 (1985). See further Biloune and
Marine Drive Complex Ltd v Ghana Investments Centre and the Government of Ghana, UNCTIRAL,
Award, October 27, 1989, 95 ILR 184, 210, para 30. See also e.g. First National City Bank,
Memorandum of determinations, IC 1023 (1973), April 9, 1973, Chile (Overseas Private Investment
Corporation); Compania del Desarrollo de Santa Elena SA v Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No.
ARB/96/1, Award, February 17, 2000, paras 77-8; Nykomb Synergetics Technology Holding AB v Latvia,
Award, December 16, 2003, para 4.3.1.
Mondev International Ltd. v United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, October 11,
2002, para 87.

 

  

40

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

expert in rebuttal. Instead, the focus of its case was on a series of statements, made by the
Claimant in 2012 and subsequently, that, in the Respondent’s view, indicated awareness that

losses had already been incurred.

There is an almost metaphysical question whether a claimant which actually asserts that it has
already suffered loss or damage can subsequently, in effect, argue that it was mistaken and that
the loss or damage were only incurred at a later date. Is it possible to have actual knowledge of
something that is not the case? But as not infrequently happens in the law, the metaphysical
question does not really arise. Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) are concerned to set time limits on
NAFTA claims once the claimant has notice of what it considers breach and consequential loss.
Aclaimant which unequivocally asserts both elements, then waits more than 3 years to commence

proceedings, can hardly be heard to say that its original assertion was premature.

It is thus necessary to review the statements relied on by the Respondent to see whether they
constituted unequivocal assertions of loss already incurred. The various statements were itemized

in paragraphs 108-117 above.

The draft notice of intent presented to the Minister on February 24, 2015 referred to market share
having declined ‘from 2012 to 2014’. The Tribunal does not accept Claimant’s argument that
this was merely a draft for the purposes of negotiation. It was a document transmitted to the
Respondent with a view to the settlement of the dispute, and was correspondingly significant.
However, the statement as to market share was not unequivocal. To say that market share declined
from one year to another does not say anything specific about whether there was a decline in the
first year, especially since only a few months in that year were implicated. The first year may be
simply a comparator. The Tribunal does not read this isolated statement as an admission that

Claimant suffered actual loss or damage in 2012.

As to the 2012 conference call and Claimant’s statement that it was ‘impossible [for the reopening
of Port Hawkesbury] not to have an impact on the market’,”*! this certainly shows that the
Claimant expected to lose market share. But made at a time when Port Hawkesbury had yet to

reopen, this was a mere prediction, not an acknowledgement of loss already incurred.
More significant in this regard is the Claimant’s closure of Line #10 at Laurentide in November

2012, and the contemporaneous explanations for this given by the Claimant. The Claimant argues

Resolute Forest Products, ‘Draft Notice of Intent’, February 24, 2015, para 19 (R-081). No further
specification was offered.
See para 110.

41

172.

173.

174.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

that the major reason for the closure of Line #10 was its own decision, made a year before, to
reopen its Dolbeau plant. This seems to have been the major reason, but the explanation reveals
the interaction of economic factors in a saturated market. Claimant’s spokesperson, Pierre
Choquette, said at the time that the reopening of Port Hawkesbury was ‘just one of several factors’
in the decision to close Line #10 and the Tribunal is inclined to think that this statement was
accurate. Moreover, the temporary closure of Line #11 at Laurentide was according to the
Claimant itself, at least partly attributable to the reopening of Port Hawkesbury. But it is one
thing, in a climate of uncertainty as to markets, to take precautionary measures, and another to
acknowledge present loss or injury. The Claimant does not suggest that the temporary closure
was a compensable loss, and in the Tribunal’s view neither was it an acknowledgement of

damage.

The Respondent quotes press articles from late 2012, which state that the Claimant will lose
market share: (i) a ‘Reel Time’ report published on November 8, 2012 predicted that Resolute’s
market share would fall from 20.1% at the end of 2011 to 13.5% at the end of 2012;?* (ii) the
‘ERA Forest Products Monthly’ November 2012 issue said that the Port Hawkesbury restart was

already having an impact on contract negotiations for the first half of 2013;7

and (iii) ‘Industry
Intelligence’ reports about drops in prices.7* The Claimant points out that previous reports by

235

‘Reel Time’ were erroneous, and asserts that speculation about markets is inherently uncertain.
In the Tribunal’s view, it was clear when Port Hawkesbury restarted in September 2012 that paper
prices would be affected at some point. But that fact is not equivalent to a finding that damage
was already being incurred, and that is what Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) require. Press

speculation and market predictions are no substitute for evidence of sales volumes and prices, or

a clear acknowledgement of present loss.

Dr Jerry Hausman, a Professor of Economics at MIT, gave evidence on the former point. In his

Expert Witness Statement he concluded that:

The management of Resolute could not have concluded that the firm’s SCP operation had
been financially harmed by the reopening of the PHP mill prior to the first quarter of 2013.
Several factors underlie my conclusion. First, the price and financial effects of the reopening
were not evident until January 2013 or later. Second, PHP did not have a material impact on

Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 64, citing Verle Sutton, Reel Time, Special Edition (Nov. 8, 2012),
p. 7, available at: http://suttonpaperstrategies.com/PDFs/Nov%2012%20Forecast%20Issue.pdf. (R-102)
Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 65, citing ERA Forest Products Research, ERA Forest Products
Monthly (November 30, 2012), p. 25 (R-105).

Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 66-7, citing, Industry Intelligence, report, ‘Industry Intelligence
i2dashboard - 35 Ib SC-A’ (R-108) and Industry Intelligence, report, ‘Industry Intelligence i2dashboard -
33 Ib SC-B’ (R-109).

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 88, 91.

42

175.

176.

177.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the North American SCP market until 2013. Third, there was nothing in the financial results
of Resolute’s SCP operations during the fourth quarter of 2012 to suggest that Resolute had
been materially harmed by the reopening, especially when viewed in the context of declining
consumption of SCP during 2012. Fourth, even if Resolute’s management had suspected
adverse effects might arise from the reopening, it would not have known the extent of any
effects, or their materiality, prior to the first quarter of 2013.7°°

He added:

Based on the evidence presented [...] Resolute could not have contemporaneously known the

damaging effects of PHP’s reopening in 2012, due to the limited price, quantity, and profit

effects apparent in Q4 2012.57
Dr Hausman was ably cross-examined on his Statement, but without resiling from its principal
conclusions. He accepted that there had been a slight decline in SC paper prices in January 2013,
and an even slighter increase in February 2013 (both of which would have been known in
December), but said that someone in the Claimant’s position should not have attached
significance to that, given the relatively modest price changes and typical market fluctuations
after the end of the holiday season. He also emphasized the uncertainties regarding Port
Hawkesbury’s reopening, which could not have been resolved in the short time scale in question.
In his view the major impact on prices was not felt until later in 2013 or even 2014.7 In the
absence of rebuttal evidence and in light of the indications of prices for supercalendered paper in

the period November 2012 to February 2013, the Tribunal accepts his evidence cited above.

As noted (paragraph 119 above), the Respondent submitted at the hearing that the Tribunal should
join (or rather rejoin) the time bar issue to the merits, or at least order a targeted production of
documents directed at disclosing the internal state of knowledge of Claimant’s senior executives.
The Tribunal is disinclined to accept either procedural proposal. The Respondent sought
bifurcation inter alia on this issue, yet at the jurisdictional phase issues will typically be decided
on the basis of written party submissions.?*? In fact, a quantity of documentary evidence was
produced, including items taken from the trade literature and statements by informed company
personnel, and the matter was fully argued. The resulting picture suggested that there was an
expectation of increased competition and pressure on prices, but, consistent with the factual
analysis presented above, there was no admission by the Claimant of immediate losses in the
period after Port Hawkesbury restarted, and the economic evidence produced by the Claimant
supported this conclusion. In the circumstances, no case for joinder or a special discovery process

has been made out.

Hausman, Expert Witness Statement, February 22, 2017, para 14.

Ibid, para 40.

The oral evidence is at Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 50-99.
Cf Grand River, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, para 54.

43

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

240

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimant did not know, and could not reasonably have known, by
December 2012, that it had already incurred loss or damage by reason of the alleged breach.
Indeed, it has not been established that it did actually suffer loss in this short period. Market
participants and observers expected increased price competition in the longer term, but that is a
different matter. The Respondent argued that at least the reopening of Port Hawkesbury precluded
the Claimant from raising its prices, but as Claimant pointed out, there is no evidence that it

240

planned a price increase,” and anyway press speculation as to possible price increases is not the

same thing as an admission of loss or injury. A fortiori it is not enough to trigger the time limit.

For these reasons, in the Tribunal’s view the time-bar in Article 1116(2) and 1117(2) does not

prevent the Tribunal exercising jurisdiction over the claims.

Cc. THE SCOPE OBJECTION

1. Introduction

NAFTA Article 1101(1) deals with the ‘Scope and Coverage’ of NAFTA Chapter Eleven and
relevantly provides:

This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:

(a) investors of another party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and

(c) with respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory of the Party.

The Respondent submits that the words ‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1) require a ‘legally
significant connection’ between the impugned measures and the investor or its investment. The
Respondent contends that such a connection does not exist in this case between the Nova Scotia
Measures and the Claimant or the Laurentide mill and so the Nova Scotia Measures do not fall

within the scope of application of NAFTA.

The Claimant, on the other hand, contends that the words ‘relating to’ only requires a ‘causal
connection’ between the impugned measures and the investor or its investment. In this case, the
Claimant submits that such a ‘causal connection’ exists here since the Nova Scotia Measures

directly affected the Claimant and the Laurentide mill.

As noted by the Tribunal in its Decision on Bifurcation, if the Respondent’s Article 1101(2)

objection is successful, it would dispose of the entirety of the claims relating to the Nova Scotia

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 54.

44

184.

185.

244

246
247

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Measures.*!

2. The Respondent’s Arguments
(a) Interpretation of the words ‘relating to’ under Article 1101(1)

The Respondent’s jurisdictional objection revolves around whether the words ‘relating to’ are
sufficiently broad to include cases where the impugned measures merely have an effect on the

242

investor and its investment, or whether something more is required.**” The Respondent submits
that the words ‘relating to’ impose a higher threshold than the ‘causal nexus’ test proposed by the
Claimant and require a ‘legally significant connection’ between the impugned measures and the
investor or its investment so as to be covered by NAFTA Chapter Eleven.”

The Respondent compares the words chosen in Article 1101(1) with other provisions of NAFTA
that are formulated more broadly in order to cover measures that have a mere direct or indirect
effect on trade.”“* The Respondent reinforces this point by reference to previous drafts of NAFTA

which broadened the scope of application of Chapter Eleven to ‘measures affecting investments

 

[...] and investors’.4° However, this earlier drafting was rejected by the NAFTA Parties and
reformulated in its narrower current form. The Respondent notes that the Disputing Parties agree
that ‘a measure that has a mere effect on an investment [...] is not sufficient to satisfy the
Article 1101(1) threshold’ and a measure ‘must directly affect the investor or its investment for it
to meet the “relating to” threshold.’ The Respondent submits that it is also the agreed view
amongst all three NAFTA Parties that the words ‘relating to’ ought to be understood as requiring
a ‘legally significant connection’ between the measure, the investor and its investment so as to
fall within Chapter Eleven’s scope of application and, consequently, the jurisdiction of a NAFTA
tribunal.7 This view, which has been expressed in cases such as Methanex and Apotex, was
adopted by those tribunals in their reasoning. For example, the tribunal in Methanex found:

If the threshold provided by Article 1101(1) were merely one of ‘affecting’, as Methanex

contends, it would be satisfied wherever any economic impact was felt by an investor or an
investment...

Procedural Order No. 4, Decision on Bifurcation, November 18, 2016, para 4.15.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 81.

Respondent's Memorial, paras 79, 81; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
7

 

ibility, August 15, 2017, 111:1-

Respondent’s Memorial, para 81 referring to NAFTA Articles 709 (‘this Section applies to any such
[sanitary and phytosanitary] measure of a Party that may, directly or indirectly, affect trade between the
Parties’) and 901 (‘this Chapter applies to standard-related measures [...] that may directly or indirectly,
affect trade in goods or services’).

Respondent’s Memorial, para 82.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 118.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 83; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 111:8-114:19.

45

186.

187.

188.

248
249

250

256

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

 

We decide that the phrase ‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1) NAFTA signifies something more
than the mere effect of a measure on an investor or an investment and that it requires a legally
significant connection between them.”*

 

The Respondent submits that this approach has been endorsed and adopted by subsequent
tribunals in Bayview? and Cargill.” In respect of the Cargill decision, the Respondent disagrees
with the Claimant’s assertion that ‘the Cargill tribunal considered that the ‘legally significant
connection’ test set out in Methanex ‘sets the bar too high, or requires refinement.’**! Rather, the
Cargill tribunal found that there was a ‘causal nexus’ between the investor, its investment and the
Mexican permit regime imposed on the import of high fructose corn syrup.” Although phrased
differently, the Respondent submits that the ‘causal nexus’ test is essentially the same as the
‘legally significant connection’ test.?*? In fact, the Cargill tribunal refused to comment on the

stringency of the Methanex test, instead determining that: ‘regardless of whether or not the test

espoused in Methanex is too restrictive, it is satisfied.’?*

The Respondent further contends that the very same argument was considered and rejected in the

Apotex and Apotex II cases, especially where the tribunal in Apotex I] determined:

The Tribunal does not consider that the Cargill tribunal was seeking to apply a different legal
interpretation of NAFTA Article 1101(1) from the two tribunals in Methanex and Bayview.255

The Respondent maintains that the ‘legally significant connection’ test is the proper approach

since it was the standard applied in Bayview and described by the Bilcon tribunal as ‘a sound basis

for deliberation.’?*° The Respondent submits that the ‘legally significant connection’ test requires

more than the measure ‘merely affect’ the claimant or its investment, but does not necessarily
require that the measures be ‘intended to deliberately harm’ the investor nor ‘create a legal

impediment’, even though measures such as these would ‘undoubtedly meet the threshold’ set by

Respondent’s Memorial, para 84
Bayview Irrigation District v United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1) Award, June 19,
2007 (RL-005) (‘Bayview, Award’); Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 115:11-
22.

Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/2) Award, September 18,
2009 (RL-050) (‘Cargill, Award’).

Respondent’s Memorial, para 88, referring to Claimant's Opposition to Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation, para 10.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 88, citing Cargill, Award, para 174.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 88; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 125.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 123, citing Cargill, Award, para 175.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 89, citing Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc v United States of America,
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/1, Award, August 25, 2014, para 6.13 (RL-051) (‘Apotex, Award’);
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 122; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
136:16-21.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 124 referring to Bayview, Award, para 101; Bilcon, Award on
Jurisdiction and Liability, para 240.

46

189.

190.

191.

192.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

the ‘legally significant connection’ test.?°7

The Respondent urges this Tribunal to follow the line of authority established by the tribunals
mentioned above and also followed by the tribunal in Bilcon and ignore the Claimant’s reference
to the BG Group v Argentina case which is based on the UK-Argentina BIT, inconsistent with
NAFTA practice, and has never been endorsed by a NAFTA tribunal.” To find otherwise, the
Respondent says, ‘would create a limitless class of affected investors’ and ‘do exactly what the

Methanex tribunal cautioned against’ .?°

(b) Whether a ‘legally significant connection’ exists between the Nova
Scotia Measures, Resolute and Resolute’s investments

The Respondent submits that while Resolute may have felt the economic impact of the Nova

Scotia Measures and the re-opening of the Port Hawkesbury mill, this is insufficient to satisfy the

 

‘legally significant connection’ test required by Article 1101(1). This is, quite simply, because
the Claimant’s operations are headquartered in Québec and the Claimant has no investment in
Nova Scotia and, conversely, the Nova Scotia government exercises no legal authority over the
Claimant’s investments outside of Nova Scotia.*°

The Respondent considers the Claimant to have inappropriately added a new claim via its
Counter Memorial by alleging that the Nova Scotia measures were intended to harm a foreign
investor.”°! This allegation was not capable of being accepted pro tem, as alleged by the Claimant,
since it only appeared for the first time in the Claimant’s Counter-Memorial.?” Without
permission to amend its claim under Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Respondent submits

that this allegation should be ignored.”

In any event, the Respondent contends that this ‘bare accusation of malign intent without so much
as a hint of evidence’ still does not satisfy Article 1101(1).”** The Respondent draws comparisons
between this case and Methanex, where the claimant had permission to amend its claim so as to

allege a conspiracy to harm in order to bolster its jurisdictional arguments.” However, just as

  

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 116:18-117:16.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 93.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 126; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
126:5-22.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 95; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 130.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 128, 131, referring to Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 154.
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 132.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 132.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 132.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 133-135.

47

193.

194.

195.

196.

266
267
268
269

270

2m

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

that tactic did not succeed in Methanex, so should the Claimant’s attempt in this case fail.?°° The
Respondent submits that the Claimant’s allegation of intention to harm is ‘totally unsupported by
evidence’ and contradicts Resolute’s evidence before the US ITC that ‘PHP and Resolute were
not in direct competition because they make a lesser quality paper.’?*”

In addition to the above, the Respondent considers each category of the Nova Scotia Measures in
turn to demonstrate ‘that only a tangential, indirect connection exists between the measure and
the Claimant’s investment.’**

The funding provided by the Forestry Infrastructure Fund was used to train and sustain workers
in the forestry industry and to help keep the Port Hawkesbury mill in ‘hot idle’, thereby preventing
the mechanical deterioration of the mill so that it could be sold as a going concern to prospective
buyers.” These measures contributed to the value of the Port Hawkesbury mill when being sold
to prospective buyers, of whom Resolute could have been one, but could equally have been futile
had no purchaser been found.’” Additionally, these measures do not ‘relate to’ the Claimant nor
its investments in a different province, they solely relate to the Port Hawkesbury mill and its resale
value.?”! Canada asks that these measures be severed from the claim as not having a ‘legally
significant connection’ to the investor or its investment since they were only ‘temporary stopgap
measures with neutral intent and limited scope.’?”

The C$124.5 million in government support for PWCC’s acquisition of the Port Hawkesbury mill
similarly lacks a significant legal connection to the Claimant and its investments. This funding
was not provided to PWCC to give it a competitive advantage, as suggested by the Claimant, but
was provided to assist the new owners implement ‘improved land management practices,
preservation and expansion of Crown land, sustainable harvesting, and support for the local work
force, the forestry sector and the Mi’kmaq people.’?

PWCC’s Property Tax Agreement and preferential electricity rate negotiated with NSPI similarly

have no connection to the Claimant or its investments since the Claimant does not pay property

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 135.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 136, referring to March US ITC Transcript, p. 130:12-15 (R-083).
Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 137.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 97; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 138, 139; Hearing on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 13:13-14:3.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 98.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 99.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 14:7-15, 138:3-141:2; August 16, 2017,
408:15-409:3.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 101; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 140; Hearing on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, August 15, 2107, 141:3-145:2.

 

48

197.

198.

199.

204

26
an
218
279
280

282

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

taxes in Nova Scotia nor is it subject to electricity rates in Nova Scotia.?” In respect of the
Property Tax Agreement, the Respondent submits that this agreement, between Richmond County
and NewPage and Port Hawkesbury, does not relate to Resolute’s investment in ‘another province
entirely where a different tax regime applies’.?”° The Respondent argues that it is insufficient for
the Claimant to contend that the Property Tax Agreement ‘benefitted PHP, and that’s good enough
for it to be related to Resolute.’ ?”* In respect of the preferential electricity rate, this was negotiated
and given because it was in NSPI’s interest, as a ‘privately-owned, commercially-run
corporation’, to preserve PHP as a customer and was in the public interest since PHP’s continued
existence ‘benefitted all of the customers on the grid’ by avoiding a ‘hike in electricity rates for
all other customers on account of the loss of this extra-large customer.’?””

The Respondent also submits that the Claimant’s case relating to the biomass facility, in addition
to being made belatedly, must fail ‘for the same reasons as the Property Tax Agreement [...]
because it doesn’t draw the necessary legal connection.’*”*

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s complaints themselves illustrate how no ‘legally
significant connection’ exists between the Claimant, its investments and the Nova Scotia
Measures. For example, the Claimant’s complaint that it was not afforded similar treatment as the
Port Hawkesbury mill demonstrates how there is no ‘legally significant connection’ since such
treatment was not afforded to it for the simple fact that it is not located in Nova Scotia.?”
Similarly, the fact that (on its own case) the Claimant did not know the economic impact of the
Nova Scotia Measures until the first quarter of 2013 demonstrates that the Nova Scotia Measures
did not relate to the Claimant’s investment in a ‘legally significant’ way.?*°

The Respondent draws a parallel between this case and the Methanex case, where the impugned
measures did not directly affect the claimant but only had an effect on the market that was felt by
the claimant.*! The Respondent contends that ‘such market effects are too far removed to meet
the threshold of Article 1101(1)’ and therefore submits that the Claimant’s claims relating to the

282

Nova Scotia Measures fall outside the scope of application of Chapter Eleven of NAFTA.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 102; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 141-142.
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 14

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Adm
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Adm
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Adm
Respondent’s Memorial, para 103.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 104; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 16:14-24.
Respondent’s Memorial, paras 107-109.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 109.

    
     

 

bility, August 15, 2017, 14

49

200.

201.

202.

286

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

In this respect, the Respondent distinguishes this case from Cargill where the impugned measures

283 By comparison, in this case the

were intended to harm the High Fructose Corn Syrup industry.
Nova Scotia Measures are of ‘general application to the entire industry and are not intended to
drive Resolute out of the market, are not intended to have the same types of effect that the very
measure, the very tax that was at issue in Cargill did.’*** The Respondent argues that the Nova
Scotia Measures were intended to ‘bring back 330 jobs and to help stabilize logging in Cape
Breton’, not to ‘make sure that we have one market player here and that there isn’t another one to

9285

compete with.’**° In this respect, the present case is different to that in Cargill in terms of the
‘directness’ of the measure.*° The Respondent clarified its position in this way during the Hearing

on Jurisdiction and Admissibility:

If you have a measure that applies directly to a company, whether you want to harm them or

not, and it has a relationship to them, it doesn’t have to intend to harm them. If you have an

indirect measure that is helping somebody else, one of the ways of showing the relationship

to the claimant in a situation like that would be to show an intention. Might there be other

evidence to show a relationship? Sure. But my simple point is that you have to show a

relationship. You have to show a legally significant connection to the rest of the industry or

the ripple effects that that might cause.7*7
At the hearing, the Respondent observed that the Claimant simultaneously argues that Nova
Scotia ‘wanted to create a national champion at the expense of Resolute’ but, at the same time,
that the impact of the reopening of the Port Hawkesbury mill was ‘unknown and unknowable’
until 2014.*** This inconsistency, the Respondent contends, demonstrates that no legally
significant connection exists between the Nova Scotia Measures and the Claimant or its
investment. The Respondent accordingly invites the Tribunal to follow the approach of the
Methanex tribunal and dismiss the claim since it does not fall within the scope of NAFTA required

by Article 1101(1).7*°

The Respondent further observes that the Claimant’s argument, that ‘predatory pricing’ by PHP
in 2014 caused the shutdown of the Laurentide mill itself, demonstrates a lack of a ‘legally
significant connection’ as required by Article 1101(1). The Respondent submits that it was
PHP, not the Government of Nova Scotia that would have engaged in any alleged predatory

pricing and, since PHP’s actions are not attributable to the Respondent, the Claimant’ s claim lacks

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 119:17-124:7, August 16, 2017, 412:16-415:14.
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Adm
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Adm 0-20.

i ction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 125:10-20; August 16, 2017, 415:15-417:6.
ction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 135:13-24.
ction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 16:2-17:7-11.
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 17:7-23, 108:2-11.
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 18:6-11.

 

  

   

50

203.

204.

205.

296

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

‘a fundamental jurisdictional prerequisite.’ ?°'

The Respondent summarized its case in this way during the Hearing on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility:

[Blenefit to PHP that allows it to eventually, if successful, and if market conditions permit,
cause harm to the Claimant’s investment can’t constitute a measure relating to the Claimant’s
investment. It’s indirect, and it doesn’t establish a legally significant connection...

As Professor Hausman said, government support is not sufficient to make a company
successful. There, we're talking again about the preconditions. If that’s the case, if the
government support isn’t sufficient to make the company successful in the first place, how is
it that that same government support has a clear relationship to the investor or its investment?
Clearly it doesn’t.?°

 

  

3. The Claimant’s Arguments
(a) Interpretation of the words ‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1)

The Claimant alleges that the stated purpose of the Nova Scotia Measures was to ‘make the Port
Hawkesbury mill the national champion in SC paper’ by making it the ‘lowest cost’ producer in
North America and putting it in direct competition with Resolute, ‘a leading SC paper producer,

in the Canadian and North American markets.’?”?

This, the Claimant says, is sufficient to clear
the ‘low threshold’ imposed by Article 1101(1) which only requires, in the words of the Ontario
Superior Court, ‘some connection’ between the measures and the investor/investment and not
requiring ‘that the measure[s] be adopted with the express purpose of causing loss.’?**

The Claimant submits that the Ontario Superior Court formulation in Cargill of ‘some connection’
is the appropriate standard, not the ‘legally significant connection’ test espoused in Methanex and
relied upon by the Respondent.”* The Claimant observes that the Cargill tribunal thought the
Methanex standard ‘might be “too restrictive”, noting that ‘Article 1101 has a causal connection
requirement as well: the measures adopted or maintained by the Respondent must be those
‘relating to’ investors of another Party or investments of investors of another Party.’° While the
Cargill tribunal found that the Mexican regulations requiring the Claimant to obtain a permit to

import High Fructose Corn Syrup passed the Methanex test because it imposed a ‘legal

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 18:6-21; 19:23-20:1.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 149:17-150:19.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 118-119.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 123, citing United Mexican States v Cargill, Inc., 2010 ONSC 4656,
para 57, affirmed by 2011 ONCA 622, application for leave to appeal dismissed, 2012 CanLII 25159 (SCC)
(CL-004); Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 108.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 124; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
333:19-334:14.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 128, citing Cargill, Award, paras 174-175 (CL-003); Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 332:24-333:9.

 

bility, August 15, 2017,

51

206.

207.

208.

297
298

299

300

301
302
303
304
305

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

impediment’ on Cargill’s business, it also found that a tax imposed on products sweetened with

High Fructose Corn Syrup was a measure ‘relating to’ Cargill.?°”

Similar to the facts in this case, the tax measure impugned in Cargill was not imposed on the
Claimant directly, but Cargill was nonetheless ‘directly affected by a measure that was intended
to protect a local industry and hurt its competitors outside the relevant jurisdiction.’?°* The
Claimant argues that this view was recently endorsed by the tribunal in Mesa Power. °° That case
dealt with Ontario legislation imposing new regulations on the power industry but where the
claimant did not receive a contract under the newly created ‘feed-in tariff program’. The Mesa
Power tribunal specified that the requirement imposed by Article 1101(1) that the measures ‘relate
to’ the investor or its investments would be satisfied so long as the measures ‘have a causal nexus
with the Claimant or its investment.’*°° Even though the measures in question in that case did not
create a legal impediment or intend to harm the Claimant, the tribunal nonetheless considered the

‘causal connection’ between the legislation and the Claimant’s injury to be sufficient.*”!

The Claimant considers the Respondent’s reliance on and characterization of the Methanex
‘legally significant connection’ test to be ‘exaggerated’ *”? The Claimant notes that the Methanex
tribunal itself conceded that ‘a “legally significant connection” need not mean that a measure
must be primarily directed at the investment or investor in order to qualify as “relating to” it’ and
‘that it is no easier “to define the exact dividing line” between related and unrelated measures
than it is “‘in twilight to see the divide between night and day.”’*°3 The Claimant also points to
the fact that the Methanex tribunal analyzed the merits of the claims before concluding that there
was no ‘legally significant connection’ and that the tribunal had no jurisdiction as evidence that

the tribunal was ‘uncomfortable with its own legal test.’*4

The Claimant submits, further, that the present case is distinguishable from Methanex on the basis
that the measures impugned in Methanex affected a potentially indeterminate class of investors,

whereas here ‘we have a finite number of affected market participants.’*°> In addition, the

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 128-129.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 130; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 111; Hearing on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 335:6-336:1.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 132, citing Mesa Power Group LLC v Government of Canada, PCA
Case No. 2012-17, Award, March 24, 2016 (CL-005) (‘Mesa Power, Award’).

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 132, citing Mesa Power, Award, para 259; Claimant’s Rejoinder
Memorial, para 116; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 337:4-21.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 134.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 135.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 135, citing Methanex, Partial Award, paras 139, 142, 147.

Claimant’ s Counter Memorial, paras 136-137.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 326:5-21.

 

   

 

52

209.

210.

211.

306
307

308

309
310

311
312
313

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Claimant argues that Methanex is ‘not particularly helpful because it decided only what did not
satisfy Article 1101, that is, the mere effect in connection with a measure of general applicability,
not what does satisfy the ‘relating to’ test beyond the phrase ‘legally significant connection.’**°

The Claimant also notes the subsequent criticism of the Methanex’s ‘legally significant
connection’ test, paying particular attention to the decision in BG Group Plc. v Republic of

Argentina.”

In that case, the tribunal disagreed with the Methanex tribunal’s interpretation of
the words ‘relating to’ as requiring a ‘legally significant connection’ since such an interpretation
would render other NAFTA articles unnecessary or redundant.*®* Rather, a simpler ‘effects’ test
would be sufficient to ‘establish that a measure is one “relating to” an investment or investor.’*”
The Claimant also points to a number of NAFTA decisions which ‘have expanded the “legally-
significant-connection” spectrum to include measures that have a causal connection or causal
nexus to a claimant.’*!° The Claimant submits that these cases, while not explicitly rejecting
Methanex, provide a more nuanced and persuasive analysis which considers the existence of a
causal nexus and possibility of liability to a determinate class or set of investors as sufficient to

establish jurisdiction under Article 1101(1).*"!

The tribunal in Apotex I] took such an approach and, when reviewing the decision in Cargill,
determined that ‘something more than a mere “effect” from the measure is required to overcome
the jurisdictional threshold in NAFTA Article 1101(1)’, but went on to explain that it would be
inappropriate to read into Article 1101(1) the requirement of a causal connection.*!? Additionally,
the Apotex IJ tribunal did not consider indeterminate liability to be a danger in that case, an

approach, the Claimant submits, this Tribunal should follow since ‘the universe of possibly

9313

impacted companies here is very small, five for the entire continent.’*'* Finally, the Claimant

considers the Respondent’s reliance on cases such as Bayview as erroneous since those cases, it
argues, do not in fact endorse the ‘legally significant connection’ test espoused in Methanex since

it was not required to resolve the question of whether the measures ‘related to’ the claimants in

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 326:22-327:3.

BG Group Ple. v Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL, Award, December 24, 2007 (CL-006) (‘BG Group,
Award’).

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 138-140; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 109; Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 342:13-21.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 138-139.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 141; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
40:14-18.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 141.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 144, citing Apotex, Award, para 6.13.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 145; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 113.

 

bility, August 15, 2017,

53

212.

213.

iii.

vi.

314

315
316

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

that case.*!*

The Claimant submits that, in the present case, the ‘relating to’ threshold will be met so long as a
measure ‘is adopted with the understanding or purpose that a significant impact on the investor
will result.’*!5 This standard would be appropriate, in the Claimant’s submission, because it would
satisfy the causal nexus requirement while not prejudging the merits of the case during this

bifurcated proceeding.*!°

(b) Whether the Nova Scotia Measures ‘relate to’ Resolute and Resolute’s
investments

The Claimant points to the following excerpts from its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of

Claim that establish a ‘causal connection’ between the Nova Scotia Measures and its investments:

Nova Scotia undertook a series of measures late in 2012 to ensure that the Port Hawkesbury
paper mill would have competitive advantages above any other SC paper producer, including

Resolute.
Nova Scotia understood that the SC paper market was in ‘secular decline’.

The unforeseen and unforeseeable introduction into the Canadian market of an SC paper mill
bankrolled by public funds to become ‘the lowest cost operation in North America’ has had a
devastating impact on the viability and competitiveness of Resolute’s three SC Paper mills in

Canada.

Nova Scotia’s measures openly threatened Resolute and other SC paper producers because Port
Hawkesbury Paper would take their customers, create a downward pressure on prices, and ‘push

higher-cost operators out of business’.
Port Hawkesbury Paper began to take market share from Resolute in 2013.

Resolute was forced to close its Laurentide mill permanently in October 2014 due principally
to the added production capacity of Port Hawkesbury, which has driven prices down while

producing at lower costs because of the measures taken by Nova Scotia.

Nova Scotia selected the Port Hawkesbury Paper mill as a national champion, chosen by a

  

54

viii.

214.

215.

317

318
319
320

321

322

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

government, to establish it as the ‘lowest cost and most competitive producer’ in the SC paper

market, displacing all other producers, including Resolute.

With tens of millions of dollars of assistance from the government and ongoing preferential
operation arrangements, Port Hawkesbury Paper was empowered to drive Resolute’s SC paper

mills in Québec out of business.

Nova Scotia propped its own provincial mill up with benefits and operational advantages to
ensure that its costs are lower than those of Resolute and other competitors in the Canadian, US
and other markets, thereby creating grossly unfair conditions in an SC paper market in Canada

that has very few producers.*"”

A causal connection exists between Resolute, its investments in Canada and the Nova Scotia
Measures given that these measures ‘eventually harmed Resolute directly’ even though they ‘were
not aimed specifically at Resolute’ nor were they ‘adopted with the express purpose of causing
[Resolute] loss.’*!* The Claimant refutes the contention that it has alleged ‘a grand, far-fetched
conspiracy’. It simply states its case that the Nova Scotia Measures sought to make Port
Hawkesbury the ‘national champion’; even though the measures were not directly aimed at the
Claimant, it nonetheless felt a direct impact from them.*!” As was the case in Cargill, the Nova
Scotia Measures were intended to harm an identifiable class of competitors, of whom ‘Resolute
was the lone foreign investor in Canada.’*”° This, the Claimant submits, is sufficient to establish

the necessary ‘causal nexus’ required by Article 1101(1).*7!

At the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Claimant relied on the following
documentary evidence to ‘show the inextricable connection between [the Nova Scotia Measures]

and the sale to Pacific West and making Pacific West the lowest cost producer in North

9322

America,’*”’ and to substantiate its submission that the Nova Scotia Measures ‘relate to’ the

Claimant and the Laurentide mill:

i. a CBC news report from September 2011 in which various individuals expressed the

intention to sell the Port Hawkesbury mill as a going concern, despite the fact it was

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 152, referring to Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of
Claim, paras 4, 47, 48, 50, 53, 89, 95, 107; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
347:2-349-18.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 118.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 120-121.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 122; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
349:19-350:9.

Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 122.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 444:1-6.

55

216.

304

325

326

327

328
329

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

suffering ‘significant operating losses’ of around $50 million in operating losses per year.
This report, the Claimant says, demonstrates the lengths to which Nova Scotia would
support the Port Hawkesbury mill in order to ensure its ongoing viability. In this regard,
reference in this report to the Forestry Infrastructure Fund shows that it was a measure
required for the sale of the Port Hawkesbury mill and is not unrelated to the Claimant and
the Laurentide mill.**
ii. a press release from Nova Scotia in which the Premier explains that ‘the province had a
role to play to make [the sale of Port Hawkesbury] a success. That the province took every
reasonable step to keep this mill resale ready and facilitate the reopening’, particularly

through the hot idle funding.**

iii. | various statements including: (a) of the Premier to the effect that the Forestry
Infrastructure Fund was intended to keep the Port Hawkesbury mill ‘resale ready’ ;*?°
(b) of the Court appointed Monitor that the hot idle funding ‘permit[s] a smooth
resumption of production when circumstances permit’ ;*”° and (c) a press release from the
Premier ‘when they announced the actual financial package, this is mentioned simply as
part of the support for making [Port Hawkesbury] the national champion.’ *””
Notwithstanding the Claimant’s submission in relation to the inappropriateness of the Methanex
‘legally significant connection’ test, the Claimant submits that it would nevertheless meet the
requirements of such a test if this Tribunal were to apply it.*?8 This is because the intent or purpose
of the Nova Scotia Measures was ‘not only to make PHP the lowest cost SC paper producer, but
also to push higher-cost producers out of business.’ *”? The desire to give PHP such a competitive

advantage necessarily implies an intention to harm foreign investors, such intention being

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
Hawkesbury mill to be sold, CBC News, September 7, 2011 (C-005).

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 450:15-451:25, referring to Nova Scotia Press
Release, Province Standing with Strait after Announcement Mill Will Not Reopen, September 21, 2012 (C-
035).

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 452:11-453:11, referring to Nova Scotia
Department of Natural Resources, News Release, ‘Province Presents Forestry Infrastructure Plan’,
September 20, 2011 (R-039).

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 453:12-454:1, referring to Re NewPage Port
Hawkesbury Corp., Report of the Proposed Monitor (S.C.N.S.), September 7, 2011 (R-046); see also 454:2-
455:5 referring to Nova Scotia Department of Natural Resources, News Release, ‘Province Will Keep
NewPage Mill in Point Tupper Re-Sale Ready’, January 4, 2012 (R-048).

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 455:6-458:3 referring to Nova Scotia Press
Release, Province Invests in Jobs, Training, and Renewing the Forestry Sector, August 20, 2012 (C-009).
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 153; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, paras 123-124.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 155.

ility, August 16, 2017, 444:15-450:10, referring to NewPage Port

 

 

 

56

217.

218.

219.

336

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

sufficient to satisfy the ‘legally significant connection’ test espoused in Methanex.**°

The Claimant submits that the public spending measures implemented by Nova Scotia were
‘designed to intervene in a competitive market and alter it to the advantage of the government’s
chosen champion.’**! Contrary to the Respondent’s contention that ‘a flood of claims by
innumerable investors’ could materialize ‘if NAFTA Chapter Eleven applied every time
government spending had an impact on market conditions’, the Claimant submits that NAFTA
Parties are permitted to ‘spend public funds in a way that incidentally impacts market conditions’
but ‘may not spend public monies deliberately, or with the unavoidable expectation, of

undermining foreign investors or their investments.’**

4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments

The United States and Mexico both endorse the finding of the Methanex tribunal that the words
‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1) require a ‘legally significant connection’ between the impugned
measures and the claimant or its investment.*** Both Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties further
submit that if the ‘relating to’ requirement were satisfied by a ‘mere, or incidental, effect that a
challenged measure had on a claimant’, an indeterminate number of investors may be entitled to

bring claims under NAFTA and so the words ‘relating to’ would impose no threshold at all.***

The United States submits further that the question of whether a ‘challenged measure bears a
“Jegally significant connection” to a foreign investor or investment depends on the facts of a given
case’ but does require a ‘direct connection between the challenged measure and the foreign
investor or investment’, not a mere ‘negative impact’ on the investor or investment.**> The United
States notes that such a connection was found in SD Myers since the relevant measure ‘was raised
to address specifically the operations of SDMI and its investment’. In Bilcon there was clearly a
‘legally significant connection’ between the measure that rejected the claimant’s investment. In
Cargill, the import permit requirement ‘directly affected’ the claimant by imposing a ‘legal
impediment’ on the conduct of its business.**° The United States notes that while a ‘legally
significant connection’ was not found in Methanex, the tribunal speculated that such a connection

would have existed had the claimant been able to prove that the ‘Governor of California intended

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 152-156.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 159.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 162.

ion, para 12; Mexico Subm
ion, para 12; Mexico Subm
ion, para 13.

ion, para 14, citing S.D. Myers, Inc. v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial
Award, November 13, 2000, para 234 (‘SD Myers, Partial Award’); Bilcon, Award on Jurisdiction and
Liability, paras 5, 12, 237, 239 and 241; and Cargill, Award, paras 173, 175.

 
    

57

220.

221.

222.

223.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

to penalize foreign producers of methanol (such as the claimant).’**”

The Respondent points out that the NAFTA Parties all agree that to satisfy the ‘relating to’
requirement in Article 1101, a claimant must demonstrate that ‘legally significant connection’
exists between the challenged measures and the investor or its investment, and that something
more than a ‘negative impact’ on the investor is required.*** The Respondent further agrees with
the United States that Article 1101 was not meant to allow ‘untold numbers of domestic measures
that simply have an economic impact on a foreign investor or its investment’ to meet the

threshold.*”

The Claimant points out that the United States highlights that whether a measure is one ‘relating
to’ an investment or investor ‘depends on the facts of a given case’. The Claimant then recalls
that the alleged purpose of the Nova Scotia Measures was to make Port Hawkesbury the national
champion of the SC paper industry, necessarily to Resolute’s detriment and that these facts,
accepted pro tem by Canada for purposes of bifurcation, are ‘sufficient to satisfy the Article 1101
standard’. Any findings on the facts for the Tribunal to make on this issue go to the merits of
Resolute’s claims.*4! The Claimant also addresses concerns expressed by the United States that
recognition of a claim would result in ‘unlimited liability’, by pointing out that the class of

affected investors in the present case is narrowly confined.*”

5. The Tribunal’s Analysis
(a) The ‘relating to’ requirement: general considerations

The term ‘relating to’ in Article 1101 of NAFTA would appear to require that the measure
complained of have some specific impact on the claimant: Chapter Eleven was not intended as a

vehicle for public interest litigation. Beyond that, however, Article 1101’s limits are not very

 

clear, and it is not a substitute for the specific requirements of other provisions of Chapter Eleven.

Under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, when the ordinary meaning

of a treaty text leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure, the interpreter may have recourse to

343.

the preparatory work. In the earliest versions of Article 1101, dated December 1991, the

United States Submission, para 14, referring to Methanex, Partial Award, paras 151-159.

Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 26-27.

Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, para 28.

Claimant’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 20-23.

Claimant’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, para 22.

Claimant’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 22-23.

Arbitrator Cass, without diverging from the Tribunal’s analysis, would use great caution in according
weight to sources other than the text accepted by the signatory Parties.

  
   

 

 

58

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

344
35
346

347
348
349

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

investment chapter’s scope referred to measures ‘affecting’ either investments of another party in
the host state’s territory or ‘affecting’ investors.* By August 1992 the text was changed to

‘relating to’. The drafts do not provide any explanation as to the modification.**°
Canada’s Statement of Implementation states that Chapter Eleven applies to:
measures by a Party (i.e. any level of government in Canada) that affect: investors of another

Party [...]; investments of investors of another Party [...]; and for purposes of the provisions
on performance requirements and environmental measures, all investments.

 

The United States’ Statement of Administrative Action uses different language, paraphrasing this
element of Article 1101(1), stating simply that, subject to exceptions ‘the chapter applies to all

governmental measures relating to investment...’*4”

A number of tribunals have had the opportunity to analyze the ‘relating to’ requirement.

In Ethyl Corporation, Canada argued that the prohibition to import and trade a gasoline additive
was not a measure relating to investment but one relating to the movement of goods. In rejecting
the argument, the tribunal observed that Canada did not cite any authority, and did not elaborate
any argument for a restrictive interpretation of the ‘relating to’ requirement.**

In Pope & Talbot, Canada contended that the implementation of the Canada-US Softwood
Lumber Agreement did not relate to investments or investors but to trade in goods. The tribunal
dismissed this argument. Among other things, it denied that a measure could be characterized as

‘relating to’ one subject matter to the exclusion of all others.”

In SD Myers, the applicant complained of a Canadian order prohibiting the export of PCB waste
to the United States. The tribunal found that the ‘relating to’ requirement in Chapter Eleven was

satisfied because the import ban was passed to address specifically the prospect that SDMI would

carry through with its plans to expand its Canadian operations.*°°

In Methanex, the claimant was a producer and marketer of methanol, a key raw material in the

manufacture of the gasoline additive MTBE. The challenged measure was California’s ban on

INVEST, December 1991, 1, Article 2101, 401.

INVEST.826, Lawyers’ Revision (August 26, 1992) 1, Article 2101 (RL-045).

Department of External Affairs, Canadian Statement on Implementation, Canada Gazette Part I, January 1,
1994, 148.

US Statement of Administrative Action, 450.

Ethyl Corporation v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction, June 24, 1998, para 63.
Pope & Talbot Inc. v Canada, UNCITRAL, Award in relation to Preliminary Motion by Canada,
January 26, 2000, para 33 (CL-002).

S.D. Myers, Inc. v Government of Canada, Partial Award, November 13, 2000, para 234.

59

231.

232.

351

353
354

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada

 

the use of MTBE. In partially rejecting jurisdiction, the tribunal decided that there must be a
legally significant connection between the questioned measure and the investor or its investment.

Specifically, it said:

.. The possible consequences of human conduct are infinite, especially when comprising acts
of governmental agencies; but common sense does not require that line to run unbroken
ss horizon. Ina traditional legal context, somewhere the line i:
whether as a matter of logic, social policy or other value judgment, a limit is necessarily
imposed restricting the consequences for which that conduct is to be held accountable. For
example, in the law of tort, there must be a reasonable connection between the defendant, the
complainant, the defendant’s conduct and the harm suffered by the complainant; and limits
are imposed by legal rules on duty, causation and remoteness of damage well-known in the
laws of both the United States and Canada. Likewise, in the law of contract, the contract-
breaker is not generally liable for all the consequences of its breach even towards the innocent
party, still less to persons not privy to that contract. It is of course possible, by contract or
statute, to enlarge towards infinity the legal consequences of human conduct; but against this
traditional legal background, it would require clear and explicit language to achieve this
result.

  
 

 

 

  

.. there must be a legally significant connection between the measure and the investor or the
investment. With such an interpretation, it is perhaps not easy to define the exact dividing
line, just as it is not easy in twilight to see the divide between night and day. Nonetheless,
whilst the exact line may remain undrawn, it should still be possible to determine on which
side of the divide a particular claim must lie.**!

 

  

Based on that reasoning, the tribunal determined that the meaning of the phrase ‘relating to’ in
Article 1101(1) went beyond the simple effect of a measure on an investor or an investment and

required a legally significant connection between them.**?

Thus, the tribunal ruled it lacked jurisdiction to hear a claim based upon California’s ban on the
use of MTBE.**? However, the tribunal stated it could hear a claim based on intent on the part of
California’s governor to favour domestic ethanol producers over foreign producers of MTBE and

methanol.***

Methanex, Partial Award, paras 138-9.

Ibid, para 147.

Ibid, para 150.

Methanex Corporation v United States of America, UNCITRAL, Tribunal's Letter re Request for
Interpretation of Award, September 25, 2002, para 17.

60

233.

234.

235.

356

359
360

361
362

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

(b) Application and critique of Methanex in subsequent cases

The Methanex test was adopted by the tribunals in Bayview,*° Cargill,*Apotex II,*°7
Bilcon**and Mesa.**° While Bayview and Bilcon did not clarify the meaning of ‘legally
significant connection’, the tribunals in Cargill, Apotex I] and Mesa did contribute to a better,

though not necessarily consistent, understanding of the test.

In Cargill, the claimant questioned Mexico’s imposition of a tax on soft drinks containing HFCS
and its failure to issue import permits. Mexico argued that the import permit requirement was a
trade measure, not an investment measure.* The tribunal considered that Methanex imposed
two requirements: (a) that the questioned measure produce an effect on the investor or its
investment; and (b) a ‘causal connection requirement’: there must be a legally significant

connection between the measure and the investors of another party or investments of investors of

r

another party.**' In that regard, the tribunal said that although the import permit requirement

notionally prevented the claimant’s goods from crossing the border from the United States into

362

Mexico, the permit directly ‘affected’ the business of Cargill de Mexico.** The tribunal also

understood that the import permit requirement constituted a legal impediment to carrying on the
business of Cargill de Mexico in sourcing HFCS in the United States and re-selling it in

Mexico.**

When reviewing (and upholding) the Cargill award, the Ontario Superior Court held that the term
‘related’ in Article 1101 requires only some connection but not that the measure be adopted with

the express purpose of causing loss. The Court said:

With reference to the threshold issues in Article 1101, Mexico acknowledges that Cargill was
an investor, and that CdM was an investment. Clearly the measures adopted by Mexico

Bayview Irrigation District v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1, Award, June 19,
2007, para 101. The tribunal decided it lacked jurisdiction because the investors were domestic investors
in Texas, not foreign investors in Mexico (para 104).

Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/2, Award, September 18,
2009, para 174. The tribunal held that there was a legally significant connection between an import permit
requirement and Cargill’s business in Mexico (para 175).

Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc v United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/1, Award,
August 25, 2014, para 6.13.

William Ralph Clayton, William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon of
Delaware, Inc. v Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, March 17, 2015, para 240.
Mesa Power Group, LLC v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award, March 24, 2016, para 259.
Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/2, Award, September 18,
2009, para 170.

Ibid, para 174.

Ibid, para 173.

Ibid, para 175.

61

236.

237.

238.

364

366
367
368

369
370
a
32

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

related to the investor and the investment. The term ‘related’ requires only some connection

and does not require that the measure be adopted with the express purpose of causing loss.*
The Respondent argues that the Cargill tribunal did not interpret or apply the ‘relating to’
threshold in any way differently from Methanex:*® while the Cargill tribunal used the phrases
‘causal connection’ and ‘causal nexus’ requirements, not ‘legally significant connection’, they
share the idea that the measure must have a direct relationship constituting more than a mere
effect on an investor or its investment.*® On the other hand, the Claimant considers that Cargill
did not have to be the specific target of the measures in order for the tribunal to exercise
jurisdiction over its claims; it needed only to be directly affected, for example, by a measure that

was intended to protect a local industry and to hurt its competitors elsewhere.*”

In Apotex IJ, the claimant complained that the United States had imposed an import alert and
detention of certain drugs produced in Canada.*** The tribunal considered that the Cargill tribunal
applied the same interpretation of Article 1101(1) as in Methanex and Bayview.*® The tribunal
considered that the circumstances of Apotex IJ were similar to those of Cargill but not to
Methanex.*” The facts were similar to Cargill in that the immediate effect of the import alert
made it impossible for the claimant’s company in the host state to receive contracted products
from its factories in Canada; as a direct result, the claimant’s investment was prevented from
carrying on a major part of its business.*”! The facts were different from Methanex, because there
the potential class of investors indirectly affected by the disputed measure was indeterminate and
unknown, whereas in Apotex IJ the questioned measure affected the claimant immediately and

directly.57

Importantly, contrary to the Cargill tribunal’s causal connection requirement, the Apotex II
tribunal thought it ‘inappropriate to introduce within NAFTA Article 1101(1) a legal test of
causation applicable under Chapter Eleven’s substantive provisions for the merits of the

Claimants’ claims’. The tribunal stated that...

United Mexican States v Cargill Inc, 2010 ONSC 4656, para 57.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, December 22, 2016, para 88; Respondent’s Reply Memorial on
Jurisdiction, 29 March 2017, para 122.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 125.

Claimants Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 130.

Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc v United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/1, Award,
August 25, 2014.

Ibid, para 6.13.

Ibid, para 6.23.

Ibid.

Ibid, para 6.24.

 

62

239.

240.

241.

242.

376

a7
378
379
380

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

For jurisdictional purposes, the threshold is necessarily different under NAFTA Article
1101(1), given the ordinary meaning of the connecting phrase ‘relating to.’*”>

.. Equally, in the Tribunal’s view, it is no answer for the Respondent to invoke different
theories as to the legal cause of loss to Apotex-US, other than the Import Alert. That issue
may likewise affect issues of liability and quantum; but, again, there is no reason for requiring
NAFTA Article 1101(1) to be so narrowly interpreted as to require only a claimant with a
successful case on causation to pass through its threshold gateway; or to establish that the
disputed measure is the only relevant possible measure.*”*

.. there is a practical problem in seeking to interpret and apply the phrase ‘relating to’ as a
narrow threshold jurisdictional issue without any regard to the substantive NAFTA
provisions invoked by a claimant investor in the particular case .

  

In Mesa, the claimant questioned certain measures taken in Ontario to promote the generation and
consumption of renewable energy in the province.*” In finding the government actions met the
Article 1101(1) requirement, the tribunal followed Cargill, saying that all of the measures must

have a causal nexus with the Claimant or its investment.*””

The Methanex test has been subject to criticism. The Methanex tribunal built its argument by
resorting to analogy with the law of state responsibility, contract law and tort law—that is,

substantive law. Nevertheless, the tribunal used the test to exclude jurisdiction.*”*

The BG tribunal expressly rejected the Methanex test on additional grounds. The tribunal noted
that several NAFTA chapters have exceptions to obligations that would not be necessary if
measures which did not ‘relate to’ other NAFTA investors or their investments were already
outside its scope.*” However, the BG tribunal seems to have understood that the Methanex test
requires that a questioned measure, on its face, targets an investor.**’ Additionally, BG’s claim

was brought under the Argentina-United Kingdom BIT, not under NAFTA.

(c) The Tribunal’s conclusion on the applicable test

Article 1101(1) requires that the questioned measure ‘relate to’ an investor or an investment.
Having regard to the preponderant case-law and the convergent views of the three NAFTA Parties
(see paragraphs 218-220 above), the Tribunal concludes that there must exist a ‘legally significant

connection’ between the measure and the claimant or its investment. It agrees with the Apotex I

Ibid, para 6.20.

Ibid, para 6.26.

Ibid, para 6.27.

Mesa Power Group, LLC v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2012-17, Award,
March 24, 2016, para 254.

Ibid, para 259.

Z Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (CUP, 2009) 244, para 464.

BG Group Ple. v Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL, Final Award, December 24, 2007, para 230.

Ibid, para 231.

63

243.

244.

245.

382

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

tribunal in rejecting the application of a legal test of causation. Chapter Eleven’s substantive
requirements of causation should be analyzed when deciding on the merits of the claim. Rather,
the Tribunal should ask whether there was a relationship of apparent proximity between the
challenged measure and the claimant or its investment. In doing so, the tribunal should ordinarily
accept pro tem the facts as alleged. It is not necessary that the measure should have targeted the
claimant or its investment—although if it did so, the necessary legal relationship will be
established. Nor is it necessary that the measure imposed legal penalties or prohibitions on the
investor or the investment itself. However, a measure which adversely affected the claimant in a

tangential or merely consequential way will not suffice for this purpose.

(d) Application to the present claim

In the present case, the Claimant complains about Nova Scotia’s measures taken for the benefit
of PHP.**' Canada argued that ‘measures which merely affect an investor and its investment
economically do not automatically allow an investor to invoke the protections of NAFTA Chapter

Eleven.’**

In principle this is correct, but it is necessary for this purpose to draw a distinction
between those measures aimed at maintaining the Port Hawkesbury mill in a condition where it
could be offered for sale as a going concern and those involved in the actual transaction of sale

and reopening on favourable terms.

As to the former, the financial support offered by Nova Scotia to maintain the plant in ‘hot idle’
condition is key. It did not directly address, target, implicate, or affect the Claimant. Had the
financial support not resulted in a sale of the plant as a going concern, it would have had no impact
at all on Claimant or other producers of supercalendered paper. The cost to Nova Scotia of keeping
the plant in ‘hot idle’ condition may or may not have been justified from a fiscal point of view
but it maintained the plant’s value and preserved the possibility of reopening, with consequent
preservation of local employment opportunities. It was in no way a measure relating to the
Claimant’s investment in different plants, in a different province. Similar considerations apply
to the other Nova Scotia measures taken during the period of administration of the company,
including the FIF. Applying the principle as articulated in paragraph 242, these pre-sale measures
fall outside the scope of Article 1101(1) of NAFTA and cannot form part of the present claim.

The position as concerns the actual terms of sale is arguably different. PWCC’s winning bid of
C$33 million had attached to it a number of conditions, notably concerning financial benefits

offered or approved by Nova Scotia, including (a) C$124.5 million in loans (not under market

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 12-21.
Respondent’s Memorial on jurisdiction, para 82.

64

246.

247.

248.

249.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

conditions) and other payments; (b) tax savings in Nova Scotia for assets in other provinces;

(c) municipal tax breaks; and (d) an electricity discount.**?

At the time of the measures there were only five companies in the business of producing
supercalendered paper in the whole of North America. The measures allowed Port Hawkesbury
to produce at a lower cost than it could have otherwise done. The Claimant argues that the total
production capacity of the market increased, competition increased and market prices were, after

a brief interval, driven down.

To determine whether these measures ‘related to’ the investor or its investment, the questions
which need to be answered are: (a) is it possible that the benefits afforded to Port Hawkesbury
might have allowed it to produce at a lower cost than its competitors?; (b) if so, is it possible that
prices were reduced as a consequence?; (c) if so, is it possible that in a five-company market
competitors might have incurred significant losses as a consequence?; and (d) if so, in a five-
company market, is a significant business loss in Québec proximate to benefits provided for a
company in Nova Scotia? Positive answers to these four questions would in the Tribunal’s view

justify a finding that the questioned measures ‘related to’ the Claimant and its investment.

The Respondent stressed that the Measures did not target or discriminate against the Claimant or
apply to it at all. But they were intended to put the purchaser in a favourable position, and in a
small and saturated market it was to be expected that competitors would be affected. The Tribunal
finds it unnecessary and inappropriate to parse the facts further at this preliminary stage: to do so
risks intruding on issues of substance. The Tribunal regards the case as close to the line, but on
balance it would answer each of the four questions identified above in the affirmative. It holds
that the sale measures were sufficiently proximate to the Claimant and its investment to satisfy

the ‘relating to’ requirement of Article 1101.

D. THE PROVINCIAL TREATMENT OBJECTION: NAFTA ARTICLE 1102(3)

1. Introduction

The Respondent submits that the Nova Scotia Measures are incapable of founding a national

treatment claim under Article 1102(3). NAFTA Article 1102(3) provides:

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs | and 2 means, with respect to a state or
province, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded, in like

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 21. [This footnote, along with the name of the mill in
para. 330 below, were corrected by the Tribunal on 5 March 2018 Pursuant to Art. 36 of the UNCITRAL
Rules. The ions have been i d into this 1 ic version of the Decision].

65

250.

251.

252.

253.

384
385
386

387
388

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

circumstances, by that state or province to investors, and to investments of investors, of the
Party of which it forms a part.

The Respondent submits that Article 1102(3) confines the scope of the national treatment
obligation, insofar as concerns a component state or province, to treatment afforded to investors
within the jurisdiction of that state or province. It does not extend to extraterritorial or extra-
provincial treatment. Since the Claimant had no investment in Nova Scotia, there could have
been no breach of the national treatment obligation by Nova Scotia in relation to it. The Claimant,
for its part, submits that the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 1102(3) is too narrow and
would diminish the national treatment protection provided by NAFTA since it would exclude

measures taken by one state or province that affect foreign investors in other states or provinces.

If the Respondent’s objection is successful, it would dispose of the Claimant’s national treatment

claim in its entirety.***

2. The Respondent’s Arguments

The Respondent refers to Merrill & Ring as the ‘only NAFTA dispute [to date] in which the issue
of cross-jurisdictional comparison has arisen.’**° In that case, the tribunal rejected a comparison
between treatment provided by the federal Government of Canada and the provincial government

of British Columbia, holding:

Treatment accorded to foreign investors by the national government needs to be compared to
that accorded by the same government to domestic investors just as the treatment
accorded by a province ought to be compared to the treatment of that province in respect of
like investments. **°

 

The Respondent considers it unreasoned that the Claimant characterises Merrill & Ring as
distinguishable on the basis that it is a ‘regulatory case’.**’ The Respondent also considers the
Claimant’s reliance on Bilcon as erroneous since the tribunal in that case also determined that ‘the
claimant had the burden of proving that “a government accorded Bilcon or its investment
‘treatment’ during the environmental assessment and ‘that the same government accorded
treatment to other domestic [...] investors or investments.”’*** The Respondent submits that, in
fact, ‘every single one of the NAFTA national treatment cases relied upon by the Claimant

undermines its own argument and proves Canada’s point that this Article 1102 claim is

Procedural Order No. 4, Decision on Bifurcation, November 18, 2016, para 4.19.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 120.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 120, citing Merrill & Ring Forestry LP. v The Government of Canada
(UNCITRAL) Award, March 31, 2010, para 82 (RL-060) (‘Merrill & Ring, Award’).

Respondent’s Memorial, para 121; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 157.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 122, citing Bilcon, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, para 717.

66

254.

255.

256.

257.

304

307

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

inadmissible.’**°

Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the Claimant’s complaint that ‘it should have been
accorded the same treatment in Québec that Nova Scotia accorded to PWCC’ is precluded by
virtue of Article 1102(3).*” The Respondent points out that the Claimant ‘has not identified any
treatment it received directly as an investor in Canada [...] [nor] any treatment that it received
within the jurisdiction of the province of Nova Scotia’ and, therefore, the claim must fail.*°!

The Respondent considers the Claimant’s case as enunciated in its Counter-Memorial to

demonstrate the ‘fundamental illogic of its position’.*°? The Respondent submits that plainly the

Claimant’s complaint that it was not afforded like treatment by Nova Scotia ‘falls apart’ since
‘Nova Scotia cannot accord treatment to an investor over which it has no jurisdiction.’** The
Respondent submits that there is no ‘treatment’ by Nova Scotia of Resolute or the Laurentide
mill, only treatment of third parties, forestry workers and First Nations industries and, as such,

304

the claim under Article 1102 must necessarily fail.*** The Respondent points out that the Nova

Scotia Measures covering ‘the subject matters of property tax, hydro-electricity, and the
management and disposition of provincial Crown land’ are matters within the competence of the
provincial government and are ‘limited by its territorial jurisdiction, as defined by its geographic
boundaries.’*°* Accordingly, Nova Scotia simply has no competence to enact measures relating

to Resolute’s investment in Québec.**°

The Respondent argues that acceptance of the Claimant’s reading of Article 1102 would lead to
the radical result that treatment by one state or province would permit a foreign investor in any
other state or province to bring a national treatment claim against the federal government,

meaning that ‘the measure of a single state would automatically become the standard of treatment

by which the remaining [...] states are held.’*””

The Respondent submits that the Claimant is attempting to ‘get around what 1102(3) would not

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 159.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 124.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 125.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 146.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 146; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
26:20-23.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 148; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
244:23-245:14.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 151.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 151; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
245:15-21.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 160.

 

ibility, August 15, 2017,

 

ility, August 15, 2017,

67

258.

259.

260.

308
309

400
401

402

403

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

allow them to do [...] by saying that there was treatment accorded to them even though Nova
Scotia could never have offered them the same treatment.’** By reference to Judge Higgins’
opinion in Oil Platforms, the Respondent alleges that the impugned conduct is not capable of
constituting a breach of the NAFTA since a factual predicate is missing, and therefore the

Respondent invites the Tribunal to determine that the claim is inadmissible.*”

Finally, the Respondent considers the Claimant’s arguments regarding the meaning of ‘in like
circumstances’ to be premature since this question ought not be answered in the jurisdiction and
admissibility phase and can only be considered once the Tribunal determines whether the

Claimant’s Article 1102 claim is permissible.“

3. The Claimant’s Arguments

The Claimant alleges that the Respondent has shifted its interpretation of Article 1102(3) from
being a ‘geographic limitation precluding Resolute from making any national treatment claims
with respect to Canadian investments located outside of Nova Scotia’ to one referring to a
‘metaphysical “jurisdiction” which ‘renders inadmissible claims that seek to compare treatment
accorded by one government to the treatment accorded by a different government.’*°! However,
the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s reformulated argument is ‘irrelevant here’ because
the Claimant ‘is not asking this Tribunal to compare treatment accorded by one province to

treatment accorded by another province’ or some other level of government.*”

Rather, the Claimant submits that its national treatment claim under Article 1102 deals with
‘whether the treatment Nova Scotia accorded to Resolute is no less favourable than the treatment
Nova Scotia accorded to PHP, when the purpose of the Nova Scotia Measures was to help PHP
compete with Resolute in the SC paper business sector and in markets that they share in
common.’ The Claimant alleges that the Respondent’s supposition ‘that a province cannot

accord treatment to foreign investors outside of the province’s geographical or jurisdictional

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 427:5-22.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 428:2-429:2. See Oil Platforms (Islamic
Republic of Iran v United States of America), ICJ Reports 1996, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins,
addressing the methodology for determining whether a particular claim falls within the compromissory
clause of a treaty.

Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 162.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 163-165; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017,
368:14-372:2.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 166; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
41:23-42:2.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 168; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
42:21-43:10.

 
 

bility, August 15, 2017,

bility, August 15, 2017,

68

261.

262.

263.

264.

404
405
406

407

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

confines’ is both legally and factually untrue.**
The Claimant submits that accepting the Respondent’s ‘narrow interpretation’ of Article 1102(3)
would permit provincial governments to favour local companies over competitors who are not

physically located in the same province.‘

Such an interpretation would require this Tribunal to
read in additional words to the plain words of Article 1102(3) chosen by the NAFTA Parties and
would run contrary to the objectives of NAFTA as they are promoted by the national treatment
standard.*°° The Claimant submits that measures undertaken to the benefit of a local investor and
the detriment of a foreign investor operating elsewhere in Canada should properly be considered

as ‘treatment’ under Article 1102.4”

In fact, Nova Scotia did not see itself as limited to granting PWCC benefits within the jurisdiction,

 

but also ‘extended tax benefits to PWCC for assets o je Nova Scotia, thus reaching deliberately
beyond its own borders, although still within Canada, to discriminate.’“°* The Claimant alleges
that ‘Canada knew that it was responsible for the conduct of Nova Scotia and that Nova Scotia’s
conduct would have continent-wide consequences’ and was ‘put on notice of the extra-territorial
impact of the Nova Scotia Measures’ by the Claimant itself and the United States through the
WTO. The Claimant alleges that despite this knowledge, Canada chose to defend and protect
Nova Scotia’s discriminatory measures that are ‘contrary to the object and purpose of NAFTA.’*!°
The size of Port Hawkesbury in the market made it obvious that the Nova Scotia Measures would
necessarily have an impact and ‘were intended to confer a comparative advantage on a domestic
competitor, to the detriment of the foreign investor in the same business sector, which was not
limited to the territory of Nova Scotia.’*!! Accordingly, the Claimant submits that ‘by distorting
market competition, the Nova Scotia measures had extra provincial effects that constituted
“treatment” for Resolute.’

The Claimant refers to the travaux préparatoires of NAFTA Chapter Eleven to the effect that the
NAFTA Parties ‘reject[ed] wording that would have restricted national treatment obligations of

states and provinces to treatment of foreign investors physically within the province or state’ but

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 169; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 129.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 173-174.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 177-179; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 140; Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 390:18-391:20.
Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 131.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 182.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 184.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 185-186.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 379:
Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 381:

 

 

 

69

265.

266.

267.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

instead ‘deliberately chose wording that did not allow a state or province to deny most favourable
treatment to a foreign investor in like circumstances as the provincial investor solely because it
was located in another state or province of the same country.’4!>

The Claimant submits that the issue for this Tribunal to resolve is whether Resolute has been
accorded ‘national treatment’ by Nova Scotia and Canada.*"* This requires the Tribunal to assess
whether the Claimant has been treated no less favourably than its Canadian competitors ‘in like
circumstances’ .“!5 The Claimant submits that ‘like circumstances’ must be ‘determined on a case-
by-case basis’ and, in past NAFTA cases, have been assessed according to the relevant ‘economic

and business sector, not geography or subnational jurisdiction.’4'°

The Claimant finds support for this submission in the SD Myers, Pope & Talbot, Archer Daniels
Midland, and Cargill decisions. The Claimant submits that these cases represent a consistent line
of authority where each NAFTA tribunal has determined that the relevant comparison required
by the words ‘like circumstances’ in Article 1102 relates to whether both comparators operate in

the same business or economic sector."!”

In this case, the Claimant says that it is in ‘like circumstances’ to PHP because it is a competitor
in the same North American SC paper market, not because of physical location in the same
province.*!® The Claimant submits that ‘NAFTA jurisprudence has never gone as far’ as to assert
that the national treatment obligation relating to provincial measures requires comparison only
with the treatment of other investors within that province.*!? The Claimant seeks to distinguish
this case from the decision in Merrill & Ring relied upon by the Respondent on the basis that the
measures in the present case were not ‘regulatory’ but ‘were intended to confer an advantage on
a domestic competitor to the detriment of the foreign investor in the same business sector’, such
business sector not being limited to the province of Nova Scotia.*” In this case, the Claimant does
not ask the Tribunal to compare the conduct of two different levels of government, as was the

case in Merrill & Ring, but rather to compare the treatment of the Claimant and PHP by the Nova

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 187-188; Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial, para 141; Hearing on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 391:21-395:21.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 189.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 189.

laimant’s Counter Memorial, para 190.

laimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 191-200.

laimant’s Counter Memorial, paras 180-181.

laimant’s Counter Memorial, para 201.

laimant’s Counter Memorial, para 204; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
398:14-20.

Cc
Cc
Cc
Cc
Cc

 

bility, August 15, 2017,

70

268.

269.

270.

271.

421

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Scotia Government.*?!

Additionally, the Claimant recalls the following comments of the Cargill tribunal:

The Claimant’s mills [in GAM] were certainly treated differently, but they were not the target
of a measure to drive them out of business. But, here, the measure and the effect are different
from GAMI. If the GAMI principle could be used to justify a measure that destroys an
economically viable foreign investment in order to benefit a domestic competitor, the national
treatment protection in Article 1102 would be meaningless.*”?
The Claimant submits that similarly, reliance by this Tribunal on the Merrill & Ring principle
would render Article 1102 meaningless since Nova Scotia’s stated intention to make PHP the
lowest cost SC paper producer ‘could be achieved only through the introduction of discriminatory

measures.’

4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments

The United States submits that the Article 1102 obligation ‘prohibits nationality-based
discrimination between domestic and foreign investors (or investments of foreign and domestic
investors) that are “in like circumstances”, but does not impose an obligation to ‘provide
nationally uniform treatment.’*** Specifically, ‘Article 1102(3) pertains to state and provincial
measures only’ and ensures that investors from NAFTA Parties are afforded the better of:
(1) treatment accorded by a state or province to in-state (or in-province) investors or their
investment; and (2) treatment accorded to domestic out-of-state (or out-of-province) investors or
their investments.‘?°

The United States submits that Article 1102(3) does not prevent a state or province from
implementing measures that apply only to investors or investments in that state or province.*?°
The United States contends that ‘an investor cannot rest its claim under Article 1102(3) on the
fact that a domestic enterprise operating in another state or province receives a different or greater
benefit or is subject to a different or lesser burden unless it is “in like circumstances” with that

2427

enterprise. Whether the measures discriminate against a foreign investor ‘in like

circumstances’ on the basis of their nationality will be a ‘fact-specific inquiry at the merits

7428

phase.

 

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 205; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admis
395:23-396:20.

Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 208, citing Cargill, Award, para 210.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 209.

United States Subm
United States Subm
United States Subm
United States Subm
United States Subm

bility, August 15, 2017,

  
  
  
  
  

71

272.

273.

274.

275.

276.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Mexico agrees with Canada’s submission that the NAFTA Parties did not intend by
Article 1102(3) that ‘the treatment by one state or province would become the national standard

for the entire country.’*”°

The Respondent does not disagree with the United States that an analysis of whether a foreign
and domestic investor are ‘in like circumstances’ is a question for the merits. It points out,
however, that such an analysis presumes there has been actual treatment accorded to the investor
or its investment by the state or province in question in order for the claim to be admissible. In
this respect, the Respondent states that ‘absent any evidence of a link between Nova Scotia and
the investor, the claim cannot even meet the prima facie basis of admissibility and can therefore

be dismissed at this preliminary stage.’**°

The Claimant notes that the United States recognizes that proof of national treatment under Article
1102(3) requires a ‘fact-specific inquiry at the merits phase’ and states that such an inquiry ‘by
definition’ cannot be made at this stage of the arbitration.**! Thus, the Claimant concludes that
the US position is consistent with its own position, and, based on an examination of like
circumstances, is contrary to Canada’s categorical argument that a claim under Article 1102(3) in
respect of a provincial measure is unavailable to an investor without an investment in that

province.*?
5. The Tribunal’s Analysis
(a) The legal framework

Article 1102 of NAFTA, the national treatment clause, provides that each party must accord to
investors of another party and to investments of investors of another party treatment no less

favourable than it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors or their investments with

 

respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or

other disposition of investments.**

In the present phase of this arbitration, the relevant measures were taken by Nova Scotia and not
by the federal government. For those situations, Article 1102(3) of NAFTA provides that:

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs | and 2 means, with respect to a state or
province, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded, in like

 

Mexico Submission, para 13, citing Respondent’s Reply Memorial, para 161.
Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, para 33.

Claimant’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 25-26.

Ibid, paras 26-27.

Article 1102 paras | & 2, NAFTA.

  
 
 

72

277.

278.

279.

434
435
436

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

circumstances, by that state or province to investors, and to investments of investors, of the
Party of which it forms a part.

The interpretation of Article 1102(3) is not without its difficulties. The underlying question is
whether, in order to apply the national treatment standard, the NAFTA investor or its investment
must already be present or intend to be present in the province. Or is it enough that the NAFTA
investor or its investment is located within any part of the host state as long as it is accorded

‘treatment’ by the province?

NAFTA’s preamble and articles give limited help. The preamble expresses the NAFTA Parties’
resolve to ‘reduce the distortions to trade’. Provincial measures that give preference to
in-province or domestic investors could be understood as distortions to trade. In light of the
preamble, Article 1102(3) could be understood as prohibiting that a state or province accords
treatment less favourable than the most favourable treatment it accords, in like circumstances, to
investors, and to investments of investors. As long as there is treatment of the investor/investment
by the state or province, it should not matter whether those distortions produce effects inside or

outside the state or province which applied the questioned measure.

The initial proposal for what became Article 1102(3) was included in the December 1991

negotiating text. Specifically regarding Article 1102(3), the parties’ proposals were as follows:

i. The Mexican version read: ‘shall mean, with respect to a province or state, treatment
no less favorable than that granted by such province or state to any investor of that

province or state.’ 434

ii. | The US proposal was similar: ‘The treatment accorded by a Party [under XXO1 with
respect to nationals and companies, and under XX02 with respect to investments]
shall, in any state or political subdivision, be no less favorable than the treatment
accorded by such state or political subdivision to its residents, or companies legally

constituted under its laws, or their investments in its territory.’*5

iii. | Canada’s proposal said: ‘treatment by a province or state shall be: no less favourable
than the most favourable treatment accorded by such province or state to any like
goods, services and service providers, investors and suppliers, as the case maybe

[sic], of the Party of which it forms a part.’*°

INVEST, December 1991, 2-3, Article 2103.
INVEST, December 1991, 3.
INVEST, December 1991, 3, Article 105.

73

280.

281.

282.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

By April 1992 Mexico also joined the pertinent part of the United States’ proposal‘*’

with respect
to political subdivisions.*** At that point the United States and Mexico supported one formulation
while Canada supported another. On July 10, 1992, the three Parties agreed on a text. The text

adopted a formulation close to the United States-Mexico proposal:*”

The treatment accorded by a Party under this paragraph with respect to investors of another
Party and their investments shall be, with respect to a state or province, no less favorable than
the treatment accorded, in like circumstances, by such state or province to its residents, or
entities legally constituted under its laws, or their investments in its territory.”

On July 22, 1992 a new text of the political subdivisions section was agreed:

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs | and 2 shall mean, with respect to a
state or province, treatment no less favourable than the treatment accorded, in like
circumstances, by such state or province to its residents, or enterprises legally constituted

under its laws, or their investments in its territory.“*!

That is to say, the 22 July version set forth that the baseline treatment owed to a NAFTA investor
was that accorded by the host state’s province to its in-province investors. On August 4, 1992 the
parties agreed on a further version, almost identical to the final text.” That text replaced the
reference to ‘by such state or province to its residents, or enterprises legally constituted under its
laws, or their investments in its territory’ by ‘treatment no less favorable than the most favorable
treatment accorded by such state or province in like circumstances to investors of the Party of
which it forms a part.’ That is to say, the baseline treatment owed to a NAFTA investor was not
only to be that accorded by the host State’s province to its in-province investors, but could include
out-of-province domestic investors and their investments. This conclusion, however, does not
provide an answer to the Respondent’s argument to the effect that Nova Scotia provided no

treatment to the Claimant because it does not operate or is not located in that province.

As regards the NAFTA Parties’ views of the final text, Canada’s Statement on Implementation

reads:

Mexico first did not endorse the US language that extended the obligation to any ‘state or political
subdivision’ (March 1992). Later, Mexico agreed to extend obligations to ‘states’ but not to other ‘political
subdivisions’ (6 April draft). See M Kinnear, A Bjorklund & J Hannaford, Investment Disputes under
NAFTA: An Annotated Guide to NAFTA Chapter 11 (Kluwer, 2006), 1102-6.

INVEST.403, Washington Composite (Apr. 3, 1992) 10.

INVEST.710, All-Star Composite (July 10, 1992) 4.

Ibid.

INVEST.722 July 22, 1992, 4.

INVEST.805, Watergate Daily Update, August 4, 1992, 3.

Department of External Affairs, Canadian Statement on Implementation, Canada Gazette Part I, June 1,
1994, 148-149.

14

283.

284.

285.

286.

444
445

447

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

National treatment means that Canada will treat US and Mexican investors and their
investments as favourably as it treats Canadian investors and their investments, in like
circumstances [...] National treatment by state, provincial, and local governments is defined
as the best treatment provided by that government to any investor or investment...

  

Canada’s Statement does not distinguish between in-province, out-of-province and foreign

investors.

The United States’ Statement of Administrative Action reads:

. the treatment provided by state and provincial governments to investors from other
NAFTA countries and their investments must be no less favourable than the most favourable
treatment they provide to domestic investors and their investments.

Under the United States’ Statement, the standard of treatment is what state and provincial
governments provide to any domestic investor. Neither statement, however, provides an answer

to Canada’s arguments on the absence of treatment.

(b) NAFTA jurisprudence
Three cases have dealt with issues close to but not exactly the same as the present one.

In SD Myers, the questioned measure was Canada’s order prohibiting the export of
polychlorinated biphenyl! (‘PCB’) waste to the United States. The measure had been taken by the
federal government.** The tribunal, explaining Article 1102(3), said: ‘in that context the relevant
comparison is between the treatment accorded to an investment or an investor and the best
treatment accorded to investments or investors within the jurisdiction of the sub-national
authority." This would require that a province provide a foreign investor the best treatment
accorded to investors within the jurisdiction of that province. However, this comment was by

way of obiter dicta.

In Pope & Talbot, the dispute arose out of Canada’s implementation of the Softwood Lumber
Agreement between Canada and the United States. The Agreement established a limit on the free
export of softwood lumber into the United States and required Canada to collect a fee for export
of softwood lumber in excess of a set quantity.“7 Canada argued that (a) the plural form of the
language of Article 1102(2) placed a single investment outside its scope or required a claimant to

demonstrate that there were other similarly-situated foreign investments; and (b) the plural form

US Statement of Administrative Action, 141.

SD Myers, Inc v Government of Canada, Partial Award, November 13, 2000, para 123.

Ibid, para 240.

Pope & Talbot Inc v Canada, UNCITRAL, Memorial of the Investor (Initial Phase), January 28, 2000,
paras 16-39.

75

287.

288.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

required a comparison of the treatment provided to the foreign investor with that accorded to more

448

than one domestically owned investment. The tribunal rejected both arguments,*** on the ground

that ‘use of the plural form does not, without more, prevent application of statutory or treaty

language to an individual case.’””

Canada also argued that NAFTA treats the two levels of government differently, imposing more
rigorous restraints on provinces.**” Once again, the tribunal rejected this view. Specifically, the
tribunal understood that ‘the obligation of a state or province was to provide investments of
foreign investors with the best treatment it accords any investment of its country, not just the best
treatment it accords to investments of its investors.’**' Under Pope & Talbot neither Canada nor
its provinces can comply with NAFTA by according foreign investments less than the most
favourable treatment they accord any investment in Canada. But once again, the questioned
measures there had been taken at federal level. Article 1102(3) was only discussed in order to
compare it with Article 1102(2). The tribunal’s reading of Article 1102(3) has no direct

application here.

In Merrill & Ring, the claimant questioned Canada’s timber export regime, which was

implemented through both federal and provincial legislation. Both included a log surplus test prior

452

to authorization of log removal or export from the province.** The claimant complained that the

federal regulations were disadvantageous compared to the provincial ones.**? Canada argued that

Article 1102(3) specifically distinguished treatment accorded by a state or province from that of
the national government and, thus, the two could not be compared.** The tribunal understood
that the ‘treatment accorded to foreign investors by the national government needs to be compared
to that accorded by the same government to domestic investors [...] just as the treatment accorded

by a province ought to be compared to the treatment of that province in respect of like

55

investments.’*°° Thus for the tribunal ‘the proper comparison is between investors which are

subject to the same regulatory measures under the same jurisdictional authority.’°° The tribunal
added that to establish a breach of national treatment, the key is to determine which investors are

in like circumstances.” The tribunal rejected using the better treatment offered by a province as

Pope & Talbot Inc v Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, April 10, 2001, para 36.
Ibid, para 37.

Ibid, para 40.

Ibid, para 41.

Merrill & Ring Forestry L.P. v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award, March 31, 2010, paras 26-8.
Ibid, paras 61-2.

Ibid, para 81.

Ibid, para 82.

Ibid, para 89.

Ibid, para 83.

76

289.

290.

291.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

a point of reference to compare the less beneficial federal regime, and thus declined to find a

breach of the national treatment standard.***

Canada reads these awards, particularly Merrill & Ring, as saying that Article 1102(3) does not
allow comparison of Nova Scotia’s treatment of investors within its jurisdiction to the treatment
received by the claimant from other governments, whether provincial or federal.**? The Claimant
argues that the Merrill & Ring rationale does not apply to the present case because the facts are
different. The Claimant says that the measures taken by Nova Scotia were not restrictions of an
industry within its territory and were not regulatory. The measures were intended to confer an
advantage on a domestic competitor to the detriment of the foreign investor in the same business

sector which was not limited to the province’s territory.*°

(c) The Tribunal’s conclusions

The Tribunal agrees with the NAFTA parties that Article 1102(3) should not be read so as to
impose, vis-a-vis foreign investments, a requirement of uniformity of treatment by the different
component units of the three federal States which are Parties to NAFTA. It agrees with the
tribunal in Merrill & Ring that Article 1102(3) only applies to ‘the same regulatory measures
under the same jurisdictional authority’. But it does not follow that Canada’s argument limiting
the effective scope of the national treatment obligation to investments located within the particular
province should be accepted. Examples can be imagined of protective measures taken for the
benefit of local investors while effectively keeping NAFTA investors or their investments out.
Whether this would involve a breach of Article 1102 would depend on the circumstances,
including the application of the ‘like circumstances’ requirement. But there seems no doubt that
there could be a breach of the national treatment obligation in such case. The same would be true
in a Methanex-type scenario if the out-of-province investor had been the specific target of a
provincial campaign to cause it loss. The situation is not limited necessarily to a scenario where
there has been a single specific target. While the Claimant does not suggest that it was specifically
targeted by the Nova Scotia measures, it is open to it to establish on the merits a breach of Article

1102 on some other basis.

The Tribunal also stresses that it is not called on in this phase of the proceedings to discuss the
application of the ‘like circumstances’ test to the present case. Nor is it necessary to discuss in

further detail here the meaning of ‘treatment’ in Article 1102.

Ibid, para 94.
Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 125.
Claimant’s Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction, para 204.

77

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

466

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

For these reasons and on this basis, the Tribunal rejects Canada’s preliminary objection based on

Article 1102(3).

E. JURISDICTION OVER THE EXPROPRIATION CLAIM UNDER THE OIL PLATFORMS TEST

1. Introduction

The Tribunal has held that the Claimant’s expropriation claim is not time-barred, on the ground
that the expropriation, if there was one, could not have occurred until October 2014. But that
claim requires more careful scrutiny, given that the last Nova Scotia measure of which the
Claimant complains occurred in September 2012 and that the Claimant retained complete control

of the Laurentide mill until it was closed and sold more than two years later.*°!

The Claimant argues that the Respondent constructively expropriated the Laurentide mill by
destroying the value of the investment.” The Claimant goes on to say that: (a) there was no valid
public purpose for the expropriation, since provincial protectionism is not a legitimate public
purpose;*®> (b) the expropriation was discriminatory because Nova Scotia favoured a
domestically-owned, in-province mill over foreign-owned out-of-province mills, without any
regard to principles of fair market competition; “* (c) the expropriation was taken in disregard of

international standards of due process;*® and (d) the Claimant received no compensation.‘

The Respondent replies that the questioned measures cannot be construed as an indirect

expropriation: (a) sales and market share cannot be expropriated;* (b) the questioned measures

468

are not the proximate cause of alleged damages;** (c) neither Canada nor Nova Scotia

substantially deprived the Claimant of its investment; and (d) the Claimant remained in control

of the mill at all times.“

At the hearing, following a question from the Presiding Arbitrator, counsel for Canada referred
to Judge Higgins’ separate opinion in Oil Platforms as having addressed whether or not, on the

facts as pled, the alleged conduct is capable of constituting a breach.*” He continued:

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 113.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, paras 88, 90.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 94.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 95.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 96.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para 97.
Canada’s Statement of Defence, para 82.

Canada’s Statement of Defence, para 83.

Canada’s Statement of Defence, para 83.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 428:2-429:2. See also Hearing on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 132:20-132:24.

78

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

404

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

with respect to the expropriation claim, our view is that it’s not capable of doing it because
the alleged expropriation was not done by the state. It was done by a private actor. Similarly,
here, it’s not capable of constituting a breach because the language of 1102(3), the factual
predicate that a province accord treatment to the investor is not here, and it couldn’t be here
because they’re in a different province.*”!

By contrast, counsel for the Claimant did not consider Oil Platforms to provide a basis for arguing
inadmissibility for the purpose of Article 1101:
[Article] 1101 is not a claim-related procedure. 1101 is very clear. It just requires Claimant

to establish that the measures are related to their investment. It doesn’t say that you can use
that to short-circuit an analysis of the claims.*”

2. The Oil Platforms Test and its Application to NAFTA Chapter Eleven
Proceedings

In Oil Platforms (Preliminary Objections), the Court determined the scope of various articles of
the 1955 Treaty of Amity, Economic Relations, and Consular Rights between Iran and the United
States on which Iran relied, deciding it had jurisdiction to entertain the Iranian claims only on the

basis of one provision of the Treaty, Article X. The Court said:

... the Parties differ on the question whether the dispute between the two States with respect
to the lawfulness of the actions carried out by the United States against the Iranian oil
platforms is a dispute ‘as to the interpretation or application’ of the Treaty of 1955. In order
to answer that question, the Court cannot limit itself to noting that one of the Parties maintains
that such a dispute exists, and the other denies it. It must ascertain whether the violations of
the Treaty of 1955 pleaded by Iran do or do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and
whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one which the Court has jurisdiction ratione
materiae to entertain...47

  

 

Judge Higgins explained the reasoning behind the Court’s approach in the following terms:

The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the claims of Iran
are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to accept pro tem the facts as alleged
by Iran to be true and in that light to interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes,
that is to say, to see if on the basis of Iran’s claims of fact there could occur a violation of one
or more of them.*4
It should be stressed that both the Court and Judge Higgins treated this as a jurisdictional matter

rather than one going to admissibility.

The Oil Platforms test has been applied by investment tribunals, although the arbitral practice is

not entirely consistent. In particular, in Methanex, the tribunal, while paying lip service to Oil

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 428:2-429:2. See also Hearing on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 132:20-133:7.

Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 16, 2017, 466:22-467:2.

Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America), Judgment of December 12, 1996
(Preliminary Objections), ICJ Reports 1996 p. 810 (para 16).

Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America), Judgment of December 12, 1996
(Preliminary Objections), Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, ICJ Reports 1996 p. 810 (para 32).

    

79

302.

303.

304.

416
471

478

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Platforms, held that since the UNCITRAL Rules refer only to preliminary objections on

jurisdictional grounds, there was no scope for the application of that test to claims of

 

inadmissibility. The tribunal said:

In order to establish the necessary consent to arbitration, it is sufficient to show (i) that
Chapter 11 applies in the first place, i.e. that the requirements of Article 1101 are met, and
(ii) that a claim has been brought by a claimant investor in accordance with Articles 1116 or
117 (and that all pre-conditions and formalities required under Articles 1118-1121 are
satisfied). Where these requirements are met by a claimant, Article 1122 is satisfied; and the
NAFTA Party’s consent to arbitration is established.

    

 

Accordingly, there is no necessity at the jurisdictional stage for a definitive interpretation of
the substantive provisions relied on by a claimant: the jurisdiction of the arbitration tribunal
is established without the need for such interpretation [...] On the other hand, in order to
establish its jurisdiction, a tribunal must be satisfied that Chapter 11 does indeed apply and
that a claim has been brought within its procedural provisions. This means that it must
interpret, definitively, Article 1101(1) and decide whether, on the facts alleged by the
claimant, Chapter 11 applies. Similarly, insofar as the point is in issue, the tribunal must
establish that the requirements of Articles 1116-1121 have been met by a claimant, which
will similarly require a definitive interpretation of those provisions...*7°

 

   

In practice the Methanex tribunal assumed that the facts alleged by the claimant, albeit disputed
by the USA, were correct only for the purpose of the award on jurisdiction. The tribunal went on
to hold that it had no power to consider, under the rubric of admissibility, whether the claims were

capable of giving rise to responsibility under the substantive provisions of Chapter Eleven.*”°

But other tribunals have not taken this view. For example, in UPS, a NAFTA arbitration under
the UNCITRAL Rules, the tribunal decided that for the purpose of the respondent’s challenge to
jurisdiction ‘the facts alleged [...] are to be accepted as correct.’*”” After quoting Oil Platforms
and noting the differences between the various formulations of the test offered by the Court and

in separate opinions, it said that:

.. the Tribunal’s task is to discover the meaning and particularly the scope of the provisions

which UPS invokes as conferring jurisdiction. Do the facts alleged by UPS fall within those
provisions; are the facts capable, once proved, of constituting breaches of the obligations they
state? It may be that those formulations would differ in their effect in some circumstances
but in the present case that appears not to be so.*7*

In Impregilo v Pakistan, the tribunal quoted Oil Platforms and inquired whether the facts as
alleged by the claimant, if established, were capable of coming within the provisions of the BIT
invoked. It considered aspects of the claims were not capable of constituting ‘unfair or inequitable

treatment’ or discriminatory measures for the purposes of the applicable BIT because they

Methanex, Partial Award, paras 120-121.

Ibid, paras 122-126.

United Parcel Service of America Inc. (UPS) v Government of Canada, ICSID Case No. UNCT/02/1,
Award on Jurisdiction, November 22, 2002, para 32.

Ibid, para 37.

80

305.

306.

307.

308.

479

480

484

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

concerned merely the implementation of contracts.*”

In Bayindir v Pakistan, the tribunal cited Impregilo*°

and defined the task as requiring it...
to determine the meaning and scope of the provisions which Bayindir invokes as conferring
jurisdiction and to assess whether the facts alleged by Bayindir fall within those provisions or
are capable, if proved, of constituting breaches of the obligations they refer to. In performing
this task, the Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning
and scope of the BIT provisions and to the assessment whether the facts alleged may constitute
breaches. If the result is affirmative, jurisdiction will be established, but the existence of breaches

will remain to be litigated on the merits.**!

 

The tribunal found that it had jurisdiction, emphasizing that this decision was ‘not equivalent to
joining the question of jurisdiction to the merits’ but rather that the claims were ‘capable of
constituting a violation of the BIT’. The tribunal added that ‘[t]he threshold at the jurisdictional
level, which implies a prima facie standard, is different from the standards which the Claimant

will have to discharge on the merits to show an actual treaty breach.’**?

In Canfor, a NAFTA arbitration under the UNCITRAL rules, the respondent relied on
Article 1901(3) by way of a jurisdictional objection. The Respondent proposed that the tribunal
apply the test enunciated by Judge Koroma in the Fisheries Jurisdiction case. In contrast, the
claimants understood that article 1901(3) was an interpretative provision that did not concern

jurisdiction, and that the Oil Platforms test need not be applied.***

The Canfor tribunal quoted Oil Platforms, Methanex and UPS, and said that:

The above decisions make clear four points that a Chapter Eleven tribunal needs to address
if and to the extent that a respondent State Party raises an objection to jurisdiction under the
NAFTA:

—First, a mere assertion by a claimant that a tribunal has jurisdiction does not in and
of itself establish jurisdiction. It is the tribunal that must decide whether the
requirements for jurisdiction are met.

—Second, in making that determination, the tribunal is required to interpret and apply
the jurisdictional provisions, including procedural provisions of the NAFTA relating
thereto, i.e., whether the requirements of Article 1101 are met; whether a claim has
been brought by a claimant investor in accordance with Article 1116 or 1117; and
whether all preconditions and formalities under Articles 1118-1121 are satisfied.

Impregilo S.p.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, April

22, 2005, para 268.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005, para 193-194.

Ibid, para 197.

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005, para 263.

Canfor Corporation and Terminal Forest Products Ltd. v United States of America, Decision on
Preliminary Question, June 6, 2006, para 174 (RL-007) (‘Canfor and Tembec, Decision’).

Ibid.

81

309.

310.

311.

486
487
488

489
490

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

—Third, the facts as alleged by a claimant must be accepted as true pro tempore for
purposes of determining jurisdiction.

—Fourth, the tribunal must determine whether the facts as alleged by the claimant, if
eventually proven, are prima facie capable of constituting a violation of the relevant
substantive obligations of the respondent State Party under the NAFTA.

It is also clear that, in determining jurisdiction by applying the above test, a NAFTA tribunal

is not in any way prejudging the merits of the case.***
The tribunal found that under Article 1901(3) the only possible interpretation was that the entire
Chapter Eleven did not apply with respect to the antidumping law and countervailing duty law of
a NAFTA’s party.**° Hence, it concluded that the respondent did not consent to arbitrate most of
the claims, except those which did not form part of the respondent’s antidumping law or

countervailing duty law.**”

In Desert Line Projects v Yemen, the tribunal cited Oil Platforms and several of the precedents
that applied it.“** In deciding whether it had jurisdiction ratione materiae, the tribunal said that
since ‘issues of jurisdiction and admissibility are examined on the hypothesis that the relevant
claims are factually founded in principle, the claim may still be defeated at the merits stage if they
are not proven.’“*? The respondent had argued that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction because
the dispute had been heard by a Yemeni arbitration tribunal. The Desert Line Projects tribunal
disagreed, on the basis that the claims formulated by the claimant were capable of constituting
violations of the BIT, and that the claims asserted in the prior arbitration were fundamentally

distinct from those related to the violation of the BIT.“

This Tribunal agrees with these and other decisions on the point. A NAFTA tribunal (whether
sitting under the UNCITRAL Rules or some other set of arbitral rules) is entitled to inquire not
merely whether procedural prerequisites and time limits for commencing arbitration have been
satisfied, but whether the claims, assuming pro tem that the claimant’s allegations of fact are true,
fall within the scope of Chapter Eleven of NAFTA, that is to say, are capable of giving rise to a
finding of breach. It should be stressed that since, under Oil Platforms, this is a matter going to
jurisdiction, not admissibility, it is not necessary for this purpose to consider whether Article 21
of the UNCITRAL Rules, which refers only to jurisdictional objections, excludes the power to

rule as a preliminary matter on questions of admissibility of claims.

Ibid, paras 171-172.

Ibid, para 273.

Ibid, para 348.

Desert Line Projects LLC v The Republic of Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, February 6, 2008,
paras 129-134.

Ibid, para 134.

Ibid, paras 137-8.

82

312.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis

In the Tribunal’s view, the Article 1110 claim for expropriation of the Laurentide mill faces

considerable difficulties, even assuming the facts as pleaded. These include the following:

iii.

The Claimant retained full control over the mill until its closure in October 2014, and
subsequently negotiated its sale. It was the Claimant’s choice to close Laurentide rather

than one of its other two mills in Quebec.

The closure decision was allegedly made because of the low paper prices offered by PHP,
and did not involve state action of any kind. The Claimant has not alleged that PHP: (a)
was a state agency; (b) exercised governmental powers delegated to it; or (c) was

controlled by government officials in taking its pricing decisions.

There was a significant delay between the Nova Scotia measures taken in September 2012
and the alleged expropriation in October 2014. The Claimant argues that it had decided
to take a risk by running the mill after the measures, and that the mill was no longer
profitable after two years. The question is how the negative consequences of its

investment decision to take that risk can be construed as an expropriation.

313. Moreover, if the Claimant’s argument were to prevail, claims under Chapter Eleven could be

314.

315.

pursued, many years after the event, as ‘new’ expropriations, with all the problems of causality

that might raise. This would drive a coach and horses through the time-limits for action under

NAFTA.

On the other hand, the Oil Platforms argument was not raised by the Respondent in its written

pleadings, and only at the oral stage in reply to questioning from the Tribunal. On balance, the

Tribunal considers that the Article 1110 claim, despite the questions it raises, should not be

dismissed at this preliminary stage but should be left to the merits.

F.

THE TAXATION MEASURES OBJECTION

1. Introduction

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction insofar as the Claimant’s

expropriation claim encompasses ‘taxation measures’. This results from the restriction imposed

by NAFTA Article 2103. Relevantly, Article 2103(6) provides:

Article 1110 (Expropriation and Compensation) shall apply to taxation measures except that
no investor may invoke that Article as the basis for a claim under Article 1116 (Claim by an
Investor of a Party on its Own Behalf) or 1117 (Claim by an Investor of a Party on Behalf of
an Enterprise), where it has been determined pursuant to this paragraph that the measure is

83

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

 

not an expropriation. The investor shall refer the issue of whether the measure is not an
expropriation for a determination to the appropriate competent authorities set out in Annex
2103.6 at the time that it gives notice under Article 1119 (Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim
to Arbitration). If the competent authorities do not agree to consider the issue or, having
agreed to consider it, fail to agree that the measure is not an expropriation within a period of
six months of such referral, the investor may submit its claim to arbitration under Article
1120 (Submission of a Claim to Arbitration).

 

 

The Respondent argues that under Article 2103(6) the Claimant was required to refer the claim
relating to ‘taxation measures’ to the appropriate tax authorities before being able to submit such
a claim to NAFTA arbitration. The Claimant, however, submits that the taxation measures to
which it refers do not independently amount to an expropriation, but are part of a series of
measures that amount to the alleged expropriation, and so do not need to be referred to the

authorities under Article 2103(6).

2. The Respondent’s Arguments

The Respondent submits that any claims relating to the Property Tax Agreement between PWCC,
Richmond County and NPPH are precluded by Article 2103. In the Respondent’s view,
Article 2103(1) provides a broad carve-out in respect of taxation measures: ‘except as set out in
this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation measures.’ “”' The Respondent relies
on the decision in Canfor and Tembec*”? as well as the claimant’s withdrawal of its claim in UPS
to support its submission that this broad carve-out excludes the Claimant’s minimum standard of

treatment claim under Article 1105 insofar as it relates to the property tax measures.

In respect of the Claimant’s expropriation claim under Article 1110, the Respondent
acknowledges that Article 2103(6) permits such a claim relating to taxation measures so long as

the Claimant follows the procedure set out therein.

The Respondent refers this Tribunal to Gottlieb Investments Group v Canada where the claimant
followed the Article 2103(6) p d obtained a determination from the ip US and

Canadian authorities that the measure was not an expropriation, and accordingly abandoned its

expropriation claims.**

The Respondent asks this Tribunal to reject the Claimant’s assertion that the current approach to
Article 2103 ‘distort[s] the exception’s intent’ and that its real purpose is ‘to deny claims that

taxes might have been used as a tool to expropriate’, not instances where tax relief, as part of a

Respondent’s Memorial, para 130.
Canfor and Tembec, Decision, para 259.
Respondent’s Memorial, para 135.

84

321.

322.

323.

494

496
497
498
499
500
sot
02

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

suite of measures, gives a third party a competitive advantage over the claimant.** The
Respondent submits that such approach has no textual basis in NAFTA and would permit
claimants to circumvent the exception in Article 2103(6) by grouping taxation measures with
other measures.*°° The Respondent refers to EnCana v Ecuador which concerned Article VII of
the Canada-Ecuador BIT, almost identically worded to Article 2103 of NAFTA. In that case, the
claimant followed the procedure set out in Article VII notwithstanding the fact that the taxation
measures were one part of the government conduct that allegedly constituted expropriation.*”°
The Respondent submits that such an approach should have been followed by the Claimant in this
case. The Respondent recalls the statement of the Feldman tribunal that ‘Chapter 11 jurisdiction
over tax matters is carefully circumscribed by Article 2103’ and that ‘this Tribunal would be

derelict in its duties if it either expanded or reduced that jurisdiction.’ #°”

3. The Claimant’s Arguments

The Claimant submits that its reference to the property tax discount provided by Nova Scotia is
admissible since it does not claim that this taxation measure amounts in itself to an expropriation
covered by Article 2103(6).*°* Rather, this measure is merely one of many that ‘contributed to the

constructive expropriation of Resolute’s Laurentide mill.’*”°

4. The Non-Disputing NAFTA Parties’ Comments

The United States submits that Article 2103 ‘generally excludes taxation measures from the
NAFTA’s provisions’ and so are ‘not subject to any Chapter Eleven obligations’ unless ‘expressly
identified as exceptions’ to that general exclusion. Article 2103 applies equally to all ‘taxation
measures’, whether they are imposed on the investment or the investor or apply to a domestic
investment or investor as a means of expropriating the foreign claimant’s investment.*! The
United States further submits that Article 2103(6) ‘imposes a jurisdictional requirement’ that the
investor must refer its complaint to the competent tax authorities before it can raise an Article

1110 claim before a NAFTA arbitration.
The Respondent observes that all three NAFTA Parties agree that, pursuant to Article 2103,

Respondent’s Memorial, para 136.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 137; Respondent’s Reply Memorial, paras 163-165; Hearing on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility, August 15, 2017, 249:3-22.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 138.

Respondent’s Memorial, para 139, citing Feldman, Award, para 188.
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 213; Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admiss
Claimant’s Counter Memorial, para 213.

 

 

ility, August 15, 2017, 35:3-10.

  
 

ion, para 19.

United States Submission, para 20; see also Mexico Submission, para 14.

85

324.

325.

326.

503
504
505

506

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

taxation measures may not be contested as a breach of Article 1105 and accordingly, the
Claimant’s argument about the Property Tax Agreement between Pacific West Commercial

Corporation and Richmond County as a breach of Article 1105 must fail.*

The Respondent also
notes that the NAFTA Parties agree that a taxation measure may only be contested as a breach of
Article 1110 if a claimant has first sought a determination from the NAFTA Parties that the
measure is an expropriation, a procedural step which Resolute has not followed here.*™*

The Claimant considers that the United States calls for the adoption of an overly expansive
interpretation of ‘taxation measures’ such that it would include a taxation ‘practice’ for the
enforcement or failure to enforce a tax. By contrast, the Claimant submits that the referral
obligation in Article 2103(6) consists of affirmative taxation measures burdening an investor to
the point of expropriation. Tax breaks favouring a competitor without affirmatively burdening

an investor are not, according to the Claimant, ‘taxation measures’ requiring referral.*°°

5. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 2103(1) of NAFTA provides that ‘except as set out in this Article, nothing in this
Agreement shall apply to taxation measures.’ Article 2103(6) provides a limited exception for
claims that a tax measure constitutes an expropriation contrary to Article 1110: this requires prior
submission of the claim to ‘the appropriate competent authorities set out in Annex 2103.6’, a
procedure not followed by the Claimant in this case. This raises two issues: first, are the two
measures invoked by the Claimant ‘taxation measures’ as referred to in Article 2103(1); and second,
if so, can the Claimant invoke them here as an aspect of its Article 1110 claim, given that it does

not rely on the measures as per se amounting to an expropriation but only as contributory to it.

The term ‘taxation measure’ was considered by the tribunal in EnCana v Ecuador. That was a
claim for expropriation under the Ecuador-United States BIT, but the relevant provisions were
not materially different from NAFTA’s. The EnCana tribunal adopted a broad interpretation of

the term, observing that...

All those aspects of the tax regime which go to determine how much tax is payable or
refundable are part of the notion of ‘taxation measures’. Thus tax deductions, allowances or
rebates are caught by the term [...] [A] measure is a taxation measure if it is part of the regime
for the imposition of a tax. A measure providing relief from taxation is a taxation measure
just as much as a measure imposing the tax in the first place.*°°

Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, para 29.

Canada’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, para 30-31.

Claimant’s Reply to Art. 1128 Submissions, paras 30-31, also citing Hulley Enterprises Limited (Cyprus)
v Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA226, Final Award, July 18, 2014, para 1407, as an example of a
similar finding in the context of claims under the Energy Charter Treaty.

EnCana Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, Award, February 6, 2006, para 142(3)-(4) (RL-066).

    

86

327.

328.

329.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v Canada

 

The tribunal did not need to consider a taxation measure dealing with taxation of a third party;
indeed, an expropriation effected by conferring a tax benefit on a competitor of the claimant was
probably not contemplated by the drafters. But the exception for taxation measures under
Article 2103(1) is a general exception, and there is no reason to limit it to taxation measures
imposed on the claimant or its investment. To do so would be to add words not in the text.
Moreover, it would be anomalous if a tribunal could evaluate a third-party taxation measure under

Chapter Eleven but not a measure imposing a tax directly on the claimant.

For similar reasons, the fact that the expropriation claim only relies on Nova Scotia’s property tax
discount as one among several circumstances leading to a claim for expropriation does not bring
the claim under the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Taxation measures are simply not covered by NAFTA

except as provided in Article 2103, and there is no relevant exception here.”

For these reasons, even if the present claim fell within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and was
otherwise admissible, it could not include any aspect of Nova Scotia’s conduct covered by the

taxation measures exemption in Article 2103.

DECISION

330.

331.

507

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal holds that it has jurisdiction to decide the Claimant’s
claims concerning the Nova Scotia Measures, with the exception of the interim measures taken
to keep the Port Hawkesbury mill in operation prior to its sale in September 2012 and the claims

concerning taxation measures, and that the claims are admissible.

Questions of costs and expenses are reserved to the final decision on the merits.

Arbitrator Cass takes a narrower view of what qualifies as a ‘taxation measure’ under Article 2103. Because
he does not read that provision as covering exemptions from taxation for reasons unrelated to framing and
application of tax laws and regulations, he would not find measures complained of in this proceeding
excluded under Article 2103.

 

87

Resolute v Canada

Place of Arbitration: Toronto, Ontario

Dae (je 30, ooxe

“Cxdteadlea,.§ —§$

Dean Ronald A. Cass Dean Céline Lévesque

en ( SOL he med

Jbdge James R. Crawford, AC|

88

