 

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE NORTH
AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (“NAFTA”) AND THE 1976 UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES

between

RESOLUTE FOREST PRODUCTS INC.

Claimant

and

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Respondent

(PCA CASE NO. 2016-13)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 4

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

 

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:
Judge James R. Crawford, AC (President)
Dean Ronald A. Cass

Dean Céline Lévesque

18 NOVEMBER 2016

Contents

 

Procedural History
Respondent's Position
Claimant's Position
The Tribunal’s Considerations

Decision

 

 

2.1

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim on
December 30, 2015. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent submitted its
Statement of Defence on September 1, 2016. In its Statement of Defence, the
Respondent proposed that these proceedings be bifurcated into two phases and noted:

The Claimant has agreed to consider Canada’s bifurcation proposal and to
advise the Tribunal by September 16, 2016, whether it will consent to bifurcation
with respect to Canada’s objections described above. Should the Claimant not
consent to bifurcation, the Disputing Parties have agreed that Canada will
submit a Request for Bifurcation setting out the rationale supporting bifurcation
in greater detail by September 29, 2016.

By letter of September 14, 2016, the Claimant stated that it was “unable to consent to
bifurcation on the basis of the proposal set out in Canada’s Statement of Defense.”

In accordance with the Disputing Parties’ agreement, the Respondent submitted its
Request for Bifurcation on September 29, 2016 and the Claimant submitted its
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation on October 13, 2016.

As notified to the Disputing Parties on October 19, 2016, and in Procedural Order No. 3
dated November 3, 2016, the Tribunal held a hearing on bifurcation via teleconference
on November 7, 2016. During that hearing Mr Luz made submissions on behalf of the
Respondent and Dr Feldman and Mr Valasek made submissions on behalf of the
Claimant.

The Tribunal has considered all the points presented by the Parties in their written and
oral submissions, and summarises the key positions below. The Tribunal stresses that
its considerations and decisions regarding bifurcation should in no way be understood to
prejudice the substance of the preliminary objections or the submissions on the merits.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

In its Request for Bifurcation, the Respondent submits that these proceedings should be
bifurcated to address in a preliminary phase its jurisdictional objections under NAFTA
Articles 1101(1), 1116(2), 1117(2) and 2103 and its admissibility objection under
Article 1102(3). The Respondent notes that “these objections are discrete, succinct and
ripe for determination without need for expert or witness testimony or delving into the
merits of the Claimant's Article 1102, 1105 or 1110 claims against the Nova Scotia

2.2

2.3

measures.”' The Respondent emphasises the potential time and cost savings that could
be achieved by the Disputing Parties if its motion for bifurcation is granted.?

The Respondent recalls Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
(‘UNCITRAL Rules”) which, in its submission, creates “a presumption in favour of
bifurcating jurisdictional questions that should be declined only if, in the circumstances
of the particular case, the Tribunal determines that it would be inefficient or would cause
prejudice to a disputing party.”? The Respondent submits that it has done enough to
enliven that presumption and that the Claimant now carries the burden of rebutting that
presumption.* The Respondent cites a number of NAFTA cases in which jurisdiction
was decided as a preliminary matter and makes particular reference to Philip Morris v
Australia.> In that case, the Tribunal (operating under the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules) “considered bifurcation to be appropriate when: (i) the objection is prima facie
serious and substantial, (ii) the objection can be examined without prejudging or entering
the merits, and (iii) the objection, if successful, could dispose of all or an essential part
of the claims raised."° The Respondent adopts these criteria when analysing its
objections to jurisdiction and admissibility.

Jurisdictional objection under Article 1101(1): The Nova Scotia Measures do not
“relate to” the investor or the investment

In summary, the Respondent argues that “Resolute’s claim cannot even pass through
the gateway to [NAFTA] Chapter Eleven because the measures adopted by Nova Scotia
are not relating to the Claimant's investment in Quebec.”” The Respondent submits,
first, that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction in respect of the Nova Scotia Measures because
they do not “relate to” the Claimant nor its investment in Québec and therefore fall outside
of the scope and coverage of NAFTA Chapter 11 as required by Article 1101(1). The
Respondent submits that the Nova Scotia Measures “at most, ‘affected’ [the Laurentide
mill] in an indirect and remote manner’ do not provide a sufficient legal nexus to bring
the claim within Article 1101. This constitutes in its view a “prima facie serious and
substantial” objection. The Respondent also contends that the disagreement between

Request for Bifurcation, para 3.

Request for Bifurcation, para 2.

Request for Bifurcation, para 4; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 7:9-17.
Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 30:14-20.

Philip Morris Asia Limited (Hong Kong) v The Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL)
Procedural Order No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014.

6 Request for Bifurcation, para 6 citing Philip Morris Asia Limited (Hong Kong) v The
Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation of the
Procedure, 14 April 2014, para 109; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 7:18-8:7.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 10:1-5.
Request for Bifurcation, para 9.

2.4

2.5

2.6

27

the Disputing Parties as to the proper test to be applied — the Respondent favouring the
“legally significant connection” test espoused in Methanex® and the Claimant preferring
the “causal connection test” adopted by the Tribunal in Cargill v Mexico"® — in assessing
the preliminary objection speaks to the fact that this objection is serious and
substantial."

Second, adjudication of the Article 1101 objection will not require prejudgment of or entry
into the merits since, even if the Tribunal accepted the allegation that the Nova Scotia
Measures contributed to the closure of the Laurentide mill, there would still not be a
“legally significant connection”’? so as to pass the threshold set by Article 1101(1).'°

Third, if this objection were successful, it would dispose of all of the Claimant’s claims in
respect of the Nova Scotia Measures, leaving only the claims in respect of the Federal
Measures for determination. '*

Jurisdictional objection under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2): Time bar

The Respondent challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis pursuant to
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2). In short, the Respondent submits that the Nova Scotia
Measures were all adopted more than three years prior to the date of the Notice of
Arbitration and, therefore, the Claimant’s claims in respect of the Nova Scotia Measures
are time-barred if the Tribunal finds that “Resolute knew or should have known of the
breach and loss before December 30, 2012.”'>

First, the objection is prima facie serious and substantial since the Nova Scotia Measures
were adopted between three and fifteen months before the relevant cut-off date of
December 30, 2012.'® Therefore, the claims would be time-barred since NAFTA
tribunals have historically “applied the time-bar limitation strictly’.'7_ At the Hearing on
Bifurcation, the Respondent further submitted that the fact that the Claimant's “Objection

9 Methanex Corporation v United States of America (UNCITRAL) Partial Award, 7 August 2002.
Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/05/2, Award,
18 September 2009.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 11:1-4.

Methanex Corporation v United States of America (UNCITRAL) Partial Award, 7 August 2002,
para 147.

Request for Bifurcation, para 10; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 13:8-13.

Request for Bifurcation, para 11; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 14:24-15:4.

Request for Bifurcation, para 12; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 16:24-17:1.

Request for Bifurcation, para 13.

Request for Bifurcation, para 13.

3

2.8

2.9

2.10

to Bifurcation is dedicated almost entirely to arguing why Canada’s legal interpretation
of time bar is wrong... shows that the objection is prima facie serious and substantial.”'®

Second, assessment of the time-bar objection only requires an assessment of the “dates
on which the Claimant first had knowledge of the measures alleged to violate NAFTA
Chapter Eleven and that it had suffered some cognizable loss.”"® Such an assessment
will not require the Tribunal to prejudge or consider the merits of the Claimant’s
substantive allegations.2° At the Hearing on Bifurcation, the Respondent relied on
Exhibit R-081 to Canada’s Statement of Defence, Resolute’s original draft NAFTA Notice
of Intent, to demonstrate that “Resolute took the position that it suffered damage starting
in 2012”, putting it on the wrong side of the time-bar.*" In Respondent's submission, the
question of knowledge is “wholly separate and unrelated to the merits of whether there
has been an expropriation, a breach of national treatment, or a breach of the minimum
standard of treatment” and is a simple factual inquiry appropriate for bifurcation.”

Third, if this objection were successful, the entirety of the claim based on the Nova Scotia
Measures would be time-barred thereby “drastically reduc[ing] the scope of the
arbitration and eliminat[ing] any need to delve into any of the highly complex questions
that will be involved in determining the merits of the Claimant’s national treatment,
minimum standard of treatment and expropriation claims.”?>

Jurisdictional objection under Article 2103: claims under NAFTA based on
taxation measures

The Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the basis that Article 2103
provides that “nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation matters,” other than as
set out in Article 2103 itself.24 The Respondent submits that Article 2103 does not refer
to Article 1105 and, additionally, Article 2103(6) specifies that “any claim that a taxation
measure constitutes an expropriation must be submitted to the competent taxation
authorities of the NAFTA Parties at the time of filing the Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim
to Arbitration.”> The fact that NAFTA specifically provides for a mechanism to be
followed in respect of taxation matters means that this is a prima facie serious and

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 18:10-20.

Request for Bifurcation, para 14.

Request for Bifurcation, para 14.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 19:6-20:15.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 20:20-24.

Request for Bifurcation, para 16; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 23:14-25.
Request for Bifurcation, para 18.

Request for Bifurcation, para 18.

2.11

2.12

2.13

2.14

substantial objection to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to determine whether any alleged
“discounted property taxes” amount to a breach of Article 1105.7°

Second, the hearing of this objection will, according to the Respondent, solely require
determination of whether Article 2103 permits expropriation claims under Article 1105
and, in respect of the claim under Article 1110, “whether the Claimant submitted the
measure to the NAFTA Parties’ taxation authorities at the time of its [Notice of Intent to
Submit a Claim to Arbitration].”*”? The determination of these questions will not require
examination or prejudgment of the substantive claims.

Third, if the Article 2103 objection is successful, the discounted property tax elements of
the Article 1105 and 1110 claims could be disposed of, saving the Tribunal from “delv[ing]
into the difficult terrain of whether, how and to what extent the taxation measure at issue
provided a financial benefit to Port Hawkesbury at all and whether or not it played any
cognizable role in the Claimant's decision to close its Laurentide mill in October 2014."

At the Hearing on Bifurcation, the Respondent conceded that “Canada would not have
proposed holding a separate preliminary phase to deal solely with this objection” but
considers it appropriate to consider the objection in a preliminary phase if other
preliminary objections are also to be determined.”

Admissibility objection under Article 1102(3): The meaning of “treatment” under
NAFTA across State or Provincial borders

Even though the Respondent's objection to admissibility does not fall within the ambit of
Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal is permitted to consider the objection
as a preliminary matter pursuant to Article 15(1) since, under that provision, the Tribunal
is entitled to “conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate, provided
that the parties are treated with equality and that at any stage of the proceeding each
party is given a full opportunity of presenting its case.”°° The Tribunal in Philio Morris v
Australia deemed it unnecessary to classify Australia’s Temporal Objection as one

Request for Bifurcation, para 18.
Request for Bifurcation, para 19.
Request for Bifurcation, para 20.
Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 28: 16-29:1.
Request for Bifurcation, para 21.

8

2.15

2.16

relating to jurisdiction or admissibility on the basis of corresponding provisions in the
2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.*'

Applying the criteria used to assess the Respondent's jurisdictional objections, the
Respondent submits that its admissibility objection under Article 1102 is, first, prima facie
serious and substantial given that Article 1102(3) defines “treatment” as referring to “in-
jurisdiction treatment, not treatment accorded across multiple jurisdictions.” At the
Hearing on Bifurcation, the Respondent noted that this is an exceptional case given that
“there has never been a NAFTA case where an investor in one province seeks to
challenge the measures adopted by a provincial government in a different province in
which the investor has no investment.”*° Second, it can be assessed without prejudging
or entering the merits as the Tribunal can assess the objection by answering one
question alone: does the Claimant have a supercalendered paper investment within the
jurisdiction of Nova Scotia?** Third, if the objection were successful, the Tribunal could
dispose of the Claimant's Article 1102 claim, would not be required to consider “Canada’s
procurement and subsidies defences based on Articles 1108(7)(a) and (b)”, and would
not be required to analyse whether the Port Hawkesbury and Laurentide mills were “in
like circumstances”.*°

Claims against the Federal Measures are not prejudiced by bifurcation

The Respondent submits further that the Federal Measures claims are “separate and
factually distinct” from the Nova Scotia Measures claims and there is “no intrinsic overlap
between the facts necessary to dispose of the Nova Scotia Measures as against the
Federal Measures.” For this reason, there is no prejudice to the Claimant in bifurcating
the proceedings and hearing the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction and admissibility
in respect of the Nova Scotia Measures in a preliminary phase.°°

CLAIMANT’S POSITION

In its Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, the Claimant “agrees with
Canada that bifurcation could, in some cases, serve purposes of fairness, efficiency and
economy.”*” The Claimant submits that the Respondent's motion should be judged

Philip Morris Asia Limited v The Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order
No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation of the Procedure, 14 April 2014, para 118.

Request for Bifurcation, para 23; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 25:4-22.
Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 26:8-15.

Request for Bifurcation, para 24; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 26:21-23.
Request for Bifurcation, para 25; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 27:9-22.
Request for Bifurcation, paras 27-29.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 2.

g

3.2

3.3

against these three criteria. By doing so, the Claimant contends that bifurcation of these
proceedings “would be unfair, inefficient, and costly” because “issues of liability and
measures of damages are bound up in Canada’s theories for dismissal’, leading to
duplication of effort and requiring the Tribunal to “prejudgef[e] or [enter] into the merits”
in the preliminary phase.*® The Claimant adopts the test espoused in Philip Morris v
Australia and relied upon by the Respondent and argues that the Respondent's
objections to jurisdiction and admissibility do not satisfy the Philip Morris criteria.°°

Response to objections under Articles 1101(1) and 1102(3)

The Respondent's objections under both Articles 1101(1) and 1102(3) will require the
Tribunal to consider the same fact, “that the Nova Scotia Measures were deliberately
aimed at giving Port Hawkesbury Paper an advantage over competitors located outside
Nova Scotia.”*° This fact, the Claimant says, is “fundamental to the merits of Resolute’s
claim”, thereby making bifurcation inconvenient.’ In respect of the Respondent's
objections under both Article 1101(1) and 1102(3), the territorial limitation advanced by
the Respondent is unmaintainable in this case because the measures in question are
not ordinary legislative or regulatory measures, but were specifically intended to have
effect beyond the borders of Nova Scotia.“? The Claimant also contends that these
objections do not satisfy the Philip Morris test.“

Objection under Article 1101(1)

First, the “legally significant connection” test relied upon by the Respondent in respect of
Article 1101(1) has been criticised and subsequently recalibrated by other NAFTA
triounals.* The Claimant relies on the “causal connection” test espoused in Cargill v
Mexico* and endorsed by the tribunal in Mesa Power Group v Canada.*® On that test,
the term “related to” in Article 1101(1) must be understood as requiring “only some
connection and [not requiring] that the measure be adopted with the express purpose of

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 2.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 4; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
32:12-18.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 5; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
34:7-10.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 5.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 36: 3-25.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 6.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 8; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
35:18-24.

Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/05/2, Award,
18 September 2009.

Mesa Power Group LLC v Government of Canada, PCA Case No 2012-17, Award, 24 March
2016.

3.4

3.5

3.6

causing loss.”47

Second, the Claimant relies on “substantial evidence” which demonstrates that the Nova
Scotia Measures were intended to have effects beyond the province of Nova Scotia and
were not, as the Respondent suggests, “aimed solely at facilitating the sale of the Port
Hawkesbury mill in Nova Scotia.”*® The Claimant contends that the stated goal of the
Nova Scotia Measures was to give the Port Hawkesbury mill a competitive advantage
so as to make it “the most efficient paper producer in the world.”*° Therefore, the
Claimant submits that the Respondent “cannot credibly argue that the [Nova Scotia]
Measures had no legally significant effect on other supercalendered paper producers,
outside Nova Scotia, nor that it did not know they would.”©° This, in the Claimant's view,
“demonstrates a prima facie case” that the Nova Scotia Measures “relate to” the Claimant
and so the jurisdictional objection under Article 1101(1) is unmaintainable and is not
appropriate for bifurcation as it requires assessment and prejudgment of the merits.*'

Objection under Article 1102(3)

The Claimant contends that the Respondent's Article 1102(3) objection similarly fails the
Philip Morris test. First, the plain words of the NAFTA text do not support the
Respondent's contention that Article 1102(3) only relates to intra-state treatment by a
state or province.** The Claimant submits that the Respondent's interpretation would
require one to “actually modify or... [read] into 1102(3) additional language.”*> The
Claimant notes that the Respondent does not cite any other authority in support of this
contention. Given the lack of authority in the NAFTA text or otherwise, the Claimant
submits that this objection cannot be considered serious or substantial.°* The Claimant
further submits that the Respondent's assertion that it is impossible for the claim to
succeed given Article 1102(3) demonstrates that the objection is not a limited legal
inquiry, but rather requires exploration of the merits of the case.°°

Second, the Tribunal will be required to enter into and prejudge the merits to determine

a

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 10 citing Cargill, Incorporated v United
Mexican States, |CSID Case No ARB(AF)/05/2, Award, 18 September 2009, para 57.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, paras 13-16.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 17.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 22.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 15; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
38:5-22.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 26; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
43:3-4.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 43:1 1-15.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 27.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 46:12-47:5.

3.7

3.8

3.9

whether the Claimant and the Port Hawkesbury mill are “in like circumstances”, whether
Nova Scotia knew its measures would have a prejudicial effect on foreign investors
outside of Nova Scotia and whether other remedies are available to investors in Canada
as are available to US competitors who have not invested in Canada.®°

Third, the assessment of all of these matters is “inseparable from the merits”, fails to
dispose of the claims under Articles 1105 and 1110, and therefore bifurcation “would be
costly and inefficient.”>”

Response to objections under Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)

As a starting point, the Claimant notes that the Respondent's objection under
Article 1116(2) and 1117(2) relies solely on the date the Nova Scotia Measures were
adopted and “ignor[es] almost entirely the question of when Resolute acquired
knowledge that the [Nova Scotia] Measures caused it loss.”%° In the Claimant's
submission, this analysis is only possible with reference to the merits and damages
portions of the claim.®?

Adopting the Philip Morris analysis again, the Claimant submits that this objection is not
serious and substantial as it has ignored half of the standard set out in Article 1116(2).
Relevantly, Article 1116(2) provides: “An investor may not make a claim if more than
three years have elapsed from the date on which the investor first acquired, or should
have [first] acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor
has incurred loss or damage.” The Claimant notes that the Respondent’s objection
emphasises the first half of this standard, but not the second half; that is, when the
Claimant knew or should have known that it had incurred loss or damage.® This
knowledge must relate to damage actually suffered, not predicted future damage.
According to the Claimant, “the standard... as a matter of law is for a Claimant to have
acquired knowledge that it has incurred loss or damage.”* In the Claimant's submission,
this objection “cannot be segregated” but must be joined to the merits so it “may be

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, paras 28-31.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, paras 34-35.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 36.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 36.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, paras 37, 43.

Pope & Talbot v Canada (UNCITRAL), Award in Relation to Preliminary Motion By
Government of Canada to Strike Paragraphs 34 and 103 of the Statement of Claim From the
Record, 24 February 2000; see also Meg Kinnear, Andrea Bjorklund et al, “Article 1116 —
Claim by an Investor of a Party on its Own Behalf” in Investment Disputes under NAFTA: An
Annotated Guide to NAFTA Chapter 11, Supplement No 1, March 2008 (Kluwer 2006) 1116-
36c — 1116-36d.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 49:12-14.

g

3.10

3.11

3.12

considered in connection with the parties’ evidence on loss and damages.”®? The
Claimant emphasises that “the realities of commerce and the market” mean that it was
impossible to know at the time the Nova Scotia Measures were implemented whether
the Port Hawkesbury mill would succeed and take market-share from other competing
supercalendered paper mills.** Accordingly, it is incorrect to assume that the Claimant
knew or should have known of its loss at the time suggested by the Respondent.

In response to the Respondent's reliance on Exhibit R-081, the draft NAFTA Notice of
Intent, the Claimant explains that this is a “non-paper”, provided as a courtesy to the
Government of Canada and not intended to be a final document.® Accordingly, the
Claimant suggests that the document “has no substance or meaning in context.”

Further, the Claimant submits that even if this objection were successful, it would not
dispose of the entirety of the claim against the Nova Scotia Measures as suggested by
the Respondent. Rather, the Claimant submits that its expropriation claim only
crystallized upon the closure of the Laurentide mill in October 2014 and its claims in
respect of continuing violations would similarly not be time-barred.®” Given that these
remaining claims would require the analysis of the “very same issues that would be
relevant to the analysis of the claims under Articles 1102 and 1105”, there is no time or
cost saving achieved by bifurcation.

Response to objection under Article 2103

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s objection under Article 2103 is
misconceived as: first, Article 2103(6) only refers to expropriation claims where such
expropriation takes place through the impugned tax measure, not in circumstances
where a tax measure forms part of a series of measures which “contributed to the
constructive expropriation of Resolute’s Laurentide mill”;°? and second, given that the
Respondent concedes that Article 2103 does not preclude its national treatment claim
under Article 1102 and its minimum standard of treatment and expropriation claims under
Articles 1105 and 1110 respectively encompass more than just the tax-related measures,
a successful objection would not dispose of the claims and therefore would not lead to
greater fairness, efficiency or economy.” At the Hearing on Bifurcation, the Claimant

3 Opposition to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, para 45; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript
12-4,

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 58:15-60:5.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 56:3-57:7.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 56:22-57:1.

Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 46.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 46.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 48.
Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, paras 49-51.

g

41

4.2

4.3

submitted further that the purpose of the Article 2103(6) exception is to “deny claims that
taxes might have been used as a tool to expropriate”, not deal with circumstances such
as these where tax relief afforded to a third party gives that third party a competitive
advantage.”' To interpret Article 2103(6) in the manner suggested by the Respondent
would “distort the exception’s intent.””2

THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATIONS

The Respondent asks the Tribunal to bifurcate these proceedings in order to rule on four
of Canada’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility as preliminary questions pursuant
to the general rule in Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

As summarised in detail above, these objections are that:

(1) the claims in respect of the Nova Scotia Measures are time-barred under
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2);

(2) the Nova Scotia Measures do not “relate to” the Claimant nor its investment in
Québec as required by Article 1101(1);

(3) Article 1102(3) should be understood as relating only to intra-State “treatment”
where measures are taken by State or Provincial governments; and

(4) Article 2103(6) requires NAFTA claims based on taxation measures to be
“submitted to the competent taxation authorities of the NAFTA Parties at the
time of filing the Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim.”

As a starting point, Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that “[i]n general, the
arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a preliminary question.
However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea
in their final award.” This creates a presumption in favour of bifurcation, subject to the
Tribunal exercising discretion to deal with jurisdictional pleas together with the merits in
appropriate circumstances. Thus, both Disputing Parties acknowledge that in some cases
bifurcation can serve purposes of fairness, efficiency and economy but that “bifurcation is
not appropriate in every case.””? The Disputing Parties also agree that for a Tribunal to
determine whether bifurcation is appropriate in a given case, it is helpful to apply the

71 Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 53:5-15.
72 Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 53:4-5.

73 Request for Bifurcation, para 3; Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 2.
Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 71:3-10.

44

45

46

47

three-part test applied in Philio Morris v. Australia, which posed the following questions:
(1) Is the jurisdictional objection prima facie serious and substantial?
(2) Can the objection be examined without prejudging or entering the merits?

(3) Could the objection, if successful, dispose of all or an essential part of the
claims raised?”

The determination of the first part of the test, namely whether an objection is “prima facie
serious and substantial” should not, in the Tribunal’s view, entail a preview of the
jurisdictional arguments themselves. Rather, at this stage the Tribunal is only required
to be satisfied that the objections are not frivolous or vexatious. In respect of the four
objections that Canada seeks to have resolved on a preliminary basis,’> the Tribunal is
satisfied that they are each credible and brought in good faith and cannot be excluded
on a prima facie basis. The Tribunal emphasises however that such an assessment
should in no way be understood to prejudice how the Tribunal will resolve the substance
of the preliminary objections themselves, or any issues on the merits.

A. Time Bar Objection under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)

The Tribunal will first consider the time bar objection under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2).

As a matter of NAFTA practice, time bar issues are normally decided as preliminary
questions.”° The same approach would normally be taken in domestic proceedings as
well.

Under Article 1116(2) and 1117(2), an investor may not make a claim if more than three
years have elapsed from the date on which the investor (or the enterprise on whose
behalf the claim is made) first acquired or should have first acquired, knowledge of the
alleged breach and knowledge that the investor (or enterprise) has incurred loss or

Both parties embrace the test enunciated in Philip Morris Asia Limited (Hong Kong) v The
Commonwealth of Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8 Regarding Bifurcation of the
Procedure, 14 April 2014: Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 7:18-23; Request for Bifurcation,
para 6; Opposition to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, para 2.

Canada does not seek a preliminary determination on its jurisdictional objection that the
challenged electricity rate negotiated between PWCC and NSPI is not attributable to Canada
and thus not a measure “adopted or maintained by a Party”. Respondent's Statement of
Defence, para 75; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 74:4-15.

See, e.g., Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., et al v United States of America
(UNCITRAL) Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 20 July 2006, para 29.

48

49

4.10

4.11

4.12

damage. The relevant 3-year cut off in this case is December 30, 2012.

The Tribunal considers that its assessment of Canada’s objection under Articles 1116(2)
and 1117(2) in this case would entail a factual enquiry of limited scope. The date of the
alleged breaches—the Nova Scotia Measures—are uncontested. Rather, the Tribunal’s
enquiry will turn on the question of when the Claimant first knew — or ought to have known
— that it incurred loss or damage. Canada contends that the reappearance onto the
market of the Port Hawkesbury mill is sufficient evidence of when loss or damage ought
to have been known to Resolute. In support of this contention, Canada describes as
“telling” a sentence in a draft Notice of Intent given by the Claimant to the Respondent
that “Resolute’s market share for all SC Paper has declined from 2012 to 2014.””” The
Claimant indicated that while evidence as to its acquisition of knowledge of damage was
“not yet on the record”, it expected it could be shown that “probably only in January,
February [2013] after we have the quarterly data and can see what in fact is going on in
that quarter will we have any real knowledge that there is a loss taking place.””®

The above-referenced exchanges with the Parties during the Hearing suggest that the
evidentiary enquiry that the Tribunal will need to undertake to decide the time bar is a
rather limited one. A bifurcated hearing would give the Disputing Parties the opportunity
to put evidence on the record as to what the Claimant knew (or ought to have known)
and when, and allow the Tribunal to decide the jurisdictional objection on the basis of
that evidence. Such a limited enquiry would not involve the Tribunal prejudging or
entering the merits of the claims.

If successful, the time bar objection could dispose of all claims relating to the Nova Scotia
Measures, which constitute a substantial and discrete part of the Claimant's case.

Canada’s time bar objection accordingly meets the criteria for bifurcation enunciated in
Philip Morris v. Australia, which were accepted by both Disputing Parties as the relevant
standard.

In circumstances where it is appropriate to bifurcate the proceedings for the purpose of
hearing Canada’s time bar objection, it would be procedurally efficient to deal with the
three other objections to jurisdiction and admissibility in a bifurcated proceeding, even if
the Tribunal might not have ordered bifurcation on the basis of any of those other
objections alone. Having so decided, it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to determine
whether the Respondent's other objections would justify bifurcation. Nonetheless and for
completeness, the Tribunal considers below the appropriateness of bifurcating for the

77 Exhibit R-081 to the Respondent's Statement of Defence, para. 19; Bifurcation Hearing
Transcript 23:2-12.

78 Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 60:21-61:2.

4.13

4.14

4.15

4.16

4.17

remaining objections.

B. Applicability of NAFTA and the definition of “relating to” in Article 1101(2)

Canada objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over claims relating to the Nova Scotia
Measures because the measures adopted or maintained by Nova Scotia did not, within
the meaning of Article 1101 of NAFTA, “relat[e]” to Resolute or its investment, which was
located in Québec. The indirect economic effect of the measures in the form of the
alleged loss of market share was, according to Canada, too remote and lacks sufficient
legal significance, to pass the “gateway” provision of Article 1102 of NAFTA.”° Canada
submits that Resolute’s claim fails the “legally sufficient connection” test in Methanex.®°

Canada stated in its written and oral submissions that it is prepared to accept, for
purposes of resolving this preliminary objection, that Resolute’s allegations are true pro
tem.*' Even if the Tribunal has to consider whether the Methanex standard is at odds
with tests adopted by other triounals,®* the Tribunal considers that resolving this aspect
of the preliminary objection would entail only a question of interpretation and would not
involve an extensive duplicative or factual enquiry or prejudge the merits.

If successful, the Article 1101 objection would dispose of the claims relating to the Nova
Scotia Measures, which constitute a substantial and discrete part of the claims raised by
Claimant.

In light of the above, Canada’s Article 1101(2) objection also meets the accepted criteria
for bifurcation enunciated in Philip Morris v. Australia.

C. Scope of application of Article 1102(3) in respect of measures taken by a state
or provincial government

Respondent's preliminary objection on the basis of Article 1102(3) requires the Tribunal

79 Respondent's Statement of Defence, para 74; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 10:1-5.

80 Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 10:9-18; Methanex Corporation v United States of America
(UNCITRAL) Partial Award, 7 August 2002, para 139 (“There must [be] a legally significant
connection between the measure and the investor or the investment. With such an
interpretation, it is perhaps not easy to define the exact dividing line, just as it is not easy in
twilight to see the divide between night and day. Nonetheless, whilst the exact line may remain
undrawn, it should still be possible to determine on which side of the divide a particular claim
must lie”).

Respondent's Request for Bifurcation, para 10; Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 13:8-13.

For example: Bayview Irrigation District and others v United Mexican States, |CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/05/1, Award on Jurisdiction, 19 June 2007; Cargill, Incorporated v United Mexican
States, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/05/2, Award, 18 September 2009; William Ralph Clayton,
William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon of Delaware, Inc. v
Canada (UNCITRAL) Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, 17 March 2015.

4.18

4.19

4.20

4.21

to accept that the national treatment protection only applies in respect of provincial
measures where the complaining investor has an investment within that province. Article
1102(3) provides:

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs 1 and 2 means, with respect to a
state or province, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment
accorded, in like circumstances, by that state or province to investors, and to investments.
of investors, of the Party of which it forms a part.

The arguments put forward by the Parties on this issue® indicate that its resolution at
the preliminary objection phase will involve a distinct and relatively straightforward
question of treaty interpretation. The Disputing Parties acknowledge that this case is
novel in as far as it is the first NAFTA case that deals with measures by a provincial
government which are said to affect an investment not in that province® and accordingly
raises a novel issue of NAFTA interpretation.

Resolving the preliminary objection will not entail a factual assessment of whether the
two mills were in “like circumstances”. Therefore it will involve no prejudgment of the
merits nor deprive the Claimant the opportunity to fairly present its case in respect of the
existence (or not) of ‘like circumstances”.®° If successful, the objection would dispose of
an essential part of the claim.

D. Claimant’s requirement to raise a claim in respect of “tax measures” otherwise
in accordance with Article 2103

Canada conceded that it would “not have proposed holding a separate preliminary phase
to deal solely with this objection,” but submitted that if a preliminary phase were held to
deal with Article 1101(1) and the time bar, then Canada’s objection relating to
Article 2103 is “straightforward enough to merit inclusion in the preliminary
phase.”®° Canada submitted that doing so “will provide clarity for both Parties.”®”

In light of this concession, in circumstances where the Tribunal has determined it
appropriate to bifurcate the proceedings for the purpose of hearing Canada’s other
objections, it would be procedurally efficient also to deal with this objection in the
bifurcated proceeding, even if the Tribunal might not have ordered bifurcation on this
basis alone. The exercise would not entail prejudging the merits; and may help narrow

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript: 24:10-27:20; 42:18-47:23.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 26:8-15; 44:6-7.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 47:1-5; Opposition to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation,
para 30.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 28:16-29:1.

Bifurcation Hearing Transcript 28:22-25.

g

4.22

4.23

4.24

5.2

the issues for the merits phase.

E. Conclusion

Based on the above, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to order bifurcation of the
proceeding covering all four grounds raised in Canada’s motion to bifurcate.

In so ordering, the Tribunal reiterates that any views expressed in this decision are
without prejudice to any findings of fact or law that the Tribunal will make on the
preliminary objections or any issues on the merits.

Accordingly, the schedule set out at paragraph 5.2 of Procedural Order No. 3 issued on
November 3, 2016 applies. The Tribunal recalls that pursuant to paragraph 4.4 of
Procedural Order No. 3, the Disputing Parties are welcome to consult and agree upon
adjustments to the calendar.

DECISION

The Tribunal determines that the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction and
admissibility under:

(1) Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) in respect of time-bar;

(2) Article 1101(1) in respect of whether the Nova Scotia Measures “relate to” the
Claimant's investment;

(3) Article 1102(3) in respect of the applicability of NAFTA to “treatment” by a
provincial government where such measures have extra-provincial effects; and

(4) Article 2103(6) in respect of claims relating to taxation measures,

shall be treated as preliminary questions and the proceedings shall be bifurcated for the
purposes of determining such objections.

The Tribunal adopts Schedule A of paragraph 5.2 of Procedural Order No. 3, subject to
the Disputing Parties submitting any agreed amendments to such schedule.

Date: 18 November 2016

For the Arbitral Tribunal

Jaen Cnmeuflers
l

Judge James R. Crawford, AC

