 

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE NORTH
AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (“NAFTA”) AND THE 1976 UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES

between

RESOLUTE FOREST PRODUCTS INC.

Claimant

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Respondent

(PCA CASE NO. 2016-13)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 6

ON THE PARTICIPATION OF PROF. ROBERT HOWSE AND
MR. BARRY APPLETON AS AMICI CURIAE

 

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:
Judge James R. Crawford, AC (President)
Dean Ronald A. Cass

Dean Céline Lévesque

JUNE 29, 2017

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)
Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

 

 

 

 

 

Contents
1. Background 3
2. The Application 4
3. The Disputing Parties’ Comments 6
4. The Tribunal’s Decision 6
5. The Tribunal’s Order 9

 

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

 

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

1.

BACKGROUND

This sixth Procedural Order sets out the Tribunal’s decision with respect to an application
to file an amicus curiae submission.

Paragraph 16 of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 of 29 June 2016 provides as
follows under the heading “Amici”:

1. If a request for the submission of an amicus curiae brief were to be filed by
the date indicated in the Procedural Calendar, the Tribunal would give the
appropriate directions in the exercise of its powers under Article 15 of the
UNCITRAL Rules and take into consideration the recommendation of the
North American Free Trade Commission on non-disputing party
participation of 7 October 2003.

2 By the relevant dates to be indicated in the Procedural Calendar or as
determined by the Tribunal, the Disputing Parties shall have the
opportunity to: (1) make submissions on any request for the submission of
an amicus curiae brief; and (2) file simultaneous observations on issues
raised in any amicus curiae brief submitted pursuant to a decision of the
Tribunal.

On December 12, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 setting a schedule
for the jurisdictional phase that included May 31, 2017 as the date for Amici Applications /
Submissions to be filed. Procedural Order No. 5 was published on the website of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”), which serves as Registry in this case.

Following consultation with the Disputing Parties, the Tribunal published on the PCA
website a Press Release on May 8, 2017 inviting the NAFTA Non-Disputing Parties and
any potential amici curiae to provide their applications and submissions to the PCA by
May 31, 2017, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 5. In the Press Release, the
Tribunal recalled the Statement of the Free Trade Commission on Non-Disputing Party
Participation (the “FTC Statement’) and the guidelines set out therein for the submission
of amicus applications and submissions.

On May 31, 2017, the Tribunal received from Prof. Robert Howse and Mr. Barry Appleton
a joint application to participate as amici curiae and accompanying submission
(the “Application’).

On June 1, 2017, the PCA, on behalf of the Tribunal, provided the Application to the
Disputing Parties and invited their comments by June 21, 2017.

By letter of June 21, 2017, the Respondent filed comments objecting to the Application.
By e-mail of June 23, 2017, the Claimant confirmed that it “has no comments regarding
the amicus application.”

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

 

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

2.

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

eNeoarona

THE APPLICATION

As mentioned above, the Application is made jointly by Prof. Robert Howse and
Mr. Barry Appleton (together, the “Applicants’).

Prof. Howse is the Lloyd C. Nelson Professor of International Law at NYU School of
Law.' The Application notes that:

Professor Howse has had a number of amicus curiae submissions accepted by
panels and the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization. One of his
co-authored amicus submissions was relied on by the panel [in] the recent EC-Seal
Products dispute.?

Prof. Howse states that “he is a frequent consultant or advisor to government agencies

and international organizations”, “serves on the editorial boards” of various journals and
has previously “held a variety of posts with the Canadian foreign ministry.”

Mr. Appleton describes himself as “a proponent of the rule of law” and a “longstanding
practitioner of investor-state arbitration, particularly in the area of the resolution of
disputes under Chapter Eleven of the [NAFTA].”* Mr. Appleton states that he is a national
of a NAFTA Party, resident in Canada, and that he has acted “as lead counsel” in a
number of investor-state arbitrations.6 Mr. Appleton notes that “he is the author of two
treatises on the North American Free Trade Agreement.”®

The Applicants note that they “have no financial relationship with either disputing party
and have received no financial contribution from anyone in the making of this
submission.”

By reference to Part B, Paragraph 6 of the FTC Statement as well as criteria set out in
the decisions on amicus curiae applications in Methanex v. United States, United Parcel
Service of America v. Canada, and Aguas Argentinas, S.A. et al. v. The Argentine
Republic,® the Applicants submit that the Application should be accepted in this case for
the following reasons:

Application, p. 1.
Application, p. 2.
Application, p. 2.
Application, p. 1.
Application, p. 1.
Application, p. 1.
Application, p. 2.
Application, p. 3.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

 

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

AEG

2.6.1

2.6.2

2.6.3

2.6.4

2.6.5

Application, p.
Application, p.
Application, p.
Application, p.
Application, p.
Application, p.
Application, p.

Assistance to the Tribunal. The Applicants submit that their submission “will
assist the Tribunal by providing expertise and knowledge not likely to be provided
by the parties.”® The Applicants refer to Mr. Appleton’s “scholarly examination of
the travaux preparatoires of the treaty, which were published in his three volume
2007 collection of NAFTA Interpretative Materials and Legal Texts” as well as
Prof. Howse’s extensive writings “on systemic and structural dimensions of the
international legal system.” They submit that their expertise in this field, as well
as their “particular experience with the challenge of providing fairness in
regulatory conduct’, allows them to “provide a view on the proper meaning that
this Tribunal should take to the interpretation of the temporal jurisdiction
limitations raised in relation to NAFTA Article 1116 and 1117.”1°

Scope of the dispute. The Applicants state that they will “address issues
concerning the importance of jurisdiction of NAFTA Tribunals” and so “are clearly
within the parameters of this claim.”"'

Direct and significant interests. The Applicants reiterate that they have “no
direct or significant interests with any disputing party to this arbitration.”'? The
Applicants identify their interest in this dispute as being a “public interest to
maintain respect [for] the rule of law, international public law and the application
of the principle of pacta sunt servanda within dispute resolution under the
NAFTA."3

Public interest. The Applicants consider the “proper interpretation of the Treaty
... the maintenance of the rule of law and in ensuring transparent procedures
under NAFTA Chapter Eleven” as the relevant public interest in the subject-
matter of the present arbitration.'*

Undue burden. The Applicants do not consider an undue burden to be placed
on the Disputing Parties should the Application be accepted and note they will
not add to the evidentiary record, only assist in legal interpretation of the NAFTA
Treaty.'5

RRRR ROO

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

3.

3.2

3.3

41

4.2

ears

ee

THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ COMMENTS

By letter of June 21, 2017, the Respondent objected to the Application on the basis that
it “does not fulfil the requirements of paragraph 6 of the [FTC Statement].”'® Specifically,
the Respondent submits that the Applicants’ submission would not be of assistance to
this Tribunal since the Applicants do not “[bring] a perspective, particular knowledge or
insight that is different from that of the disputing parties.”"” In this regard, the Respondent
states that “the applicants merely repeat arguments already advanced by the
Claimant.”"® The Respondent submits that this Tribunal should therefore reject the
Application for the same reasons that a similar application was rejected by the tribunal
in Apotex v. United States (“Apotex’),'® namely, that “Mr. Appleton and Professor Howse
offer no knowledge, expertise or experience beyond the disputing parties’ counsel.””°

Additionally, the Respondent objects to the Applicant's submissions in respect of “the
application of Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) in cases of ‘continuing breach,’ including the
‘continuous application of a statutory or regulatory scheme” on the basis that “these are
not issues in dispute between Canada and Resolute” and so do not fall within the bounds

set by the FTC Statement.”

As mentioned above, the Claimant stated that it had no comments on the Application.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

According to Paragraph 16 of Procedural Order No. 1, when exercising its discretion
under Article 15 of the UNCITRAL Rules in deciding whether to admit an amicus
application, the Tribunal shall “take into consideration the recommendation of the North
American Free Trade Commission on non-disputing party participation of
7 October 2003,” i.e. the FTC Statement.

The FTC Statement provides the following relevant guidance in Section B:

6. In determining whether to grant leave to file a non-disputing party submission,
the Tribunal will consider, among other things, the extent to which:

Respondent's Objection dated June 21, 2017, p. 1.

Respondent's Objection dated June 21, 2017, p. 1.

Respondent's Objection dated June 21, 2017, p. 2.

Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/1)
Procedural Order on the Participation of the Applicant, Mr. Barry Appleton, as a Non-Disputing Party,
4 March 2013 (“Apotex’).

Respondent's Objection dated June 21, 2017, p. 2.

Respondent's Objection dated June 21, 2017, p. 2.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

 

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

4.3

44

4.5

22
23

24

(a) the non-disputing party submission would assist the Tribunal in the
determination of a factual or legal issue related to the arbitration by
bringing a perspective, particular knowledge or insight that is different
from that of the disputing parties;

(b,

the non-disputing party submission would address matters within the
scope of the dispute;

(c) the non-disputing party has a significant interest in the arbitration; and
(d) there is a public interest in the subject-matter of the arbitration.

7. The Tribunal will ensure that:

(a) any non-disputing party submission avoids disrupting the proceedings;
and

(

neither disputing party is unduly burdened or unfairly prejudiced by such
submissions.

The question for the Tribunal to examine here is whether the Applicants meet the four
criteria set forth in Section B(6) of the FTC Statement and assess whether their
participation would disrupt the proceedings or unduly burden either disputing party as
set out in Section B(7) of the FTC Statement.

The Tribunal is not convinced that the Applicants fulfil the first of the criteria listed in
Section B(6), namely that they would “assist the Tribunal in the determination of a factual
or legal issue related to the arbitration.” There is no suggestion by the Applicants that
they could assist on factual issues. On legal issues, the Tribunal does not consider that
the Applicants, experienced and knowledgeable as they no doubt are as individual
practitioners and scholars, bring a “perspective, particular knowledge or insight different
from that of the disputing parties” as specified in Section B(6)(a) of the FTC Statement.”
This is particularly so in circumstances where both Disputing Parties are represented by
experienced counsel who have extensively briefed the issues on the interpretation of
NAFTA; the Tribunal is also in receipt of submissions from both the Non-Disputing
Parties.” In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with the Apotex tribunal in dealing with a
similar application, that it is “most unlikely” that the Applicants “would provide the Tribunal
with any particular perspective or insight different from the Disputing Parties.”°4

The Tribunal notes that the Applicants are required to address issues that are within the
scope of the dispute pursuant to the second criterion listed in Section B(6)(b). The
Respondent has pointed out that certain of the arguments on the time bar in
Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) of NAFTA arguably reach beyond the scope of the issues

Apotex, paras. 31-34.

Submission of the United States of America Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128 dated June 14, 2017;
Submission of Mexico Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128 dated June 14, 2017.

Apotex, para. 34.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)

 

Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

46

47

48

25
26
27
28

contested by the Disputing Parties in the present arbitration. In any event, even if the
intention of the Applicants is to address exclusively issues within the scope of the
dispute, if the other criteria in the FTC Statement are not met, the application should be
denied.

The third criterion for an amicus applicant is that it has a “significant interest” in the
arbitration as set out in Section (6) of the FTC Statement. The Tribunal agrees with the
test articulated by the Apotex tribunal, that in order to establish a “significant interest” in
the arbitration, the Applicants must demonstrate that they have “more than a ‘general’
interest in the proceeding.”*° While the Applicants have stated the admirable goal of
“maintain[ing] respect [for] the rule of law, international public law and the application of
the principle of pacta sunt servanda within dispute resolution under the NAFTA”,”S this
does not prove a “significant interest” in this arbitration beyond “having the Tribunal adopt
legal interpretations of NAFTA” that the Applicants favour. The Tribunal thus concludes,
similarly to the conclusion of the Apotex tribunal, that the Applicants lack a “significant
interest’ .2”

The Tribunal now turns to the fourth consideration under Section 6(B) of the FTC
Statement, which is whether there is a public interest in the subject-matter of the
arbitration. The Tribunal accepts that its interpretation of the provisions of NAFTA in the
jurisdictional phase of this dispute could impact upon individuals and entities beyond the
Disputing Parties. However, it does not consider that the Applicants have shown any link
between their Application and furtherance of the public interest.

Finally, given the Tribunal’s determinations above, the Tribunal also considers that
granting the Applicants status as amici curiae would unnecessarily burden the Disputing
Parties by imposing further work, time and expense on them.”® Accordingly, the
Application also fails to satisfy Section 6(B)(7) of the FTC Statement. The Tribunal notes
in this respect that the Application is not supported by either Disputing Party and that the
Respondent actively opposes it.

Apotex, para. 38.
Application, p. 4.
Apotex, para. 40.
Apotex, para. 44.

Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada
(PCA Case No. 2016-13)
Procedural Order No. 6 on the Participation of Prof. Howse and Mr. Appleton as Amici Curiae

 

5. THE TRIBUNAL’S ORDER

5.1 For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal denies the application by Prof. Howse and
Mr Appleton to file a non-disputing party submission in these proceedings.

Date: June 29, 2017

For the Arbitral Tribunal

 

er mpd

Judge James R. Crawford, AC

