PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION

 

PCA Case No. AA280

BETWEEN

ROMAK S.A. (Switzerland)

CLAIMANT

THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

RESPONDENT

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Arbitral Tribunal

Mr. Fernando Mantilla-Serrano, Chairman

Mr. Noah Rubins, Co-arbitrator

   

Mr. Nicolas Molfessis, Co-arbitrator

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION. 3
A. CLAIMANT 3
B. RESPONDENT 4
Cc. THE DISPUTE 4

 

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND TO THE PRESENT ARBITRAL
PROCEEDINGS 5

 

A. THE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE WHEAT SUPPLY TRANSACTIONS...

THE CONTRACTUAL STRUCTURE OF THE WHEAT SUPPLY TRANSACTIONS......... 8

 

THE ALLEGED NON-PAYMENT FOR THE WHEAT SUPPLIED.

 

B.
Cc.
D. THE GAFTA ARBITRATION
E

 

THE ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS

 

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 18
A. FROM THE NOTICE OF ARBITRATION TO THE TERMS OF APPOINTMENT.........-+- 18
B. FROM THE TERMS OF APPOINTMENT TO THE HEARING 120

 

IV. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

A. UZBEKISTAN’S OBJECTIONS TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE ARBITRAL.
TRIBUNAL 21

B. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON THE MERITS.

 

Vv. ANALYSIS BY THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

 

 

A. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL RULES

 

B. THE TERM “INVESTMENTS” UNDER THE BIT .....

 

Cc. THE EXISTENCE OF AN “INVESTMENT” UNDER THE BIT

D. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

 

 

 

E. CONCLUSION. 62
VI. COSTS 62
VII. DECISION. 65

 

L

1.

Introduction

The Parties’ submissions are referred to as follows:

(i) 20 March 2006:
(ii) 4 February 2008:
(iii) 4 February 2008:

(iv) 6 June 2008:

(v) 6 June 2008:

(vi) 22 September 2008:

(vii) 22 September 2008:

(viii) 26 January 2009:

(ix) 26 January 2009:

(x) 13 March 2009:

(xi) 13 March 2009:

A. Claimant

Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration (hereinafter, “NOA”)
Claimant’s Statement of Claim (hereinafter, “SoC”)
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal (hereinafter, “OJ”)

Claimant’s Defense to Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction (hereinafter, “DOJ”)

Respondent’s Statement of Defense (hereinafter, “SoD”)
Claimant’s Reply to Respondent’s Statement of Defense
(hereinafter, “RSOD”)

Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Defense on
Jurisdiction (hereinafter, “RDOJ”)

Claimant’s First Post-hearing brief (hereinafter, “C-
PHB1”)

Respondent’s First Post-hearing brief (hereinafter, “R-
PHB1”)

Claimant’s Second Post-hearing brief (hereinafter, “C-
PHB2”)

Respondent’s Second Post-hearing brief (hereinafter, “R-

PHB2”)

Romak S.A. is a société anonyme incorporated in 1969 under the laws of Switzerland,

having its headquarters at 110/112 rue des Eaux Vives, CH-1207 Geneva, Switzerland

(hereinafter, “Romak ”).

Romak specializes in the international trading of cereals. Romak is authorized, as part

of its main business, to conduct all financial and commercial operations and equity

investments, as well as the purchase, sale, representation and management of securities,

movable and immovable interests or participations, in Switzerland and abroad. Romak’s

representative in Uzbekistan at the relevant time was Mr. Dan Pletscher, and its Legal
and Managing Director is Mr. Jacques Covo.'

Romak is represented in the present arbitration by: Christophe Ayela and Renauld
Semerdjian of Cabinet Ayela / Semerdjian & Associés, 43 rue de Courcelles, 75008
Paris, France and by Dr. Walid Ben Hamida.

B. Respondent

THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN is a sovereign State, formerly a member of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, which declared its independence on 31 August 1991
(hereinafter, “Uzbekistan”). It is represented by His Excellency Sir Islam
Abduganievich Karimov, President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Uzbekistankaya
Street 43, 7000163 Tashkent, Uzbekistan.

Uzbekistan is represented in the present arbitration by: Jean-Pierre Harb, David Fraser
and Christoph Lobier of Baker & McKenzie, | rue Paul Baudry, 75008 Paris, France.
H.E. Mr. Ravshanbek Alimov, Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan in France, 22

tue d’Aguesseau, 75008 Paris, appeared as agent for Uzbekistan.”
Cc. The Dispute

Romak has initiated this arbitration on the basis of allegations that Uzbekistan violated
the Bilateral Investment Treaty entered into between the Swiss Confederation and the
Republic of Uzbekistan on the “Promotion and the Reciprocal Protection of

Investments” dated 16 April 1993 (hereinafter, the “BIT”).>
Romak has characterized said violations as follows:*

- obligation de protection des opérations économiques effectuées par
des investisseurs Suisses (tel ROMAK) et de respect des engagements,
notamment en refusant a l’appui de considérations formelles discutables
le paiement du blé livré conformément aux dispositions contractuelles;

- interdiction de prendre des mesures injustifiées ou discriminatoires
préjudiciables aux investisseurs Suisses (tel ROMAK), notamment en
privant ROMAK de l’exequatur de la sentence arbitrale GAFTA en
Ouzbékistan;

SOC {ff 9-10; Exhibits C-2 and C-3.

Terms of Appointment, at p. 2.
Exhibit C-1.

soc 42.

- lobligation d’assurer un traitement juste et équitable aux investisseurs
Suisses (tel ROMAK), en refusant l’exequatur de la sentence arbitrale
GAFTA en Ouzbékistan pour des motifs contestables juridiquement et ce
notamment au regard des autres engagements internationaux pris par la
République d’Ouzbékistan;

interdiction de mesures de dépossession a l’égard des investisseurs
Suisses (tel ROMAK), en privant ROMAK du paiement qui lui avait été
promis et méme garanti par divers organes de |’Etat dont FTC UZDON
(ci-aprés ‘UZDON”), et en privant ROMAK de toute chance de pouvoir
faire exécuter la sentence arbitrale GAFTA sur le territoire Ouzbek mais
aussi @ l’étranger;

obligation de respecter les autres engagements internationaux signés
par la République d’Ouzbékistan (et notamment la Convention de New
York).

Uzbekistan contests the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal on the ground that Romak
does not own an investment protected by the BIT. It also contends that the acts alleged
by Romak cannot be attributed to Uzbekistan and that, in any event, its State courts
have acted reasonably.°

Uzbekistan further considers that the contractual relationship that underlies the present
dispute, as well as the original arbitral award that was rendered in this regard, are purely
contractual and commercial in nature, and that therefore neither qualifies as an

“investment” subject to protection under the BIT.

Uzbekistan also alleges that, in the event the Arbitral Tribunal retains jurisdiction,

Uzbekistan has not violated any of its obligations under the BIT.
Factual Background to the Present Arbitral Proceedings

The factual context of the present arbitral proceedings revolves around the importation
of grain into Uzbekistan in the aftermath of the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

In summary, Romak and several companies specialized in the trading of grain (A)
entered into a set of contracts for the supply of wheat (B). As a result of difficulties in
obtaining payment for wheat deliveries (C), Romak initiated arbitration proceedings
against its Uzbek counterparty pursuant to the contracts, under the auspices of the Grain
and Feed Trade Association (hereinafter, “GAFTA”) (D) and unsuccessfully attempted

to enforce the resulting award in several countries including Uzbekistan (E).

OJ, pp. 17 et seq.; SOD, pp. 46 et seq.

A. The Parties Involved in the Wheat Supply Transactions

In addition to Romak, three Uzbek entities were involved in the wheat supply

transactions: Uzkhleboproduct (1), Uzdon (2) and Odil (3).
1. Uzkhleboproduct (or Uzdonmakhsulot)

Uzkhleboproduct (also occasionally referred to as Uzdonmakhsulot*) was the principal
State institution with responsibility for cereal production, supply and distribution. It was
reorganized into a “State Joint Stock Company” pursuant to Decree of the President of
the Republic of Uzbekistan No. 840 dated 22 April 1994’ and Decree of the Council of

Ministers dated 20 June 1994 (hereinafter, the “Council of Ministers Decree”).*

Uzkhleboproduct’s activities, as set forth in its Charter? and in the above-mentioned
Decrees, are wide-ranging and include the production, storage and supply of cereal
products to the population of Uzbekistan, as well as various related activities such as
the implementation of scientific policies or the development of market relations within
the grain sector.

Article 4 of the Council of Ministers Decree provides that the State shall hold a 51%
participation in Uzkhleboproduct’s capital, and that the remaining shares shall be sold
to employees and to the public. In addition, Article 1.5 of Uzkhleboproduct’s Charter
provides that Uzkhleboproduct “ensures performance of the closed circuit: purchase of
grain — storing — processing — production of goods — shifting of resources — sale of final
products to the population, as well as other consumers” and “is the fund-bearer of
material-technical resources, allocated by the State for the planned production and
supply of the national economy and population of the Republic with grain, wheat flour,
groats, bread-bakery, paste and confectionery products, as well as with compound

feed.”

Uzkhleboproduct’s Charter further provides that Uzkhleboproduct is a legal entity that

owns property and can appear in its own name before State courts and arbitral

It is common ground between the Parties in these proceedings that Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdonmakhsulot
are one and the same entity.

Exhibits C-7 and R-1.
Exhibit R-2.

Exhibits C-8 and R-3.

20.

21.

22.

tribunals.'°

Uzkhleboproduct is individually responsible for its own obligations,
pursuant to Uzbekistan’s Law on Property dated 31 October 1990,'! the Civil Code of
Uzbekistan,'? and the Law on Joint-Stock Companies and Shareholder Protection,
which provides that “[n]either the State nor its agencies shall be liable for obligations
of the company, nor shall be the company liable for obligations of the State or its

agencies.”"3

2. Uzdon

Uzdon Foreign Trade Company (hereinafter, “Uzdon”) was established by Resolution
No. 120 of the Council of Ministers dated 4 April 1995 (hereinafter, the “Uzdon
Resolution”).'* Uzdon was later transformed into an open joint-stock company. Article
3 of the Uzdon Resolution provides that Uzkhleboproduct is to create a foreign trade
firm, Uzdon, which will become one of Uzkhleboproduct’s corporate members, and is

to assign to this new entity “the mission of centralizing the import of bread products.”

Uzdon’s purpose, as set out under Article 2.1 of its Charter dated 20 November 1995,
is “to ensure the centralized import of grain products and other types of raw materials

and materials in sufficient amount, of proper assortment and quality.”

Article 1.2 of Uzdon’s Charter provides that Uzdon “shall constitute a state structural
unit of Uzkhleboproduct Corporation, be accountable to it, pay participant’s
contribution in the established procedure and become a participant in the corporation.”
Article 5.2 of the Charter further provides that Uzdon’s general director shall be

appointed and dismissed by Uzkhleboproduct.

Articles 1.2 and 1.3 of Uzdon’s Charter respectively provide that the company will

 

operate in di with “the principles of self-sufficiency, self-fi ‘ing and self-
repayment including currency self-repayment’, and that it shall have “separate
property, fixed assets and working capital.” In addition, Article 1.5 of the Charter
provides that the State shall not be held liable for Uzdon’s obligations.

Exhibits C-8 and R-3, Article 1.3

Exhibit R-4, Article 18.

Exhibit R-5, Articles 48 and 80.
Exhibit R-6, Article 4.

Exhibits C-9 and R-7.

Exhibits C-10 and R-8.

23.

24,

25.

26.

1

6

3. Odil

Odil is an Uzbek private company with its headquarters in Uzbekistan. It is a subsidiary
of Adil, a group specialized in the trading of wheat and incorporated in Kazakhstan
shortly after Uzbekistan became independent. Besides the fact that Odil has its offices
in a building owned by Uzkhleboproduct and that it is owned by a certain

Mr. Kamalovich, the Parties have provided almost no information about this company.
B. The Contractual Structure of the Wheat Supply Transactions

The earliest contract referred to by the Parties in the present proceedings, and which
lays the foundation for the subsequent transaction involving Romak, was concluded
between Uzkhleboproduct and Odil in October 1995 (1). Odil having failed to deliver a
final shipment of goods under that contract, Uzkhleboproduct entered into a
commission agreement with Uzdon. That commission agreement was intended to
remedy Odil’s failure by resorting to the services of Romak (2). Eventually, a
quadripartite agreement (3), a supply contract (4), a Letter of Guarantee (5) and a
protocol of intention on mutual cooperation (6) were concluded.

1. The Supply Contract Between Uzkhleboproduct and Odil

Contract No. 6-2/005 dated October 2, 1995 (hereinafter, the “Odil Supply
Agreement”)'® was entered into between Uzkhleboproduct'’ as buyer, and Odil as
seller, for the supply of 450,000 tons of soft bread third class wheat at a price of
US$120 per ton. Payment for the goods was to be made “according to loan agreement
N° 05/14 as of October 2, 1995.”
The schedule dated 4 October 1995 and attached as Annex No. | of the Odil Supply
Agreement called for the delivery of the goods in the following installments:

October 1995 — 50,000 tons

November 1995 — 10,000 tons

December 1995 — 150,000 tons

January 1996 — 100,000 tons

February 1996 — 50,000 tons

Exhibit R-52.

Uzkhleboproduct is referred to in the document as Uzdonmakhsulot, which is the Uzbek-language
equivalent of the entity’s Russian name. See, supra, note 6.

-8-

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

18

19

Odil delivered the first 400,000 tons of wheat, and was apparently paid for the goods by
means of a letter of credit. However, Odil was unable to effect delivery of the final

shipment of 50,000 tons.
2. The Commission Agreement Between Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon

The “Commission Agreement for the purchase of imported cereal products under the
Contract with Romak” (hereinafter, the “Commission Agreement”) was entered into
between Uzkhleboproduct, as principal, and Uzdon, as commission agent. Romak and

Uzbekistan disagree on whether this contract was signed on 10 June or 10 July 1996.'*

Pursuant to Article 1 of the Commission Agreement, Uzdon undertook to conclude a
contract with Romak for the supply of up to 50,000 tons of wheat, subject to grain
import quotas to be allocated by the State in the future. The goods were to be delivered
in two installments in July and August 1996, although the seller was entitled to make

deliveries ahead of schedule.

With respect to payment, Article 2.1 of the Commission Agreement provides that
“[playment to the foreign company for the sold and shipped grain, and also for the
delivery of the grain to the border of the Republic of Uzbekistan shall be made by Odil
or the PRINCIPAL [Uzkhleboproduct].”

Article 5 lists a range of penalties applicable in case of breach of certain obligations set
out in the Agreement.

3. The Quadripartite Agreement Between Romak, Odil, Uzdon and
Uzkhleboproduct

The agreement between Romak, Odil, Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct (hereinafter, the
“Quadripartite Agreement”)'” was entered into in or about June/July 1996. It was
intended to remedy Odil’s failure to deliver the last 50,000-ton shipment of wheat to

Uzkhleboproduct under the Odil Supply Agreement.

In substance, the structure of the Quadripartite Agreement, as set out in Article 3, calls
for Romak to deliver wheat on behalf of Odil so as to fulfill Odil’s obligations vis-a-vis
Uzkhleboproduct under the Odil Supply Agreement. Subsequently, Romak would be

asked to make additional deliveries of wheat totaling not less than 50,000 tons, which

For Romak the date is 10 June 1996 (Exhibit C-12), for Uzbekistan it is 10 July 1996 (Exhibit R-49).

Exhibits C-17 and R-53.

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

20

would in turn be delivered by Odil and would be counted towards the fulfillment of
Romak’s obligations towards Uzdon under the Romak Supply Agreement described

below. These “additional deliveries” were never agreed to or undertaken.
4, The Supply Contract Between Romak and Uzdon

Uzdon and Romak signed a supply contract, and an Addendum thereto, (hereinafter, the
“Romak Supply Agreement”),”” pursuant to which Romak undertook to deliver up to
50,000 tons of milling wheat. It is common ground between the Parties that the Romak

Supply Agreement was entered into in July 1996.!

The Romak Supply Agreement provides for the supply of a maximum quantity of
50,000 tons of third class milling wheat, to be delivered by 31 December 1996 (with
earlier completion allowed), at a price of US$235 per ton on terms “C.I.P. (Carriage

and insurance paid to) Kazak-Uzbek border station Chengeldy.”

Pursuant to Article 6 of the Romak Supply Agreement, Uzdon must provide a letter of
guarantee issued by the National Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs of Uzbekistan and
acceptable to Romak’s bank, Credit Suisse. Addendum No. | provides a model letter of

guarantee for this purpose.

Article 11 of the Romak Supply Agreement contains an arbitration clause, which
envisages the submission of disputes to final and binding GAFTA arbitration.
5. The Letter of Guarantee Issued by Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct to
Romak

Uzdon sent a letter to Romak on 10 July 1996, labeled “Letter of Guarantee”
(hereinafter, the “Letter of Guarantee”),”” signed by Mr. Kadyrov, Chairman of
Uzdon, and by Mr. Makhamadzhanov, Director of Uzkhleboproduct. The Letter of
Guarantee states in relevant part:

Now therefore we, the Foreign Trade Company “‘Uzdon’, 36 Lakhuty

Street, Tashkent, under the order of our superior authority ‘Uzkhleproduct’

36 Lakhuty Street, Tashkent Republic of Uzbekistan hereby irrevocably

undertake:

To sign the Contract and Addenda No. I as well as the Quadripartite
Agreement as negotiated and agreed upon in July 1996.

Exhibits C-14 and C-15.
See also the reference in this regard in the “Letter of Guarantee,” Exhibit C-16.

Exhibits C-16 and R-55.

-10-

39.

40.

41.

42.

To open a letter of guarantee of the National Bank for Foreign Economic
Affairs of Uzbekistan in accordance with Addendum No. 1 to the above
mentioned contract or equivalent or an equivalent NBFEA letter of credit
acceptable to your banker(s) as soon as possible, but latest on October 10th
1996.

6. The Protocol of Intention on Mutual Cooperation Between Romak
and Uzkhleboproduct
On 10 July 1996, Romak, Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon signed an agreement entitled
“Protocol of Intention on Mutual Cooperation between Romak S.A., Geneva and the
State Joint-Stock Corporation ‘Uzkhleboproduct’” (hereinafter, the “Protocol of

Intention”).”>

The Protocol of Intention is aimed at establishing long-term commercial cooperation
between Romak and Uzkhleboproduct. Notably, it states that Romak will assist
Uzkhleboproduct by providing it with market data, forecasts and recommendations on
world grain stocks. In exchange, Uzkhleboproduct was to grant Romak preferential
status in connection with future grain imports.

Cc The Alleged Non-Payment for the Wheat Supplied

1. Romak’s Allegations of Non-Payment

Shortly after the conclusion of the aforementioned agreements, Romak began delivering
wheat to Uzbekistan. Delivery is reflected in two letters dated 24 July and 12 August

1996,” and further evidenced by contemporaneous letters from Uzdon.”*

Romak issued several invoices dated between 8 August and 9 September 1996 in
relation to 40,301.58 tons of wheat, delivered between July and November 199626 An
additional 280 tons were invoiced on 21 January 199727 for a total amount of 40,581.58

tons.

Exhibit C-13.
Exhibits C-18 and R-56.
Exhibits C-21 and C-29.
Exhibit C-19.

Id.

-ll-

43.

44,

45.

46.

As of 10 October 1996, neither Uzdon nor Uzkhleboproduct had implemented financial
guarantees in favor of Romak with the National Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs of

Uzbekistan, as envisaged in the Romak Supply Agreement and Letter of Guarantee.

On 24 October 1996, Uzdon sent a letter to Romak explaining that the letter of credit
relating to the Romak Supply Agreement had not yet been opened due to the late
allocation of funds for this purpose.”* Uzdon indicated that it would strive to remedy
the situation, and to provide a letter of credit by 10 November 1996. Uzbekistan alleges
that this letter of assurance was signed by mistake, and that Uzdon in fact intended it to
relate to a different delivery.” Uzbekistan further contends that Uzdon could not have
obtained such a letter of credit, given that the underlying Romak Supply Agreement had

not been registered with the relevant administrative authorities.*°

On 24 October 1996, Uzkhleboproduct and Odil signed a document entitled
“Reconciliation Report on Grain Deliveries and Payments under Contract N° 6-2/005
Dated 2 October 1995,”! by which “the parties to Contract N° 6-2/005 dated 2
October 1995 acknowledge that they do not have any claims against each other as to
both the quality and the quantity of the products delivered.” This agreement mentioned
a total quantity of grain supply by Odil of 338,017.47 tons in exchange for
US$66,592,796.53, paid by Uzkhleboproduct through the National Bank for Foreign

Economic Activities of the Republic of Uzbekistan.

In a letter dated 10 February 1997, Mr. Kadyrov of Uzdon indicated to the Control
Institution attached to the Office of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan that
““Romak S.A.’ have delivered 40581.6 tons of milling wheat for the amount of USD
10581,6 thousand to the enterprises of GAK ‘Uzkhleboproduct’ under [the Romak
Supply Agreement].”** Mr. Kadyrov further stated that “[t]he shipping documents for
virtually received grain have been handed over to GAK ‘Uzkhleboproduct’, upon which
functions of Company ‘Uzdon’ regarding the execution of the corporation’s assignment

under this deal have been completed. ” He went on to conclude that “FTC ‘Uzdon’,

Exhibit C-20,
SoD, §¥ 101 — 102.
SoD, § 103.
Exhibit R-57.

Exhibit C-21.

-12-

47.

48.

49.

33

4

35

being an executor, have not received, as well as have not put into its books the grain
from the Company ‘Romak S.A.’, and is not in a position to solve the matter of payment

as it is GAK ‘Uzkhleboproduct’ who is the guarantor and warrantor [sic].”
On 15 February 1997, Mr. Kadyrov, acting on behalf of Uzdon, informed Romak that:

Due to uncertainties in respect of allocation by the Government of the
Republic of Uzbekistan of Quota to Romak S.A. for the purchase of milling
grain in 1997 we kindly ask you to stop as for 31.01.1997 accrual of
penalties provided by the clause 10.2. of the contract between Romak S.A.
and FTC ‘Uzdon’ attached to GAK ‘Uzkhleboproduct’, due to
circumstances beyond Uzdon’s influence.*

2. Alleged Intervention of the Office of the President of the Republic of
Uzbekistan

On 10 March 1997, the Director of Uzkhleboproduct, Mr. Atayev, wrote to the Chief
Consultant of the Office of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan acknowledging
that Romak had delivered 40,500 tons of milling wheat." In addition, he indicated that
this delivery was subject to certain import quotas that had not been allocated to Romak.
Mr. Atayev also stated that “‘Uzkhleboproduct’ had repeatedly negotiated with Odil in
order to settle the ‘Romak issue’ and informed the Presidency that ‘Romak’ turned to
the Government of the Republic with the request for convertation of the Soums and

repayment of the hard currency due to the company [sic].”

On 20 March 1997, the Chief Consultant of the Office of the President of the Republic
of Uzbekistan sent a letter to Romak, noting that the Romak Supply Agreement could
not be regarded as valid, and that there were no documents establishing Romak’s
performance thereof.*° The Chief Consultant also indicated that the documents
presented by Romak were related to the Odil Supply Agreement, which had been paid
in full. He further advised that Romak’s deliveries made before 31 December 1996
contravened Uzbek legislation, because a bank guarantee had not yet been issued. The
letter referred Romak to Odil’s parent company, Adil, to obtain payment for its

deliveries.

Exhibit C-22.
Exhibit C-25.

Exhibits C-26 and R-11.

-13-

50.

SL.

52.

53.

54.

55.

By letter of 25 March 1997 Romak reiterated its request for payment from Uzdon and
Uzkhleboproduct.** On 27 March 1997, the Chief Consultant of the Office of the
President reiterated his position.*’ He nevertheless informed Romak that the Council of
Ministers would raise the matter with Uzkhleboproduct, and added that Romak should

continue to correspond with Uzkhleboproduct.

On 28 March 1997, Odil wrote to Romak acknowledging its responsibility under the
Quadripartite Agreement for payments to Romak. Odil also stated that it would effect

payments in the course of 1997.**
D. The GAFTA Arbitration

Following its unsuccessful attempts to recover sums due from Uzdon and
Uzkhleboproduct, Romak initiated arbitration proceedings against Uzdon under the
Romak Supply Agreement, ultimately resulting in an arbitral award in Romak’s favor.

On 2 April 1997, Romak sent a Notice of Arbitration to Uzdon, with copy to
Uzkhleboproduct and the Chief Consultant of the Office of the President of

Uzbekistan.”

In correspondence with Romak dated 10 April 1997, Uzdon denied all of Romak’s
claims.” Its primary defense was that the Romak Supply Agreement could not be
performed due to “force majeure,” because the Government of Uzbekistan had not
allocated import quotas for the relevant grain purchase. According to Uzdon, the
absence of quotas rendered the completion of mandatory formalities an impossibility.
Uzdon indicated that Romak ought to request payment directly from Odil or
Uzkhleboproduct.

Subsequently, Uzdon refused to participate in the constitution of the arbitral tribunal,
which was ultimately set up with the assistance of GAFTA. The Parties reiterated their
respective contentions in the course of the GAFTA Arbitration, in an exchange of

written submissions that took place in May 1997.

Exhibit C-24.
Exhibit C-27.
Exhibit R-58.
Exhibit C-28.

Exhibit C-29.

-14-

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

6l.

4

a

4B

The arbitral tribunal in the GAFTA Arbitration issued a final award on 22 August 1997
(hereinafter, the “GAFTA Award”).*!

With respect to the law applicable to the merits of the dispute, the GAFTA tribunal held
that in the absence of a specific agreement, the Parties had by implication selected
English law. The tribunal also found that the Romak Supply Agreement was valid, and
did not rest upon the fulfillment of any further formalities. Moreover, the arbitral
tribunal found that Uzdon was obligated to pay for all deliveries effected by Romak
which had not been paid by Odil.

On this basis, the tribunal ruled that Uzdon was required to make payment for the
40,000 tons of wheat that Romak had delivered, and awarded Romak damages for
breach of this obligation in the amount of US$10,510,629.12, plus interest.

Uzdon appealed the GAFTA award before the GAFTA Board of Appeals on 27 March
1998. On 31 July 1998, this appeal was rejected as untimely.”

On 28 August 1998, Uzdon challenged the GAFTA Award before the High Court of

Justice in London, claiming that the arbitral tribunal had failed to conduct the

dings in a fair and itable manner. The chall

1999.8

was rejected on 28 January

The High Court held that:

[T]he parties had a reasonable opportunity to put their case and to deal
with their opponent’s case. The tribunal did act fairly and impartially and
did adopt appropriate procedures. Moreover insofar as UZDON complains
about the procedure it was either the author of its own problems or chose
not to seek to remedy them by deciding not to pursue an appeal. The right to
appeal was clearly documented and indeed discussed and I regret to say
that I cannot accept UZDON’s evidence that it was unaware of the right
until it instructed solicitors. ...

It follows that I can also see nothing in the evidence or submissions to
suggest that UZDON has suffered any let alone any substantial injustice in
not advancing those arguments (so far as it did not in fact do so) before the
first tier tribunal. I repeat that UZDON had, but chose not to exercise, its
right to advance them on appeal.

Exhibits C-40 and C-48.
Exhibit C-43.

Exhibit C-44.

-15-

62.

63.

64.

65.

E. The Enforcement Proceedings

Romak sought the assistance of the Swiss authorities for the purposes of reaching a
settlement with the Uzbek State. In a letter sent to the Ambassador of the Swiss
Confederation on 10 January 1999, the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Uzbekistan advised that Uzdon would not voluntarily implement the GAFTA Award,
primarily because the decision was biased and had been rendered against the wrong
party, as Odil was in fact responsible for paying Romak.** The Deputy Prime Minister
further stated that pursuant to the 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (hereinafter, the “New York Convention”),
“in order to have the arbitral award enforced, the party requesting enforcement should
present all corresponding documents to the court of the country where the respondent is

located.”

Romak attempted to enforce the GAFTA Award before the Uzbek courts (1), and

subsequently turned to the French courts (2).
1. Enforcement Efforts before the Courts of Uzbekistan

On 9 August 2000, Romak applied to the Commercial Court of the City of Tashkent for
the recognition and enforcement of the GAFTA Award.*? Romak’s application was
drafted in Russian (which was also the language used during the enforcement
proceedings).
On 2 October 2000, the Commercial Court of the City of Tashkent held that the
application for recognition and enforcement of the GAFTA Award should be “returned
to plaintiff” on two grounds.*® First, because the application for recognition and
enforcement of the GAFTA Award in Uzbekistan did not fulfill the requirements of
Article IV of the New York Convention, which requires that the party applying for
recognition and enforcement produce a translation of the original award and the
underlying contract in an official language of the country in which enforcement of the
award is sought — such language being Uzbek.‘” Second, because Romak submitted no
evidence to the Court that Uzdon had been duly notified of the appointment of the

Exhibit R-60.

Exhibit R-64.

Exhibits C-45 and R-13.

The official language of Uzbekistan is Uzbek. Exhibits R-65 and R-66.

-16-

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

arbitrators, in accordance with the requirements of Article V(i)(b) of the New York

Convention.

Romak appealed the Commercial Court’s decision. On 24 November 2000, the
Appellate Jurisdiction of the Commercial Court of Tashkent confirmed the decision of

the lower court.“*
2. Enforcement Efforts in France

By order dated 7 November 2002, the Tribunal de Grande Instance of Paris (first
instance court for civil matters) granted exequatur with respect to the GAFTA Award,
authorizing its enforcement in France.” This decision was confirmed by the Paris Cour
d’Appel on 27 October 2005.*°

On 28 May 2003, Romak obtained an order for the attachment (saisie-attribution) of a
bank account in the name of two Uzbek companies, the National Aviation Company of

the Republic of Uzbekistan (hereinafter, “NAC”) and Ouzaeronavigation.

This order was later reversed by the Paris Cour d’Appel in a decision of 26 October
2006.°! The Cour d’Appel found that the attached bank account had been opened by
NAC on behalf of the Republic of Uzbekistan, and that it therefore could not be seized

to enforce an award directed solely against Uzdon.

On 27 October 2006, Romak filed a request for a protective attachment (saisie
conservatoire) of the above-mentioned bank account, which was granted.*? This
attachment was confirmed by a decision of the Paris Tribunal de Grande Instance of 31

March 2008,°? and by the Paris Cour d’Appel on 4 December 2008.™4

Exhibit C-46.
Exhibit C-49.
Exhibit C-135.
Exhibit R-15.
Exhibit R-16.
Exhibit C-137.

Exhibit C-217.

-17-

Til.

71.

72.

73.

74.

Procedural History

A.

Pursuant to Article 9 of the BIT and in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, Romak issued a Notice of Arbitration to the Republic of Uzbekistan on 29

From the Notice of Arbitration to the Terms of Appointment

March 2006.

Article 9 of the BIT reads as follows:

Article 9

Disputes between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party

(1) For the purposes of solving disputes with respect to investments between
a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party,
consultations will take place between the parties concerned with a view to
solving the case amicably.

(2) If these consultations do not result in a solution within six months the
dispute shall upon request of the investor be submitted to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal. Such arbitral tribunal shall, unless otherwise agreed upon by the
parties to the dispute, be established under the arbitrations rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(3) In the event of both Contracting Parties having become members of the
Convention of Washington of March 18, 1965, for the settlement of disputes
regarding investments between States and nationals of other States, disputes
may, upon request of the investor, as an alternative to the procedure
mentioned in paragraph (2) of this article, be submitted to the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

(4) Each Contracting Party hereby consents to the submission of an
investment dispute to international arbitration.

 

 

(5) The Contracting Party which is party to the dispute shall at no time
whatsoever during the settlement procedure or the execution of the sentence
allege as a defense its immunity or the fact that the investor has received
compensation under an insurance contract covering the whole or part of the
incurred damage or loss.

(6) Neither Contracting Party shall pursue through diplomatic channels a
dispute submitted to international arbitration unless the other Contracting
Party does not abide by and comply with the award rendered by an arbitral
tribunal.

Uzbekistan received the Notice of Arbitration on 29 March 2006.

In its Notice of Arbitration, Romak suggested that the dispute be settled by a sole
arbitrator, to be appointed by mutual agreement of the Parties. As Uzbekistan did not

agree to this suggestion, a three-member Arbitral Tribunal was constituted in

-18-

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules. By letter of 18 August 2006, Romak appointed

Mr. Noah Rubins as co-arbitrator.

By letter dated 8 November 2006, Uzbekistan appointed as co-arbitrator Mr. Nicolas
Molfessis.

By letter dated 10 April 2007, pursuant to Article 7(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules,
Romak informed the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
(hereinafter, the “PCA”) that the two co-arbitrators had failed to agree on the Chairman
of the Arbitral Tribunal within the 30-day limit time contemplated in the UNCITRAL
Rules, and requested that the Secretary General of the PCA designate an Appointing

Authority to appoint the Chairman.

By letter dated 2 May 2007, Uzbekistan confirmed that the two arbitrators had been
appointed, but that the Parties had failed to agree on the appointment of the Chairman.
Uzbekistan also asserted that any Tribunal constituted under the UNCITRAL Rules
would lack jurisdiction, but pointed out that this issue would have to be ruled upon by
the Tribunal once constituted. Uzbekistan further stated that it participated in the
arbitration “without having waived its immunity privilege and its rights to challenge the

jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.”

On 3 May 2007, the PCA designated Mr. Bernard Hanotiau as appointing authority,
charged with selecting the Chairman of the tribunal. On 5 July 2007, Mr. Hanotiau
appointed Mr. Fernando Mantilla-Serrano as Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal. On the
same day, the PCA notified the Parties of this appointment.

On 23 July 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal received the file that had been submitted to the
PCA as part of the appointment procedure.

On 5 September 2007, the Terms of Appointment and the Procedural Calendar were

signed by the Parties and by the members of the Arbitral Tribunal.
The Terms of Appointment provided, inter alia, that:

e The Parties confirm that the members of the Arbitral Tribunal have been validly
appointed in accordance with the BIT and the UNCITRAL Rules;

e The place of arbitration is Paris, France;

e The proceedings are conducted in English and in French and the Award shall be

drafted in English or in French, at the discretion of the Arbitral Tribunal; and

-19-

e The International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration is appointed as

Registrar.

The Procedural Calendar, as amended, established the following timetable:

e Filing of Romak’s Statement of Claim and Uzbekistan’s Objections to Jurisdiction
on 4 February 2008;

e Filing of Uzbekistan’s Statement of Defense and Romak’s Defense to Uzbekistan’s
Objections to Jurisdiction on 6 June 2008;

e Filing of Romak’s Reply to Uzbekistan’s Statement of Defense and Uzbekistan’s
Reply to Romak’s Defense to Uzbekistan’s Objections to Jurisdiction on 22
September 2008;

e A Conference Call to prepare the Hearing on 14 October 2008;

e A two-day Hearing in Paris on 6 and 7 November 2008;

e First Post-hearing briefs on January 26, 2009;

e Second Post-hearing briefs and Submissions on Costs on March 13, 2009; and

Reply to Submissions on Costs on March 18, 2009.

On 6 September 2007, after consultation with the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 1 fixing further procedural rules. These documents were

communicated to the Parties and transmitted to the Registrar that same day.
B. From the Terms of Appointment to the Hearing

The arbitral proceedings were carried out in application of the agreed Procedural
Calendar, as modified from time to time by the Arbitral Tribunal with the agreement of

the Parties.

The Hearing took place in Paris on 6-7 November 2008. In addition to the members of
the Arbitral Tribunal and Mr. Paul-Jean Le Cannu, who acted as Secretary, in
attendance were, for Romak, Mr. Jacques Covo (Legal and Managing Director), Mr.
Renaud Semerdjian (Counsel), Mr. Walid Ben Hamida (Counsel) and Mr. Aurélien
Aucher (Counsel), and for Uzbekistan, Mr. Nodirjon Juraev (representative of the
Ministry of Justice), Mr. Jean-Pierre Harb (Counsel), Mr. David Fraser (Counsel) and
Mr. Alexis Martinez (Counsel).

-20-

90.

91.

92.

IV.

93.

94,

During the hearing, Mr. Adadiy Konstantinovitch Karpukhin and Prof. William B.
Simons, appeared on behalf of Uzbekistan as witness and expert, respectively, and were

subjected to cross-examination as well as additional questioning by the Tribunal.

Each Party presented oral arguments, and then were provided the opportunity to make
rebuttal statements. The Arbitral Tribunal, with the agreement of the Parties, submitted
questions to be addressed by the Parties in Post-hearing written submissions.

Prior to the closing of the Hearing, with express reference to Article 30 of the
UNCITRAL Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal asked counsel for the Parties whether they had
any objections regarding the manner in which the arbitration proceedings had been
conducted. Counsel for the Parties each stated that they had no such objections.

The Hearing was recorded, and a verbatim transcript was made by the PCA, which was
forwarded to the Parties and to the members of the Tribunal on 24 November 2008.

Neither of the Parties objected to the contents of the transcript.
The Parties filed Post-hearing written submissions and Submissions on Costs in
accordance with the Procedural Calendar as amended.

On 29 September 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal declared the arbitral proceedings closed

and proceeded to the final deliberations and drafting of the present award.
The Parties have agreed to the publication of the present award.*°
Summary of the Parties’ Positions

Uzbekistan requests that the Arbitral Tribunal find, as a preliminary matter, that it does
not have jurisdiction to hear the claim (A). The Parties’ contentions on the merits are
focused upon whether the acts committed by Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct, as well as
the Uzbek courts’ refusal to enforce the GAFTA Award, constitute violations of the
BIT by Uzbekistan (B).

A. Uzbekistan’s Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal

With their written submissions concerning jurisdiction, the Parties addressed two
separate issues: burden of proof (1), and the characterization of the Romak Supply
Agreement and of the GAFTA Award as investments for the purposes of determining

jurisdiction (2). Despite being an issue germane to the merits, the Parties also addressed

C-PHB1, {| 174; R-PHB1, { 89.

-21-

95.

96.

97.

in their initial submissions the attributability to the State of Uzbekistan of the acts

committed by Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct (3).
1. Burden of Proof

Relying on scholarly writings as well as decisions and awards of arbitral tribunals
adjudicating under the ICSID Convention and the UNCITRAL Rules, Uzbekistan’s first
contention is that Romak bears the burden of proving that this Tribunal has jurisdiction

under the BIT.

Romak submits that it need only establish the Tribunal’s prima facie jurisdiction.*’
Romak argues that the burden of proof contemplated in Article 24 of the UNCITRAL
Rules has been interpreted and applied with flexibility. Romak further contends that, in
any event, Romak has made an investment within the meaning of the BIT, regardless of
which Party bears the burden of proof.

2. The Characterization of the Transaction Between Romak and
Uzdon, and of the GAFTA Award, as an Investment

a. The BIT

In essence, Uzbekistan argues that Romak has failed to identify an investment within

the meaning of Article 1(2) of the BIT,” which provides:

The term “investments” shall include every kind of assets and particularly:

a. movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem,
such as servitudes, mortgages, liens, pledges;

b. shares, parts or any other kind of participation in companies;

c. claims to money or to any performance having an economic value;

d. copyrights, industrial property rights (such as patents, utility models,

industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade names,
indications of origin), technical processes, know-how and goodwill;

e. concessions under public law, including concession to search for,
extract or exploit natural resources as well as all other rights given by
law, by contract or by decision of the authority in accordance with the
law.

OJ, 959 — 62; RDOJ, 9 42-53.

DOJ, 4498 — 103.
Id., §§ 102 — 103.
OJ, $9.63 — 68; RDO, 4 79 et seq.

-22-

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

Uzbekistan argues that the sale of goods, the activity envisaged by the Romak Supply
Agreement, does not constitute an investment, and that to interpret the term otherwise

would expand the notion of “investment” almost infinitely.

Uzbekistan further contends that the notion of “investment” in the BIT necessarily
involves an element of territoriality. Since the Romak Supply Agreement was carried
out entirely outside the territory of Uzbekistan, it cannot constitute an investment for
present purposes.”!

Uzbekistan supports its limited view of “investment” in part by reference to a separate
agreement that Uzbekistan and Switzerland negotiated and concluded at the same time
as the BIT, governing the two States’ relations with respect to sales of goods. In
Uzbekistan’s view, this second treaty, the Agreement on Trade and Economic
Cooperation (hereinafter, the “ATEC”) reflects the intention of Uzbekistan and

Switzerland to exclude ordinary sales of goods transactions from the scope of the BIT.

Romak submits that Article 1(2) of the BIT includes a broad definition of investment
that includes “every kind of asset’ having economic value. To illustrate this definition,
Romak points to various investment types specifically listed as protected under Article
1(2), including “claims to money or to any performance having an economic value” and
“rights given by law, by contract or by decision of the authority in accordance with the
law.” Romak contends that it has made an investment within the meaning of Article
1(2)(c) of the BIT since it is the owner of a “claim to money,” including rights under

the Romak Supply Agreement and the GAFTA Award.

With respect to territoriality, Romak considers that the BIT imposes no such
requirement. Even if investments had to be connected to the territory of the host State,
this requirement would be satisfied by virtue of the establishment of Romak’s
representative in Tashkent and the delivery and use of the goods in question within

Uzbekistan.

OJ, 9.69 — 78; RDOJ, § 86-91.

R-PHB2 §f[ 42-68.
OJ, {9 101 — 105.

DOJ, 4 121 — 126.

C-PHB1 ¥[ 82 — 110 and C-PHB2 4] 5 — 14.

-23-

103

104.

105.

a

106.

. Finally, Romak argues that, contrary to Uzbekistan’s assertions, the signing of the
ATEC on the same day as the BIT does not exclude the protection under the BIT
claimed by Romak in this arbitration.

b. Previous Arbitral Decisions

Uzbekistan submits that the sale of goods contract between Romak and Uzdon does not

constitute an investment. Uzbekistan relies in the so-called “Salini test,”°°

pursuant to
which an investment will normally exhibit a certain “regularity of profit and return,” a
certain “duration of the economic operation,” the existence of a “risk assumed by the
investor” and a contribution to the “economic development of the host State.”
Uzbekistan’s main submissions concerning the “Salini test” can be summarized as
follows:°”

(i) The sale of goods contract concluded with Uzdon did not and could not have

yielded regular profits and returns, as it was a one-off transaction.

(ii) The one-off sale of goods under the contract in question constitutes such limited
economic activity that it does not fulfill the requirement of duration.

(iii)The only risk that Romak assumed was breach by Uzdon of its contractual
obligations.

(iv)Romak has not made a significant contribution to the Republic of Uzbekistan’s
development, since the impact of a single contract for the sale of goods is

negligible.

Romak distinguishes between investment treaty arbitration within the ICSID system, in
which the claimant must prove that it owned an investment both within the meaning of
the applicable investment treaty and within the meaning if the Washington Convention,
and an investment treaty arbitration such as this one, conducted under the UNCITRAL,

Rules, in which the claimant satisfies the requirement of jurisdiction ratione materiae

DOJ, 49248 — 256.

After the seminal case Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001.

OJ, 9 84 — 100; RDOJ, 4 104 — 113.

-24-

107.

10:

109.

a

8.

S

simply by establishing that it has made an investment within the definition of the
relevant investment treaty.

Because this arbitration is conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules, Romak contends
that the Sa/ini criteria are inapplicable and irrelevant, having been developed within the

context of ICSID case law.

Romak argues in the alternative that, even if the “Salini test” were applicable, Romak’s
contractual relationships with Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct, and the attendant rights,

would qualify as an investment:

(i) | the Uzdon-Romak Agreement was part of the “Jong term and mutually profitable
cooperation” envisaged in the Protocol of Intention concluded between Romak
and Uzkhleboproduct, and was carried out over the course of five months, during
which Romak delivered over 40,000 tons of wheat. The profits derived from the
deliveries were intended to finance further scientific cooperation pursuant to the

Protocol of Intention.

(ii) Although ICSID jurisprudence does not require that a contract have a minimum
duration, Romak nevertheless fulfilled this requirement, as Romak’s deliveries of
wheat were but the first of a projected series of deliveries, pursuant to the
“preferential right” accorded to Romak in the Protocol of Intention.

(iii) Romak assumed substantial risk, in light of the investment climate in Uzbekistan
at the time. Additionally, Romak bore the risk of knowledge transfer pursuant to
the Protocol of Intention, without receiving any direct financial compensation in

exchange for the same.

(iv) Romak contributed to the development of Uzbekistan, because cereal supply to
the country was far from guaranteed at the time, but was vital to the Uzbek

economy and population.

Uzbekistan contends that an award may not be construed as an investment on the basis
of Article 1(2)(e) of the BIT, on the grounds that an arbitral award cannot, standing

alone, constitute an investment.”

DOJ, 44 105-115 and §¥ 185-215.

DOJ, 4230-247.
OJ, {9 106 — 109.

-25-

110.

111.

11

1

114.

So

2.

3.

5B

Relying on previous arbitral decisions, Uzbekistan submits that an arbitral award can be
considered an investment only to the extent that the underlying transaction can be

defined as an investment.”

Romak disagrees with Uzbekistan’s interpretation of Article 1(2) of the BIT. Romak
argues that the scope of application of Article 1(2)(e) is not limited to “concessions,”
and extends to a separate category of “other rights.” According to Romak, arbitral
awards fall within the scope of the separate sub-category of “other rights given by law,

by contract or by decision of the authority in accordance with the law.”

3. The Attributability to the Republic of Uzbekistan of Uzdon’s and
Uzkhleboproduct’s Acts for the Purpose of Jurisdiction

a. Uzbekistan’s Position

Uzbekistan claims that for the Arbitral Tribunal to have jurisdiction over this dispute
between Romak and Uzbekistan, Uzdon would have to be either a State entity or an
entity under the responsibility of Uzbekistan. In Uzbekistan’s view, neither

Uzkhleboproduct nor Uzdon falls within these categories.”>

According to Uzbekistan, in 1994 Uzkhleboproduct became a voluntary combination of
enterprises of various forms of ownership involved in the purchase and production of
grain and grain products. As such, Uzkhleboproduct functions as an agricultural
cooperative. Moreover, Uzkhleboproduct has since its creation functioned as a private
corporation and not as a Government body, and is independently responsible for its own

obligations under Uzbek law.”*

Uzbekistan further contends that Uzdon is a separate legal entity which is self-financing
and manages its own assets. Uzbekistan refers to Article 1.3 of Uzdon’s Charter, which
confirms its independence from Uzkhleboproduct and enables Uzdon to engage in

independent, conventional commercial transactions.”>

OJ, 9 110 — 114; RDOJ, 4 114-122 et seq.

DOJ, 44258 — 263.
03,4116.

SoD, $4 20 - 25, OJ, $9.7-9.

OJ, {9 19 - 25; RDOJ, $4157 — 61; SoD, $f 31 — 36.

-26-

ll

a

116.

117.

118.

119.

. Uzbekistan adds that Uzdon did not have a monopoly on grain importation into
Uzbekistan. Other private corporations, including Uzinterimpex, Uzmarkazimpex and
Markasanoatexport, performed the same activities and were in competition with
Uzdon.”° Moreover, Uzbekistan argues that the Ministry of Finance and the State Tax
Committee must intervene in every import transaction conducted in Uzbekistan — and
not only in those carried out by Uzdon — because the Uzbek currency is not

convertible.”

According to Uzbekistan, Uzdon was originally set up as a foreign trade company, but
was transformed into an open joint stock company after the Uzdon Resolution, prior to
the Romak transaction. The Republic of Uzbekistan holds no shares in Uzdon, and
Uzkhleboproduct only owns 8.4% of Uzdon’s shares. In addition, Uzbekistan asserts
that, even if Uzdon is part of Uzkhleboproduct, this does not establish that
Uzkhleboproduct controls Uzdon, since (as already described above) Uzkhleboproduct
is a voluntary association of independent entities. Uzbekistan contends that, even if the
Tribunal were to find that Uzdon is controlled by the Uzkhleboproduct, Romak has
failed to demonstrate that Uzkhleboproduct is a company which (i) fulfills a function of

the State, and (ii) is not independent from Uzbekistan.”

Uzbekistan contests the authenticity of a certificate produced by Romak with the
letterhead of the Tashkent Bar and the Ministry of Justice, which certifies that
Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon are State entities.”

b. Romak’s Position

Romak argues that the acts of Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon can be attributed to the
Republic of Uzbekistan because both were State entities that pursued a public purpose

at the time the relevant facts occurred.

According to Romak, Uzkhleboproduct is a State consortium accountable to the
Council of Ministers and controlled by Uzbekistan. The State owned 51% of the shares
of Uzkhleboproduct when the entity was transformed into a corporation. Given that

(even after reorganization) Uzkhleboproduct was obligated to report regularly to the
SoD, 437; OF, 926.
SoD, $438 — 40.
RDOJ, {62 — 69.
SoD, $441 —44.

-27-

Council of Ministers of Uzbekistan, the State must have been informed of Romak’s

difficulties in obtaining payment for the wheat delivered.*°

120. With respect to Uzdon, Romak points out that the Uzdon Resolution directed

121.

Uzkhleboproduct to establish Uzdon within the State Shareholding Corporation for the
purpose of “attracting foreign investors,” in particular those specialized in cereal
imports.*!

In addition, Romak contends that Uzdon is a structural unit of Uzkhleboproduct. Its
Charter grants Uzkhleboproduct the right to nominate the General Director, who
“determines the amount and kinds of transactions, agreements and contracts” to which
Uzkhleboproduct can be a party. In support of its allegations, Romak refers to the fact
that, in the context of Romak’s transactions with Uzdon, the Letter of Guarantee was
signed not only by the chairman of Uzdon, but also by one of the directors of
Uzkhleboproduct. Romak also invokes a legal opinion certificate from Mr. Karpukhin

s authentic.

 

of the Tashkent Bar Association,*” which it insi

122. Romak further argues that Uzdon’s activities are under the direct supervision of the

123.

Republic of Uzbekistan. The Uzdon Resolution established that “the Ministry of
Finance of the Republic of Uzbekistan [is] in charge of providing sufficient financing to

the food producer to satisfy the needs of the public.”**

In addition, with respect to the companies cited by Uzbekistan to demonstrate the
existence of market competition in Uzbekistan, Romak notes that said companies —
Markazsanoateksort, Uzinterimpex and O’Zmarkazimpex — were all created after the

present dispute arose.**

SoC, § 15; DOJ, § 21; RSoD, 4 28 — 29.

SoC, § 16 — 19; DOJ, 4 24; RSoD, $f 30-31.

Exhibit C-11,

SoC, $9 20-21, 344, 369 — 370; DOJ, | 25; RSoD, $f] 22-25.
SoC, ff 17-26.

DOJ, 4429-33.

-28-

12.

=

125.

. Lastly, Romak insists that Uzdon is not a self-financing entity, and points out that it is
merely since 20 May 2007 that Uzkhleboproduct only owns 8.4% of Uzdon’s stock.

Uzdon’s stock was first issued in 2000, well after the disputed facts occurred.*°
B. Summary of the Parties’ Positions on the Merits

With respect to the substantive issues in dispute, the Parties have exchanged
submissions relating to the applicable law*’ (1), and as to whether the Republic of
Uzbekistan has committed direct violations of its obligations by refusing to enforce the

GAFTA Award (2) and through Uzkhlepboproduct’s and Uzdon’s acts (3).

1. The Applicable Law

126. As part of its allegations on applicable law, Romak submits that, by virtue of the Most

Favored Nation (hereinafter, “MFN”) clause contained in Article 3 of the BIT, the
Arbitral Tribunal should hold Uzbekistan accountable, in addition to the BIT, for
violations of the more favorable substantive provisions contained in other investment
treaties to which Uzbekistan is a party, of international conventions to which the State

of Uzbekistan is a party and, in the alternative, of customary international law.**

127. Romak refers extensively to Article 11 of the BIT, which Romak characterizes as an

128.

observance of obligations or “umbrella” clause. This provision reads as follows:

Either Contracting Party shall constantly guarantee the observance of
commitments it has entered into with respect to the investments of the
investors of the other Contracting Party.

 

Romak therefore argues that Article 11 covers both contractual undertakings and
undertakings assumed through law or regulation.” Romak relies on a number of ICSID
awards and decisions in support of its interpretation.”

Id.

Although the contents of the Parties’ submissions in this regard properly pertain to “the applicable
standards” to be retained by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Tribunal refers to “Applicable Law”, which is the
expression actually used by the Parties in their submissions.

SoC, $f] 135 — 139.

SoC, § 192.

Notably Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3,
Award, August 22, 2007; Fedax v. Venezuela ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Award, March 9, 1998; SGS

Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision
on jurisdiction, January 29, 2004; Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award, 19 August 2005.

-29-

129

130.

S

131.

132.

. In Romak’s view, Uzbekistan’s other obligations under the BIT are broad in scope, and
include the protection of investments, the guarantee of fair and equitable treatment, and
the prohibition against expropriation or nationalization without appropriate
compensation.”!

In addition, Romak relies upon the MFN clause to invoke Article 2(c) of Annex B to the
Uzbekistan-Italy BIT, which provides that “[e]ach Contracting Party shall provide
effective means for asserting claims and enforce rights related to investments and
investment agreements”; Article 4.1 of the Uzbekistan-Austria BIT,” which concerns
the transparency of State activities affecting the operation of the BIT; and Article 3(1)
of the Uzbekistan-France BIT,” which provides for the fair and equitable treatment of

investments.”

Romak also invokes Articles III and VII of the New York Convention, as well as
customary international law, notably the principles of international law relating to

denial of justice.°°

In response to Romak’s allegations concerning applicable law, Uzbekistan submits that
the claim brought by Romak is in fact a purely contractual one, and thus does not fall
within the scope of the BIT.°® Uzbekistan further alleges that Article 11 of the BIT is
not an “umbrella” clause and that, in any event, such a clause could not apply since

there is no contract between Romak and Uzbekistan.”

SoC, $f 140 — 200.

Article 4(1) provides that “[e]ach Contracting Party shall promptly publish, or otherwise make publicly
available, its laws, regulations, procedures as well as international agreements which may affect the
operation of the Agreement. Where a Contracting Party establishes policies which are not expressed in
laws or regulations or by other means listed in this paragraph but which may affect the operation of the
Agreement, that Contracting Party shall promptly publish them or make them publicly available.”

  

    

Article 3 provides: “chacune des Parties s engage a assurer, sur son territoire et dans sa zone maritime, un
traitement juste et équitable, conformément aux principes du droit international, aux investissements des
investisseurs, de l'autre Partie et a faire en sorte que l’exercice du droit ainsi soit entravé ni en
droit ni en fait. En particulier, bien que non exclusivement, sont considérées comme des entraves de droit
ou de fait au traitement juste et équitable toute restriction a l’achat et au transport de matiéres pi
et de matiéres auxiliaires d’énergie et de combustibles, ainsi que de moyens de production et d’exploitation
de tout genre, toute entrave d la vente et au transport de produits  l'intérieur du pays et a l’étranger ainsi
que toutes autres mesures ayant un effet analogue.”

 

 

  

wremiéres,

 

SoC, $4 201 — 204.
SoC, $9 206 — 214.
SoD, pp. 46 et seq.

See, Section 3.b. infra.

-30-

133

2. The Uzbek Courts’ Refusal to Enforce the GAFTA Award
a. Romak’s Position

. In substance, Romak contends that the Uzbek courts’ refusal to enforce the GAFTA

Award violated several of Uzbekistan’s international obligations.”*

134. First, Romak asserts that the Uzbek courts wrongly refused to enforce the GAFTA

135.

Award based upon Article IV of the New York Convention, which sets out the
admissibility requirements for a request to enforce an award. According to Romak,
Article V sets out the exclusive grounds for refusing recognition and enforcement of an
award. Romak submits that a request for enforcement under Article IV should not be
interpreted too strictly, and that a claimant “should be allowed to complete the
conditions for such a request during the proceedings.” Uzbekistan has thus violated the

provisions of the New York Convention.”

Romak argues that the improper interpretation and application of the New York
Convention constitute a breach of the “umbrella” clause found in Article 11 of the BIT,
which guarantees the enforcement of arbitral awards.’ It further claims that the
conduct of the Uzbek courts is, likewise, incompatible with Article 3 of the BIT, which
is intended to ensure a secure investment environment, the promotion of investments,

and fair and equitable treatment before Uzbek courts.

136. Romak also alleges that the Uzbek courts’ conduct resulted in the expropriation of its

100

101

102

103

contractual rights, either directly or indirectly.'*!

Romak draws support from the recent
award in Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v.
Kazakhstan,'” arguing that “a taking by the judicial arm of the State may also amount

to an expropriation.” Further, relying on Saipem v. Bangladesh,'*> Romak argues that

SoC, $9 215 et seq.
SoC, $9 230 — 241.
SoC, $9 244 — 253.
SoC, $9 254 — 264.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Award, 29 July 2008.

Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 21 March 2007 (the final Award was rendered on 30 June 2009).

-31-

137.

a

138.

oe

139.

104

10s

106

107

the courts’ refusal to enforce the GAFTA Award has destroyed Romak’s rights and the

commercial value of its investment, and therefore constitutes expropriation.

Lastly, Romak contends that the Uzbek courts’ decision to refuse enforcement of the
GAFTA Award contains “gross defects in its substance,” which resulted in a denial of
justice and a violation of principles of international law.'*' Romak asserts that, in
contravention of Uzbekistan’s international obligations, the Uzbek courts imposed two
unreasonable obstacles preventing the enforcement of the GAFTA Award: the
obligation to provide an Uzbek translation of the GAFTA Award (although Russian is
commonly used by the courts), and the refusal to grant an extension in order to have the

GAFTA Award translated into Uzbek.

Similarly, Romak argues that these acts amount to unjustified, unfair and inequitable
treatment prohibited under Article 3 of the BIT and — by virtue of the MFN Clause —
under Article 2(c) of Annex B to the Uzbekistan-Italy BIT. Alternatively, Romak
submits that it was denied justice under customary international law, giving rise to
corresponding liability under the BIT.'°°

b. Uzbekistan’s Position

oe - «106
Citing Azinian v. Mexico,

Uzbekistan argues that investors must accept the host
State’s laws and regulatory framework as they find them, and that a State cannot be
faulted for complying with a decision of its courts, unless the court in question has itself
breached an international legal standard.'"’ On this basis, Uzbekistan alleges that
Romak has failed to demonstrate that the treatment accorded by the Uzbek courts
amounts to a denial of justice involving a “clear and malicious misapplication of the
law,” or “pretence of form to achieve an internationally wrongful end.” Just as
importantly, a denial of justice cannot be established unless the claimant has sought
redress through all levels of the judicial system (or has proven the futility of further
appeal). Romak did not appeal to the Supreme Court of Uzbekistan, which could have

reversed the decision of the courts below in Romak’s favor.

SoC, $9 266 — 276.
SoC, 279 et seq.
Robert Azinian and others v. Mexico, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award, 1 November 1999.

SoD, $4 203 — 205.

-32-

140. In any event, Uzbekistan submits, the behavior of the Uzbek courts did not amount to a

141.

denial of justice as, prima facie, the courts complied with international standards.
According to Uzbekistan, not only did the Uzbek courts take reasonable decisions in
light of the New York Convention, but Romak could still today resubmit a request for

enforcement.'°*

Uzbekistan stress

 

s that the Commercial Court of Tashkent, and later the Appellate
Court, ruled that Romak’s application for recognition and enforcement of the GAFTA
Award should be “returned” because it failed to meet the requirements of Articles

IV(2)'” and V(1)(b)!"° of the New York Convention.'!!

142. As to Article IV(2), Romak failed to produce a translation of the award in the Uzbek

143.

108

109

no

ao

language, which is the official language of Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan clarifies that the
Uzbek courts did not refuse the enforcement of the GAFTA Award, but merely
“returned” the application for enforcement to Romak, allowing Romak to resubmit an
application with an Uzbek translation, after it had failed to provide a translation within
the three-day time limit granted by the Uzbek courts. As to Article V(1)(b), Uzbekistan
claims that its courts complied with the New York Convention in requiring that Romak

produce evidence that Uzdon has been notified of the appointment of arbitrators.

Finally, in Uzbekistan’s view, the argument that the Uzbek courts have expropriated
Romak’s alleged investment must fail because Romak retains its right to seek
enforcement of the GAFTA Award elsewhere. The Award therefore retains value. In
addition, even if the award had been set aside by the Uzbek courts (which it was not)

Romak would still be entitled to initiate another GAFTA arbitration.'!

SoD, 211-212

Article IV(2) of the New York Convention reads as follows: “If the said award or agreement is not made in
an official language of the country in which the award is relied upon, the party applying for recognition
and enforcement of the award shall produce a translation of these documents into such language. The
translation shall be certified by an official or sworn translator or by a diplomatic or consular agent.”

Article V(1)(b) of the New York Convention reads as follows: “Recognition and enforcement of the award
may be refused, at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the
competent authority where the recognition and enforcement is sought, proof that: [...] (b) the party against
whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of the arbitrator or of the
arbitration proceedings or was otherwise unable to present its

 

  

se.”

 

SoD, § 213.
SoD, $4 225 — 230.

-33-

3. The Responsibility of the Republic of Uzbekistan for Acts
Committed by Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct

a. Romak’s Position

144. Romak asserts that Uzkhleboproduct appoints Uzdon’s General Director in accordance
with Article 5.2 of Uzdon’s Charter, and therefore controls Uzdon.'!? Romak recalls
that, pursuant to the Commission Agreement, Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon agreed that
the latter would enter into a supply contract with Romak within the framework of the
Protocol of Intention. Romak also points out that Uzdon’s Letter of Guarantee dated 10
July 1996 was signed by Uzdon’s General Director and by Uzkhleboproduct’s Director.
Romak further emphasizes that Uzkhleboproduct has a public purpose, namely the
setting up of a centralized system of payments for, and purchase of, grain and grain
products. Uzkhleboproduct itself is accountable to the Council of Ministers, and a
majority of its share capital was held by the State at the time the disputed facts
occurred.''* Romak concludes that Uzkhleboproduct and the Council of Ministers were

therefore informed of Romak’s difficulties in receiving payment.

145. Romak contends that Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct are State organs controlled by the
Uzbek State within the meaning of Articles 4 and 8 of the Articles on Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts. Romak submits that Uzdon and
Uzkhleboproduct’s internationally wrongful acts can therefore be imputed to the

115

Republic of Uzbekistan.
146. According to Romak, Uzdon’s first violation is its failure to pay for Romak’s delivery
of 40,000 tons of wheat under the Romak Supply Agreement, although an arbitral
tribunal upheld Romak’s claim that it should be compensated for the delivery.''®
Uzdon’s second violation stems from its failure to open a letter of credit, as indicated in
its letter dated 10 July 1996, in order to guarantee payment under the Romak Supply

17

Agreement.“ Uzdon also failed to abide by the binding GAFTA Award by attempting,

SoC, $9 342 — 346.

SoC, $366.

5 SoC, 49354 — 364.

SoC, $9 321 — 322.

SoC, $9 329 — 330.

-34-

147.

148.

149.

150.

inter alia, to invoke the absence of dates in the contract or the non-attribution of quotas

for the year 1997 under the contract.'!*

Romak contends that these acts violated the obligation to observe investment-related
commitments, enshrined in Article 11 of the BIT, as well as the guarantee of fair and
equitable treatment and the prohibition against unjustified measures contemplated in
Article 3, and constituted indirect expropriation, in violation of Article 5 of the BiT.!!?

Romak also highlights that Uzdon never received the funds that Uzkhleboproduct
should have allocated to it pursuant to Article 5 of the Uzdon Resolution. In addition to
failing to allocate the funds necessary to enable Uzdon to perform the contract, Romak
further submits that Uzkhleboproduct failed to guarantee the performance of the Romak
Supply Agreement. The existence of the guarantee mechanism, as well as
Uzkhleboproduct’s failure to comply with it, was expressly acknowledged by Uzdon in
its letter to Romak dated 18 February 1997. Romak argues that these acts violated the
guarantee of fair and equitable treatment under Article 3 of the BIT, and constitute

indirect expropriation, in breach of Article 5 of the BIT.'”°

Romak concludes that the Uzbek State, which through Uzkhleboproduct failed to

provide Uzdon with the financial capacity nec

 

sary to fulfill its mission, acted in
collusion with Uzdon and Uzkhleboproduct, allowing them to undermine Romak’s
contractual guarantees and, ultimately, to prevent the enforcement of the GAFTA
Award. According to Romak, the Uzbek State is therefore responsible for breaches of
Articles 3(2) and 11 of the BIT. Its acts also constituted indirect expropriation of
Romak’s contractual rights, including rights arising out of the GAFTA award.'”!

b. Uzbekistan’s Position

Uzbekistan argues that Uzbekistan’s treatment of Romak did not violate the standards
of protection contained in the BIT. More importantly, Uzbekistan contends that Romak
has simply presented contractual claims to this Tribunal, claims which are not

cognizable as a matter of international law.'”? Uzbekistan draws support from cases

SoC, $9 335 — 338.
SoC, $9 323 — 328.
SoC, $9 347 — 353.
SoC, $f] 363 — 364.
SoD, §¥ 158 — 163

-35-

151.

152.

Nu

such as Azinian v. Mexico,'* ADF v. United States,'*4 and Waste Management IP? to
argue that a mere breach of contract or “simple illegality or lack of authority under the
domestic law of a State” are allegations insufficient to support a finding of breach of an

investment treaty.

Uzbekistan argues that Article 11 of the BIT does not automatically elevate contractual
breaches to treaty breaches, and that no breaches of the Quadripartite Agreement or of

the Sales Contract could constitute, standing alone, breaches of the BIT:!7¢

e Article 11 of the BIT only impos

 

s a guarantee that Uzbekistan will ensure the
observance of its commitments towards Swiss investments;

e The commitments to be guaranteed, according to Uzbekistan, are those found in the
substantive provisions of the BIT, which do not include contractual obligations; and

e The very position of Article 11 within the text of the BIT — i.e., after the dispute
resolution provisions — indicates that its purpose is merely to facilitate the

enforcement of the provisions of the BIT.

Uzbekistan finds support for its position on Article 11 in SGS v. Pakistan,'”” in which
the Tribunal examined the “umbrella” clause in another Swiss BIT which was nearly
identical to the clause in the present case. The tribunal in SGS considered that “the text
itself of Article 11 does not purport to state that breaches of contract alleged by an
investor in relation to a contract it has concluded with a state [...] are automatically
‘elevated’ to the level of breaches of international treaty law.” Uzbekistan further
points out that Romak would have to prove that, in agreeing to Article 11 into the BIT,
the “shared intent of the Contracting Parties” to the BIT was indeed to elevate contract
claims to treaty claims. Uzbekistan also relies on the SGS v. Pakistan Tribunal’s
analysis of the consequences of a liberal interpretation of the umbrella clause, namely
the incorporation by reference of an unlimited number of State contracts and other State

commitments, the fact that other substantive provisions of the Treaty would become

See, supra footnote 106.

ADF Group Corporation v. United States of America, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, Award, 9 January
2003.

Waste Management, Inc v. Mexico, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004.
SoD, $f 166 — 171

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/13,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, August 6, 2003.

-36-

153.

Oo

154.

155.

129

130

superfluous, and the de facto nullification of freely negotiated dispute settlement
clauses contained in the relevant State contracts.'”*

Uzbekistan argues that a similar reasoning was followed by a number of other arbitral

tribunals'”?

that examined clauses with comparable wording. Invoking Salini v.
Jordan,'* in which the Tribunal refused to elevate contractual breaches to the level of
treaty breaches, Uzbekistan concludes that Romak cannot argue that mere violations of
the Quadripartite Agreement or the Romak Supply Agreement amount to breaches of

the BIT."

Uzbekistan considers Romak’s presentation of case law in support of its umbrella
clause arguments to be misleading, because the cases cited dealt with differently-
worded provisions. Moreover, Uzbekistan emphasizes that the interpretation of the

132

umbrella clause in SGS v. Philippines” has been criticized by other tribunals on the

ground that it would render investment treaties completely useless.'**

Uzbekistan argues that even if the Tribunal were to hold that Article 11 is an “umbrella”
clause that automatically elevates contractual breaches to the international level, Romak
cannot invoke Article 11, as it entered into contracts with three private companies
(Odil, Uzkhleboproduct and Uzdon) and not with the Republic of Uzbekistan.

Uzbekistan relies upon several arbitral decisions'™ to conclude that umbrella clauses
cannot be invoked if either the claimant or the host State were not a party to the

agreement allegedly breached.'**

SoD, $173 - 175.
See notably E! Paso Energy International Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006; Pan American Energy LLC & BP Argentina Exploration Company v.
Argentina, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006; Joy Mining
Machinery v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2004; Gas
Transmission Company v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award, 12 May 2005.

Salini Costruttori SpA v. Jordan, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 November
2004.

SoD, § 177-181.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004.

SoD, $f 184 — 192.
See, Impregilo SpA v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005; Azurix
Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARBV/O1/12, Award, 14 July 2006; Siemens A.G. v. The
Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004.

SoD, $f 194 — 198.

-37-

156

157.

158.

oo

159.

16

S

161.

136

137

. Lastly, Uzbekistan contends that Romak cannot argue that Uzdon’s conduct amounts to
a breach of the BIT because “actions of an instrumentality cannot constitute breaches
of a BIT where domestic remedies are available.” According to Uzbekistan, Romak

has not exhausted all available remedies before the Uzbek courts.'*”

Analysis by the Arbitral Tribunal

At the time of organizing the proceedings and rendering Procedural Order No. 1, the
Arbitral Tribunal, together with counsel for the Parties, decided to hear simultaneously
the jurisdictional and merits issues raised in the present arbitration, without ordering the
bifurcation of the proceedings.

This approach has permitted the Arbitral Tribunal to consider the entire scope of the
Parties’ submissions, and to form a more accurate and comprehensive opinion on the
issues to be adjudicated.

Romak initiated these proceedings in order to avail itself of the protection of the BIT.
Romak invoked Article 9 of the BIT (see, supra, § 72) as the basis for the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal. There is no dispute between the Parties that Article 9 contains
Uzbekistan’s consent to arbitrate, or that Romak accepted this consent in its Notice of

Arbitration.

. Article 9 of the BIT provides the State’s consent to arbitration only for disputes “with
respect to investments between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party.” Accordingly, in order to accept jurisdiction over the present
dispute, the Arbitral Tribunal must be satisfied that Romak is an “investor” and that the
dispute submitted to arbitration relates to an “investment” within the meaning of the

BIT.

Uzbekistan does not contest that Romak qualifies as “an investor of the other
Contracting Party.” No issue of jurisdiction ratione personae has been raised by
Uzbekistan as regards the characterization of Romak as an investor. As regards
Uzbekistan’s allegations concerning the attribution to Uzbekistan of the acts of Uzdon

and Uzkhleboproduct (see, supra, §§ 112 et seq.) — as well as those stating that “Romak

Uzbekistan relies on SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Philippines, supra, footnote 132;
EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3481, Award and Partial Dissenting Opinion, 3
February 2006; and Salini Costruttori SpA v. Jordan, see, supra, footnote 130.

 

SoD, $4 199 — 202.

-38-

16:

Nv

163.

ive)

164.

z

165.

was not a victim of expropriation or inequitable proceedings” — while presented by
Uzbekistan as arguments undermining the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction,'** in fact
pertain to the merits of the dispute and are therefore irrelevant for the purposes of
deciding on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The BIT does not require that the acts of certain
entities be first attributed to the State before jurisdiction can be established, and much
less that an actual violation of the BIT be proved. Clearly, in such cases an arbitral
tribunal may retain jurisdiction, if only to establish at a subsequent stage whether or not
the acts complained of have been proved, constitute a violation of the BIT, or are

attributable to the Contracting Party.

. Accordingly, the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal ratione personae is not at issue in

the present arbitration as regards the characterization of Romak as an investor.

Rather, the relevant jurisdictional objections raised by Uzbekistan all relate to
jurisdiction ratione materiae. As noted above (see, supra, §§] 94 to 124), Uzbekistan
contends that Romak did not own an “investment” as required to establish jurisdiction

under the BIT.

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore first set out the legal rules relevant to its decision
on issues of jurisdiction (A). It will then address the criteria to be applied for the
purposes of determining whether an investment exists under the BIT (B) and will then

consider whether Romak owns an “investment” under the BIT (C).
A. The Applicable Legal Rules

This Arbitral Tribunal has been constituted under the UNCITRAL Rules. The
UNCITRAL Rules expressly grant the Arbitral Tribunal unfettered authority to decide
on its own jurisdiction (see, Article 21.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules). With respect to
applicable law, the UNCITRAL Rules merely state as follows:

APPLICABLE LAW, AMIABLE COMPOSITEUR

Article 33

1. The arbitral tribunal shall apply the law designated by the parties as
applicable to the substance of the dispute. Failing such designation by the
parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict
of laws rules which it considers applicable.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall decide as amiable compositeur or ex aequo et
bono only if the parties have expressly authorized the arbitral tribunal to do

188 OJ, Gf 57-58 and 115-138.

-39-

so and if the law applicable to the arbitral procedure permits such
arbitration.

3. In all cases, the arbitral tribunal shall decide in accordance with the
terms of the contract and shall take into account the usages of the trade
applicable to the transaction.

166. Both Parties have referred to the BIT (an instrument of international law) as the

16

168.

140

7.

oo

applicable law in the present arbitration. The BIT does not contain an express choice of

law provision.

Romak has stated that “only the requirements of the BIT and of the UNCITRAL Rules
shall be applicable for the purposes of determining the scope of the jurisdiction of the

39139
1.

Arbitral Tribuna Uzbekistan’s submission in this regard is that “only the BIT and

relevant international legal principles are applicable.”'°

At the same time, concerning
jurisdiction, the Parties advocate different interpretations of the terms of the BIT.
Nevertheless, the Parties are in agreement that the resolution of the issue of jurisdiction
requires the construction of the BIT, and both have invoked'*! the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties (hereinafter, the “Vienna Convention”).'*? Both Parties’
submissions have made abundant reference to legal doctrine and arbitration awards
(primarily within the ICSID system).

Concerning previous decisions by other arbitral tribunals, Uzbekistan summarizes its
position by stating that “decisions of other investment arbitration tribunals interpreting
the term ‘investment’ in the context of investment treaty arbitration are relevant in the
interests of the development of consistent jurisprudence in this evolving body of public
international law.”'* For its part, Romak considers, with particular reference to ICSID
cases, that “there is no legal basis imposing and justifying the application of ICSID
jurisprudence, and more specifically the Salini jurisprudence, in the context of arbitral

proceedings organized under the UNCITRAL Rules,” and that “it is therefore perfectly

DOJ, J 105: “seules les exigences du TBI et celles du réglement de la CNUDCI sont applicables pour

déterminer l’étendue de la compétence du Tribunal arbitral.”
R-PHBI, 17.
OJ, 66 and DOS, § 116.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, signed on May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331 (entered into force
January 27, 1980).

R-PHB2, { 84.

-40-

16

17

144

open at law for the Arbitral Tribunal to choose, purely and simply, to ignore this

jurisprudence.”'

oS

. As regards the Vienna Convention, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that it only applies to
treaties “which are concluded by States after the entry into force of the present
Convention with regard to such States.”'* The BIT was signed on April 16, 1993, and,
whereas Switzerland acceded to the Vienna Convention on May 7, 1990, Uzbekistan
did so only on July 12, 1995. However, the Vienna Convention’s non-retroactivity
provision is “[w]ithout prejudice to the application of any rules set forth in [it] to which
treaties would be subject under international law independently of the Convention.”\“°

The Vienna Convention, and in particular its provisions on the interpretation of treaties,

has been accepted by the International Court of Justice and by the international

community as a codification of customary international law.'*” Accordingly, the

Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the application of the Vienna Convention, as relied

upon by the Parties, is appropriate in these proceedings and offers salient guidance as to

the proper interpretation of the BIT.

0. With respect to arbitral awards, this Arbitral Tribunal considers that it is not bound to
follow or to cite previous arbitral decisions as authority for its reasoning or conclusions.
Even presuming that relevant principles could be distilled from prior arbitral awards
(which has proven difficult with respect of many of the decisions cited by the Parties in
these proceedings), they cannot be deemed to constitute the expression of a general
consensus of the international community, and much less a formal source of
international law. Arbitral awards remain mere sources of inspiration, comfort or

. 148
reference to arbitrators.

C-PHB1, {| 128 and 130: “il n’existe aucun fondement légal imposant et justifiant l'application de la
jurisprudence CIRDI et plus particuliérement la jurisprudence Salini dans le cadre d’une procédure
arbitrale organisée selon les régles de la CNUDCI:” “le Tribunal Arbitral peut donc parfaitement choisir,
en droit, d’ignorer purement et simplement cette jurisprudence.”

See, Vienna Convention, Article 4.
See, idem.

See, Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya/Chad, Judgment I.C.J. Reports 1994, pp. 21-22, §
41; Kasikili/Sedudu Island (Botswana/Namibia), Judgment 1.C.J. Reports 1999, p. 1059, 18.

Other arbitral tribunals have arrived to a similar conclusion, see, Bayindir Insaat Turizm Tecaret Ve Sanayi
AS v Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No ARB/03/29, 14 November 2005, § 76 (“The
Tribunal agrees that it is not bound by earlier decisions, but will certainly carefully consider such decisions
whenever appropriate”); and RosInvestCo UK Lid v Russian Federation, Jurisdiction Award, SCC Case No
V079/2005, § 49 (“It is at all events plain that the decisions of other tribunals are not binding on this

-41-

171. Ultimately, the Arbitral Tribunal has not been entrusted, by the Parties or otherwise,

17:

Nv

with a mission to ensure the coherence or development of “arbitral jurisprudence.” The
Arbitral Tribunal’s mission is more mundane, but no less important: to resolve the
present dispute between the Parties in a reasoned and persuasive manner, irrespective of
the unintended consequences that this Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis might have on future
disputes in general. It is for the legal doctrine as reflected in articles and books, and not
for arbitrators in their awards, to set forth, promote or criticize general views regarding
trends in, and the desired evolution of, investment law.'” This is not to say that the
Arbitral Tribunal will simply ignore awards rendered by distinguished arbitrators. The
Arbitral Tribunal may and will examine them, not for the purposes of extracting from
them rules of law, but as a means to provide context to the Parties’ allegations and
arguments, and as to explain succinctly the Arbitral Tribunal’s own reasoning.

. Accordingly, in construing the BIT the Arbitral Tribunal will be guided primarily by the
provisions of the Vienna Convention, and particularly by Articles 31 and 32:

ARTICLE 31—- GENERAL RULE OF INTERPRETATION

J. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and
in the light of its object and purpose.

 

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall
comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all

the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in

connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other

parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

 

Tribunal [...]. This does not however preclude the Tribunal from considering other arbitral decisions and
the arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find that they throw any useful light
on the issues that arise for decision in this case’).

 

As it has been put by one Arbitral Tribunal: “An identity of the basi
when it meets with very similar if not even identical facts at the origin of the disputes, does not suffice to
apply systematically to the present case positions or solutions already adopted in thes es. Each tribunal
remains sovereign and may retain, as it is confirmed by ICSID practice, a different solution for resolving
the same problem; but decisions on jurisdiction dealing with the same or very similar issues may at least
indicate some lines of reasoning of real interest; this Tribunal may consider them in order to compare its
own position with those already adopted by its predecessors and, if it shares the views already expressed by
one or more of these tribunals on a specific point of law, it is free to adopt the same solution.

of jurisdiction of these tribunals, even

 

 

 

 

 

One may even find situations in which, although seized on the basis of another BIT as combined with the
pertinent provisions of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal has set a point of law which, in essence, is or will
be met in other cases whatever the specifict of each dispute may be. Such precedents may also be rightly
considered, at least as a matter of comparison and, if so considered by the Tribunal, of inspiration.” AES
Corporation v. The Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No ARB/02/17, April 26,
2005, 44] 30-31.

 

   

-42-

17.

17:

3.

z

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the

interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which

establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations

between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

ARTICLE 32 —- SUPPLEMENTARY MEANS OF INTERPRETATION

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation,
including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its
conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application
of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according
to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

B. The Term “Investments” under the BIT

At issue in this case is the meaning of the term “investments” as it is used in the BIT,

particularly in Articles 1 and 9 — the alleged basis for this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

. Article 1 (“Definitions”) of the BIT states:

“For the purpose of this Agreement:

(2) The term ‘investments’ shall include every kind of assets and
particularly:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in
rem, such as servitudes, mortgages, liens, pledges;

(b) _ shares, parts or any other kinds of participation in companies;
(c) claims to money or to any performance having an economic value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property rights (such as patents, utility
models, industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade
names, indications of origin), tech | processes, k how an

goodwill;

(e) concessions under public law, including concessions to search for,
extract or exploit natural resources as well as all other rights
given by law, by contract or by decision of the authority in
accordance with the law.”

-43-

175

176.

a

177.

178.

150

. The Parties disagree as to the meaning and relevance of the enumeration found in
Article 1(2) of the BIT. Both Parties agree that the list is not exhaustive — which is
confirmed by a_ straightforward reading of the introductory expression “and
particularly.” Uzbekistan argues that the “term ‘include’ indicates that the ensuing
enumeration is only part of the definition of the term investment,’ and that the
enumeration “can constitute part of an investment but is not sufficient on its own as a
definition of an investment.”'*° For its part, Romak contends that the expression “every
kind of asset” is a broad one which, pursuant to its plain meaning, covers the rights
underlying its claims. Specifically, Romak submits that it owned an investment under

Article 1(2), letters (c) and (e).'*!

The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore required to interpret the term “investments” as found
in Article 1(2) of the BIT. In order to do so, it shall resort to the “ordinary meaning” of

the terms of the BIT “in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

The “ordinary meaning” of the term “investments” is the commitment of funds or other
assets with the purpose to receive a profit, or “return,” from that commitment of

capital.'*? The term “asset” means property of any kind.'*?

Romak alleges that the Arbitral Tribunal should simply confirm that the Claimant’s
assets'™* fall within one or more of the categories listed in Article 1(2) of the BIT, thus
sponsoring a construction of the BIT that puts special emphasis on the literal words in

the list of Article 1(2).!*

R-PHBI, ff 18-19.

DOJ, {J 123-128: “ROMAK a réalisé un inv ement au sens de l’alinéa (c) dans la mesure ot elle est
titulaire d'un droit de créance monétaire et qu'elle est également titulaire d’un droit conféré en vertu des
contrats et relations économiques développés avec des entités publiques Ouzbeks conformément a l'alinéa
(ec). En fin, la sentence GAFTA, elle-méme constitue un investissement au regard des critéres des alinéas (c)
et (e), dans la mesure ou son caractére bicéphale la rattache la fois a la notion de titre de créance et a
celle d’une décision de l’autorité en application de la loi? (4128).

 

    
 

  

   

“Investment. (16c) 1. An expenditure to acquire property or assets to produce revenue; a capital outlay. 2.
The asset acquired or the sum invested. 3. Investiture. 4. Livery of Saisin.” Black's Law Dictionary. Ninth
Edition. WEST.

 

“Asset. (16c) I. An item that is owned and has value. 2. (pl.) The entries on a balance sheet showing the
items of property owned, including cash, inventory, equipment, real estate, accounts receivable, and
goodwill. 3. (pl) All the property of a person (esp. a bankrupt or deceased person) available for paying
debts or for distribution.” Black’s Law Dictionary. Ninth Edition. WEST.

i.e., Romak’s claims and rights arising out of the wheat supply transaction and the GAFTA Award.

DOJ, 44 121-128.

-44-

179.

180.

181.

182.

156

The Arbitral Tribunal disagrees with this approach.

First, the approach advanced by Romak deprives the term “investments” of any inherent
meaning, which is contrary to the logic of Article 1(2) of the BIT. Indeed, as already
mentioned, the categories of investments enumerated in Article 1(2) of the BIT are not
exhaustive, and do not constitute an all-encompassing definition of “investment.” Both
Parties agree that this is the case. Therefore, there may well exist categories different
from those mentioned in the list which, nevertheless, could properly be considered
investments protected under the BIT. Accordingly, there must be a benchmark against
which to assess those non-listed assets or categories of assets in order to determine
whether they constitute an “investment” within the meaning of Article 1(2). The term
“investment” has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored when considering the list
contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT.

Second, such literal application of the terms of the BIT effectively ignores the second
sentence of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, which requires the interpreter to
take into account, together with the “ordinary meaning” of the terms of the treaty, their
context and the object and purpose of the treaty. The BIT’s object and purpose is
reflected in its preamble, which declares that the Contracting Parties entered into the
BIT “[rlecognizing the need to promote and protect foreign investments with the aim to
foster the economic prosperity of both States” and “[d]esiring to intensify economic

cooperation to the mutual benefit of both States”.

Furthermore, and shedding more light on the “context” of the list contained in Article
1(2) of the BIT and on the “object and purpose” of the BIT, on the same day the BIT
was signed, the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Uzbekistan also entered into
an Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation.'*° This treaty specifically regulates
the two States’ mutual rights and obligations in relation to contracts for the sale of
goods between parties established in the two States (see, particularly, Articles 1, 5.2 and
6). The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore persuaded that the Contracting Parties to the BIT
adopted a distinction — also drawn in international practice — between trade and
investment, and that a special and discrete treaty was concluded with respect to

investment.

 

Accord de et de coopé ique entre la Confédération suisse et la
d’Ouzbékistan, signed on April 16, 1993 and in force since July 22, 1994 (Exhibit R-45).

-45-

183.

184.

&

185.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that a construction based solely on the
“ordinary meaning” of the terms of the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT, as
advocated by Romak, is inconsistent with the given context and ignores the object and
purpose of the BIT.

In addition, for a number of reasons the Arbitral Tribunal finds that a mechanical
application of the categories listed in Article 1(2) of the BIT would produce “a result
which is ifestly absurd or un ble.”'°7 Such an is contrary to Article
32(b) of the Vienna Convention.

First, said interpretation would eliminate any practical limitation to the scope of the
concept of “investment.” In particular, it would render meaningless the distinction
between investments, on the one hand, and purely commercial transactions, on the

other. As the Joy Mining tribunal explained:

  

if a distinction is not drawn between ordinary sales contracts, even if
complex, and an investment, the result would be that any sales or
procurement contract involving a State agency would qualify as an
investment. International contracts are today a central feature of
international trade and have stimulated far reaching developments in the
governing law, among them the United Nations Convention on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, and significant conceptual contributions.
Yet, those contracts are not investment contracts, except in exceptional
circumstances, and are to be kept separate and distinct for the sake of a
stable legal order. Otherwise, what difference would there be with the many
State contracts that are submitted every day to international arbitration in
connection with contractual performance, at such bodies as the
International Chamber of Commerce and the London Court of International
Arbitration?'**

 

186. Second, the mechanical application of the categories found in Article 1(2) would create,

157

158

de facto, a new instance of review of State court decisions concerning the enforcement
of arbitral awards. Under the scenario advocated by Romak, any award rendered in
favor of a national of a Contracting Party (even one rendered in a purely commercial
arbitration procedure) would be considered a “claim to money” or, arguably — as
pleaded by Romak — a “right given by decision of the authority.” The refusal or failure

of the host State’s courts to enforce such an award would therefore arguably provide

Vienna Convention, Article 32(b).

Joy Mining Machinery Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on Jurisdiction,

August 6, 2004, 58. See, also Fedax NV v. Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Award on
Jurisdiction, July 11, 1997, § 42.

-46-

187.

18:

189.

x

8.

So

sufficient grounds for a de novo review — under a different international instrument and
on grounds different from those that would normally apply — of the State courts’

decision not to enforce an award.

Finally, the approach that Romak advances would mean that every contract entered into
between a Swiss national and a State entity of Uzbekistan (regardless of the nature and
object of the contract), as well as every award or judgment in favor of a Swiss national
(irrespective of the nature of the underlying transaction), would constitute an
investment under the BIT. This in turn would mean that, by entering into the BIT,
Switzerland and Uzbekistan have renounced, in respect of every contract entered into
with a national of the other Contracting Party, the application of domestic (or the
chosen governing) law, and surrendered the jurisdiction of their own domestic courts
(or the chosen dispute-resolution forum), even if the contract is a simple one-off sales

transaction.

Based on the above considerations, Romak’s proposed literal construction of Article
1(2) of the BIT is untenable as a matter of international law. The Arbitral Tribunal
must therefore explore the meaning of the word “investments” contained in the
introductory paragraph of that Article. As stated above at paragraph 180, the categories
enumerated in Article 1(2) are not exhaustive and are clearly intended as i//ustrations.
Thus, for example, while many “claims to money” will qualify as “investments,” it does
not follow that a// such assets necessarily so qualify. The term “investments” has an
intrinsic meaning, independent of the categories enumerated in Article 1(2). This

meaning cannot be ignored.

In construing the term “investments,” the Arbitral Tribunal will have due regard to the
object and purpose of the BIT which, by referring to “economic cooperation to the
mutual benefit of both States” and to the “aim to foster the economic prosperity of both

States,” suggests an intent to protect a particular kind of assets, distinguishing them
from mere ordinary commercial transactions. However, it is also plain that the BIT’s
stated object and purpose sheds little light on the meaning of the term “investments,”

and “/eaves [it] ambiguous or obscure.”

-47-

190.

191.

192.

19.

194,

159

160

S

Nv

3.

=z

The Arbitral Tribunal must therefore determine the contours of the term “investments.”
In this regard, legal doctrine, as well as the decisions of other arbitral tribunals, may be

nce in illustrating the reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal.'*

 

of a

The notion of investment has become one of the most controversial issues in the context

of the determination of jurisdiction in investment arbitration.’

The Arbitral Tribunal is very much aware that it is not faced with the preoccupations of
other tribunals acting within the framework of the ICSID Convention. These tribunals
have deemed it necessary to define “investment” in light of the jurisdictional
requirements imposed by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention — which, incidentally,
does not contain a definition of the term “investment.”

However, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot ignore the fact that Article 9(3) of the BIT

161

provides for the possibility to resort to ICSID Arbitration. ”’ Romak has suggested that

the definition of the term “investment” may vary depending on the investor’s choice
between UNCITRAL or ICSID Arbitration, and has suggested that the definition of
“investment” in UNCITRAL proceedings (i.e., under the BIT alone) is wider than in
ICSID Arbitration.'”

The Arbitral Tribunal does not share this view, which could lead to “wnreasonable”
results. This view would imply that the substantive protection offered by the BIT would
be narrowed or widened, as the case may be, merely by virtue of a choice between the

various dispute resolution mechanisms sponsored by the Treaty. This would be both

See, supra, footnotes 148 and 149.

See, E. Gaillard, “Identify or Define? Reflections on the Evolution of the Concept of Investment in ICSID
Practice” in International Investment Law for the 21st century Essays in Honour of Christoph Schreuer,
Oxford (2009), pp. 403-416; Y. Andreeva, “Salvaging or Sinking the Investment? MHS vy. Malaysia
Revisited”, The Law and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals, Volume 7, No. 2 (2008), p. 161;
D. Krishan, “A Notion of ICSID Investment” in Jnvestment Treaty Arbitration: A Debate and Dis on
(T. Weiler ed.), (2008); S. Manciaux, “The Notion of Investment: New Controversies” in Journal of World
Investment & Trade (2008), p. 443; D. Carreau, v. Investissements, Rép. Dr. int. Dalloz, Paris (August
2008); A. Rigo Sureda, “La Nocién de Inversién Protegida” in Arbitraje Internacional: Tensiones Actuales
(F. Mantilla-Serrano, coord.), Legis (2007), p. 3; I. Fadlallah, “La notion d’investissement: vers une
restriction la compétence du CIRDI?”, in Liber Amicorum Robert Briner, CC Publishing (2005), p. 259 ;
N. Rubins “The Notion of * 7 in Arbitration” in Foreign
Investment Disputes (N. Horn, S. Krill, eds.), Kluwer (2004), p. 283. See also the commentaries on Czech
Republic v. Pren Nreka, infra, footnote 193.

 

 

 

Switzerland became a member of the ICSID Convention on June 14, 1968 and Uzbekistan on August 25,
1995.

C-PHB1, 138. See, espousing a similar approach, Mytilineos Holdings SA v. The State Union of Serbia &
Montenegro and Republic of Serbia, Partial Award on Jurisdiction, 8 September, 2006, $f 111 - 125.

-48-

absurd and unreasonable. Naturally, there are specific jurisdictional restrictions
imposed by the ICSID Convention (for example, the limitation with respect to physical
persons who are dual nationals, or to the existence of a “legal dispute”). However, said
restrictions do not bear on the definition of “investment”. There is no dispute that the
ICSID Convention’s drafters offered no definition for the term “investment.” There is
no basis to suppose that this word had a different meaning in the context of the ICSID
Convention than it bears in relation to the BIT. Indeed, the drafters appear to have
excluded any specific definition from the ICSID Convention precisely to accord
contracting parties a great deal of flexibility in their designation of transactions or

disputes as investment-related in their instruments of consent.

195. On this basis, it would be unreasonable to conclude that the Contracting Parties
contemplated a definition of the term “investments” which would effectively exclude
recourse to the ICSID Convention and therefore render meaningless — or without effet
utile — the provision granting the investor a choice between ICSID or UNCITRAL
Arbitration. As already noted, this would run counter to the rule of construction
requiring the interpreter to infer that a State party to two or more treaties which employ
the same term in the same (or a similar) context intended to give said term the same (or

at least a compatible) meaning in all the treaties.'*

196. In the realm of investment arbitration, ICSID Awards are by far the most numerous
awards in the public domain.'“ As explained above, the Arbitral Tribunal considers
that certain Awards cited by the Parties appropriately summarize the methods that have
been used in the past in order to give content to the term “investment,” and help to

explain the reasoning of this Arbitral Tribunal in the case at hand.

197. Two approaches can be identified in this regard.’ Certain arbitral tribunals have taken
a “conceptualist” approach and have considered that there exists a definition of
investment that entails certain elements which must be present in order to assert
jurisdiction ratione materiae. Other tribunals have resorted to a more “pragmatic”

163 “<1¢ can hardly be supposed that Greece should at the same time have intended to give a scope to its

reservation of ‘disputes relating to the territorial status of Greece’ which differed fundamentally from that
given to it both in the General Act an in its declaration under the optional clause.” (Agean Sea Continental

Shelf, Judgment, [CJ Reports 1978, p. 3, 457).

This is no doubt why both Romak and Uzbekistan have made multiple references to ICSID Arbitral Awards
in their submissions.
165 The doctrine has already attempted to establish categories on the approach to the notion of investment, see,
supra, footnote 160.

-49-

approach which avoids any generalization, and considers the presence of certain
elements typical of investments — even if they are not always present in every

investment — to suffice for the purpose of establishing jurisdiction.

198. The Salini arbitral tribunal was among the first to attempt a definition of “investment”
providing a list of the hallmarks of “investment.” Its conclusions, which were
discussed at length the by the Parties in the present proceedings and referred to by them

as the “Salini test,” were expressed as follows:

The doctrine generally considers that investment infers: contributions,
certain duration of performance of the contract and a participation in the
risks of the transaction [citations omitted]. In reading the Convention's
Preamble, one may add the contribution to the economic development of the
host State of the investment as an additional condition.

In reality, these various elements may be interdependent. Thus, the risks of
the transaction may depend on the contributions and the duration of
performance of the contract. As a result, these various criteria should be
assessed globally even if for the sake of reasoning, the Tribunal considers
them individually here.

Although the total duration for the performance of the contract, in
accordance with the CCAP, was fixed at 32 months, this was extended to 36
months. The transaction, therefore, complies with minimal length of time
upheld by the doctrine, which is from 2 to 5 years [citations omitted].'°

199. The pragmatic approach to identifying the existence of an investment was described by

another arbitral tribunal as follows:

This statement also indicates that investment as a concept should be
interpreted broadly because the drafters of the Convention did not impose
any restrictions on its meaning. Support for a liberal interpretation of the
question whether a particular transaction constitutes an investment is also
found in the first paragraph of the Preamble to the Convention, which
declares that ‘the Contracting States [are] considering the need for
international cooperation for economic development, and the role of private
international investment therein’. This language permits an inference that
an international transaction which contributes to cooperation designed to
promote the economic development of a Contracting State may be deemed
to be an investment as that term is understood in the Convention.'*

Finally, applying the definition of an investment proffered by the Slovak
Republic (para. 78, supra), it would seem that the resources provided

16 Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco, supra, footnote 66, § 52.
17 Idem, 4 54.

68 CSOB v. The Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, 4 64.

-50-

through CSOB’s banking activities in the Slovak Republic were designed to
produce a benefit and to offer CSOB a return in the future, subject to an
element of risk that is implicit in most economic activities. The Tribunal
notes, however, that these elements of the suggested definition, while they
tend as a rule to be present in most investments, are not a formal
prerequisite for the finding that a transaction constitutes an investment as
that concept is understood under the Convention.'®

200.

Ss

This latter approach has been followed by several tribunals, which have expressly or

impliedly criticized the strict application of the “Salini test.”'°

201.

Other tribunals have espoused the “conceptualist” approach in Salini, but have

nevertheless refused to endorse all of the constitutive elements invoked in that award.'7!

202.

ns

In particular, the tribunals in LES/-Dipenta v. Algeria and Pey Casado v. Chile revisited

Salini in the following terms:

[..-] it seems that, in conformity with the objectives of the Convention, for a
contract to be deemed an investment it must fulfill the following three
conditions;

a) the contracting party has made a contribution in the country in
question,

b) this contribution must extend over a certain period of time, and
c) it must entail some risk for the contracting party.

However, it does not seem necessary to establish that the contract
addresses economic development of the country, a condition that is in any

16 Idem at 90.

1 MCI Power Group, LC and New Turbine, Inc v. Ecuador, CSID Case No. ARB/03/6, Award of July 31,
2007, | 165; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision of the ad
hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, September 25, 2007, 71; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd
v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award of July 24, 2008, | 312-317;
Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN v. The Government of Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision
of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, April 16, 2009, 4] 78-79 (citing Biwater v.
Tanzania).

 

 

   

Consortium Groupement LESI-Dipenta v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/8, Award of January 10, 2005, § 13(iv); LES/, SpA and Astaldi, SpA v People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria, Award on Jurisdiction of July 12 2006, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/3, § 72(iv); Bayindir
Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS y, Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID CaseNo. ARB/03/29, Award on
Jurisdiction of November 14, 2005, § 130; Jan de Nul NV and Dredging International NV v, Arab Republic
of Egypt, ICSID Case No.ARB/04/13, Award on Jurisdiction of June 16, 2006, 4 91; Saipem SpA v.
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award on Jurisdiction and
Recommendation on Provisional Measures, March 21, 2007, 99; Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18, Award on Jurisdiction of July 6, 2007, § 116.

-51-

case difficult to establish and is implicitly covered by the three conditions
adopted herein.'”

203. This was also the view of the Pey Casado tribunal:

This Tribunal considers that a definition of investment does exist within
the meaning of the ICSID Convention and that it does not suffice to note
the existence of certain ‘characteristics’ which are typical of an
investment to satisfy this objective requirement of the Centre’s
jurisdiction. Such an interpretation would result in depriving certain terms
of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention of any meaning, something that
would be incompatible with the obligation to interpret the terms of the
Convention in accordance with the effet utile principle, as was rightly
stated by the award rendered in the Joy Mining Machinery Limited v.
Arab Republic of Egypt case on August 6, 2004. According to the
Tribunal, this definition, by contrast, only includes three elements. The
requirement of a contribution to the development of the host State, which
is difficult to establish, appears to allude to the merits of the dispute rather
than to the Centre's jurisdiction. An investment may or may not prove to
be useful to the host State without losing its status as such. It is true that
the preamble of the ICSID Convention makes reference to the contribution
to the economic development of the host State. This reference is
nevertheless presented as a consequence, and not a condition, of the
investment: by protecting investments, the Convention foments the
development of the host State. That does not mean that the development of
the host State is a constitutive element of the notion of investment. This is
why, as has been pointed out by certain arbitral tribunals, this fourth
condition is in reality covered by the first three.'”

204. The approach of the Lesi-Dipenta and Pey Casado tribunals is reminiscent of an earlier

and more general doctrinal analysis of the term “investment.”!”*

205. There is some debate as to whether, from a purely subjective perspective — and by
analogy to the freedom of contract normally enjoyed by private parties — an investment
will consist of whatever the contracting States have decided to label as such in the

treaty they have concluded.'”* Operating under the UNCITRAL Rules, this Arbitral

Consortium Groupement LESI-Dipenta v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, see supra, note 171, §
13(iv).

"3. Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, (CSID Case No. ARB/98/2,
‘Award of May 8, 2008, § 232.

'™ See, D, Carreau, T. Flory and P. Juillard, Droit International Economique, LGDJ (3 ed. 1990), 940. The
2007 edition (Dalloz) of this treatise has been revised and no longer contains this paragraph; E. Gaillard,
CIRDI — Chronique des sentences arbitrales, SDI (1999), p. 273, particularly pp. 291 - 293.

"5 An illustration of this debate is found in: CSOB v. the Slovak Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/4,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, {fj 66-68; Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Kingdom of
Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, §] 52.5

 

-52-

201

207.

176

6.

a

Tribunal does not need to engage in a discussion of the interplay of the ICSID
Convention and the instrument providing consent to arbitration. However, we are of the

view that contracting States are free to deem any kind of asset or economic transaction

 

to constitute an investment as subject to treaty protection. Contracting States can even
go as far as stipulating that a “pure” one-off sales contract constitutes an investment,
even if such a transaction would not normally be covered by the ordinary meaning of
the term “investment.” However, in such cases, the wording of the instrument in
question must leave no room for doubt that the intention of the contracting States was to
accord to the term “investment” an extraordinary and counterintuitive meaning. As
explained above, the wording of the BIT does not permit the Arbitral Tribunal to infer

such an intent in the present case.

The point of departure for the Arbitral Tribunal remains the ordinary meaning of the
term “investment” (see, supra, J 177), which entails expenditure or contribution, as well
as the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit the existence and extent of which is, by
definition, uncertain. However, as stated above (see, supra, §§] 181, 188 and 189), the
Arbitral Tribunal needs to construe the term “investments” in its context and in light of
the object and purpose of the BIT. In this regard, the Arbitral Tribunal attaches
importance to the BIT’s preamble (see, supra, {181 and 189), and also to the
definition of the term “returns” (Article 1(3)), the repeated references to “territory’!”° in
relation with the investment (particularly at Article 2), and the description of the
protection offered at Article 3(1), all of which denote an economic activity involving

some permanence or duration in relation to the host State.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that the term “investments” under the BIT has
an inherent meaning (irrespective of whether the investor resorts to ICSID or
UNCITRAL arbitral proceedings) entailing a contribution that extends over a certain
period of time and that involves some risk. The Arbitral Tribunal is further comforted in
its analysis by the reasoning adopted by other arbitral tribunals (see, supra, F§ 198 -
204) which consistently incorporates contribution, duration and risk as hallmarks of an
“investment.” By their nature, asset types enumerated in the BIT’s non-exhaustive list
may exhibit these hallmarks. But if an asset does not correspond to the inherent

definition of “investment,” the fact that it falls within one of the categories listed in

With respect to the references to “territory” in the BIT, Uzbekistan developed at the Hearing an argument in
relation to investments under the BIT requiring an economic activity within the boundaries of the State. The
Arbitral Tribunal will deal with this argument under “Additional Considerations” at page 59 of the award.

-53-

Article 1 does not transform it into an “investment.” In the general formulation of the

wl77

tribunal in Azinian, “labeling... is no substitute for analysis

 

208.

~

It is on the basis of the plain meaning of the term “investment” that the Arbitral

Tribunal will now consider whether Romak owns an investment under the BIT.
Cc. The existence of an “investment” under the BIT
209. Romak has characterized its investment in Uzbekistan in the following terms:

ROMAK has made an investment within the meaning of paragraph (c) to
the extent that it holds a right to money, and also holds a right conferred
by virtue of contracts and economic relations entered into with Uzbek
public entities, in accordance with paragraph (e). Finally, the GAFTA
Award itself constitutes an investment pursuant to the requirements of
paragraphs (c) and (e), to the extent that its bicephalous nature
simultaneously links it to the notion of a right to money, and that of a
decision of the authority in accordance with the law.

210.

So

The Arbitral Tribunal need not rule in abstract whether an arbitral award in itself can be
considered an investment under the BIT, a matter which should be analyzed in light of
the meaning of the term “investment” as it has been determined by this Arbitral
Tribunal (see, supra, at §§ 206 and 207), and which is necessarily dependent on the

specific facts of the case.

211.

On the basis of the allegations made and the evidence produced by the Parties in the
present arbitration, the Arbitral Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the GAFTA
Award is so inextricably linked to the Romak Supply Agreement that any determination
as to whether Romak holds and investment under the BIT cannot be made without
reference to the entire economic transaction that is the subject of these arbitral
proceedings.'” The GAFTA Award merely constitutes the embodiment of Romak’s

contractual rights (as determined by the GAFTA Arbitral Tribunal) stemming from the

"7 Azinian v. United Mexican States, supra, footnote 106, 4 90.

18 See, DOJ, | 128: “ROMAK a réalisé un investissement au sens de UValinéa (c) dans la mesure ot elle est
titulaire d'un droit de créance monétaire et qu'elle est également titulaire d’un droit conféré en vertu des
contrats et relations économiques développés avec des entités publiques Ouzbeks conformément a l'alinéa
(ec). En fin, la sentence GAFTA, elle-méme constitue un investissement au regard des critéres des alinéas (c)
et (e), dans la mesure ou son caractére bicéphale la rattache a la fois a la notion de titre de créance et a
celle d’une décision de l'autorité en application de la loi.”

 

    

   

Holiday Inns v. Morocco, Decision of jurisdiction of 12 May 1974, reported in Pierre Lalive, The First
World Bank Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) — Some Legal Problems, British Yearbook of
International Law 1980, p. 159.

-54-

212.

21

214.

Nv

3.

5B

wheat supply transaction entered into by Romak.'*° If the underlying transaction is not
an investment within the meaning of the BIT, the mere embodiment or crystallization of

rights arising thereunder in an arbitral award cannot transform it into an investment.

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore address the issue of whether what Romak refers to
as “contracts and economic relations entered into with Uzbek public entities” constitute
an investment under the BIT; that is, whether they involved a contribution that extended

over a certain period of time and entailed some risk.
1. Contribution

The Parties have addressed the notion of “contribution” under the heading “regularity

of profits and return.”'*!

The Arbitral Tribunal interprets the term “contribution” in broad terms. Any dedication

of resources that has economic value, whether in the form of financial obligations,

 

services, technology, patents, or technical assistance, can be a “contribution.” In other

words, a “contribution” can be made in cash, kind or labor.

215. As alleged by Romak, its expenditure encompassed, on the one hand, the performance

180

of the Romak Supply Contract (which involved the transfer of title over 40,581.58 tons
of milling wheat) and, on the other, the performance of Romak’s obligations under the
Protocol of Intention (see, supra, at {] 12-40) which, in the words of Romak, “institutes
true cooperation between the OUZKHLEBOPRODUCT State Group and ROMAK.”'*
With respect to the supply of wheat itself, this can hardly be considered a contribution,
given that immediate payment at a market rate was envisaged under the Romak Supply

Contract.

Directly on point in this regard was the decision of the tribunal in Saipem v. Bangladesh, which was faced
with an ICC Award rendered on the basis of a rather traditional investment contract: “the rights embodied
in the ICC Award were not created by the Award, but arise out of the Contract. The ICC Award crystallized
the parties’ rights and obligations under the original contract. It can thus be left open whether the Award
itself qualifies an investment, since the contract rights which are crystallized by the Award constitute an
investment within Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT.” Saipem v. Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision
on Jurisdiction of 21 March 2007, {| 127.

 

See, OJ, $¥] 84-87; DOJ, $f] 230-234; RDOJ, $f] 230-234.

See, C-PHBI, 168: “institue une véritable coopération entre le Groupement  d’Etat
OUZKHLEBOPRODUCT et ROMAK.”

-55-

216. As a result, the Protocol of Intention (Exhibit C-13) takes on particular importance.
The Arbitral Tribunal considers it appropriate to reproduce the full text of this one-page

document:

Protocol of Intention
on mutual cooperation between Romak S.A., Geneva and
the State Joint-Stock Corporation ‘“Uzkhleboproduct”’

“Considering establishing of friendly relations between SJSC
“Uzkhleboproduct” and Messrs. Romak S.A., Geneva and for the purpose
of long-term and mutually profitable cooperation the parties have signed
the present protocol on following:

Messrs. Romak S.A., Geneva, will be assisting Corporation
“Uzkhleboproduct” in studies of cereals markets, outlooks and forecasts
of grain world stocks, as well as of same of the CIS. countries, will be
preparing and presenting to corporation as per their request operative
information on the formation of exchange prices, recommendations as
well as any other information regarding grain imports possibilities with
the consideration of the optimal transportation routes to the Uzbek
border, regulations on the insurance of goods as well as inspecting of
cereals.

While planning and distributing grain import volumes for 1996-1997,
as well as export quotas to be allocated for coming imports of necessary
grain products The state Joint-Stock Corporation “Uzkhleboproduct” will
be giving Romak S.A., Geneva, its preference and presenting appropriate
bids.

The parties have agreed to organise meetings in form of seminars in
order to discuss the current matters and exchange experience in the field
of grain markets and international trade at least twine an year.

Place and date of signing: Tashkent, 10" of July 1996.

 

SJSC “Uzkhleboproduct” Romak S.A., Geneva
Sh. Makhamadjanov Dan Pletscher
FTC “UZDON”

B. Kadyrov [sic]

217. Mindful of the importance that Romak has attached to the Protocol of Intention, at the
close of the oral hearings the Arbitral Tribunal expressly invited the Parties to inform

the Tribunal of any steps taken to perform the obligations reflected in that Protocol.

-56-

218.

219.

oS

220.

221.

222.

Romak has alleged that, in furtherance of the Protocol: (i) Mr. Dan Pletcher (Romak’s
director) established residence in Tashkent (Uzbekistan), and that (ii) the Romak
Supply Contract was entered into. For its part, Uzbekistan insists that the Protocol of

Intention was never performed.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Protocol of Intention in essence envisages that: (i)

 

Romak will provide technical and marketing assistance, (ii) Uzkhleboproduct will give
preference to Romak when presenting bids for the future supply of “grain products,”
and (iii) the Parties will meet twice a year to “discuss the current matters and exchange
experiences.” The Protocol creates no binding obligation for the Uzbek parties to enter

into future contracts with Romak, whether for the supply of wheat or otherwise.

No evidence has been submitted that substantiates the performance of any of the
undertakings contained in the Protocol of Intention. As regards Mr. Pletcher, no
evidence has been submitted corroborating either his stay in Tashkent, or any expenses
incurred in connection with his presence there. In fact, as Uzbekistan has pointed out,'*?
during the relevant years (1996-1997), correspondence with Mr. Pletcher was addressed
solely to his office in Geneva. It is apparent that the Romak Supply Agreement itself

was entered into in furtherance of the Quadripartite Agreement, and not as a result of a

“bid” envisaged in the Protocol of Intention (see, supra, at §] 32-33).

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that Romak made no contribution in furtherance of the
Protocol of Intention, which — as its title suggests — seems never to have evolved from

the status of a mere statement of aspiration, and was never acted upon by the Parties.

The only possible contribution established in the evidentiary record is the actual transfer
of title over the 40,581.58 tons of wheat, the delivery of which has never been
contested. However, as noted above, there is a difference between a contribution in kind
and a mere transfer of title over goods in exchange for full payment. Romak’s delivery
of wheat was a transfer of title in performance of a sale of goods contract. Romak did
not deliver the wheat as contribution in kind in furtherance of a venture. Accordingly,
the Arbitral Tribunal does not consider that Romak made a contribution in relation to

the transaction in question.

"3 See, R-PHB2, 104.

-57-

22:

224.

22:

221

227.

184

185

See, DOJ, 4236: “l'accord d’approvisionnement conclu par ROMAK s

2. Duration

3. Romak has alleged that “the supply agreement entered into by ROMAK was duly
performed, and it solely consisted of a first order,” and — with reference to the Protocol
of Intention — that “it would seem that the commercial relationship was intended to last
for several years, with ROMAK enjoying a preferential right with regard to future grain

imports.” '*4

=

The Arbitral Tribunal has found that the Protocol of Intention was never implemented,
and that no expenditure was incurred in connection with it. The only potentially
relevant event that has been borne out by the evidence is the delivery of wheat, which

took place between July and November 1996.'**

5. The Arbitral Tribunal does not consider that, as a matter of principle, there is some
fixed minimum duration that determines whether assets qualify as investments. Short-
term projects are not deprived of “investment” status solely by virtue of their limited
duration. Duration is to be analyzed in light of all of the circumstances, and of the

investor’s overall commitment.

6. In the instant case, Romak’s wheat deliveries spanned a five-month period. Romak
made no deliveries, whether under the Romak Supply Agreement or otherwise, before
July 1996 or after November 1996. Indeed, Romak had no history of a prior, let alone
continuing, economic relationship with Uzbekistan. The evidence in the record of this
arbitration indicates that the supply of up to 50,000 tons of wheat was Romak’s first and
last economic transaction in relation to Uzbekistan. Moreover, the five-month span
simply reflects the timeframe agreed under the Romak Supply Agreement for the sale

of up to 50,000 tons of wheat.

x

In light of the facts before it, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the duration of
Romak’s wheat deliveries does not reflect a commitment on the part of Romak beyond
a one-off transaction, and is not of the sort normally associated with “investments”

according to the common understanding of the term.

 
  

st exécuté dans le temps et il
8 agissait seulement d'une premiére commande; “il apparait que les relations commerciales étaient vouées
4 durer plusieurs années, ROMAK bénéficiant d'un droit de préférence dans l’importation de grain pour le
futur...”

 

See, Exhibit C-19.

-58-

a

3. Assumption of Risk

. Romak considers that by accepting to engage in a contractual relationship with “public
entities of a state in relation to which international observers have alerted foreign
investors to the absence of true financial security,’ Romak assumed a risk that
ultimately materialized, and was fatal to its investment.!®°

. All economic activity entails a certain degree of risk. As such, all contracts — including
contracts that do not constitute an investment — carry the risk of non-performance.
However, this kind of risk is pure commercial, counterparty risk, or, otherwise stated,
the risk of doing business generally. It is therefore not an element that is useful for the
purpose of distinguishing between an investment and a commercial transaction.

. An “investment risk” entails a different kind of a/ea, a situation in which the investor
cannot be sure of a return on his investment, and may not know the amount he will end
up spending, even if all relevant counterparties discharge their contractual obligations.
Where there is “risk” of this sort, the investor simply cannot predict the outcome of the

transaction.

. It is clear from the evidence in the record of this arbitration that, at the time it entered
into the wheat supply transaction, Romak knew that its exposure was limited to the
value of the wheat to be delivered. Indeed, Romak sought to avoid even this risk by
providing, in the Romak Supply Agreement, for payment by means of a “letter of

guarantee” or “letter of credit.”'®’

The risk assumed by Romak was therefore
circumscribed to the possible non-payment of the wheat delivery, which is the ordinary
commercial or business risk assumed by all those who enter into a contractual
relationship.

. On this basis, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that Romak’s economic activity did not

involve the risk normally associated with an investment.
D. Additional considerations

. Uzbekistan has also raised the issue of “territoriality” as a bar to this Tribunal’s

jurisdiction. The Arbitral Tribunal, with the agreement of the Parties, granted the

See, DOJ, { 238: “entités publiques d'un état pour lequel les observateurs internationaux ont pu alerter les

investisseurs étrangers sur l’absence de véritable sécurité financiére,”

See, Article 6, Exhibit C-14.

-59-

234.

23

236.

z

5.

a

Parties the opportunity to develop further their arguments on this issue in post-hearing
briefs.

Uzbekistan submits that, in order for an asset to be protected as an investment by the

188

BIT, it must be located within the territory of Uzbekistan. °” Uzbekistan emphasizes

that Romak delivered the wheat not in Uzbekistan, but at Chengeldy,'”

a railway
station located in Kazakhstan. The price was agreed in accordance with Incoterms to be

CIP (Carriage and Insurance Paid) to Chengeldy.'””

Romak argues that the BIT does not require that the economic activity take place
physically within the boundaries of Uzbekistan in order to be considered an
“investment.” Romak further contends that, even if the BIT did contain a “territoriality”
requirement, that requirement ought to be construed in a very flexible manner, and
should be satisfied where the investment contributes to the prosperity of the host

191

State.” Romak contends that such requirement has been fulfilled in the instant case.

In light of the evidence in the record, the Arbitral Tribunal has no doubt that the
delivery of the wheat supplied by Romak took place outside Uzbekistan. Further, the
Arbitral Tribunal has no doubt that Romak and the Uzbek parties involved knew that

the final destination of the wheat was Uzbekistan.

237. Although the BIT contains numerous references to the “territory” of the Contracting

States, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that Article 1(2) of the BIT, which defines the term
“investments,” does not. The Arbitral Tribunal can identify no treaty provision
requiring that the investor’s contribution physically take place within the boundaries of
the host State to trigger substantive protection. Uzbekistan relies particularly on the
Preamble of the BIT, which refers to the intention of the Contracting Parties “to create
and maintain favourable ditions for ii by investors of one Contracting
Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”. However, the Preamble does not

impose any independent requirement for purposes of establishing the existence of an

18" See, R-PHBI, {4 66-82; R-PHB2, {ff 42-68.

1 See, Exhibit C-14, Article 5.1: “5.1 USD235,-- (TWOHUNDREDTHIRTYFIVE) PER METRICTON C.LP.

190

(CARRIAGE AND INSUARANCE PAID TO) KAZAK-UZBEK BORDER STATION CHENGELDY. THIS
PRICE IS BASED ON RAILWAY RATES IN FORCE DURING JUNE 1996. IN CASE OF ANY INCREASE
NEW RATES THE UNIT PRICE TO BE INCREASED ACCORDINGLY WITHIN THE EXISTING VALUE
OF THE BANK GUARANTEE(S)/ LETTER OF CREDIT(S).” [sic]

Idem, Article 10.3: “/0.3 INTERPRETATION OF TRADING TERMS AS PER INCONTERMS”. [sic]

See, C-PHBI, ff 82-110; C-PHB2, 5-14.

-60-

238.

239.

240.

12

“investment.” The Tribunal considers that, unless contracting States have made
“territoriality” an express pre-requisite for treaty coverage (which is not the case in the
BIT), references to “territory” normally refer to the benefit that the host State expects to

derive from the investment.'”

As already stated, in construing the term “investment”
the Arbitral Tribunal has taken the Preamble of the BIT into consideration and
concluded that, pursuant to the BIT, an “investment” requires a contribution that
extends over a certain period of time and entails some risk. It is in light of these three
elements (contribution, duration and risk) that the BIT’s reference to “territory” — which

involves a benefit to the host State — has been analyzed.

The Parties have also engaged in a debate regarding the “territoriality” of the GAFTA
Award. The Arbitral Tribunal has already stated that the wheat supply transaction and
the GAFTA Award are inextricably linked, and cannot be dissociated when determining
whether Romak owned a protected investment (see, supra, at § 211). There is therefore
no need to analyze the GAFTA Award separately.

Finally, Romak has invoked two French decisions by the Paris Cour d’Appel'® in
support of its argument that the “territoriality” requirement should not be “imposed” on
Romak. The Arbitral Tribunal fails to see the relevance of these decisions to the issue
of “territoriality”. It appears that Romak relies in these decisions in order to advocate an

all-encompassing and broad notion of “investment” within the meaning of the BIT.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the decision of December 8, 2008, rendered in
connection with the saisi conservatoire obtained by Romak (see, supra, { 70), refers to
the BIT. However, the Paris Cour d’Appel’s decision is limited to a prima facie analysis
of matters relevant to the review of the interim measures that had been granted by the
Paris Tribunal de Grande Instance in application of French Law. It is therefore
irrelevant to the issue of the present Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction to adjudicate on this

dispute.

Some arbitral tribunals have come to a similar conclusion even where the applicable treaty includes a
territorial element within the definition of investment. See, LESI-Dipenta v. Algeria, {14(i) (and in the same
terms LESI, SpA and Astaldi, SpA v Algeria, § 73(i)), supra, note 171; Pey Casado, {ff 374-375, supra, note
173; Fedax, § 41, supra, note 158; and CSOB, §§ 76-78, supra, note 168.

Decision of the Paris Cour d’Appel (1st Section C) of September 25, 2008 (Exhibit C-216); Decision of the
Paris Cour d’Appel (8th Section B) of December 4, 2008 (Exhibit C-217). See also the commentaries on the
September 25, 2008 decision by P. Duprey in Journal of International Arbitration 26(4), 2009, p. 591; 1.
Fadlallah in Revue de I’Arbitrage No. 2, 2009, p. 337; and E. Silva Romero in Spain Arbitration Review,
No. 6, 2009.

-61-

241.

242.

Ss

243.

VI.

244,

245.

The decision of September 25, 2008 (which is unrelated to this dispute) dismissed a
recourse seeking to set aside an arbitral award. There, the Paris Cour d’Appel stated
that, with respect to jurisdiction, the “only test consists in determining whether the
underlying transaction falls within the framework of the treaty.” This is exactly what
the Arbitral Tribunal has done in the present Award. As explained above (see, supra,

4 173-208), the Arbitral Tribunal has discharged its mi

 

ion to construe the agreement
to arbitrate invoked by the Claimant and contained in the BIT, and has done so in
application of public international law rules as embodied in the Vienna Convention — an
instrument relied upon both by Romak and Uzbekistan. The Tribunal has therefore
addressed and answered the question raised by the Parties, namely whether the claim
brought by Romak falls within the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal as determined by
the BIT.

E. Conclusion

In summary, Romak did not own an “investment” within the meaning of Article 1 of the
BIT. Romak’s rights were embodied in and arise out of a sales contract, a one-off
commercial transaction pursuant to which Romak undertook to deliver wheat against a
price to be paid by the Uzbek parties.

In the absence of any investment underlying the dispute, Uzbekistan has not consented
to arbitrate this dispute in accordance with Article 9 of the BIT, and the Arbitral

Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in the present matter.
Costs

The BIT is silent with respect to the allocation of the arbitration costs and the costs of
legal representation of the Parties.

In the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which are applicable in the present case,
provisions on costs are contained in Articles 38 to 40. These Articles provide:

Article 38

The arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in its award. The term
“costs” includes only:

(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each
arbitrator and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with
article 39;

(b) The travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

-62-

246. The Arbitral Tribunal has fixed the costs of the arbitration in the amount of
€ 293,462.27 (including VAT). Said amount includes both arbitrators’ fees and the

247.

a

248.

(d) The travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses

are approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful party

if such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to
the extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such
costs is reasonable; ...

Article 39

7

The fees of the arbitral tribunal shall be reasonable in amount, taking
into account the amount in dispute, the complexity of the subject-matter,
the time spent by the arbitrators and any other relevant circumstances
of the case.

Article 40

1.

Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.

With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred
to in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account
the circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party
shall bear such costs between the parties if it determines that
apportionment is reasonable.

expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, as follows:

- Noah Rubins: € 32,549.28.

- Nicolas Molfessis: € 75,598.96.

- Fernando Mantilla-Serrano: € 162,203.91.

- Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal: € 7,915.02.

- Fees and expense of the PCA acting as registrar: € 15,195.10.
The Parties have contributed in equal shares to the advance on costs.

When deciding how the arbitral costs should be apportioned between the Parties, the
Arbitral Tribunal notes its discretion to allocate costs and expenses in accordance with

the UNCITRAL Rules, a discretion that is complete with respect to the cost of legal

-63-

249.

S

250.

S

251.

252.

194

19s

196

representation of the Parties. In determining the proper allocation of costs, the Arbitral

Tribunal has considered all of the circumstances of the case at hand.

Firstly, it should be noted that the Respondent has prevailed entirely as a matter of
jurisdiction. The question is whether, as a consequence, the Claimant should bear more

than half of the arbitration costs and/or pay the Respondent’s legal fees and expenses.

The Arbitral Tribunal has reviewed a number of arbitral awards in investment treaty
disputes. These awards indicate that, in this field, a general trend has developed that
arbitration costs should be equally apportioned between the Parties, irrespective of the
outcome of the dispute. One of the reasons for this, as stated in several awards, is that
investment treaty tribunals are called upon to apply a novel mechanism and substantive
law to the resolution of these disputes (see, for example, Azinian v. Mexico,'* Tradex v.

Albania,!> and Berschader v. Russia'®

). Thus, the initiation of a claim that is
ultimately unsuccessful is more understandable than would be the case in commercial
arbitration, where municipal law applies. With respect to the present dispute, to the
Tribunal’s knowledge, there has never been an investment treaty claim decided outside
the ICSID system in relation to the enforcement of an arbitral award. Other cases, such
as Saipem, share similar factual elements with the present dispute, but offered no direct
analogy.

Clearly, the general practice in investment treaty arbitration disfavoring the shifting of

arbitration costs

 

against the losing party does not always apply. In particular,
deficiencies in the presentation of a case or obstructive behaviour, which lead to an
unjustified increase of the costs of the proceedings, not infrequently justify apportioning
the arbitration costs in another way.

In the present case, neither of the Parties has presented its case in a way justifying the
shifting of arbitral costs against it. To the contrary, counsel for both Parties worked
ably, diligently and efficiently in defense of their clients’ respective interests. Nor are
there any other reasons that support such apportionment. Each of the Parties shall

therefore be liable to pay half of the arbitration costs. Each Party shall also bear its own

Azinian and others v. United Mexican States, supra, footnote 106.

Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Award of 29 April 1999.

 

Vladimir ‘ and Moise v. Russian ion, The Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Case No. 080/2004, Award of 21 April 2006.

-64-

costs for legal representation and other costs incurred in connection with presenting its
case.
VII. Decision
The Arbitral Tribunal, for the reasons stated above:
1) DISMISSES Romak’s claims for lack of jurisdiction; and
2) ORDERS that the Parties shall bear the arbitration costs of € 293,462.27 in equal
shares, to be satisfied out of the advance on costs already paid by the Parties. Each
Party shall bear its own costs for legal representation and assistance.
Issued in Paris, France.

Date: November 26, 2009.

 

Noah Rubins Nicolas Molfessis
Co-arbitrator Co-arbitrator

Fernando Mantilla-Serrano
Chairman

-65-

