ARBITRATION INSTITUTE OF THE STOCKHOLM CHAMBER OF

COMMERCE

P.O. Box 16050, SE-103 21 Stockholm, Sweden,
phone: +46-8-555 100 50, fax: +46-8-566 316 50

Claimant:

Claimant’s counsel:

Respondent:

Respondent’s counsel:

Arbitral Tribunal:

www.sccinstitute.com
Case no: Arbitration V 079 / 2005

Award on Jurisdiction

RosInvestCo UK Ltd.

John M. Townsend
Marc-Olivier Langlois

James H. Boykin

Hughes Hubbard & Reed, LLP

Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér
William McKechnie

Mannheimer Swartling

V.V. Veeder, Q.C.
Essex Court Chambers

The Russian Federation

Robert Greig

Dr. Claudia Annacker

Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP
Prof. Dr. Béckstiegel, Chairman

The Rt. Hon. The Lord Steyn
Essex Court Chambers

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC
Essex Court Chambers

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

 

 

 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

The Partie: -6-

B. The Tribunal -8-
C. — Short Identification of the Case........c.ccccececcceeseseeeseseeeseeeeeeseseeseseeseeeeeee OO
CI. The Claimant’s Perspective .....0.0.ccccceeceeeseseseesesceeeceeseeseneeeeeseneneneee -9-
C.II. The Respondent’s Perspective .......0...cccccccceeeseseeesee ees eseeeseeeeneneeeneee -12-
D. Procedural History - 16-
E. _ The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions. 7 28 -
EI. Provisions of the UK-Soviet BIT. - 28 -
EJIL. Provisions of other BITs of the Soviet Union or Russia..............0000 -31-
E.III. Articles 31 and 32 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties............. - 33-
F. Relief Sought by the Parties regarding Jurisdiction .......0.0.00ccce eee - 34 -
FI. Relief Sought by Respondent regarding Jurisdiction... - 34 -
FIL Relief Sought by Claimant regarding Jurisdiction... - 34-
G. Short Summary of Contentions regarding Jurisdiction......0.0.0.0c ce - 35 -
G.I. Short Summary of Contentions by Respondent... eee - 35 -

 

G.I. Short Summary of Contentions by Claimant

 

H. Considerations and Conclusions of the Tribunal regarding Jurisdiction ..... - 40 -
HI. Preliminary Considerations ......0.0.0.c.cccccecceeeeseseseeescseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeneee - 40 -
1. Applicable Law - 40 -

2. Competence of the Tribunal to decide on its Jurisdiction.......0.0.0.000. - 40 -

3. Principles of Interpretation 20.0.0... cece eee ee eeeeeeeeeneeeeeteeetees -A4l-

4. Decision on Act of Expropriation to be joined to the merits .

5. Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals.

6. Procedural Objections to Most-Favoured-Nation Issue..........00.ccc
HII. The Issue of Consent to International Arbitration .............ccccscceeee

1. Arguments by Respondent ............ cece eee eeeeeeeee cece eeteeeeeeeneeeneneee

2. Arguments by Claimant ..0...0.0.0 ccc eee eeeeeeteeee eects eeteteeeeeeeneeeeeieee

3. The Tribunal

 

3.1. Consent by Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT... eee

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

3.2. Consent by Art. 3 UK-Soviet BIT in connection with

 

 

Art. 8 Denmark-Russia BIT ........0.ccccccscceeeteseeteseeeseeesteeanenens -54-

3.3. Conclusion -55-
H.IIL. Subject-matter Jurisdiction — Ratione Materide .......c.cccccecee eee -55-
1. Arguments by Respondent ............ cece eee eeeeeeeee cece eeteeeeeeeneeeneneee -55-

2. Arguments by Claimant ..0...0.0.0 ccc eee eeeeeeteeee eects eeteteeeeeeeneeeeeieee - 62 -
3. The Tribunal - 69 -
3.1. Jurisdiction based on Art. 8 UK-Soviet BIT .........ccccceteeeneeees -70-

3.2. Jurisdiction based on the MFN-Clauses in Art. 3 UK-Soviet

BIT in connection with the Denmark-Russia BIT.

H.IV. Exhaustion of Local Remedies: Admissibility of Claim.
1. Arguments by Respondent ............ cece eee eeeeeeeee cece eeteeeeeeeneeeneneee

2. Arguments by Claimant ..0...0.0.0 ccc eee eeeeeeteeee eects eeteteeeeeeeneeeeeieee
3. The Tribunal

H.V. Considerations regarding Costs at this Stage... eee
1. Relief Sought by Respondent... cece ceeeeee eects ee eeeeneneeneeeee
2. Relief Sought by Claimant... cece cece te eeeeneneneeeneee

3. The Tribunal

 

I. Decisions

 

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

BIT
co
cI

cil

C II-Annex

C-1 et seq.

CB

DK-Russia BIT

ABBREVIATIONS

Bilateral Investment Treaty

Claimant’s Letter to Respondent of June 2, 2005

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration of October 28, 2005
Claimant’s First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues of
February 28, 2007

Annex to Claimant’s First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues of
February 28, 2007

Claimant’s Exhibit (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Common Bundle (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Agreement between the Government of Denmark and the
Government of the Russian Federation concerning the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated

November 4, 1993

UK-Soviet BIT/IPPA Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom

SCC

SCC Institute

SCC Rules

fn

and the Government of the USSR for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments signed in London on
April 6, 1989

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the SCC

Footnote

Page

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

para
PO

PP
RI

RII

RII

R-1 et seq.
ROSINVEST
Russian Federation
VCLT
Yugansk/YNG

Yukos

Paragraph

Procedural Order

Pages

Respondent’s Reply of February 28, 2006 to the Request for
Arbitration

Respondent’s First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues of
October 31, 2006

Respondent’s Second Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues of
June 8, 2007

Respondents’ Exhibit (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Claimant

Respondent

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of May 23, 1969
Yuganskneftegaz

Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

A. The Parties

The Claimant

Represented by:

RosInvestCo UK Ltd.
6-8 Underwood Street
London N17JQ
UNITED KINGDOM

John M. Townsend

James H. Boykin

HUGHES HUBBARD & REED, LLP
1775 I Street, N.W.

Washington, DC 20006-2401
USA

Marc-Olivier Langlois, Esq.
HUGHES HUBBARD & REED, LLP
47, avenue Georges Mandel
75116 Paris

FRANCE

Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér

William McKechnie

MANNHEIMER SWARTLING ADVOKATBYRA
Box 1711

SE-111 87 Stockholm

SWEDEN

V.V. Veeder, Q.C.
ESSEX COURT CHAMBERS

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
UNITED KINGDOM

The Respondent The Russian Federation

His Excellency the President of the Russian
Federation

4, Staraya Square

103132 Moscow

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

32/34 Smolenskaya Sennaya PI.

121200 Moscow G-200

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

His Excellency the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation to the United Kingdom

6/7, Kensington Palace Gardens

London W8 4Qp

UNITED KINGDOM

Represented by: Robert Greig
Dr. Claudia Annacker
CLEARY GOTTLIEB STEEN & HAMILTON, LLP
12, Rue de Tilsitt
75008 Paris
FRANCE

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

The Tribunal

Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Chairman
Parkstrasse 38
D-51427 Bergisch-Gladbach

GERMANY

The Rt. Hon. The Lord Steyn, Arbitrator
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields

London WC2A 3EG

UNITED KINGDOM

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC, Arbitrator
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields

London WC2A 3EG

UNITED KINGDOM

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

Short Identification of the Case

CI.

The short identification below is without prejudice to the full presentation of

the factual and legal details of the case by the Parties and the Tribunal’s

considerations and conclusions.

The Claimant’s Perspective

The following quotation from the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration

summarizes the main aspects of the dispute as follows (C I, paras. 3.6 — 3.12,

5.1-5.8):

“3.6 RosInvestCo is the owner of seven million (7,000,000)

3.7

3.8

3.9

ordinary shares of Yukos. RosInvestCo was and is competent
under U.K. laws to invest in such shares, which were
purchased on the Russian stock market in November and
December 2004. ...

Article Five of the Treaty [the UK-Soviet BIT] prohibits the
Russian Federation from expropriating the investment of a
U.K. investor, except for a purpose which is in the public
interest and which is not discriminatory and against the
payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation. ...

The protections contained in Article Five also apply to
instances in which the Russian Federation expropriates the
assets of a company in which a U.K. investor has a
shareholding. ...

The Russian Federation, through the discriminatory and
unlawful expropriatory actions outlined below and to be
described in more detail when Claimant files its Statement of
Claim pursuant to Article 21 of the Rules, rendered
RosInvestCo’s investment in Yukos nearly valueless. To this
date, RosInvestCo has not received compensation for the loss
of its investment. As a result, there is currently a legal dispute
between RosInvestCo and the Russian Federation.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-10-

3.10 Article Eight of the Treaty requires that an investor provide the
Russian Federation with written notification of a dispute and
foresees a three month period following such notification
during the claim may be resolved amicably. ...

3.11 On June 2, 2005, RosInvestCo sent a letter to the Russian
Federation notifying it of RosInvestCo’s claim and inviting it
to contact RosInvestCo, or its designated representatives for
mediation purposes, for the purpose of resolving the dispute.
RosInvestCo sent with the notice a courtesy translation into the
Russian language. ...

3.12 The three-month period contemplated by the Treaty has
expired and the Russian Federation has not contacted
RosInvestCo or any of its legal representatives. RosInvestCo
has therefore elected to exercise its right to submit its dispute
with the Russian Federation to arbitration before the
Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
in accordance with Article Eight of the Treaty ... .

5.1 Yukos was formed in 1993, by combining oil and gas
enterprises formerly owned by the Russian state. From the time
it was privatized in 1995-1996 until December 19, 2004, Yukos
was the leading integrated international oil company based in
the Russian Federation. Yukos published consolidated annual
financial statements under international accounting standards,
audited by PriceWaterhouseCoopers, beginning with its
financials for the year 1997.

5.2 Yukos shares were traded on the Russian stock market. Yukos
shares, or American Depository Receipts (“ADRs”) for those
shares, were also traded over-the-counter in the United States,
on the Stuttgart, Berlin, Frankfurt and Munich stock
exchanges, and through the London Stock Exchange
International Order Book. By December of 2004,
approximately 1,935 million shares of Yukos stock were
outstanding, exclusive of shares held by the company itself.

5.3 The most valuable asset of Yukos was its largest production
subsidiary, Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”). YNG represented 60%
of Yukos’ oil production and still produces one-tenth of
Russia’s total oil output. In October of 2004, YNG was valued
by investment bankers to be worth as much as USD 22 billion.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.8

6.2

-1ll-

In December of 2004, the Russian Government brought months
of harassment of Yukos to a head by conducting a sham
auction of YNG. The Russian Government justified the seizure
and auction of YNG as needed to pay a series of arbitrary
incremental tax assessments it had levied on Yukos. By
December 2004, these assessments, including penalty interest,
fines, surcharges, and the taxes Yukos had already paid,
brought Yukos’ assessed total tax expense for the years 2000-
2003 to more than 90% of Yukos’ annual consolidated gross
revenues for those years. Measured as tax expense per ton of
oil produced, that tax bill was triple the equivalent tax expense
of other Russian oil companies.

 

Yukos was denied any reasonable means or opportunity to
defend itself before the Russian courts against these tax
assessments and the forced auction of YNG.

The bidder to which YNG was sold at the auction on December
19, 2004 was Baikal Finance Group (“Baikal”), an unknown
company that listed its office address as that of a mail drop
building in the Russian provincial town of Tver. Baikal made
the only bid, for USD 9.37 billion. The auction lasted
approximately ten minutes.

Four days after the auction, the Russian Federation’s state oil
company, Rosneft, purchased Baikal for an undisclosed
amount in a secret sale. YNG thus passed into the possession
of the Russian State for less than half of its real value, without
payment even of that sum to Yukos or its shareholders.

As will be explained in more detail in RosInvestCo’s Statement
of Claim, these events constituted an expropriation by the
Russian Federation of YNG, the principal asset of Yukos.

RosInvestCo will in its Statement of Claim seek an Award:

(a) Ordering the Russian Federation to pay compensation
for the injury to the value of RosInvestCo’s shares of
Yukos. RosInvestCo suggests that, for purposes of
calculating the advance on costs in this arbitration, it
should be assumed that the amount claimed will be no
less than USD 75 million.

(b)

(c) Ordering the Russian Federation to pay interest,
compounded, on all sums awarded.”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-12-

C.II. The Respondent’s Perspective

3. Apart from the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility
which are described in a separate section below, the following quotation from
the Respondent’s Reply summarizes the main aspects of the dispute as

follows (R I, paras. 23 — 35):

23. Claimant alleges in the Request for Arbitration that it
purchased shares in Yukos Oil Company (“Yukos”) on the “Russian
stock market” in November and December 2004. Claimant does not
and cannot allege that its Yukos shares have been taken: at most the
Request for Arbitration claims that the shares have suffered a decline
in value.

24. The Request for Arbitration does not disclose that before
November 2004 Yukos had already suffered adverse tax audits and tax
re-assessments imposing large assessments for interest and penalties
for the years 2000, 2001, and 2002, and the tax re-assessments for the
years 2000 and 2001, including the assessments of interest and
penalties, had already been upheld by Russian courts, thus confirming
the illegality under Russian law of Yukos’ tax schemes, and
confirming the standards against which Yukos’ later tax returns would
be judged. The seizure of shares in Yuganskneftegaz (“Yugansk”) to
satisfy the tax deficiency for the year 2000 had already occurred in
July 2004. Khodorkovsky and Lebedev were already being held in jail
on related tax charges. All measures complained of that occurred
prior to Claimant’s purchase of Yukos shares cannot constitute an
expropriation of Claimant’s shares for the simple reason that there
was no investment at the time these measures took place.

25. The Request for Arbitration does not disclose that the adverse
tax audit and tax re-assessment for the year 2003 and the
announcement of the auction of the Yugansk shares that had already
been seized occurred on November 19, 2004, and the auction took
place on December 20, 2004. Again, to the extent that Claimant
purchased Yukos shares after November 19, 2004, or December 20,
2004, respectively, these measures cannot constitute an expropriation
of such shares, respectively.

26. With respect to any measures that may have occurred after any
shares were purchased, Claimant cannot establish that they caused
the substantial and permanent economic loss necessary to constitute
an expropriation. Claimant does not disclose the price or prices it
paid for Yukos shares in November and December 2004, but the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-13-

trading range of such shares during that period, between US$0.42 —
4.32 per share on the Moscow Interbank Currency Exchange
(“MICEX”) and US$0.44 — 4.27 per share on the Russian Trading
System (“RTS”), establishes the market value of Yukos shares during
that period. Far from there being an expropriation, it is not possible
to determine from the Request of Arbitration, apart from the request
for relief itself, even whether Claimant stands to make a profit or loss
on its purchase of shares because Yukos shares have traded
substantially above the trading low for the November/December 2004
period on a regular basis. For example, the high price of Yukos shares
on September 30, 2005 was US$1.17 on MICEX and US$1.16 on RTS,
on November 30, 2005, US$1.63 on MICEX and US$2 on RTS, on
December 30, 2005, US$2.01 on MICEX, and the high for the year
2006 as of February 26 is US$2.25 on MICEX and US$2.22 on RTS,
all well within the trading range for the October/December 2004
period.

27. The Request for Arbitration also fails to allege that claimant
has realized any loss on its purchase of Yukos shares, as apparently
Claimant has not sold any of the shares on which it bases its claim.
Since Yukos, based on published reports, is very much in business
extracting and marketing large volumes of oil and oil products, and
buying and selling oil related assets, any paper loss on Claimant’s
Yukos shares cannot be said to be permanent. Indeed, the economic
outcome of Claimant’s investment is not yet known, even to the extent
of knowing whether Claimant will eventually realize a loss or a profit.

28. It is rather extraordinary that Claimant even alleges an
expropriation of its shares based on this set of facts. It is by no means
clear what if any eligible expropriating measure is even alleged.
Moreover, as the trading ranges set forth above show, Claimant
cannot establish, based on published information, even a decline in
such prices, much less that the investment represented by the Yukos
shares has been rendered substantially and permanently valueless —
the decisive element of an expropriation or any measure tantamount
to expropriation.

29. An additional deficiency of the Request of Arbitration is that
even if somehow eligible expropriating measures and a substantial
and permanent loss of investment could be alleged, Claimant, as the
investor, cannot establish a frustration of any reasonable and
legitimate expectation with respect to the purchased Yukos shares.
Prior to November 2004, the Russian and international press was
literally full of articles relating to the 2000, 2001, and 2002 tax re-
assessments on Yukos, including large amounts of interest and
penalties, the upholding of the 2000 and 2001 tax re-assessments by
Russian courts based on the illegality of Yukos’ tax fraud schemes, the
seizure of Yugansk shares, the likely auction of Yugansk shares, and

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-14-

the arrest, prosecution, and jailing of Khodorkovsky and Lebedev.
Depending on exactly which search terms, such as “tax assessment”
“auction” “seizure” “Yukos,” and “Yugansk,” are entered, literally
thousands of responsive news articles dated prior to November 2004
show up in a simple Google search, detailing these matters. Indeed,
there were even news articles dated prior to November 1, 2004
discussing whether Yukos would be able to survive.

30. In short, prior to its purchase of Yukos shares, Claimant could
not have been unaware, or at the very least was on notice, that
Claimant should have conducted an inquiry as to the legality of
Yukos’ tax reporting, the magnitude of the tax re-assessments, the
likelihood that the tax re-assessments would be upheld by the Russian
courts, the fact that Yugansk shares had already been seized, the
likelihood that Yugansk shares would be auctioned for substantially
less than valuations previously obtained, and Yukos’ owners and
principals would be prosecuted and jailed for related tax crimes. This
information was not lost on the financial community, which had
caused Yukos stock to fall from its range of US$9 — 15 per share for
the period January 1, 2003 through April 30, 2004 to a range of US$3
—4 per share for the period August 1, 2004 through October 31, 2004.

31. Claimant’s purchase of shares of Yukos in November and
December 2004 therefore could not have been made on reasonable
and legitimate expectations that did not take these adverse
circumstances and all of this negative public information and negative
market experience into account. Indeed, it would not appear that any
“expropriating” event is alleged in the Request for Arbitration that
was not disclosed or foreshadowed in public documents prior to
Claimant’s alleged purchases of Yukos shares. At the very least,
Claimant’s purchase of Yukos shares in November and December
2004 involved a strong element of risk and speculation, thus
precluding a determination of expropriation.

32. Although the Tribunal should not reach these issues on these
facts, the Russian Federation specifically denies the allegations in the
Request for Arbitration concerning the alleged expropriating events.
Specifically, the Russian Federation denies that the auctions
complained of, including the tax re-assessments on Yukos, the seizure
of shares of Yugansk, and the sale of such shares at auction to satisfy
outstanding tax liens, were anything other than the legitimate exercise
of the Russian Federation’s power to tax and to take measure to
enforce tax laws.

33. The tax schemes employed by Yukos included the misuse of
special low tax zones in Russia through the setting up of sham
companies and the use of such companies to engage in the sham
purchase and sale of oil and oil products arranged by Yukos resulting

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-15-

in the payment of taxes only on the basis of the nominal sale prices
paid for such products by the sham companies, and accumulation of
profits untaxed through the sale of oil and oil products offshore at
much higher prices recorded on the books of the sham companies, but
transferred to without the payment of any taxes and reported by Yukos
in its consolidated financial statements. The tax schemes employed by
Yukos constituted massive tax fraud, plainly violate Russian tax laws,
and indeed would violate the laws of almost any State in which such
transparent schemes might be attempted.

34. The question of the amount of compensation is not reached,
and cannot even be addressed based on the allegations contained in
the Request for Arbitration. The Russian Federation specifically
denies that compensation in any amount may be determined or is due.

35. Except as specifically and expressly admitted in this Reply, the

Russian Federation denies all of the allegations in the Request for
Arbitration.”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-16-

D.__Procedural History

4. On June 2, 2005 the Claimant sent a letter to the Respondent (C 0) notifying
it of the Claimant’s claim and inviting the Respondent to contact the
Claimant or its designated representatives for mediation purposes according
to Article 8(2) of the 1989 Agreement between the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (UK-Soviet BIT). The letter contained a courtesy

translation into the Russian language.

5. According to Article 5 and 8 SCC rules, arbitral Proceedings against the
Respondent commenced with the Request for Arbitration sent by the
Claimant to the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
(SCC Institute) on October 28, 2005 (C I). The Claimant invoked the Russian
Federation’s consent to arbitration provided in Article 8 of the UK-Soviet
BIT. The Claimant designated The Rt. Hon. The Lord Steyn as its appointed

arbitrator and suggested Stockholm as the Place of Arbitration.

6. Pursuant to Article 10 SCC rules, the Respondent replied to the SCC Institute
on February 28, 2006 (R I) raising in particular several objections to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and presenting its view of the dispute as quoted above
(para. 3). The Respondent designated Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, QC as its

appointed arbitrator and agreed that the Place of Arbitration be Stockholm.

7. On May 9, 2006 the SCC Institute confirmed Prof. Bockstiegel as Chairman
of the Tribunal.

8. By e-mail of June 6, 2006, the Parties were sent an annotated preliminary

agenda for the First Procedural Meeting to be held on June 27, 2006 in Paris.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-17-

The Tribunal invited the Parties to try to agree in advance of the meeting on
whether a bifurcation is deemed appropriate in view of the Respondent’s

jurisdictional objections and, if that was the case, to agree on a timetable.

On June 22, 2006 the Parties jointly proposed a timetable for the

jurisdictional phase.

The First Procedural Meeting of the Tribunal with the Parties took place on
June 27, 2006 at the Centre Regus in Paris. The venue was chosen without
prejudice to the Place of Arbitration for reasons of convenience in accordance
with Article 20(4) SCC rules. Present at the meeting were the members of the
Tribunal as well as V.V. Veeder, Q.C., John M. Townsend, James H. Boykin,
Marc-Olivier Langlois representing the Claimant, and Robert T. Greig, Dr.

Claudia Annacker, Roland Ziadé representing the Respondent.

On July 8, 2006 Procedural Order (PO) No.1 regarding the further procedure
was issued, confirming the established timetable and taking into account the

agreements reached between the Parties at the First Procedural Meeting:

J. Meeting in Paris
This PO puts on record the results of the discussion and agreement

between the Parties and the Tribunal at the Ist Procedural Meeting in
Paris on 27 June 2006.

2. Communications

2.1. The Tribunal shall address communications to Counsel of the
Parties. E-mail and fax communications will be addressed to
all counsel of the Parties. Courier mail will be addressed to
the lead counsel indicated by each Party.

2.2. Counsel of the Parties shall address communications directly
to each member of the Tribunal with a copy to counsel for the
other Party either by courier or by fax ( but fax
communications shall not exceed 15 pages ) and always, in
addition, by e- mail, to allow direct access during travels.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

2.3.

2.4.

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

3.1.

3.2.

3.3.

4.1.

4.2.

-18-

To facilitate word-processing and citations in the deliberations
and later decisions of the Tribunal, the e-mail transmission of
briefs and longer submissions shall be in Windows Word.

In view of the different law offices used by counsel of
Claimant, the Parties shall agree as to which law office
Respondent shall send its courier communications.

Deadlines for submissions shall be considered as complied
with if the submission is received by the Tribunal and the other
Party in electronic form or by courier on the respective date.

Longer submissions shall be preceded by a Table of Contents.

To facilitate that parts can be taken out and copies can be
made, submissions of all documents including statements of
witnesses and experts shall be submitted separated from
Briefs, unbound in 2-ring binders and preceded by a list of
such documents consecutively numbered with consecutive
numbering in later submissions (C-1, C-2 etc. for Claimants;
R-I, R-2 etc. for Respondents) and with dividers between the
documents. As far as possible, in addition, documents shall
also be submitted in electronic form ( preferably in Windows
Word to facilitate word processing and citations ).

Particulars Regarding the Procedure

The Procedure shall be in accordance with the SCC Rules of
Arbitration in force as from I April 1999.

The language of the arbitral procedure shall be English.

The place of arbitration is Stockholm, Sweden.

Jurisdictional Phase

A first phase of the procedure will deal with the jurisdictional
objections raised by Respondent in part I of its Reply dated
February 28, 2006.

If those objections are resolved in favor of going forward, a
second phase will deal with the other issues raised by

Claimant’s claim and Respondent’s defense and a further
timetable will be established for that purpose.

5. Timetable for Jurisdictional Phase

5.1.

July 27, 2006

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

5.2.

5.3.

5.4.

5.5.

5.6.

5.7.

5.8.

5.9.

5.10.

-19-

Claimant to propound initial document request to Respondent
based on Respondent's Reply of February 28, 2006

October 31, 2006:

Respondent’s Principal Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues
(Items LA, IB, and LC of Reply), together with witness
statements, documents, and expert reports (if any); and
Respondent to respond to Claimant’s initial document request

November 24, 2006:

Claimant may propound second document request to
Respondent

January 19, 2007

Respondent to respond to Claimant’s second document request
February 28, 2007

Claimant’s Principal Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues,
together with witness statements, documents, and expert
reports (if any)

Mar. 23, 2007

Respondent to propound document request to Claimant

April 3, 2007

Pre-Hearing Conference between the Parties and the Tribunal,
if considered necessary by the Tribunal, either in Paris in

person or by telephone.

As soon as possible thereafter, Tribunal issues a Procedural
Order regarding details of the Hearing.

Apr. 20, 2007
Claimant to respond to Respondent’s document request
June 8, 2007

Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-20-

5.11. June 22, 2006 (sic. Should be 2007)

Claimant may apply for authorization to submit further
documents in reply to Respondent’s Reply Memorial

Subject to the Tribunal’s decision on such an application,
thereafter, no new evidence may be submitted, unless agreed
between the Parties or expressly authorized by the Tribunal.

5.12. June 29, 2007
Parties submit

* notifications of the witnesses and experts
presented by themselves or by the other Party
they wish to examine at the Hearing,

* and a chronological list of all exhibits with
indications where the respective documents can
be found in the file.

5.13. July 24-25, 2007

Hearing on Jurisdictional Issues.

After consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal may extend
the Hearing to July 26 or 27, 2007. But in any case, the Parties
and the members of the Tribunal will block all four days and
book accommodation for the full period.

5.14. By dates set at the end of the Hearing after consultation with
he Parties, Parties shall submit Post-Hearing Briefs (no new
documents allowed).

6. Evidence

6.1. The Parties and the Tribunal may use, as a guideline, the
"IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration", always subject to changes
considered appropriate in this case by the Tribunal.

6.2. If or insofar as the Parties cannot agree on a document
request, they may submit the matter to the Tribunal for
decision in such a manner that the timetable up to the Hearing
can be maintained.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-21-

Documentary Evidence

 

7.1. All documents ( including texts and translations into English
of all substantive law provisions, cases and authorities)
considered relevant by the Parties shall be submitted with their
Briefs, or as otherwise established in the Timetable.

7.2. All documents shall be submitted in the form established above
in the section on communications.

7.3. Subject to the provisions of section 5.11, new factual
allegations or evidence shall not be any more permitted after
the respective dates for the Rebuttal Briefs indicated in the
above Timetable unless agreed between the Parties or
expressly authorized by the Tribunal.

7.4. Documents in a language other than English shall be
accompanied by a translation into English of all relevant
sections.

8. Witness Evidence

8.1. Written Witness Statements of all witnesses shall be submitted
together with the Briefs mentioned above by the time limits
established in the Timetable.

8.2. In order to make most efficient use of time at the Hearing,
written Witness Statements shall generally be used in lieu of
direct oral examination though exceptions may be admitted by
the Tribunal. Therefore, insofar as, at the Hearing, such
witnesses are invited by the presenting Party or asked to attend
at the request of the other Party, the available hearing time
should mostly be reserved for cross-examination and re-direct
examination, as well as for questions by the Arbitrators.

 

Expert Evidence

Should the Parties wish to present expert testimony, the same
procedure shall apply as for witnesses, but with some allowance for
brief direct testimony of the expert on application of the presenting
Party.

10. Hearing
10.1. As indicated in the timetable above, the Hearing shall be from

July 24 to 25, 2007, but, after consultation with the Parties, the
Tribunal may extend the Hearing to July 26 or 27, 2007.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

10.2.

10.3.

10.4.

10.5.

10.6.

10.7.

10.8.

10.9.

-22-

The Hearing shall be held in Stockholm at a site selected by
the Parties after consultation with the Tribunal. The Parties
shall make the necessary logistical arrangements and
reservations and shall share the respective costs. They shall
take the necessary steps and inform the Tribunal as soon as
possible.

The Parties may present opening statements of up to three
hours.

No new documents may be presented at the Hearing. But
demonstrative exhibits may be shown using documents
submitted earlier in accordance with the Timetable.

To allow all concerned the necessary evaluation of the day and
preparation of the next day, the Hearing will start at 9:00 and
end at 17:00 hours, subject to changes decided by the Tribunal
after consultation with the Parties.

Taking into account the time available during the period
provided for the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal intends
to establish equal maximum time periods both for the Claimant
and for the Respondent which the Parties shall have available.
Changes to that principle may be applied for at the latest at the
time of the Pre-Hearing Conference.

A transcript shall be made of the Hearing and sent to the
Parties and the Arbitrators. The Parties, who shall share the
respective costs, shall try to agree on and make the necessary
arrangements in this regard and shall inform the Tribunal
accordingly before the time of the Pre-Hearing Conference.

Should the Parties be presenting a witness or expert not
testifying in English and thus requiring interpretation, they are
expected to provide the interpreter unless agreed otherwise.
However, the Parties are encouraged to agree on interpreters
and make common arrangements in this regard. Should more
than one witness or expert need interpretation, to avoid the
need of double time for successive interpretation, simultaneous
interpretation shall be provided.

Further details regarding the Hearing will be given in the PO
by the Tribunal under section 5.8 of the Timetable.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-23-

1. Extensions of Deadlines and Other Procedural Decisions

11.1. Short extensions may be agreed between the Parties as long as
they do not affect later dates in the Timetable and the Tribunal
is informed before the original date due.

11.2. Extensions of deadlines shall only be granted by the Tribunal
on exceptional grounds and provided that a request is
submitted immediately after an event has occurred which
prevents a Party from complying with the deadline.

11.3. The Tribunal indicated to the Parties, and the Parties took
note thereof, that in view of travels and other commitments of
the Arbitrators, it might sometimes take a certain period for
the Tribunal to respond to submissions of the Parties and
decide on them.

11.4. Procedural decisions will be issued by the chairman of the
Tribunal after consultation with his co-arbitrators or, in cases
of urgency or if a co-arbitrator cannot be reached, by him
alone.

12. Administrative Secretary

The Tribunal may appoint an Administrative Secretary at an
appropriate time before the Hearing, probably in spring 2007. The
respective costs shall be treated as expenses of the procedure.

13. Results of the Procedural Meeting

The Parties, within one week after receiving the Draft for this Order,
were given an opportunity to submit any comments if they felt that a
result of the Paris meeting was not correctly recorded. Taking into
account the comments received, the Tribunal then issued this Order in
its final form.”

12. By e-mail sent to the SCC Institute, the Chairman of the Tribunal requested
on August 22, 2007 an extension of the time for issuing the award on
jurisdiction to December 31, 2007 (Article 33 SCC rules). In an e-mail sent to
the Parties on August 24, 2006, the SCC Institute asked for comments on the
request by August 29, 2007. By letter of August 30, 2006, the SCC extended

the time for rendering the Award to December 31, 2007.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-24-

13. On October 31, 2006, the Respondent submitted its First Memorial on
Jurisdictional Issues (R II) together with copies of the documents relied upon

in the Memorial.

14. On February 28, 2007 the Claimant submitted its First Memorial on
Jurisdictional Issues (C II) together with copies of the documents relied upon
in the Memorial .The Claimant also submitted as annex to the Memorial
(C II-Annex) a historical survey directed at the period from 1917 to 1991 on

Russian state policy with respect to international arbitration.

15. On March 16, 2007 the Parties informed the Tribunal via e-mail that they had
not identified any dispute that counsel would need to ask the Tribunal to
resolve at that point in a pre-hearing conference pursuant to para. 5.7 of PO

No.1, as had been scheduled for April 3, 2007.

16. After deliberation with the Members of the Tribunal, the Chairman replied to
the Parties by e-mail on March 22, 2007 cancelling the pre-hearing

conference until further notice.

17. On June 8, 2007 the Respondent submitted its Second Memorial on
Jurisdictional Issues (R IIT) together with copies of the documents relied upon

in the Memorial (R-103 to R-327).

18. After the Parties had contacted the Tribunal via e-mail on June 22, and
June 25, 2007 respectively, the Tribunal addressed the Parties by the

Chairman’s letter of June 26, 2007 as follows:

“Dear colleagues,
the Tribunal thanks the Parties for their e-mails of 22 and 25 June
2007 and hereby replies to the information and questions raised

therein:

I. The Tribunal agrees that there is no need to submit a
chronological list of exhibits. However, in view of the many

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-25-

boxes of a great number of exhibits submitted by the Parties, to
avoid that each member of the Tribunal has to bring all of
them to Stockholm, the Parties are invited to bring to the
Hearing, for the other Party and for each member of the
Tribunal

either an agreed Common Bundle of Exhibits or parts
thereof on which they intend to rely in their oral
presentations at the hearing,

or, from each Party, Hearing Binders of those exhibits
or parts thereof on which that Party intends to rely in
its oral presentations at the hearing.

2. The hearing will take place only on 24 and 25 July, but, as a
precaution, both days should be fully blocked.

3. Since Respondent has made the most recent submission, the
Agenda should be as follows:

3.1. Short Introduction by Chairman of Tribunal.

3.2. Opening Statement by Claimant of up to 3 hours.

3.3. Opening Statement by Respondent of up to 3 hours.

3.4. Questions by the Tribunal,
and suggestions regarding particular issues to be
addressed in more detail in Parties’ 2nd Round
Presentations.

3.5. 2nd Round Presentation by Claimant of up to 2 hours.

3.6. 2nd Round Presentation by Respondent of up to 2
hours.

3.7. Final questions by the Tribunal.

3.8. Discussion on whether Post-Hearing Briefs are deemed
necessary and of any other issues of the further
procedure.

Members of the Tribunal may raise questions at any time
considered appropriate, however intend to do so only
exceptionally during the Ist Round Presentations of both
Parties, but perhaps more during the 2nd Round Presentations
of both Parties.

4. Timing (unless otherwise agreed at the beginning of or during
the Hearing):

Ist day: Start at 9:00.

Depending on the actual time taken by the Parties for their
Opening Statements, coffee breaks and the lunch break will be

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

20.

- 26 -

taken at convenient times. If Claimant uses up its full three
hours, it may be preferable that Respondent’s Opening
Statement starts only after an early lunch break.

In the afternoon, after a coffee break and short deliberations of
the Tribunal, Agenda item 3.4. (Questions and suggestions by
Tribunal)

2nd day: Start at 9:00.

Agenda items 3.5. to 3.8. with coffee breaks and a lunch break
at a convenient time.

5. The Tribunal would be grateful for an information by the
Parties according to § 10.7 of Procedural Order No.1
regarding the arrangements made for a transcript of the
Hearing.

6. The Parties are invited to submit, by 16 July 2007, a list of the
names and functions of the persons who will attending the
hearing from their respective sides.”

On July 24 and 25, 2007, a Hearing on Jurisdictional Issues was held in the
Berns Salonger, Stockholm. In addition to the members of the Tribunal, the

following persons attended the Hearing:

For Claimant: John Townsend, James Boykin, Anton Skuratovskyy (Hughes,
Hubbard & Reed, Washington D.C.); Marc-Olivier Langlois (Hughes,
Hubbard & Reed, Paris); Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér, William McKechnie
(Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra, Stockholm).

For Respondent: Robert Greig, Dr. Claudia Annacker, Roland Ziade, Lorenzo
Melchionda, Maja Menard (Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, Paris).

Ms. Thelma Harries as court reporter from the firm European Court reporting.

The Agenda for the Hearing was as outlined in the Tribunal’s letter dated

June 26, 2007, as quoted above. At the end of the Hearing:-

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-27-

. it was agreed that there was no need for the Parties to submit Post-
Hearing Briefs,

. in reply to a question to that effect by the Chairman, both Parties
stated that they had no objections to the procedure as conducted by

the Tribunal up to that time.

21. On August 7, 2007, the transcript of the Hearing was received from European

Court Reporting.
22. Beginning immediately at the conclusion of the Hearing, the Tribunal

conducted a number of deliberations by meetings in person and written

communications and exchanges.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

- 28 -

E. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions

E.I. Provisions of the UK-Soviet BIT

23. The principal relevant provisions of the UK—Soviet BIT/IPPA are as follows:

“ARTICLE 1
Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement:

(a) the term “investment” means every kind of asset and in
particular, though not exclusively, includes:
(i) ..5
(ii) shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of, and any
other form of participation in, a company or business
enterprise;

(d) the term “investor” shall comprise with regard to either
Contracting Party:
(i)...
(ii) any corporations, companies, firms, — enterprises,
organisations and associations incorporated or constituted
under the law in force in the territory of that Contracting
Party;
provided that that natural person, corporation, company, firm,
enterprise, organisation or association is competent, in accordance
with the laws of that Contracting Party, to make investments in the
territory of the other Contracting Party.
(e)

ARTICLE 3
Treatment of Investments

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than that which it accords to investments or
returns of investors of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards their

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-29 -

management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to
investors of any third State.

(3).

ARTICLE 5
Expropriation

(1) Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not
be nationalised, expropriated or subjected to measures having effect
equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to
as “expropriation”) in the territory of the other Contracting Party
except for a purpose which is in the public interest and is not
discriminatory and against the payment, without delay, of adequate
and effective compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the
real value of the investment expropriated immediately before the
expropriation or before the impending expropriation became public
knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall be made within two months
of the date of expropriation, after which interest at a normal
commercial rate shall accrue until the date of payment, and shall be
effectively realizable and be freely transferable. The investor affected
shall have a right, under the law of the Contracting Party making the
expropriation, to prompt review, by a judicial or other independent
authority of that Party, of his or its case and of the valuation of his or
its investment in accordance with the principles set out in this
paragraph.

(2) Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a
company or enterprise which is incorporated or constituted under the
law in force in any part of its own territory, and in which investors of
the other Contracting Party have a shareholding, the provi:
paragraph (1) of this Article shall apply.

 

ARTICLE 7
Exceptions

The provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of this Agreement shall not be

construed so as to oblige one Contracting Party to extend to the

investors of the other the benefit of any treatment, preference or

privilege resulting from

(a) any existing or future customs union, organisation for mutual
economic assistance or similar international agreement,
whether multilateral or bilateral, to which either of the
Contracting Parties is or may become a party, or

(b) any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly
or mainly to taxation or any domestic legislation relating
wholly or mainly to taxation.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-30-

ARTICLE &
Disputes between an Investor and the Host Contracting Party

(1) This Article shall apply to any legal disputes between an
investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in
relation to an investment of the former either concerning the amount
or payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement,
or concerning any other matter consequential upon an act of
expropriation in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement, or
concerning the consequences of the non-implementation, or of the
incorrect implementation, of Article 6 of this Agreement.
(2) Any such disputes which have not been amicably settled shall,
after a period of three months from written notification of a claim, be
submitted to international arbitration if either party to the dispute so
wishes.
(3) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the
investor concerned in the dispute shall have the right to refer the
dispute either to:
(a) the Institute of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce of
Stockholm; ....”

The Russian text of Article 8(1) is translated unofficially by the Respondent
in its First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues as follows (R II, para. 21,
fn. 15). The translation was acknowledged by the Claimant at least with
respect to all relevant parts (C II, para. 58, fn. 55; para. 65). It was, however,
emphasised by the Parties that the inclusion in the Common Bundle (CB) of
an unofficial translation prepared by one party does not constitute acceptance

by the other party of the accuracy of that translation.

“The provisions of this Article shall apply to any disputes of a legal
character between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party in relation to issues of the investor’s investment
concerning either the amount and the procedure for the payment of
compensation provided for in Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement, or any
other matters being the result of an act of expropriation in
accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement, or regarding the
consequences of the non-implementation, or of the incorrect
implementation, of undertakings under Article 6 of this Agreement.”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-31-

E.IL. Provisions of other BITs of the Soviet Union or Russia

24. The principal relevant provisions of the Denmark-Russia BIT are set out

below:

“ARTICLE 8
Disputes between an Investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party

(1) Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one

Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in connection with

an investment on the territory of that other Contracting Party shall be

subject to negotiations [sic] [between the] parties in dispute.

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled in such a way within a period of

six months from the date of written notification of the claim, the

investor shall be entitled to submit the case either to:

(a) a sole arbitrator or an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established
under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), or

(b) the Institute of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm.”

25. Article 10 of the Belgium/Luxemburg-Soviet BIT reads as follows:

“Tout différend entre l'une des Parties contractantes et un
investisseur de l’autre Partie contractante, relatif au montant ou au
mode de paiement des indemnités dues en vertu de l'article 5 ...”

The unofficial translation by the Respondent is quoted below (R II para. 28):

“Any dispute between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor
of the other Contracting Party, relating to the amount or to the
modality of payment of compensation due by virtue of Article 5...”

26. The relevant paragraphs of Article 7 of the France-Soviet BIT read as
follows. Since Respondent and Claimant do not agree on a translation, both

versions of the text are set out below:

“Tout différend entre l'une des Parties contractantes et un
investisseur de l’autre Partie contractante portant sur les effets d’une

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-32-

mesure prise par la premiére Partie contractante et relative a la
gestion, l’entretien, la jouissance ou la liquidation d’un investissement
réalisé par cet investisseur, en particulier, mais non exclusivement,
sur les effets d’une mesure relative au transport et a la vente des
marchandises, a la dépossession ou aux transfert visés a Varticle 5 du
présent Accord est, autant que possible, réglé a l’amiable entre les
deux Parties concernées.

Si un tel différend n'a pas pu étre réglé a l'amiable dans un délai de
six mois a partir du moment ou il a été soulevé par l'une ou l'autre des
parties au différend, il peut étre soumis par écrit a l'arbitrage.”

[Translation by the Respondent, R II, para. 35, fn. 27]

“Any dispute between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor
of the other Contracting Party concerning the effects of a measure
taken by the first Contracting Party relating to the management,
maintenance, enjoyment or the liquidation of an investment made by
this investor, particularly but not exclusively concerning the effects of
a measure relating to the transport and to the sale of merchandise, to
the dispossession or to the transfers provided for in Article 5 of the
present Agreement is, to the extent possible, to be settled amicably
between the concerned parties.

If such a dispute could not be settled amicably in a period of six
months from the moment it was raised by one or the other party to the
dispute, it can be submitted, in writing, to arbitration.”

[Translation by the Claimant, C II, para. 97]

“Any dispute between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor
of the other Contracting Party, concerning the consequences of a
measure, taken by the former Contracting Party and that relates to the

i ce, use or di: l of an in made by
this investor, and in particular, but not exclusively, concerning the
consequences of a measure that relates to the transport and sale of
goods, to deprivation of investment or to transfers, provided for by
Article 5 of this Agreement...”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-33-

E.III. Articles 31 and 32 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

27. Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of

May 23, 1969 provide:

“Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty
shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and
annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between
all the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other
parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;
(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the
relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established
that the parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation,
including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of
its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the
application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the
interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-34-

F.__ Relief Sought by the Parties regarding

 

F.I. Relief Sought by Respondent regarding Jurisdiction

28. As identified in the First Memorial (R II, para. 62) and restated in the Second
Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues (R III, para. 166) the Respondent requests

the Tribunal to issue an award:

“(a) Determining that it lacks jurisdiction to entertain the claim
brought by Claimant;

(b) In the alternative, determining that the claim brought by
Claimant is inadmissible;

(c) Ordering Claimant to pay all of the Russian Federation’s
costs, expenses, and attorney’s fees;

(d) Granting any further relief against Claimant that the Tribunal
deems fit and proper.”

F.II. Relief Sought by Claimant regarding Jurisdiction

29. The Claimant asks the Tribunal to award as follows (C II, p. 94):

“For all of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal should find that it has
jurisdiction to adjudicate the Claimant’s claim and should convene a
new procedural conference to establish a framework for addressing
the merits of the present dispute.”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

G__ Short Summary of Contentions regarding
Jurisdiction

G.I. Short Summary of Contentions by Respondent

-35-

30. Subject to greater detail in later sections in regard to particular issues, the

Respondent challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or, alternatively the

admissibility of the claim, principally on three grounds, which are best

summarized by quoting the Introduction of Respondent’s First Memorial on

Jurisdictional Issues (R ID):

“I. In its Request for Arbitration Claimant states that it became a
shareholder of Yukos Oil Company in November and December 2004.
By this time period, as set forth in the Statement of Defense, the
alleged acts of expropriation had already occurred or were publicly

disclosed.

2. This Memorial is submitted pursuant to Section 4

of

Procedural Order No. I dated July 8, 2006 with respect to the
jurisdiction and admissibility defenses raised in Part I of the Russian

Federation’s Reply dated February 28, 2006.

3. The UK-Soviet BIT does not contain an offer to an investor to
arbitrate a dispute arising under the substantive protections of the
treaty. The investor-State dispute resolution provision, Article 8 of the
UK-Soviet BIT, requires a joint referral to international arbitration.

4. In addition, the UK-Soviet BIT limits any grant of jurisdiction
to this Tribunal to issues of the amount and modality of compensation
for expropriation or other matters consequential upon an act of
expropriation. No jurisdiction exists over issues of the existence and
legality of an alleged expropriation. Instead, the UK-Soviet BIT
provides, in the absence of an acknowledgement, for the availability of

an independent Russian body to determine such issues.
acknowledgement or court determination is alleged.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

No such

-36-

5. Another arbitral tribunal has dismissed an investor claim on
the basis set forth in 29 for lack of jurisdiction brought under a
strictly analogous provision of the Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet BIT.
The determination and rationale of this award are fully on point.

6. Finally, Claimant has failed to exhaust local remedies, which
is a fundamental requirement under customary international law.
This requirement has not been dispensed with under the terms of the
UK-Soviet BIT. Claimant does not allege any disability that would
excuse it from satisfying this requirement.”

G.IL Short Summary of Contentions by Claimant

31. Subject to greater detail in later sections in regard to particular issues, the
main arguments of Claimant can best be summarized by quoting sections | to
15 of the Introduction in Claimant’s First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues

(Cl):

“T, The Respondent challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear
and decide on its merits the Claimant’s claim against the Respondent
under Article 5 of the Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom and the Government of the USSR for the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments signed in London on 6th
April 1989 (the “IPPA”). That jurisdictional challenge was first
raised in the Respondent’s Reply dated 28th February 2006 (the
“Reply”), submitted in answer to the Claimant’s Request for
Arbitration dated 28th October 2005 (the “Request for Arbitration” ).
The Respondent had earlier failed to make any response, let alone any
jurisdictional protest or challenge, to the Claimant’s letter dated 2nd
June 2005 containing the written notification of the Claimant’s claim
against the Respondent required by Article 8(2) of the IPPA.

2. It is common ground that the IPPA came into force on 3rd July
1991, pursuant to an exchange of notes between the United Kingdom
and the USSR. It is also common ground that the Respondent was at
all material times and remains a state party to the IPPA as the
USSR’s successor under international law, as confirmed by the letter
dated 13th January 1992 from the Respondent’s Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to (inter alios) the United Kingdom’s Ambassador in Moscow,
and the joint declaration dated 30th January 1992 issued by the
United Kingdom and the Respondent.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-37-

A. THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIM UNDER THE IPPA
3. The Claimant seeks compensation from the Respondent for the
loss of the value of its investment in Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC
(“Yukos”) as a result of Respondent’s expropriation of Yukos assets.
Article 5 of the IPPA protects such an investment from
“expropriation,” as there defined, by requiring the host state to pay
adequate and effective compensation without delay.

4. In its Reply, the Respondent confirmed its refusal to pay any
such compensation to the Claimant. Accordingly, under any objective
standard, this is a dispute about whether or not the Respondent should
pay compensation to the Claimant.

5. It is at present both unnecessary and inappropriate for either
Party to make submissions as to the merits of the Claimant’s claim or
the Respondent’s defences. At this jurisdictional stage, it is to be
presumed that the Claimant’s claim can be made good on the facts
and matters pleaded by the Claimant in its Request for Arbitration.

6. If the Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge were to be upheld
by this Tribunal, the Claimant would be left without any practical
remedy for the injury that it has suffered as a result of the
Respondent’s expropriation of Yukos assets. The notion, as advanced
by the Respondent, that in this case the Claimant should sue the
Respondent in its own courts would inevitably give rise to a claim
under international law for denial of justice.

B. THE RESPONDENT’S THREE JURISDICTIONAL
ISSUES
7. The Respondent’s challenge to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction over
the Claimant’s present claim raises three separate issues:

First Issue: The Respondent asserts that the wording of Article 8 of
the IPPA requires the prior consent of the Respondent to any
reference by the Claimant of a dispute to arbitration, and that such
consent has not been given. This issue is addressed in Part I, below.

Second Issue: The Respondent asserts that the wording of Article 8(1)
of the IPPA materially limits its scope to preclude the Tribunal from
deciding upon any issue other than “the amount of compensation and
the modality of payment,” and only after an expropriation is
acknowledged or determined elsewhere. This issue is addressed in
Part Il, below.

Third Issue: The Respondent asserts a general rule under customary
international law imposing on the Claimant an ostensible duty to
exhaust first, prior to any reference of its dispute to arbitration under
Article 8 of the IPPA, all local remedies before the Respondent’s own

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-38-

courts in the Russian Federation. This issue is addressed in Part III,
below.

8. It is necessary to demonstrate in turn that Respondent is
mistaken as to each of these three Issues; but collectively they raise
overlapping threshold questions. We therefore first set out certain
preliminary submissions concerning  investor-state arbitration
generally and under this IPPA specifically.

Cc. THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF
TREATIES

9. All three Issues turn (in whole or in part) on the interpretation
of the IPPA, particularly Article 8. It is common ground that the
IPPA, as a treaty between two sovereign states, falls to be interpreted
in accordance with the customary rules of international law codified
in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Both the
United Kingdom and the Respondent are parties to the Vienna
Convention.

10. It is also common ground that the Tribunal should look to
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention. Article 31 provides (inter alia)
that a treaty, such as the IPPA, “shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

11. The Respondent also invokes “supplementary means of
interpretation” under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention. It is not
common ground that the Respondent has properly brought Article 32
into play in the present case. It will therefore be necessary to address
these submissions of Respondent more fully below.

D. THE CONTEXT OF THE IPPA: THE USSR’S
TRANSITIONAL PERIOD (1989-1991)

12. This Tribunal may take judicial notice of the fact that, during
the period between 1989 and 1991, when the IPPA was agreed and
ratified, respectively, the USSR was rapidly transforming itself, its
economy, and its foreign trade relations with other countries,
particularly the Member states of the European Union, including the
United Kingdom.

13. By 1989, the USSR’s economy, based on state foreign trade
monopoly and centralised economic state planning, was moving away
from a closed socialist economy towards an open-market economy,
significantly increasing the need for inward foreign investment. This
transition took place more quickly than could have been imagined.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-39-

14. Between 1989 and the end of 1990, the USSR agreed to
fourteen BITs, including the IPPA. The USSR ratified all fourteen
simultaneously on 29 May 1991.

E. THE JURIDICAL NATURE OF INVESTOR-STATE
ARBITRATION

IS. These arbitration proceedings are brought by a_ private
investor against the host state under Article 8 of the IPPA (“Disputes
between an Investor and the Host Contracting Party”). These are not
proceedings between two states brought under the quite separate
provision for inter-state arbitration under Article 9 of the IPPA
(“Disputes between the Contracting Parties”). The Claimant’s claim
against the Respondent is brought independently of the United
Kingdom as its home state; so this is not a claim made or supported
by the United Kingdom espousing the Claimant’s claim as its
national. This distinction, much elided in the Respondent’s First
Memorial, cuts across all three Issues.”

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

H.

- 40-

Considerations and Conclusions of the Tribunal

 

regarding Jurisdiction

32.

HI.

33.

34.

35.

The Tribunal has carefully examined all of the many and extensive arguments
of the Parties as well as the more than 500 exhibits submitted with their
memorials. What follows deals with those aspects that the Tribunal considers

to be the most relevant in their respective contexts.

Preliminary Considerations

Applicable Law

In reply to a question to the Parties during the oral hearing, the Tribunal
sought confirmation that the law applicable to the jurisdictional question was
public international law; both Parties confirmed that this was their position

[Transcript, 25 July, p.5 (Claimant); p.58 (Respondent)].

Competence of the Tribunal to decide on its Jurisdiction

As recorded in sections 4 and 5 of Procedural Order No.1, the Parties and the
Tribunal agreed that there would first be a Jurisdictional Phase of the
Proceedings, at the end of which the Tribunal was to decide on its

jurisdiction.

This is in conformity with the generally accepted principle in international
arbitration, as well as national arbitration laws, including Swedish arbitration

law, that the arbitrators have what is most often called “Kompetenz-

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

36.

37.

38.

-41-

Kompetenz”, namely that they have the inherent authority to decide on their

own jurisdiction.

Article 34 SCC Rules provides that, at the request of a Party, a separate issue
may be decided in a Separate Award. In view of the Parties’ abovementioned
agreement that there should be a separate jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal

therefore has the authority to issue this Award on Jurisdiction.

Principles of Interpretation

The Claimant, in its written and oral arguments, has urged the Tribunal to
adopt a ‘dynamic’ approach to the interpretation of the IPPA. By this, the
Claimant appears to mean that the Tribunal should not be confined by the
circumstances against which the Contracting Parties reached agreement on
the IPPA at the time, but should instead give full weight, for the purposes of
giving meaning to its terms, to events and attitudes as they have developed
since then, notably the dissolution of the USSR, the emergence of the Russian
Federation as its legal continuation, and the radically different economic,
trading and investment policies adopted by the Russian Federation as that
period went on. In support of this, the Claimant drew the Tribunal’s
attention to the second and third paragraphs of the preamble to the IPPA,
which refer to ‘favourable conditions for greater investment’ and to ‘the
development of economic relations between the two States’. Pressed to
specify the basis in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the
Vienna Convention) for this interpretative technique, Counsel explained that
the Claimant was not relying on the provisions of Articles 31 and 32 of that
Convention in a formal sense, but rather as general indications that the
philosophy of the Vienna Convention is to look at what happens after the

conclusion of the treaty [Transcript 25 July, pp 21-2].

The Tribunal is unable to agree. It begins by observing that the present is

one of those cases — surprisingly rare in practice — in which the Vienna

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

39.

-42-

Convention is more than just a convenient reference point for the rules of
general international law, but is in fact a treaty in force between the Russian
Federation and the United Kingdom, and which entered into force before the
IPPA itself was negotiated and concluded. The consequence is that, under
the terms of its Article 4, the Vienna Convention applies as a matter of legal
obligation to the interpretation and application of the IPPA. The Tribunal
does not find that the Articles of the Vienna Convention cited can reasonably
bear the weight which the Claimant seeks to rest on them; without exception,
insofar as these Articles look toward subsequent events, the subsequent
events take the form, not merely of joint or coincident practice by the treaty
parties, but of such practice in respect of the implementation of their treaty.
Hence both subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Article 31(3) look towards
something equivalent to an agreement between the Parties (express or
implicit) on what they regard their specific treaty obligations to be, and it is
hardly to be wondered at that the Vienna Convention requires this obviously

significant material to be “taken into account, together with the context”.

‘When it comes to Article 31(3)(c), the position may be different. Here the
reference is to “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the
relations between the parties”. ‘Applicable in the relations between the
parties’ must be taken as a reference to rules of international law that
condition the performance of the specific rights and obligations stipulated in
the treaty — or else it would amount to a general licence to override the treaty
terms that would be quite incompatible with the general spirit of the Vienna
Convention as a whole. ‘The cases cited by the Claimant relate almost in
their entirety to human rights treaties and to the constituent instruments of
international organizations. It is however plain that both of these are special
cases: the former (human rights) because they represent the very archetype
of treaty instruments in which the Contracting Parties must have intended that
the principles and concepts which they employed should be understood and
applied in the light of developing social attitudes (as has repeatedly been held

by national as well as international judicial bodies); the latter (international

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

40.

Al.

- 43 -

organizations) because it is generally understood that, given the changing
nature of the problems and circumstances international organizations have to
confront, a degree of evolutionary adaptation is the only realistic approach to
realizing the underlying purposes of the organization as laid down in its
constituent instrument. It is difficult to see what bearing any of this might
have on the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal, which remains, as it always

has been, a matter of specific consent by the parties.

It is open to serious question, moreover, whether these special kinds of
multilateral treaty are at all analogous to bilateral engagements regulating a
particular area of the relations between one Party and the other. Here a
bargain is a (reciprocal) bargain and the Parties must be held to what they
agreed to, but not more, or less. The common thread among the multilateral
examples just referred to is that their nature or circumstances provide
evidence that the Parties themselves intended or understood that an
evolutionary approach was appropriate to the interpretation and application of
what they had agreed upon, and exactly the same common thread is to be
found in the two bilateral cases the Claimant invokes (the
Gabcikovo/Nagymaros case in the International Court and the Iron Rhine
arbitration). No such evidence is available here; the preambular references
mentioned above offer nothing of the kind. The Tribunal inclines to the
opposite view, namely that, so far as the treaty parties foresaw and wished to
admit an evolutionary development at all, the MFN clause in Article 3 was

their chosen vehicle for doing so — as the Claimant has itself argued.

Moreover, while the doctrine advanced before the Tribunal by the Claimant
may at first sight have an appearance of progressiveness since (in present
circumstances) it would expand the protection offered to investors, it would
in other circumstances have an utterly pernicious effect if it allowed a
Respondent State, under the excuse of having adopted in the meanwhile more
restrictive or nationalistic economic policies, to claim to escape from the

guarantees it had bound itself to in earlier bilateral treaties, and the Tribunal

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

42.

43.

-44-

can see no way in which it could devise a legal ratchet under which changes

of circumstance could be admitted in one direction only but not the other.

The Tribunal recognizes that this argument by the Claimant may have
developed as a reaction against the Respondent’s argument that certain
aspects of the national policy of the former Soviet Union should be taken as
determinants of what it would or would not have agreed to in particular
bilateral treaties. The Tribunal does not however consider this of more than
incidental descriptive interest, given that the main focus of its attention has to
be not the policies which either one or the other Contracting Party brought to
the negotiating table (and which might of course have been widely different
from one another) but what they agreed on, as embodied in the terms of their
treaty. To that extent, therefore, the Tribunal considers that neither the
argument nor the counter-argument is of any pertinence to the task before it.
That said, the Tribunal merely observes that it cannot conceive of any
circumstances in which it would be proper for it to substitute for the treaty
actually concluded by the former Soviet Union (and which both Parties to it
continue to regard as binding on them) another treaty which might have been
concluded by the Russian Federation had it then been in existence and

pursuing different economic policies.

The Claimant also maintains that what it refers to as a ‘fundamental change
of circumstances’ must obviously be taken into account in the process of
interpretation [Transcript 24 July, p. 70; 25 July, pp. 19-21]. The argument
is, however, questionable. The Vienna Convention does indeed employ the
phrase, but in the wholly different context of a claim that such a ‘fundamental
change of circumstances’ constitutes grounds for terminating a treaty (or
suspending its operation) — a possibility which the Convention
understandably subjects to onerous and highly restrictive conditions. The
invocation of the concept of in the present context is therefore misplaced and,

in the Tribunal’s view, entirely without merit.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

-45-

The Tribunal rests therefore with the conclusion that the correct approach is
to interpret the BIT even-handedly and objectively, on its terms, under the
tules laid down in the Vienna Convention, and without any presumption

either in favour of or against the Tribunal’s own jurisdiction.

Decision on Act of Expropriation to be joined to the merits

The issues as to whether, in the present case, there has been an act of
expropriation and, if so, its relevance for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal has

been discussed extensively by the Parties.

Later sections of this Award will deal in detail with the core issue in this
jurisdictional phase, i.e. whether either Article 8 or Article 3 of the UK-
Soviet BIT provide jurisdiction not only to determine any compensation that
may be due, but also over the prior issue of whether the acts imputed to the

Respondent are to be classed as an expropriation.

However, in so far as such a jurisdiction is found to exist, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the issue whether in fact the acts of Respondent are to be classed
as an expropriation cannot be properly addressed in the context of this
jurisdictional phase, because they are too closely connected to the merits of
the case, and will have to be fully argued by the Parties before the Tribunal

can come to a decision on the matter.
Therefore, as has often been done in arbitrations in similar circumstances, if
the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction, the issue as to whether there has

been an expropriation or not will be joined to the proceedings on the merits.

Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals

Both Parties have cited in argument various Decisions and Awards by arbitral

tribunals for their relevance to the issues presently before this Tribunal,

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

50.

51.

52.

- 46 -

notably in relation to the jurisdictional provisions in Article 8 of the IPPA),
and in relation to the most-favoured-nation (MFN) provisions in Article 3 of
the IPPA). The Tribunal deems it useful to make clear from the outset that it
regards its task in these proceedings as the very specific one of arriving at the
proper meaning to be given to those particular provisions in the context of the
particular bilateral investment treaty in which they appear. That being so, it
is not obviously clear how far arbitral decisions on other jurisdictional or
MEN clauses in other treaties are of relevance to the Tribunal’s task. It is at
all events plain that the decisions of other tribunals are not binding on this
Tribunal, and the Tribunal refers in this connection to paragraphs 73-76 of the
Decision on Jurisdiction in Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29). This does not however
preclude the Tribunal from considering other arbitral decisions and the
arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find that

they throw any useful light on the issues that arise for decision in this case

Procedural Objections to Most-Favoured-Nation Issue

The Tribunal has carefully examined the memorials and exhibits submitted,
as well as the presentations at the Hearing by each of the Parties on this issue.
It is not necessary to recall these arguments in detail here, but the Tribunal
has taken them fully into account in reaching the following findings and

conclusions.

Respondent (R III, para. 101) has raised procedural objections against
Claimant’s argument that the MFN provisions of Article 3 of the UK-Soviet
BIT, taken together with the Denmark-Russia BIT, provide a ground for this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In particular, Respondent argues that this second
ground was not mentioned in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, but only

later in Claimant’s First Memorial dated 28 February 2007.

In turn, Claimant argues that Respondent had raised this objection too late.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

53.

54.

-47-

The Tribunal does not encounter any procedural difficulty in dealing with the
MEN issue. First, if one were to conclude that, under Article 21 SCC Rules,
the MEN argument had to be included in the Claimant’s Statement of Claim,
such a requirement would be complied with. As can be seen from the
introductory sentence of Article 21(1), normally the Tribunal has to be
constituted and sets a date for the Claimant’s Statement of Claim. The
proviso contained in the Rule, “unless previously provided in the case”,
cannot, at least in the present context, be interpreted so as to require that
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, which had already been submitted (on 28
October 2005) as the opening step in the arbitration proceedings, had to
include the MEN issue. For at that time Respondent had not yet raised its
objection to jurisdiction. It was that objection which determined the later
procedure, and particularly provided the reason why, with the agreement of
both Parties, it was decided that (as recorded in Procedural Order No.1) for
the jurisdictional phase of the proceedings, Respondent was to be the first to
submit a Principal Memorial, after which Claimant was to submit its
Principal Memorial. It follows that it was not until that latter Memorial that

Claimant was required to raise the MFN argument, as indeed it did.

But even had Article 21 to be seen as raising an obstacle, Article 22 SCC
Rules would still have granted the opportunity for Claimant to add the MFN
issue as an amendment to its claim or to its defence against Respondent’s
objection to jurisdiction. In fact, Claimant’s submission that the MFN issue
should be included in the proceedings on jurisdiction, could, if necessary, be
interpreted as a request for such an amendment. The Tribunal has no
hesitation over using its discretion under Article 22 to decide that it is
appropriate to include the MEN issue in the proceedings on jurisdiction, not
least because this issue could be — and was in fact — fully argued by both

Parties both in their written submissions and at the Hearing.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

55.

HI.

56.

57.

- 48 -

In view of the above conclusions, the Tribunal does not have to decide
whether, as argued by Claimant, Respondent was in turn too late to raise its

procedural objection, in the light of Article 29 SCC Rules.

The Issue of Consent to International Arbitration

Arguments by Respondent

The Respondent contends that the fundamental principles of sovereignty and
equality of States in public international law require an unequivocal
indication of voluntary and indisputable acceptance by a State of an
international tribunal’s jurisdiction over the State. Therefore, the State’s
consent to arbitrate some or all investment disputes given in advance in the
framework of a bilateral or multilateral investment treaty must be clear and
unambiguous. In contrast, to presuppose the existence of a right in an investor
to direct investor-State arbitration and to require express and unambiguous
wording to “destroy” that right, as the Claimant seems to argue, is considered
by the Respondent to be devoid of any basis (RI, paras. 4, 5; R II, para. 7;
RII, paras. 93, 95 ).

Respondent asserts that the UK-Soviet BIT (R-1) contains neither an express
nor an unequivocal and indisputable implied consent to investor-State
arbitration. Interpreted in accordance with the basic rule of interpretation
expressed in Article 31 VCLT (R-9), Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT merely
obligates the Parties to agree to submit certain disputes to arbitration, but
does not constitute a consent to arbitrate. Thus the Parties are under an
obligation to cooperate to refer a dispute to arbitration, failing which the issue
would be resolved inter-State. In the present context, where there is no
determination or acknowledgement of the required predicate act of
expropriation, the Respondent argues that even this obligation to consent to
arbitration does not arise (R I, paras. 6 and 7; R II, para. 8; R III, paras. 96
and 97).

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

58.

59.

60.

61.

- 49 -

As regards the ordinary meaning of the equally authentic English and Russian
language versions of Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT, the Respondent translates the

Russian text into English as follows (R II, para. 11):

“(2) Any of such disputes that has not been amicably settled will,
after expiration of a period of three months from the moment of
written notification of such dispute, be_referred_to international
arbitration if either party to the dispute so wishes.

(3) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the
investor participating in the dispute shall have the right to refer the

dispute either to: ... [emphases added].

The Respondent maintains that expressions such as “shall consent”, “shall
assent,” “shall be referred or submitted to arbitration,” or “will be
submitted or referred to international arbitration” impose an obligation on
the State to consent to arbitrate, but do not, without more, constitute an offer
to arbitrate (R II, para. 12). It is further contended that the express “hereby
consent” formulation is not equivalent to “shall be submitted” clauses (R III,
para. 96). Although the Respondent acknowledges that there are authorities
that support the proposition that the phrase “shall be submitted” constitute
consent, the Respondent emphasises that these authorities do not address

limited grants of jurisdiction (R III, para. 99).

Invoking the Encyclopaedia of Public International Law (R-14), the
Respondent relies further on the context of Article 8(2) UK-Soviet BIT. A
phrase such as “‘a dispute shall be submitted to an arbitral tribunal by either
party” may constitute an offer to arbitrate or it may not, depending upon the
related arbitration provisions. The contrast between Article 8(2) UK-Soviet
BIT and the explicit language of the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT (R-15),
supports its view that no clear and unequivocal offer to arbitrate is contained

in the UK-Soviet BIT (R II, paras. 13-15).

In addition, it is stated that the key phrase of Article 8(3) UK-Soviet BIT,

“[w]here the dispute is referred to international arbitration,” would be

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

62.

63.

64.

-50-

deprived of any meaning, if Article 8(2) was interpreted to contain an offer to
investor-state arbitration. Such an interpretation would be inconsistent with

the ordinary meaning and with the principle of effectiveness (R II, para. 16).

The language of Article 8(2), “if either party so wishes”, is said to avail the
State and the investor equally. However, the Respondent takes the view that
Claimant and investors generally cannot be held to have unilaterally offered,
in an instrument to which they were not a party, jurisdiction over a claim by
the host State against Claimant or such an investor. To the extent that the
phrase cannot be interpreted as constituting an offer by the investor, there
would as a result equally be no — at least no clear and unambiguous — offer of

the State to international arbitration (R II, para. 17).

As to the object and purpose of Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT, the Respondent
also considers why the requirement of a joint referral to arbitration was
established. First, the requirement is said to reflect a strong Soviet policy
against submission of so-called “diagonal” or “asymmetrical” disputes to
international arbitration and, second, to be consistent with the limited subject-
matter jurisdiction as reflected in the 1987 Soviet Model BIT which lacks any
provision for investor-State arbitration. Further, in view of the general policy
of the communist block to limit arbitration to the amount or other matters
consequential to an expropriation, and not accept arbitration as to determining
whether an act of expropriation has occurred, it is considered appropriate and
well motivated that the Contracting Parties did not actually consent to

arbitration (R II, paras. 18 — 19; R III, paras. 94, 97).

Arguments by Claimant

First, the Claimant points out that the Respondent, prior to its Reply dated
February 28, 2006 (R I), failed to make any response, let alone any
jurisdictional protest or challenge, to the Claimant’s letter (C 0) dated June 2,

2005 (C II, para. 1).

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

65.

66.

67.

-51-

In response to Respondent’s objections, the Claimant contends that the
necessary consent to arbitration on the part of the Respondent is expressly
and unambiguously provided in Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT (C II, paras. 27 et

seq.).

To support its view, the Claimant maintains that the language employed in
Article 8(2) and (3) is clear in both the English and Russian versions. The
word “shall” in the English language version imports an essential element of
compulsion, inconsistent with a further requirement for the state party’s
consent (C II, para. 30). The use of “shall” in Article 9(2) for state-state
arbitration is said to confirm this interpretation, whereas the use of “should”
in Article 9(1) is believed to mark the Contracting Parties’ distinction
between compulsion and mere recommendation (C II, para. 30). The phrase
“if either party to the dispute so wishes” in Article 8(2) leaves no room for
interpretation and means that either the state party or the investor party has
the right to submit a dispute to arbitration. The Claimant further argues that
this interpretation is reinforced by Article 8(3), which is provides specifically
for the benefit of “the investor concerned” an express and unconditional right

to refer the dispute to arbitration under the SCC Rules (C II, para. 32).

The Claimant rejects the notion that Article 8(2) contains a limited “shall
consent” or “shall assent” clause, that only imposes an obligation on the State
to consent, such that a failure to do so might constitute a breach of the BIT,
but does not constitute in itself an offer to arbitrate. Instead of supporting the
Respondent’s view, the legal material cited by the Respondent (R-11)
contradicts it (C II, para. 35 et seq.) and the reliance on the Encyclopaedia of
Public International Law (R-14), being general in nature and often criticised
as outdated, is asserted to be misplaced (C II, para. 39 et seq.). In favour of its
own position, that no further consent on the part of the Respondent is needed,
the Claimant relies on the distinction between limited “shall assent” clauses

and unlimited “shall be submitted” clauses citing Professor Schreuer’s

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

68.

69.

-52-

Commentary on the ICSID Convention (C-16). Whereas the Respondent
refers to no jurisprudence in support of its interpretation that Articles 8(2) and
(3) require prior consent to arbitration by the host state, the Claimant sees its

view confirmed by numerous cases (C II, para. 44).

As regards the principle of effectiveness invoked by the Respondent, the
Claimant contends that the key phrase of Article 8(3), “[wJhere the dispute is
referred to international arbitration”, is not deprived of all meaning by
interpreting it as merely linking the right of either party to submit a dispute to
arbitration if it so wishes under Article 8(2) and the particular right of the
investor to refer the dispute to arbitration before the Stockholm Institute or
under UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules under Article 8(3) (C II, para. 46).
Furthermore, it is argued that one cannot derive from the phrase a
requirement that there must first be joint reference to arbitration, stating that
it would take express and unambiguous wording to achieve such a result
under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention because such a reading would
effectively destroy an investor’s independent “right” to refer any dispute to

investor-state arbitration under Article 8 (CII, para. 47).

The Respondent’s reliance on a strong Soviet policy is held by the Claimant
to be historically incorrect and to be irrelevant for interpretation purposes
under Article 31 VCLT as being at most a unilateral policy by one state. The
Claimant finds it significant that the Respondent has not previously raised
this point in its defence of claims previously brought by foreign investors.
Moreover, the Claimant deems it to be inconsistent that the Respondent, on
the one hand, insists upon limitations to the scope of disputes that could be
submitted to arbitration by the investor, and, on the other hand, alleges
Article 8 to require joint and specific consent to any reference to arbitration.

(C Il, para. 48 et seq.)

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

70.

71.

3.1.

72.

-53-

The Tribunal

The Tribunal has carefully examined the memorials and exhibits submitted,
as well as the presentations at the Hearing by each of the Parties on this issue.
It is not necessary to recall these arguments in detail here, but the Tribunal
has taken them fully into account in reaching the following findings and

conclusions.

In the present context, to avoid misunderstanding, one has to distinguish two

different questions:

1) Is there a binding consent to arbitration with the effect that a
prospective party to the arbitration proceedings does not need the
agreement of the other prospective party to start arbitration
proceedings?

2) If there is such a consent, what is its scope, in other words, which

issues can be submitted to such arbitration proceedings?

The second question will be discussed later in this Award with regard both to
Article 8 and to Article 3. It is only the first of these questions which will be
discussed here. And since Claimant argues that the UK-Soviet BIT provides a
consent both under Article 8 and under Article 3, this first question has to be

examined with regard to both of these provisions.
Consent under Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT

The Tribunal does not see great difficulty in interpreting Article 8 in this
context. That provision, irrespective of its material scope which will be
discussed later in this Award, contains express and unambiguous language in
its 24 paragraph: first, by using the word “shall”, which makes clear that it is
mandatory; and second, by adding the words “if either party to the dispute
wishes”, which clearly indicates that the initiation of the arbitration

proceedings depend solely on the unilateral decision by either party and that

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

3.2.

723.

74.

3.3.

75.

-54-

the other party does not have to agree again in order to permit the arbitration
to start. This interpretation is confirmed by the third paragraph of Article 8
which authorizes the investor to choose between various arbitration rules; that
provision would not make sense if the investor had first to obtain once again
the agreement of the Host State to start the arbitration proceedings. Finally,
the Tribunal notes that the wording of Article 8, again irrespective of its
scope, uses language which is found often in BITs, of both the UK and the
Soviet Union, and of many other States, and which has generally been

interpreted as a binding consent to arbitration.

Consent by Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT in connection with Article 8
Denmark-Russia BIT

The question whether the MEN clauses in Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT can
attract the application of arbitration clauses in other BITs will be discussed
later in this Award. Here, the only question to be examined is whether, if
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT can be resorted to, it provides a binding
consent to arbitration authorizing the investor to start arbitration proceedings

without the need to obtain afresh the agreement of the Host State.

Taking into account the analysis above of Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT, the
Tribunal concludes that there can also be no doubt that Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT provides such a binding consent to arbitration. The
language in its second paragraph, under which “the investor shall be entitled
to submit the case either to”, and which then once again offers several
options for the applicable arbitration rules, leaves no room for any
interpretation other than that the investor can initiate the arbitration, without

the need for further agreement by the Host State,.

Conclusion

In view of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent

has submitted in a binding way to arbitration and that Respondent’s renewed

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-55-

prior consent was not needed when Claimant initiated this arbitral procedure.
This is without prejudice to the question whether this Tribunal also has

jurisdiction over the claims, which will be discussed hereafter in this Award.

H.III.Subject-matter Jurisdiction — Ratione Materiae

76.

77.

78.

Arguments by Respondent

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
materiae to hear and decide Claimant’s claim (R I, paras. 9, 13). The subject-
matter jurisdiction under Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT would not encompass the
power to determine whether there was an expropriation and if so, its legality
(R II, para. 20). The Respondent further refuses to accept Article 3 UK-Soviet
BIT in conjunction with Article 8 DK-Russia BIT as a valid basis for

jurisdiction (R III, paras. 100 et seq.).

As regards Article 8(1) UK-Soviet BIT, the Respondent holds that any grant
of jurisdiction is limited to legal disputes “concerning the amount or
[procedure for] payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5 of this
Agreement” (the so-called ‘First Jurisdictional Clause’), or “concerning any
other matter consequential upon an act of expropriation” (the so-called

‘Second Jurisdictional Clause’) (R III, para. 2; C II, para. 58).

Against the background of this limited subject-matter jurisdiction, it is
asserted that the Tribunal only has jurisdiction when the alleged expropriation
is acknowledged, in particular through an agreement to refer a dispute
concerning the amount of compensation to arbitration, or determined
otherwise, for example by a Russian court or an act of legislature (R I,
para. 13; R II, paras. 21, 44 et seq.). It is, however, the firm position of the
Respondent that no expropriation has occurred and that the acts complained
of are legitimate exercises of the powers of the Russian Federation to levy

and collect taxes and to enforce its tax assessments (R II, para. 45). The

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

79.

80.

-56-

Respondent therefore strongly opposes the Claimant’s assertion that “an act
of expropriation” is established or admitted by “the fact that Respondent
seized assets of Yukos and sold them at auction” (R Il, para. 13). Tax
measures are said by the Respondent to be intrinsically lawful (R I, para. 15;
R IIL, para. 7). But far from having to establish the absence of a direct or
indirect expropriation, the Respondent regards it as sufficient to show that
there is an issue as to whether an expropriation occurred (R III, para. 6). The
Respondent characterizes Claimant’s argument as an attempt to skip over the
issue of whether there is an act of expropriation, factually and legally (R II,
para. 2), and concludes that in the absence of an acknowledgement or
determination of expropriation, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione

materiae to determine an amount of and award compensation (R II, para. 47).

The Respondent asserts that the Claimant, after having mischaracterized the
language of Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT in its Request for Arbitration (R II,
para. 22), has very little to say about the First Jurisdictional Clause and even
expressly accepts that it requires an established or acknowledged act of
expropriation as a predicate to jurisdiction (R III, para. 15). Although the
Claimant might in its First Memorial (C II) focus on the Second Jurisdictional
Clause, this clause is believed to be even more clearly insufficient than the
First to establish jurisdiction (R III, para. 2). The Claimant, in contrast, is said
to be alleging in its own Memorial only a “possible” grant of jurisdiction
over the existence of an expropriation, offering no textual analysis or support

leading to such a result (R III, para. 19).

The Respondent primarily relies upon the ordinary meaning to support its
view that both the First and Second Jurisdictional Clause unambiguously
require a predicate act of expropriation. Contrasting the language of Article
8(1) against other bilateral investment treaties the United Kingdom concluded

namely with Hungary, Bulgaria, Poland and Albania, and in which the

phrases “arisen under,” “relates to,” “arising under,” or “concerning

obligations of” are followed directly by the relevant substantive provision, the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

81.

-57-

Respondent maintains that under the UK-Soviet BIT jurisdiction is limited to
the matters in question following upon an act of expropriation and do not
extend jurisdiction to a dispute concerning Articles 4 and 5 (R II, paras. 23 et
seq.). Further support with respect to the Second Jurisdictional Clause is said
to be lent by the dictionary definition of “consequence” as “[a] thing or
circumstance which follows as an effect or results from something preceding”
or “[t]he action or condition of following as a result upon something
antecedent; the relation of a result of effect to its cause of antecedent’(R III,
para. 16). It is stressed that the plain language of the Second Jurisdictional
Clause sets forth the antecedent: “an act of expropriation.” The phrase “any
other matter,” coming before the phrase “consequential upon” does give the
Tribunal jurisdiction to address the consequences of an expropriation, but
cannot be read to provide jurisdiction to determine the existence of an
expropriation (R III, para. 17). Considering the basic structure of the sentence
that constitutes Article 8(1), the Respondent contemplates that instead of
actually employing additional clauses to expand the scope of jurisdiction, the
Contracting Parties would have set it forth in a single phrase, if they had
intended to grant to the Tribunal jurisdiction over the existence and legality

of an expropriation (R III, para. 18).

Additionally, the Respondent relies upon the award in the Berschader case
(R-33), where the arbitral tribunal is deemed to have resolved precisely the
same subject-matter jurisdictional issue in favour of the Respondent’s
position. The arbitral tribunal had to determine the scope of jurisdiction under
Article 10 of the Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet BIT (see above section E)
which, the Respondent asserts, contains language that closely tracks the
language of the UK-Soviet BIT (R II, paras. 28 ef seq.). Although the
Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet BIT does not contain a clause comparable to
the Second Jurisdictional Clause, the Respondent contends that the tribunal’s
plain meaning analysis in the Berschader case applies equally to the Second
Clause as well as the First (RII, para. 20). The Sedelmayer Case (C-23),

however, cannot serve as a determination on which Claimant can rely, for the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

82.

83.

-58-

simple reason that the jurisdictional issue in question was not raised (R III,

para. 15).

As regards the context of Article 8, the Respondent argues that it is entirely
consistent with the narrowly defined scope of jurisdiction under Article 8(1)
that Article 5(1) guarantees the investor in broad terms the availability of an
independent Russian body to determine such issues as the existence and
legality of an expropriation instead (R II, paras. 4, 31 ef seq.). This structure
of the UK-Soviet BIT is deemed to represent an obvious compromise from
the perspective of both the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. In
response to Claimant’s reliance on the references in Article 8(1) to Articles 4,
5, and 6 in order to confirm its view that the Tribunal is competent to hear the
claim that the Respondent has breached its treaty obligation under Article 5,
the Respondent explains that the references in the First Jurisdictional Clause
to Articles 4 and 5 are references to the amount of compensation due under
these Articles and the modalities of payment of such compensation set forth
therein, whereas references to Articles 5 and 6 in the Second Jurisdictional
Clause merely specify the jurisdictional predicate, that is an act of
expropriation within the meaning of Article 5 and a violation of Article 6
(RII, paras. 21 et seq.). To reinforce its position, the Respondent says that
Claimant’s proposed reading of the reference to Article 5 would involve
radical changes and additions to Article 8(1) - formulations [which] simply

do not appear.

Furthermore, the Respondent denies that its reading of Article 8(1) would
render the substantive guarantees of the UK-Soviet BIT “illusory” on the
grounds advanced by Claimant, namely that investors would be left without a
forum to claim compensation. Although some of the treaty obligations are not
necessarily supplemented by the grant to an investor of a right to enforce
them at an international level, it is emphasised that they are nonetheless
binding treaty obligations imposed on the Contracting Parties (R III,

para. 26). It is contended with respect to the object and purpose of the UK-

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

84.

85.

-59-

Soviet BIT that the arbitration agreement is a very specific agreement, which
largely stands on its own and therefore has to be considered carefully by the
Tribunal on the basis of the specific object and purpose that the Contracting
Parties had in mind when they negotiated the arbitration agreement as is said
to be confirmed by the International Court of Justice (R III, para. 27). The
Respondent asserts that in accordance with an advisory opinion of the
Permanent Court of International Justice and scholarly writings the
interpretation based on the object and purpose of the treaty has to find its
limits in the terms of the treaty itself (R TI, para. 28). As derived from the
fact that the protection and promotion of foreign investment is not the sole
aim of investment treaties, particular emphasis is further placed on the need
for a balanced interpretation rather than an interpretation in favour of the
investor (R III, para. 31). Especially against the background that preambles
usually contain broadly worded object and purpose clauses to protect and
promote foreign investments even in case of investment treaties which do not
contain any right to international arbitration, the interpretative exercise
should not be diverted from the actual wording of Article 8(1) or lead to a

rewrite of a narrow jurisdictional clause (R III, para. 32).

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s allegation that there is subsequent
state practice within the meaning of Article 31(3)(b) VCLT that would lend
support to the Claimant’s theory that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
determine the existence and legality of an expropriation. The failure of the
Respondent to raise a jurisdictional objection with respect to the scope of the
arbitration clause in Article 8 in the Sedelmayer case and the Nomura case,
invoked by the Claimant, is deemed to be at most an isolated omission or as
not reflecting a common understanding of the Contracting Parties. The
Berschader case shows that the state practice of the Russian Federation at

least cannot be regarded as consistent (R III, para. 33 et seq.).

Moreover, the Respondent rebuts Claimant’s call for a dynamic interpretation

of Article 8 in the light of present day practice and attitude of the Russian

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

86.

- 60-

Federation. On the contrary, it is stressed that in principle the terms of a
treaty must be given the meaning that they had at the time of its conclusion
pursuant to the intentions of the Contracting Parties at that time (R TI,
para. 51). Even though the Respondent acknowledges that the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties takes into account possible dynamic or
progressive developments, it is asserted that there is neither any subsequent
agreement, nor any subsequent practice, nor any relevant rules of
international law as required pursuant to Article 31(3) VCLT. The domestic
law of the Russian Federation and the economic, political, treaty, and
legislative developments are considered irrelevant in this context (R III,
paras. 42 et seq.). Far from being a general rule, dynamic interpretation is
contended to be limited to terms that are inherently evolutionary and also to
be not applicable in circumstances where the Tribunal as in the present case
would have to revise the actual terms of the treaty (R III, paras 56 et seg.).
The Respondent argues that the terms of Article 8(1) do not lend themselves
to an evolutive interpretation and certainly do not contain words that
evidence that the Contracting Parties had any such intent. In addition, it is
the Respondent’s view that an investment treaty cannot be equated to a
human rights treaty or a constituent instrument of an_ international
organization, which require a more dynamic approach to interpretation, and

on which the Claimant so heavily relies (R III, paras. 58 et seq.).

The Respondent asserts that the UK-Soviet BIT represents a compromise
between the position of the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union at the time
the Treaty was negotiated: the UK Model BIT, on the one hand, providing for
a broad grant of investor-state arbitration and on the other hand, the Soviet
Model BIT ruling out investor-State arbitration as a matter of principle (R I,
para. 12). As supplementary means of interpretation to confirm the
limitations on subject-matter jurisdiction, the Respondent therefore submits
that the UK-Soviet BIT follows the pattern of restrictive BITs entered into by
the Soviet Union in that era. A strongly held position of the Soviet Union was

that the sovereign act of expropriation is not subject to international review.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

87.

88.

-61-

Consistent with this position, asymmetrical or diagonal arbitration was not
permitted with respect to the sovereign act of expropriation. Disputes over
the amount of compensation or the modality of payment, in contrast were
considered to be civil law in nature and thus could be the subject of
international arbitration (R II, para. 34). To reinforce its position, the
Respondent considers the BITs the Soviet Union negotiated in 1989 and
1990, and relies upon the Berschader case as well as upon materials
documenting the German and Dutch experience in negotiating the respective
BITs (R IL, paras. 35 et seqg.; R II, paras. 66 et seg.) The United Kingdom, on

the other hand, is supposed to have repeatedly demonstrated its willingness to

 

compromise if necessary to conclude bil lin treaties that either
contain no investor-State arbitration clause or contain restrictive investor-

State arbitration clauses (R II, para. 41; R III, paras. 86 et seq.).

As indicated above, the Respondent also rejects the Claimant’s assertion that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction by virtue of Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT in

conjunction with Article 8 DK-Russia BIT.

According to the Respondent Article 3 of the UK-Soviet BIT, a narrow most-
favoured-nation clause, cannot displace the deliberately chosen narrow grant
of jurisdiction in Article 8 with a broad grant of jurisdiction such as the one
that Claimant would import from the Denmark-Russia BIT (R Ill, para. 102).
Invoking the ejusdem generis principle, the Respondent claims that Article 3
of the UK-Soviet BIT does not serve to incorporate into a basic treaty an
arbitration clause from a third State treaty because it only addresses
substantive standards, with Article 7 of the UK-Soviet BIT addressing
exceptions to these substantive standards. At least, Article 3 would not
clearly and unambiguously cover jurisdiction and procedural remedies as said
to be required under Articles 31 and 32 VCLT (RIII, paras. 104 et seg.).
Regarding the plain meaning of Article 3, the Respondent notes that each of

the terms “management,” “use

enjoyment,” “maintenance,” and “disposal”

expressly relates to the substantive protection of an investment and none of

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

89.

90.

-62-

these terms relate to remedies for or jurisdiction over claims that an investor
has suffered an expropriation (R III, para. 110). On the basis of an analysis of
arbitral awards, the Respondent holds that, far from there being a majority of
arbitral tribunals in support of the Claimant, every single tribunal that has
considered the question of expanding international tribunals’ jurisdiction on
the basis of a most-favoured-nation clause has rejected the Claimant’s
position (R III, paras.127 et seq., 141). The Respondent further concludes that
in the face of the strong Soviet policy against diagonal arbitration and
international review of the sovereign act itself, the narrow scope of the most-
favoured-nation clause and the absence of any common intention of the
Contracting Parties to extend the scope of jurisdiction in Article 8(1) by
operation of the most-favoured-nation clause in Article 3, Claimant’s belated
attempt to rely on Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT ... fails (R Ill, para.
126).

Arguments by Claimant

The Claimant contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione materiae
primarily under Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT, and in the alternative under
Article 8 of the DK-Russia BIT, which is deemed to be incorporated into the
UK-Soviet BIT by virtue of the most-favoured-nation clause contained in

Article 3 of the UK-Soviet BIT.

In the Request for Arbitration (C I), the Claimant asserts in general that
Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT commits the Russian Federation to arbitrate
legal disputes with U.K. investors relating to expropriation of investments
(CI, para. 3.3). As specified in the Claimant’s First Memorial on
Jurisdictional Issues (C II), the dispute is considered to be, under any
objective standard, about whether or not the Respondent should pay
compensation (C II, para. 4). The Claimant further analyses the juridical
nature of investor-state arbitration (C II, paras. 15 et seg.) and criticises the

Respondent’s overall attempt to push the Claimant’s claim away from

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

91.

92.

-63-

investor-state arbitration under Article 8 towards state-to-state arbitration

under Article 9 of the UK-Soviet BIT (C II, para. 23).

Article 8(1) is divided by the Claimant into three jurisdictional clauses as
mentioned above. Although Claimant alleges that it has previously been
determined in the Sedelmayer case that the language of the First Jurisdictional
Clause, “concerning the amount or [procedure for the] payment of
compensation under Articles 4 or 5”, gives a tribunal jurisdiction to rule on
the merits of an investor’s demand for compensation for an expropriation, the
contentions of the Claimant focus almost exclusively on the Second
Jurisdictional Clause which refers to disputes “concerning any other matter
consequential upon an act of expropriation in accordance with Article 5”

(C Il, para. 60).

The ordinary meaning of the Second Jurisdictional Clause is alleged to
include the present dispute as to whether the Russian Federation’s seizure
and sale of Yukos’s assets obliges the Russian Federation to pay
compensation to Claimant pursuant to Article 5 (C II, para. 54). The
Claimant breaks the clause down into three parts: “any other matter,”
“consequential upon” and “an act of expropriation in accordance with Article
5”. It is argued that the phrase “any other matter” must necessarily give the
Tribunal jurisdiction over disputes that are in addition to those covered by
the First Jurisdictional Clause. In contrast, Respondent’s interpretation of the
Second Clause would limit the jurisdictional grant to the same disputes
already encompassed by the First Jurisdictional Clause and would therefore
deprive the clause of any meaning whatsoever. A matter is “consequential
upon” an act when the matter results from, is caused by, or is triggered by
that act. The third phrase is said to cover all acts defined in Article 5, which,
in turn, broadly defines “expropriation” to include indirect expropriations as
well. To demonstrate that the broad grant of jurisdiction encompasses the
present dispute, the dispute is subsumed as follows: The present dispute over

whether the Russian Federation is legally obliged to pay compensation to

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

93.

- 64-

Claimant (“any other matter”) arises out of (is “consequential upon”) the
seizure and sale of Yukos’s assets (“an act of expropriation in accordance
with Article 5”). The Claimant points out that there is no dispute that the
Respondent seized assets of Yukos and sold them at auction and that at this
jurisdictional stage, it is to be presumed that the facts are as Claimant has
pleaded them. Any defence to liability that the Respondent may have
necessarily would have to be reserved for the merits and cannot deprive a

tribunal of jurisdiction (C II, paras. 62 et seq.).

By considering the structure and context of Article 8(1), Claimant seeks to
confirm its interpretation of the Second Jurisdictional Clause. The First
Jurisdictional Clause is said to address those situations in which a dispute
arises only over the amount or procedure for payment of compensation, while
the Second Jurisdictional Clause, which is introduced by a disjunctive “or”,
gives the tribunal jurisdiction over something more and addresses situations
where the State’s justification for the taking, whether compensation will be
paid, and possibly even the existence of an expropriation itself is disputed
between the State and the investor (C II, para. 76). The Second Jurisdictional
Clause is characterized by the Claimant as the vehicle for the enforcement of
Article 5’s substantive guarantee that compensation will follow any
expropriation and therefore necessarily encompasses jurisdiction to resolve
the question of whether or not an act of expropriation has in fact occurred
(CII, para. 77). To support this view, the Claimant further invokes the Third
Jurisdictional Clause which gives a tribunal jurisdiction to resolve disputes
“concerning the consequences of the non-implementation, or of the incorrect
implementation, of Article 6 of this Agreement”. The clause, which is
deemed to mirror the Second Jurisdictional Clause and gives rise to an equal
interpretation of the two clauses, would necessarily grant the tribunal
jurisdiction to determine the antecedent question of whether Article 6 has

been correctly implemented or not been implemented at all (C II, para. 78).

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

94.

95.

96.

-65-

Claimant also relies upon the object and purpose of the UK-Soviet BIT to
confirm its interpretation of the Second Jurisdictional Clause. Against the
background of the Contracting Parties’ intention to “create favourable
conditions for greater investment by investors of one State in the territory of
the State” as derived from the preamble, Claimant identifies both investor-
state arbitration and the principle of customary international law that
compensation must follow an expropriation of a foreign investors’ property
as the fundamental elements of protection offered under the UK-Soviet BIT
(CII, para. 80). The notion of limited subject-matter jurisdiction as advanced
by the Respondent, however, would render any decision to pay compensation
entirely within the discretion of the Russian authorities and, ultimately,
would render the guarantees of the UK-Soviet BIT to investors illusory (C II,
paras. 81, 188). In any event, investors would have to commence two sets of
proceedings — a situation deemed absurd and unreasonable (C II, paras. 188

et seq.).

The Claimant holds that Respondent has failed to satisfy the pre-requisites in
Article 32 VCLT for the use of supplementary means of interpretation
because it has offered no meaning capable of confirmation by reference to
supplemental sources of interpretation, nor has it demonstrated that
Claimant’s proffered interpretation of Article 8 would be ambiguous,
obscure, or lead to a result that is “manifestly absurd or unreasonable”
(CI, para. 85). Therefore the Claimant does not believe that it is necessary or
even appropriate to consider the supplementary means of treaty interpretation
including in particular other tribunals’ decisions, the Soviet policy regarding
international arbitration and United Kingdom’s own treaty practice (C II,

paras. 86, 93).

Against the eventuality that the Tribunal chooses to consider the Berschader
case relied upon by the Respondent throughout its submissions, the Claimant
asserts that Article 10 of the Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet BIT in question

lacks any language equivalent to that found in the Second Jurisdictional

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

97.

- 66 -

Clause and thus has no bearing on the present case (C II, para. 89 et seg.). On
the contrary, the Claimant derives from the Sedelmayer case that even the
narrow First Jurisdictional Clause is sufficient to grant the Tribunal
jurisdiction to determine the antecedent question of the existence of an
expropriation (C II, para. 92). In addition, Claimant relies upon the Telenor
tribunal (C-21) which had to consider a provision in the Norway-Hungary
BIT which is identical to Article 8(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT, and which did
not express any doubt that it had jurisdiction to determine whether an

expropriation had occurred (C II, para. 93).

As regards the Respondent’s allegations with respect to the so-called “strong
Soviet policy”, Claimant, though acknowledging that it is partly correct that
the Soviet Union sought to limit access to arbitration in some of the bilateral
investment treaties that it signed during the late 1980s and early 1990s,
stresses that the Respondent entered into a number of bilateral investment
treaties that offered investors far greater access to international arbitration
(CII, para. 94). Claimant contends that of the fourteen BITs Respondent
negotiated between 1989 and 1990, at least four, namely those with the
United Kingdom, France, Canada and South Korea, and arguably a fifth with
Germany, contain broad grants of jurisdiction. The text of the relevant
provision of the France-Soviet BIT which was made subject to closer
examination is quoted above. The Claimant further draws attention to the
rapid pace of changes in the USSR between 1986 and 199] and refers to
another forty-five BITs the Respondent signed while transforming itself into
a market economy (CII, paras. 95, 181). As detailed in the annex (C II-
Annex), Claimant concludes that the Soviet Union had a long history of

arbitration (C II,

favouring the lution of dis} through inter l

para. 103). Claimant also points to the fact, that Respondent failed to raise
this jurisdictional defence in both the Sedelmayer arbitration and in a
subsequent arbitration brought under the UK-Soviet BIT resulting from the

financial crisis in Russia. These past actions are deemed also to contradict the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

98.

99.

-67-

Respondent’s assertions regarding a strongly held and principled position

(C Il, paras. 100 et seg., 183 et seq.)

In addition to exaggerating the Soviet Union’s supposed categorical
opposition to broad grants of jurisdiction to international arbitral tribunals,
the Respondent is said to also misinterpret the United Kingdom’s practice.
The Claimant asserts that the United Kingdom may have failed to insist upon
compulsory investor-state arbitration of all claims of expropriation in only
five out of a total of 102 treaties, all of which predate the IPPA and concludes
that the United Kingdom’s practice does not demonstrate the claimed
willingness to compromise as to the inclusion of effective investor-state
arbitration provisions, but shows a persistent commitment to the protection of
investors through the use of investor-state arbitration instead (C II,

paras. 104 et seq., 108).

In the event that the Tribunal were to find that it did not have jurisdiction
under Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT, it is contended by the Claimant that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article 8 of the DK-Russia BIT which is
deemed to be incorporated into the UK-Soviet BIT by operation of the Most-
Favoured-Nation clause contained in Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT (C II, paras.
55, 109 et seq.). The relevant treaty provisions are quoted above in section E.
The Claimant holds that according to Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT it shall not
receive treatment less favourable than that afforded by the Russian Federation
to investors of any third state. If Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT were found not to
grant jurisdiction, then Article 8 of the DK-Russia BIT would be viewed as
more favourable treatment of investors, with the present dispute being well
within the scope of the broad jurisdiction granted by Article 8 of the DK-
Russia BIT (C II, paras. 111 ef seg.). To establish that the MFN standard
includes the dispute resolution provisions of the treaty, Claimant relies upon a
majority of arbitral awards (C II, paras. 114 et seq., 146 et seq.), the ordinary
meaning of the terms used in the Articles 3(1) and 3(2) of the UK-Soviet BIT,

“treatment”, “management, use, enjoyment or disposal” (C II, paras. 120 et

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

- 68 -

seq.), as well as upon the object and purpose of the UK-Soviet BIT as
derived from the preamble (C II, paras. 125 et seq.). Dispute resolution is
further considered to be an integral part of the protection offered to foreign
investors under BITs satisfying the requirements of ejusdem generis (C II,
paras. 129 et seg., 135). The Claimant also points to Article 7 of the UK-
Soviet BIT which contains the exceptions the Contracting Parties agreed to
exclude from the operation of the MFN clause. Although the Contracting
Parties specifically addressed the scope of the MEN standard, they apparently
did not list dispute resolution amongst these exceptions. Applying the
principle of expressio unius est exclusio alterius, Claimant therefore
interprets Article 7 to the effect that all matters within the scope of the IPPA
not expressly excluded from Article 3 are included (C Il, para. 137).
Additional evidence is said to be provided by the state practice of the
Contracting Parties. The United Kingdom is deemed to have a consistent
practice of including dispute resolution provisions within the scope of the
MEN, while the USSR is believed to have been well aware of the widespread
application of the MFN standard in international law and the standard’s
importance in ensuring sovereign equality of treatment amongst states at the

time of concluding the UK-Soviet BIT (C II, paras. 142 et seq.).

100. As a subsidiary argument in support of the view that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction under Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT and Article 8 of the DK-
Russia BIT the Claimant advances the need for a dynamic interpretation of
Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT in the light of present day circumstances (C II,
paras. 158 ef seq.). As treaties are considered not to be static documents
rooted eternally to the context in which they were concluded, Article 8 should
be interpreted to include jurisdiction to decide the merits of the present
dispute (CII, paras. 56, 161). The present-day practice and attitude of the
Russian Federation, i.e. its promotion and encouragement of foreign
investment and acceptance of international arbitration as the dispute
resolution mechanism of choice under BITs, is deemed to be of greater

relevance to the interpretation of the IPPA than any view allegedly held by

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

- 69 -

the USSR in 1989 (CII, para. 182). In order to support its dynamic approach
to treaty interpretation Claimant invokes Articles 31(1), (3) and 32 VCLT and
the fact that the original intention of the authors of a treaty is not ascribed
central importance in the Vienna Convention (C II, paras. 162 et seq.). After
showing that this approach is often applied to multilateral and_ bilateral
treaties, Claimant concludes with respect to BITs that they are evolutionary
bilateral treaties that are generally intended to create sustainable and
durable economic ties between the contracting states (C II, paras. 168 et seq.,
174). The Contracting Parties’ intention to interpret the UK-Soviet BIT as a
living document is derived by the Claimant from the preamble and the

inclusion of the MEN standard in Article 3 (C II, paras. 175 et seq.).

3. The Tribunal

101. The Tribunal has carefully examined the memorials and exhibits submitted,
as well as the presentations at the Hearing by each of the Parties on this issue.
It is not necessary to recall these arguments in detail here, but the Tribunal
has taken them fully into account in reaching the following findings and

conclusions.

102. The Tribunal, having already found that Respondent has indeed consented to
arbitration, both in Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT and Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT, now turns in this section to the scope of the submission
to arbitration and in particular whether the submission also covers a
jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide on whether an expropriation occurred

and, if so, its legality.

103. To avoid misunderstanding, it may be recalled here again that the
examination of the Tribunal in the present section only deals with its
jurisdiction over this issue, and that, should jurisdiction be found to exist, the

examination of whether the Respondent’s actions have indeed to be

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

104.

3.1.

105.

106.

-70-

considered as an expropriation will be joined to the merits phase of this

arbitration.

Since Claimant bases its contention that the Tribunal does have jurisdiction
alternatively on Article 8 and on Article 3, and both have been extensively

discussed by the Parties, the Tribunal will take up each issue separately.

Jurisdiction based on Article 8 UK-Soviet BIT

The text of Article 8 is quoted above in section E of this Award.
Nevertheless, that part of its wording which is relevant in the present context

may be recalled:

“ARTICLE 8
Disputes between an Investor and the Host Contracting Party

(1) This Article shall apply to any legal disputes between an
investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in
relation to an investment of the former either concerning the amount
or payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement,
or concerning any other matter consequential upon an act of
expropriation in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement, or
concerning the consequences of the non-implementation, or of the
incorrect implementation, of Article 6 of this Agreement.
(2) Any such disputes which have not been amicably settled shall,
after a period of three months from written notification of a claim, be
submitted to international arbitration if either party to the dispute so
wishes.
(3) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration, the
investor concerned in the dispute shall have the right to refer the
dispute either to:
(a) the Institute of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce of
Stockholm; ....”

The Russian text of Article 8(1) is translated unofficially by the Respondent
in its First Memorial on Jurisdictional Issues as follows (R II, para. 21,
fn. 15). The translation was acknowledged by the Claimant at least with
respect to all relevant parts (C II, para. 58, fn. 55; para. 65). It was, however,

emphasised by the Parties that the inclusion in the Common Bundle (CB) of

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-71-

an unofficial translation prepared by one party does not constitute acceptance

by the other party of the accuracy of that translation.

“The provisions of this Article shall apply to any disputes of a legal
character between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party in relation to issues of the investor’s investment
concerning either the amount and the procedure for the payment of
compensation provided for in Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement, or any
other matters being the result of an act of expropriation in
accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement, or regarding the
consequences of the non-implementation, or of the incorrect
implementation, of undertakings under Article 6 of this Agreement.”

107. In the view of the Tribunal the slight variations in the translation by the
Respondent do not contain anything of relevance for the issue to be examined
in the present section of this Award. The Tribunal will therefore focus on the

official English text as quoted above.

108. Paragraph (1) of the provision, after its introductory wording ending with the
words “either concerning”, continues with what has been called, by the

Parties and the Tribunal, three “jurisdictional clauses”, namely:

1. “the amount or payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5
of this Agreement,
2. or concerning any other matter consequential upon an act of

expropriation in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement

3. or concerning the consequences of the non-implementation, or
of the incorrect implementation, of Article 6 of this
Agreement.”

109. While the third jurisdictional clause is obviously not relevant in the present
context, the Parties have widely debated whether the first or second

jurisdictional clauses provide jurisdiction for this Tribunal.
110. In interpreting these Articles, the Tribunal is primarily guided by the
provisions of Article 31.1. of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

(VCLT) according to which a

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-72-

Treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of the object and purpose.

To start with the first jurisdictional clause, rather than referring generally to
Articles 4 and 5, it expressly contains a qualification by the words
“concerning the amount or payment of compensation under”. In order to give
an ordinary meaning to that qualification, it can only be understood as a
limitation of the jurisdiction conferred by that clause. Though no documents
from the negotiation of the BIT have been produced, the Parties including the
Claimant agree that the rather complicated wording in Article 8 presented a
compromise between the UK’s intention to have a wide arbitration clause and
the Soviet intention to have a limited one. If that is so, it is hard to arrive at an
interpretation all the same that the clause is so wide as to include all aspects

of an expropriation.

111. If one further considers the wording of Article 5 to which this first
jurisdictional clause refers, it can be seen that that provision first determines
that, in principle, an investment shall not be expropriated, and then adds
exceptions to that principle by the word “except”. Of the exceptions
mentioned thereafter, payment of compensation is “only” the third. And the
following sentence in Article 5 then gives a number of concrete requirements

regarding the compensation.

112. In view of this order in Article 5, the Tribunal cannot see how the reference
in the first jurisdictional clause expressly to the amount or payment of
compensation under Articles 4 or 5 only can nevertheless be interpreted as a
reference also to the earlier sections of Article 5 which deal with
expropriation in general and the first two exceptions mentioned in that

provision.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-73-

113. This limiting interpretation is confirmed by a comparison with arbitration
clauses in BITs concluded by the UK, the Soviet Union, Russia and other
states in which a general reference to expropriation or the article dealing with
expropriation makes it clear that every aspect of expropriation is under the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. An example from the Russian practice is
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT quoted in Section E above. An example
from the practice of the UK is Article 9(2) of the 1988 UK Model BIT (CB-9
= R-34). These examples may suffice to illustrate the obvious, namely how
easily it can be and is in practice indicated in clear and unambiguous terms
that every aspect of expropriation shall be under the jurisdiction of an arbitral

tribunal.

114. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the wording of the first jurisdictional
clause does not include jurisdiction over the questions whether an

expropriation occurred and was legal.

115. The Tribunal now turns to the second jurisdictional clause in Article 8.
Again, one must first recall the wording by which that clause expressly
qualifies the jurisdiction, namely “or concerning any other matter
consequential upon an act of expropriation in accordance with Article 5 of
this Agreement”. In a potential analogy with the issue of Kompetenz-
Kompetenz, it may be argued that, in order to exercise its undoubted
competence to decide a disputed issue consequential on an expropriation, a
tribunal must (implicitly) be endowed with the power to determine whether
the issue is “consequential upon an act of expropriation”, and that from that it
is only a short step to saying that it has therefore the power to determine
whether there was an expropriation or not. However, at least in the present
context of the wording of Article 8 (1), such an interpretation would deprive
the wording “or concerning any other matter consequential upon” in the
above-mentioned qualification of any substantive meaning and turn this
jurisdictional clause into an arbitration clause with a general reference to

Article 5. For similar reasons as discussed above regarding the first

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-74-

jurisdictional clause, this qualification can only be understood to the effect
that not all aspects of Article 5 and particularly of expropriation are included,
but that jurisdiction is only granted over the specific aspects mentioned in the
clause. In particular, the words any other matter are not placed on their own,
but are combined with the words “consequential upon an act of expropriation
in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement”. This can only be interpreted
to mean that not all other matters are included but only those falling under

this further qualification.

116. Now, regarding that qualification, the Tribunal considers that the ordinary
meaning in the sense of Article 31 VCLT of the word “consequential” can not
be interpreted to include, in addition to the consequences of an expropriation
according to Article 5, also the preconditions laid down in Article 5, i.e. that
an act of expropriation occurred and within the conditions specified for a

lawful expropriation.

117. If these preconditions were to be considered as also included, the
qualification would be meaningless - as would the qualification stated in the
first jurisdictional clause — because not only the issues mentioned in these

qualifications, but all other aspects of expropriation would be included.

118. Therefore the Tribunal concludes that the second jurisdictional clause does
equally not confer jurisdiction on this Tribunal over the occurrence or the

validity of an expropriation.

119. Since the Tribunal has come to the above conclusions on the basis of the
ordinary meaning of Article 8 in the context of the object and purpose of the
BIT in accordance with paragraph (1) of Article 31 VCLT, there is no need to
go into the additional criteria for interpretation mentioned in the further
paragraphs of that Article. In this context, the Tribunal notes that none of the
various agreements, instruments, practice or rules of international law to

which paragraphs (2) or (3) of Article 31 refer can be found to be of

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-75-

relevance for the interpretation of Article 8. All of these subsections (a) and
(b) of Article 31(2) and (a) to (c) of Article 31(3) require some relation or
connection to the treaty to be interpreted, a requirement not fulfilled by
earlier or later BITs or other agreements or other practice either of the UK or

the Soviet Union or Russia.

120. Even less applicable are the supplementary means of interpretation identified
in Article 32 VCLT. It needs no further explanation that the meaning of
Article 8 found above is neither ambiguous or obscure nor manifestly absurd

or unreasonable.

121. The above considerations, in the view of the Tribunal, also do not permit in
particular the dynamic interpretation which Claimant has proposed to be
applied in this regard. In this regard, the Tribunal refers to its separate section
above containing a more general analysis of the principles of interpretation.
At least in the present context it cannot be justified under Articles 31 and 32
VCLT that later developments can be found to change the ordinary and
unambiguous meaning of a treaty provision like Article 8 of the BIT. Since
the present context is that of a bilateral treaty, the Tribunal does not have to
take up the questions whether other considerations may justify such an
interpretation in the context of a long term multilateral convention or human

rights.

122. The Tribunal has taken note of the references the Parties have submitted to
other treaties and decisions of arbitral tribunals regarding dispute settlement
clauses in other treaties. Indeed, there are clauses which contain limiting
language similar to that of Article 8 such as Article 10 of the
Belgium/Luxemburg-Soviet BIT quoted above in section E, as well as clauses
which provide a wider language such as Article 7 of the France-Soviet BIT
(“concerning the effects of a measure taken” and “particularly but not
exclusively concerning ...”) also quoted above. However, the Tribunal feels

there is no need to enter into a discussion of these or other treaties or

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-76-

decisions concerning them, because the combined wording of the three
jurisdictional clauses in Article 8 is unique and not identical to that in any of
such other treaties and thus must be interpreted by itself as has been done

above.

123. As a final conclusion, therefore, the Tribunal determines that it has no
jurisdiction as to the occurrence and validity of an expropriation on the basis
of Article 8. In addition to this negative conclusion, there is no need for the
Tribunal to determine in detail at this stage by a positive conclusion what
extent of jurisdiction is indeed covered by Art.8, because the Tribunal will
now have to examine whether it has jurisdiction on the aspects not covered by

Art.8 by application of the MFN-clause in Art.3.

(Co-Arbitrator Sir Franklin Berman wishes to add the following declaration:

Tam in full agreement with my colleagues that Article 8 of the BIT does not
suffice to confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal to pronounce on the claims
advanced by the Claimant in this Arbitration. I note only that Article 8 is
quite plainly, and on its very face, a difficult compromise between opening
positions on the part of the two Contracting States which must have been far
apart from one another (as indeed the Parties have argued at length before
us). In a circumstance of that kind — which one encounters from time to time
in treaty practice — it will seldom if ever be justified for the interpreter to
arrive at a conclusion that corresponds to all intents and purposes with the
position of either the one Contracting State or that of the other. In other
words, I would not want our common conclusion that Article 8 does not
confer jurisdiction in this case to be taken in any way as an expression of
opinion on how that article or other similar treaty clauses relates to other
claims that might be brought forward in other cases based on an allegation of

expropriation. )

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

3.2.

124.

125.

126.

-77-

Jurisdiction based on the MFN-Clauses in Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT

in connection with the Denmark-Russia BIT.

The Parties have extensively engaged on the question whether the MFN-
provisions in Articles 3(1) and (2) of the UK-Soviet BIT are effective to
import the wide wording of Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT so as to
submit expropriations to arbitration under the UK-Soviet BIT. The provisions
in question are quoted above in section E of this Award. But, for the present
context, the relevant wording may be recalled here. The Denmark-Russia BIT

provides:

“ARTICLE 8
Disputes between an Investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party

(1) Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one

Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in connection with

an investment on the territory of that other Contracting Party shall be

subject to negotiations [sic] [between the] parties in dispute.

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled in such a way within a period of

six months from the date of written notification of the claim, the

investor shall be entitled to submit the case either to:

(a) a sole arbitrator or an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established
under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), or

(b) the Institute of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm.”

There is no dispute between the Parties, and the Tribunal agrees, that that
provision, by its wording “Any dispute ... in connection with an investment”
confers jurisdiction on the arbitral tribunal on issues such as those at stake in
the present context, i.e. whether an act of the host state was an expropriation

and was legal under the BIT.

It may also be recalled that the relevant paragraphs of Article 3 of the UK-
Soviet BIT provide:

“ARTICLE 3

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

127.

128.

129.

-78 -

Treatment of Investments

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting Party to
treatment less favourable than that which it accords to investments or
returns of investors of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards their
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to
investors of any third State.”

As can be seen, the 1“ paragraph deals with investments and the 2™ with the
investors. The two paragraphs provide MFN protection by quite different
wordings and thus with a different scope. Therefore the Tribunal will

consider them separately hereafter.

Paragraph (1) of Article 3 grants MEN protection for investments to the
effect that they shall not be subject to treatment less favourable than that
which it accords to investments ... of any third State. Can the term treatment
include the protection by an arbitration clause? The Tribunal feels that, for
the purposes of this Award, it does not have to answer that question in
general, but only regarding the sub-question whether it includes an arbitration
clause covering expropriation. In that latter regard, it is difficult to doubt that,
first, an expropriation is indeed a “treatment” of the investment by the Host
State. However, secondly, while the protection by an arbitration clause
covering expropriation is a highly relevant aspect of that “treatment”, if
compared with the alternative that the expropriation of an investment can
only be challenged before the national courts of the Host State, it does not
directly affect the “investment”, but rather the procedural rights of the

“investor” for whom paragraph (2) of Article 3 provides a separate rule.

Therefore, without entering into the much more general question whether
MEN-clauses can be used to transfer arbitration clauses from one treaty to
another, the Tribunal concludes that, for the specific wording of Article 3 (1)

of the UK-Soviet BIT, and for the specific purpose of arbitration with regard

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-79 -

to expropriation, the wide wording of Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT is

not applicable.

130. In view of the above conclusion regarding paragraph (1) of Article 3, the
Tribunal now has to consider whether it has jurisdiction based on Paragraph
(2) of Article 3. As seen above, the provision grants MFN-protection for
“investors” by a wording which is quite different to paragraph (1), namely
regarding “their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of
their investments”. Again limiting its considerations to the possible
application of the MFN-clause to arbitration regarding expropriation, the
terms “use” and “enjoyment” in paragraph (2) lead the Tribunal to different
conclusions from those reached with regard to paragraph (1). For it is difficult
to doubt that an expropriation interferes with the investor’s use and
enjoyment of the investment, and that the submission to arbitration forms a
highly relevant part of the corresponding protection for the investor by
granting him, in case of interference with his “use” and “enjoyment”,
procedural options of obvious and great significance compared to the sole
option of challenging such interference before the domestic courts of the host

state.

131. Does that conclusion have to be changed in view of the further conclusion
reached above that Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT expressly limits the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and does not give jurisdiction in respect of other
aspects of expropriation? In the Tribunal’s view, that is not so. While indeed
the application of the MFN clause of Article 3 widens the scope of Article 8
and thus is in conflict to its limitation, this is a normal result of the
application of MEN clauses, the very character and intention of which is that
protection not accepted in one treaty is widened by transferring the protection

accorded in another treaty.

132. If this effect is generally accepted in the context of substantive protection, the

Tribunal sees no reason not to accept it in the context of procedural clauses

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-80-

such as arbitration clauses. Quite the contrary, it could be argued that, if it
applies to substantive protection, then it should apply even more to “only”
procedural protection. However, the Tribunal feels that this latter argument
cannot be considered as decisive, but that rather, as argued further above, an
arbitration clause, at least in the context of expropriation, is of the same
protective value as any substantive protection afforded by applicable

provisions such as Article 5 of the BIT.

133. In view of these considerations, the Tribunal concludes that, on the basis of
the MEN Clause in Article 3(2) of the UK-Soviet BIT taken together with
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT, , it has jurisdiction beyond that granted
by Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT and which extends to the issues whether

Respondent’s actions have to be considered as expropriations and were valid.

134. The above interpretations by the Tribunal of the MFN-clauses in Article 3 (1)
and (2) are confirmed by a consideration of Article 7 of the same BIT.

Though quoted above in section E, its relevant parts may be recalled here:

“ARTICLE 7
Exceptions

The provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of this Agreement shall not be

construed so as to oblige one Contracting Party to extend to the

investors of the other the benefit of any treatment, preference or

privilege resulting from

(a) any existing or future customs union, organisation for mutual
economic assistance or similar international agreement,
whether multilateral or bilateral, to which either of the
Contracting Parties is or may become a party, or

(b) any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly
or mainly to taxation or any domestic legislation relating
wholly or mainly to taxation.”

135. As can be seen, Article 7 contains certain exceptions, in particular regarding
the application of Article 3 which, as we know, contains the MFN clauses.

Article 7 expressly excludes the transfer of MFN-protection from other

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-81-

treaties with regard to the fields mentioned in its subjections (a) and (b).
While it can be argued that the multilateral commitments mentioned in (a) are
of quite different character and are obvious exceptions in order to avoid that
the states concluding the BIT receive the benefits of such multilateral
arrangements without joining them, the exception in (b) regarding taxation
does not contain such an obvious background. It presents a clear decision of
the two States when concluding the BIT that the MFN clauses shall not apply
to such taxation issues. It shows that the two States considered the question,
which issues should not benefit from the MEN protection. Now, it needs no
further explanation that, just as taxation is a highly important matter for an
investor, so is the submission to arbitration which “protects” the investor,
should a dispute arise with the Host State, from having to depend on the
national courts of the same Host State. In view of the careful drafting of
Article 8 and the limiting language therein, it can certainly not be presumed
that the Parties “forgot” arbitration when drafting and agreeing on Article 7.
Had the Parties intended that the MFN-clauses should also not apply to
arbitration, it would indeed have been easy to add a sub-section (c) to that
effect in Article 7. The fact that this was not done, in the view of the
Tribunal, is further confirmation that the MFN-clauses in Article 3 are also

applicable to submissions to arbitration in other Treaties.

136. The Tribunal has taken note of the references the Parties have submitted to
other treaties and decisions of arbitral tribunals regarding MFN-clauses and
arbitration submissions in other treaties. In particular, the Tribunal has taken

note of the decisions in the following cases:

. Telenor v Hungary, ICSID Award of 13 September 2006 (CB-48 =
C-21)

e Suez and Vivendi v Argentina, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of

3 August 2006 (CB-47 = C-15)

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-82-

e National Grid v Argentina, UNCITRAL/BIT arbitration, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 20 June 2006 (CB-52 = C-41)

. Suez and InterAguas v Argentina, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of

16 May 2006 (CB-53 = C-42)

e Berschader v The Russian Federation, SCC Award of 21 April 2006
(CB-37 = R-33). In this context see also the dissenting opinion of
Weiler regarding the MFN-clause (CB-55 = C-49)

e Gas Natural SDG v Argentina, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of
17 June 2005 (CB-51 = C-40)

e Plama v Bulgaria, 1CSID decision on Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005,
ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal Vol.20 No.1 issue

2005 (CB-35 = R-6)

. Siemens v Argentina, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of 3 August

2004 (CB-45 = C-9)

. MTD Equity v Chile, ICSID Award of 25 May 2004 (CB-54 = C-48)

e Salini v Jordan, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001
(CB-44 = C-5)

. Maffezini v Spain, ICSID decision on Jurisdiction of 25 January 2000
(CB-50 = C-39)

137. After having examined them, the Tribunal feels there is no need to enter into
a detailed discussion of these decisions. The Tribunal agrees with the Parties
that different conclusions can indeed be drawn from them depending on how

one evaluates their various wordings both of the arbitration clauses and the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-83-

MEN-clauses and their similarities in allowing generalisations. However,
since it is the primary function of this Tribunal to decide the case before it
rather than developing further the general discussion on the applicability of
MEN clauses to dispute-settlement-provisions, the Tribunal notes that the
combined wording in Article 3 and 7 of the UK-Soviet BIT is not identical to
that in any of such other treaties considered in these other decisions.
Therefore, they must be interpreted by themselves as was done above and, in
the view of this Tribunal, these other decisions do not mandate a change of

the interpretation found above.

138. The same is true for the extensive UNCTAD Report (2007) on Bilateral
Investment Treaties 1995-2006 — Trends in Investment Rulemaking which
Respondent submitted just before the Hearing (CB-75) and which both
Parties have referred to during the Hearing. Its section on The MFN-Standard
in Relation to Dispute Resolution (p.39 seq.) is indeed interesting as a piece
of research which demonstrates the great variety of solutions to be found in
BITs. But the research, though different readers may draw different
conclusions regarding what can be considered the modern “trend”, certainly
does not provide any basis to interpret a specific MFN-clause in a BIT in one
way rather than another. Therefore this Report provides no reason to change

the interpretation this Tribunal has given above to Article 3.

139. Thus, at the end of its analysis of the relevant factors, the Tribunal concludes,
on the basis of the MEN clause in Article 3(2) of the UK-Soviet BIT in
conjunction with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT, that it has jurisdiction
extending beyond that granted by Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT and
covering the issues whether Respondent’s actions have to be considered as

expropriations and were valid.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-84-

H.IV. Exhaustion of Local Remedies: Admissibility of Claim

1.

140.

141.

142.

Arguments by Respondent

The objection that Claimant has failed to exhaust local remedies is treated by
the Respondent as one either of jurisdiction or admissibility. As confirmed by
paras. 4.1 and 5.2 of PO No.1, the first phase of the arbitral proceeding is to
address all issues raised in Part I of Respondent’s Reply (R I) which includes
the question of exhaustion of local remedies. It is asserted that for present
purposes the distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility is one without
relevance and should only be addressed if the question of whether the
requirement may be waived by the Respondent becomes acute (R I, para. 22;

RII, para. 61; R III, para. 142).

The requirement of exhaustion of local remedies is considered by the
Respondent to be a fundamental principle of customary international law. The
Respondent purports to gain support from overwhelming authority for its
position that private persons must exhaust local remedies before seeking
diplomatic protection or espousal of their claims, or reference to an
international court or tribunal (R I, para. 20; R II, paras. 6, 48 et seq.; R II,
para. 145). The Respondent rejects Claimant’s contention that inter-State
authority would be irrelevant for the local remedies rule by stating that
human rights cases as well as investment treaty awards routinely rely on

inter-State cases for authority (R III, para. 151).

As regards the applicable rules of treaty interpretation, the Respondent takes
the view that treaty provisions must be interpreted by reference to, and in
conformity with, the governing rules of general international law. It is further
to be assumed that the Contracting Parties intended a treaty provision to
produce effects in accordance with existing law rather than in violation of it.
Relying primarily upon the International Court of Justice (R-89), the

Respondent contends that in the absence of explicit treaty provisions

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-85-

expressing the Contracting Parties’ clear intention to derogate from a
fundamental principle of customary international law, the Contracting
Parties cannot be deemed to have tacitly dispensed with such principle (R I,
paras. 18 ef seg.; R II, paras.50 et seg.). The Respondent, however,
acknowledges that if the present case were a contractual one in which the
Russian Federation had entered into an agreement with a private party and
that agreement had contained an arbitration clause, there would be no
applicable rule of customary international law and the exhaustion of local
remedies rule would not apply. Yet, it is emphasised that the present dispute
deals with a quite distinguishable treaty obligation to arbitrate, where an

express waiver is required (R III, paras. 155 et seq.).

143. The UK-Soviet BIT not only is not explicit as to whether the requirement to
exhaust local remedies is waived, it even impliedly embraces the principle as
alleged by the Respondent. This derives especially from Article 5(1) last
sentence which provides for an independent authority of the State making the
expropriation to review the case of the investor, i.e. the expropriation itself
and the value of its investment. The Respondent further seeks to establish that
an arbitration under the UK-Soviet BIT cannot be analogized to cases arising
under the ICSID Convention, nor to an ICC, UNCITRAL or SCC arbitration
arising under the myriad of bilateral investment treaty that contain an express
waiver of exhaustion of local remedies (R I, para. 20; R II, paras. 53 et seq.;

RII, para. 158).

144. Finally, the Respondent contends that Claimant is under no disability in
seeking redress in the Russian courts. It is stated that Russian law does
contain a remedy for expropriation. As regards Claimant’s allegations that the
Russian courts are not independent and that it would be wholly without a
remedy if this Tribunal does not accord it jurisdiction, the Respondent refers
to the UK High Court which rejected this argument raised by Yukos itself in
2006 when challenging the Financial Services Authority’s decision to admit

Rosneft GDRs to listing on the London Stock Exchange. In conclusion, the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-86-

Respondent points out that Claimant as independent shareholder does not
even allege that it is personally subject to any disability or hostility, but
simply decided not to pursue its remedies in the Russian courts (R I, para.

60; R III, paras. 164 et seq.).

2. Arguments by Claimant

145. The Claimant considers the rule on exhaustion of local remedies to be a
procedural objection to the admissibility of the claim, relying upon the
Interhandel case (C-205). The Respondent is deemed to have acknowledged
this qualification by accepting that the rule may be waived because the
concept of waiver is asserted to be the distinguishing element between
objections as to admissibility and objections as to jurisdiction. The
Respondent, however, is said to be not permitted to advance an objection as
to admissibility as a challenge to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction pursuant to SCC

tules (C II, paras. 196 et seq.).

146. From the Claimant’s point of view the Respondent appears to assume that an
investor-state arbitration is brought by way of diplomatic protection, as
would be a home state’s espousal of an investor’s claim. Although the
Claimant acknowledges that the local remedies rule may apply in the context
of diplomatic protection or state espousal by a home state against a host state,
and therefore making the “overwhelming authority” cited by the Respondent
irrelevant, it is stressed that due to the juridical nature of investor-state
arbitration, the local remedies rule does not apply at all in the present case.
This position is said to be reinforced by the award in Elf Aquitaine v. NIOC
(C-88) and the ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection (C-89). Invoking
Professor Schreuer (C-91), the Respondent asserts that the requirement to
exhaust local remedies is “dispensed with” by international investment

arbitration (C II, paras. 201 et seq.).

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-87-

147. Even if the local remedies rule were to be applied, Claimant submits that
Respondent’s consent to investor-state arbitration in the UK-Soviet BIT
would constitute an implied waiver of the rule. Referring not only to
authorities such as Dr. Amerasinghe (C-85) and Judge Schwebel (C-93) for
support, the Claimant also draws upon the historical development and
purpose of arbitration to provide “one-stop adjudication” for investor-state
disputes. As regards Respondent’s allegation that an express provision
waiving the local remedies would be necessary, it is noted that Claimant
submits its Memorial based on the assumption that the Claimant has duly
exercised a legal right to refer its dispute to arbitration in accordance with
Article 8 of the UK-Soviet BIT. Against this background, it is deemed to be
more significant that the UK-Soviet BIT does not contain an express
provision requiring the exhaustion of local remedies. With reference to Prof.
Paulsson (R-27), it is suggested that if the text of the BIT gave a right of
access to international arbitration in “simple, declarative, unqualified
sentences,” then it would be “astonishing” to read a requirement to exhaust
local remedies into the text as an implied condition (C Il, para. 217). The
Respondent’s attempt to contrive a requirement out of the last sentence of
Article 5(1) is also considered not to avail. An implied requirement at most, it
is submitted that the provision gives the investor a right to review by
domestic authorities which cannot be equated to an obligation to exhaust that

recourse prior to investor-state arbitration. (C II, paras. 209 et seq.).

148. Objections by the Claimant to the application of the local remedies rule are
furthermore based upon the allegation that no adequate local remedies exist
for the Claimant at present and in the foreseeable future (C II, para. 220). The
notion of suing the Respondent in its own courts would inevitably give rise to
a claim under international law for denial of justice (C II, paras. 6, 25). Apart
from the assertion that the Respondent has failed to carry its burden of
showing that local remedies even exist and are available to the Claimant
(CII, para. 221), the Claimant mainly relies upon the Respondent’s statement

that Russian courts have repeatedly and consistently rejected the objections of

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

149.

150.

151.

-88-

Yukos to the seizure and sale of its core assets, in order to come to the
conclusion that assuming that Claimant could in fact bring a claim before the
Russian courts, there is no reason to imagine that it would obtain results any
better than those obtained by Yukos (C Il, para. 223). The Claimant further
believes the Respondent’s overt hostility to Yukos’s management, its
employees, and its outside advisors to be amply documented in the

international press.

Acknowledging that the submission may raise factual issues between the
Parties, Claimant suggests that the Tribunal should reserve any final decision
as to its own jurisdiction, if necessary, until it has heard the merits of the

claim (C II, paras. 5, 224).

The Tribunal

The Tribunal has carefully examined the memorials and exhibits submitted,
as well as the presentations at the Hearing by each of the Parties on this issue.
It is not necessary to recall these arguments in detail here, but the Tribunal
has taken them fully into account in reaching the following findings and

conclusions.

Above, the Tribunal has ruled against the Respondents on issues of
jurisdiction, viz by ruling that (1) the Respondents consented to arbitration in
Article 8 of the Soviet-UK BIT and (2) that the Tribunal has jurisdiction
based on Article 8 of the Denmark-Russian Federation BIT by operation of
the MEN clause in Article 3 of the Soviet-UK BIT. In the latter respect it will
be recalled that the Tribunal reached this conclusion on the contingent basis
that jurisdiction is rolled into the merits in respect of expropriation. That
leaves one question to be determined, namely the issue of the exhaustion of

local remedies under public international law.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-89-

152. The Respondents advance their case about exhaustion of local remedies on a
jurisdictional basis or on the basis of the lack of admissibility of the claim.
The jurisdictional argument must be rejected. The very fact that the local
remedies rule may be waived, as is undoubtedly the case, demonstrates that

one is not dealing with a jurisdictional issue.

153. The alternative argument is based on a principle of customary international
law. It is unnecessary to examine the width of the principle of customary
international law involved. The context in which the question arises is
investor-state arbitration under Article 8 of the Soviet-UK BIT and the MFN
clause under Article 8 of the Denmark-Russian Federation BIT. The objective
purpose of such treaty provisions, which confer independent third party rights
on investors, tellingly demonstrate that the principle of customary
international law is inapplicable. So far as it is necessary to do so the consent
to investor-state arbitration, as explained, amounts to a waiver of the principle
of exhaustion of local remedies. By choosing international arbitration to settle
third party investment arbitration disputes the principle of exhaustion of

national legal remedies is excluded.

154. To the extent that the Respondent relies on the last sentence of Article 5(1) of
the Soviet-UK BIT the Tribunal is satisfied that the plain meaning of the
provision confers a right on the investor and not a duty. The Claimant has

not exercised this right. It is not germane to the issues.

155. The special regime established for investor-state arbitration, determinable by
an international arbitration tribunal, conclusively establishes that the principle
of customary international law invoked by the Respondent is excluded by
Article 8 of the Soviet-UK BIT and by the MEN clause contained in Article 3
of the same treaty read with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russian Federation
BIT. This conclusion gives primacy to the text of the treaty provisions and
provides an interpretation in good faith in accordance with Article 31 0 the

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

156.

H.V.

157.

158.

159.

-90-

Therefore, no exhaustion of local remedies is required in the present context

and the claims are admissible.

Considerations regarding Costs at this Stage

Relief Sought by Respondent

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to issue an award (RII, para. 62; R III,
para. 166):

“(c) Ordering Claimant to pay all of the Russian Federation’s
costs, expenses, and attorney’s fees; ....”

Relief Sought by Claimant

The Claimant stated in the Request for Arbitration (C I, para. 6.2) that:

“6.2 RosInvestCo will in its Statement of Claim seek an Award:

(a)

(b) Ordering the Russian Federation to pay Claimant’s costs in
these arbitration proceedings, including all attorney’s fees and
expert fees.

(Cc)...

The Tribunal

Since the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that it does have jurisdiction and
thus the procedure now continues on the merits, the Tribunal considers that a
separate decision on the costs of arbitration up to this stage would be

inappropriate. The decision on costs will rather be taken at the end of the

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-91-

merits phase taking into account the procedure and results of the

jurisdictional phase as well at those of the merits phase.

(The section with the decisions and signatures of the Tribunal follows on a

separate page of this Award.)

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

-92-

I.__ Decisions

Taking into account its above considerations, at the end of this jurisdictional

phase of the proceedings, the Tribunal decides as follows:

1.

The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the claims submitted by
Claimant on the basis of Article 8 of the UK-Soviet Treaty.

The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims submitted by Claimant
on the basis of the Most-Favoured Nation Clause in Article 3 UK-
Soviet BIT in connection with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT.

The claims submitted by Claimant are admissible.

The issue whether the actions of Respondent have to be considered as
expropriations under the UK-Soviet BIT is transferred to the merits
phase of this arbitration.

The decision on costs of the arbitration is also joined to the merits
phase of this arbitration.

After this Award on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal will enter into
consultation with the Parties regarding the further conduct of the
merits phase of this arbitration.

Place of arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden

Date of this Award: October 2007

The Rt. Hon. The Lord Steyn Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC

(Co-Arbitrator) (Co-Arbitrator)

Prof. Dr. Béckstiegel

(Chairman of Tribunal)

Roslnvest v Russian Federation Award on Jurisdiction October 2007

