12. DEC. 2010 13:24 SVEA HOVRATT NR.

ARBITRATION INSTITUTE
OF THE STOCKHOLM CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

ROSINVESTCO UK LTD.,
CLAIMANT,
v.
THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION,
RESPONDENT.

Final Award
Made on 12 September 2010
Seat of Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden
SCC ARBITRATION V (079/2005)

mg

Claimant: RosiInvestCo UK Ltd.

Claimant’s counsel: V.V. Veeder, Q.C.
Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér
Dr. Nils Eliasson

John M. Townsend
Mare-Olivier Langlois

James H. Boykin

Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP

oN
.“y Respondent: The Russian Federation
Respondent's counsel: William B. McGum III
. Robert T. Greig
Y Dr. Claudia Annacker
‘ Matthew D. Slater
Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP
Arbitral Tribunal:
Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel, President
The Right Honourable The Lord Steyn, Arbitrator
Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC, Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal: Andreas Heuser

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

300
396

71. DEC. 2010 13:24

)

ABBREVIATIONS

 

A. THE PARTIES

 

B. THE TRIBUNAL

 

D, PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

SYEA HOVRATT 3886 |S. 3
2
Table of Contents
6
8
10
C. SHORT IDENTIFICATION OF THE CASE... cssssssessssessersseneeesernareanesnnenses 11
C.L THE CLAIMANT’S PERSPECTIVE .....sessessssetesnsessseurssesereneientertesesentsatesesnseeeeenees LL
C.IL. THE RESPONDENT'S PERSPECTIVE w.ecscssessscesssseeessesssneeesecsnesvensvesenstesnteaecneenee 28)
41
E. THE PRINCIPAL RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS wsssssssstssesesseessens 66

El. DPA

 

EL DENMaARK-RUSSIA BIT
F, RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIE!
FJ. ReLier SouGHT BY CLAIMANT
F.IL RELIEF SOUGHT BY RESPONDENT .
G. STATEMENT OF FACTS

 

 

 

 

 

GJ. STATEMENT OF FACTS ACCORDING TO THE CLAIMANT ..
G.IL STATEMENT OF FACTS ACCORDING TO RESPONDENT ..

Hl. CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL

HI. JURISDICTION

HLL PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS

(A) Parties’ Answers to Tribunal’s Questions in Procedural Order No.5...

Question 3.1: veces

 

Question 3.2 ee seeeccsessecssssentatssccsecsecssecessessesecessecessneteseeseastetsessansetenceeeneense
QweSTION 3.3 Lacssececsssrescsissrentcsseneecesseensasessonecsspeensarisiistuieseeserseeetsasessetessenetan

QUESTION 3.4 veeisctsteetesnecseecceeccssesseesseesseeseessitiattsnnetsueccesesnecseneceteeaneenneersee

 

Question 3.5

 

Question 3.6
Question 3.7

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

  

 

 
 

117
119
124
126
128

22. DEC. 2019 13:24 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3636S. 4

Ci

an

 

 

3
Question 3.8 - 129
Question 3.9.4... denies we 132
Question 3.10 sestssersanennne 138

 

(B) Applicable LAW.....cscssessvecsssesssseccessssessceneesnnecinaessciscvctsapeeseeasieaesssesceee 140
(C) Burden Of Proof..sescsesscscsesesisscsvessssssnesseenseeesnecsntisesetssccerecesecsssneeeere 140
(PD) Whether the ion of Respondent that Claii has no ding is

relevant to Merits stage... eseeeeesevecessessnetenessesetavaseerssneecsitseceseeteeseeesees L4Q

 

 

(E) Whether the consideration of taxation is excluded due to Article 11 of the

Denmark-Russia BIT .osc.c-ccccsececcessscsseevsesnceeevercesencriceaessoussennevecessanereerstsneuess 143
(F) Can the Tribunal review Russian Court decisions? .....0..cccccceceesevscveee 147
(G) Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals and Courts 0.0.2...

HIM. ~WHETHER IPPA APPLIES RATIONAE PERSONAE TO THE CLAIMANT.
lL Clai we
2, Respond

3. Tribunal.
HLIV. NaTUuRE OF CLAIMANT’S INVESTMENT IN YUKOS — RATIONAE MATERIAE .... 166

 

 

 

 

 

1. Clai: Coe ceecesecececseacaesenesnseeeeseensesqceeeseageassacerge sequeatecateceecerescaetneeagetens 166
2. Respondent... se crete 174
Bo THIDURNAL ec eeceseseescteeeseeserrccereeseeceureennecendecnnieestiesiiietecostentoinsiestiesseescanteene 183

TLV. WHETHER THE IPPA APPLIES RATIONAE TEMPORIS TO CLAIMANT HAVING
REGARD TO THE TIMING OF THE SHARE PURCHASE wuiscsesesesetssetesnessenresreecesses 188
1. Claimant secenes ... 188

2. RESPONAENE esos cesseeeivsssencsccsctsaes cece centeunnseesttenetanetessiteectecentsusteanrentoeesrae 190
3. Tribunal......

H.VI. WHETHER RESPONDENT BREACHED THE IPPA.
(A) THE TAXATION LAWS APPLICABLE TO YUKOS
1. CAINE ee seeceseesesesseseectteeeseseneneeecnenecenes

 

 
 

2. RESPOMAGHL esses eeeececctecessesesseeteaecsssesaeeeessneseesesacsueeeeeseverscsuerssesenseeeesicetes
THIDUNAL 0. cseceeseetsceesassenennenceseenserneeserseecsetssetnesereocsseraeetireteectnie 2

3
(B) TAX ASSESSMENTS IN RESPECT OF YUKOS..
i Claimant

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 3

”
wt

22. DEC. 2010 13:24 SVEA HOVRATT Wk, 3886

2. ReSpOndent......essecesseessecsecssessssecssveccsesavesesneesunessveneaessasessscssstcnaaneqeerentsess 214
3. Tribunal............
(C) AUCTION PROCESS IN RESPECT OF YNG.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

L Claimant 220

2. ReSpONdent 0... secevessssssecssseesscesssncescsenterecceeeanerereceseecenneess w. 222

3. Trib Urn sce seecsecseesenesnesseasescsneeseectsncccssesesvecceatevenucsecsessecanessencaneneeseaens 224

(D) BANKRUPTCY AUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF REMAINING YUKOS ASSETS... 226

Lo CLG AIE ee cecss csceeseeeseenseesecenesnneesnenaseenesecsetserecouectsseeteeacasceeareceessessensneaes 226

U 2. Respondent .os..ccesccesssesvesssesseesssenveeescsecsseescessecetitsiecesersseresecsaneeneansanseesiaes 227
3. TH ADU ees ese crete ceeeeteesensececesessnenet ons besieanetsqaesceseseeieniceretieeaneuaneetitees 228

LS (E) WHETHER THE ALLEGED EXPROPRIATORY ACTS WERE DISCRIMINATORY 229

~ 1 Claimant eyeseeepitcestee ere eueeutaeeeesvesseetencansscaneeaseceseseesesneeceetene 229
2. Respordentt .....cccccsevcsscssssssssssesessssssccssssssecseyesecsstsyustsosstssseescesecseeccansineceess 231

3. Tribunal wee eseesesenssceeseneeseeenvesseenveesetanesenenuesseeyssotsecesceassqicsnncsatensstenetenee 233

(F) | WHETHER ALLEGED EXPROPRIATORY ACTS WERE BONA FIDE wn 235

1. Claimant... “ w. 235

2, Respondent. ceseeseeenesseanessaueetssseesessseaneesvnt cheseeseeseuessesuerssesteeressaaesnenssnieanees 237

3. THiDUnnl ee cees cesses sseeesneseeentessneessescecsessucevecsneese stan cid uage esate sseeeateseeesenenees 237

(G) WHETHER ALLEGED EXPROPRIATORY ACTS WERE CONFISCATORY «...0104 238

L. Claimant... cecsepeteteneceeeseeanes -- 238

CS 2. Respond seteesenneseetinees 238
3. TV iDUDL oe csesesesesceceeseeeseevessetsnscuee conseenecaeescissaycteceietesiteecsreersesaerneacertees 239

_ (H) COMPENSATION FOR ALLEGED EXPROPRIATION wisssscsssessssrsssnessserseceteesreeaee 240
VY L CLGIMAN ..essesescsesseescescescessceese ites eceerceeneeneeesneeneageesseanensenieensecsneatsnsssneseesies 240
2. Respondent... .» 240

 
 

3. Tribunal..... . 240

(I) WHETHER, IN ANY EVENT, CLAIMANT HAD NO LEGITIMATE INVESTMENT-BACKED

 

 

EXPECTATIONS 241
I, Claimant 241
2. RESPOMAENE ve .eesseecceecsteecesccssctsnesetvent ones rtecncssseccareatecees cecceseeneeetsanesnsueene 242
3. Tribunal .......41... ceecesegeeeeseceeseecenncesansesuesesnesaeeneacsceasansvotaesoessisecensascasneaeee 242

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 4

22. DEC. 2040 13:25 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3386 6S. 6

|

(J) WHETHER CUMULATIVE EFFECT OF THE VARIOUS STRANDS OF RESPONDENT’S
ACTIONS CONSTITUTED A BREACH OF THE JPPA. :
1. CLAIM .oresseccecsecscesstessessestsouceeeeeesnsees

2, RESPORACHL ss ceessseeseceectsscesnesesnvresensateecsucsscaveranunetsnnetsnucsnniseieeaneesneens

 

3, Tribune seseesescsssvecssnecanucnnsesnecsssetesestsveneesiecatacsnsessicssetineeateneasecstestiee
H.VIL EXHAUSTION OF LOCAL REMEDIES.
1. CIOIMANE oes cece cececsestestessceneeeeees

PRoonnn,
2. Resp

 

3. Tribunal.

H.VIII. CONCLUSIONS OF TRIBUNAL ON LIABILITY
1. Scope of Jurisdiction

2. Attributability sesaeceecaees ete we
3. Applicable Provisions of IPPA for Claimant's Claim in Respect of its

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Shareholdings .....ccesccecrerceveres beseeenneeeesetensvesssanescevetiese 250
4. Alleged Breach of Article 5 IPPA ..scscccuesinescccsssussrceceressesntsnsaeess BOD
J. Yukos' Contribution to the Loss of its ASS€tS ...ececeectsivcsececeeeteeeeteeiees 261
HUIX. . DAMAGES ben 262
1. Claimart...... \essseeececrssssesueeessesaneesnsseuyetesyeeescsveee .. 262
2. — Respondent............. eeccs ences oceans 266
3. Tribunal......... cevedigueseenstanesneesesanecnsecsaseacastecseceecsneeanenseaivcseteassecsaeeectsiperecers 271
HX. INTEREST 277
I. Claimant.. 277

  
 

2. Respondent...
3. Tribunal...

FLXL COSTS OF ARBITRATION ....ecsssssssnsssssesonecsaressstsssssssecssesneecccessetensessnees 201

1, CO IMAM oases sscte cee eseeeceeeeseeneseestereeaeneesetaeceseecsotncacsesgqeeeeectaeneeeteessenseess 281
2, Respondent ......ceccecsesesvesvssnssseeesenseesneesessnesseccessusceresneseeneaatsentoneesesanesetesies 281
3B, TRIBUNAL ecsesssssesssessssnsesetcsstsssseninnnseeceevneneeeuneeseees ccuesseesnsctnneseeince 282
L DECISIONS 284

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 5

7). DEC. 2010 13:25

whe

NY

Abbreviations

Award on Jurisdiction
BIT
Borisova Report

CI

CI

cB

CHB

CLA

CM

CPHB-I

CPHB-II

CSFB
Denmark-Russia BIT

Dow Report
fn

Hearing
IPPA

Konnov or Konnov Report

LECG Report

Low Tax Regions

Maggs or Mages Report

para or J,
PO

SYEA HOVRATT

NR. 3986S. 7

Award of the Tribunal on Jurisdiction dated 5 October 2007

Bilateral Investment Treaty

The report of Professor Elena Alexandrovina Borisova accompanying
R-I and Professor Borisova’s supplemental report accompanying R-II
Claimant’s Statement of Claim of 22 August 2008

Claimant's Reply of 21 September 2009C-1 et seq.Claimant’s Exhibit
(followed by the exhibit’s number)

Common Bundle (followed by the exhibit’s number)

Claimant’s Hearing Binder (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Claimant’s Legal Authority (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Claimant’s Memorial (followed by the exhibit’s number)

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief of 26 March 2010

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Reply Brief of 4 May 2010

Credit Suisse First Boston

Agreement between the Government of Denmark and the Government
of the Russian Federation concerning the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments dated November 4, 1993

The report of Professor James Dow accompanying R-I (Dow Report I)
and Professor Dow’s Rebuttal Report accompanying R-II (Dow
Report II)

Foomote

The hearing on the merits of the case from 18 January to 22 January
2010 held at the ICC hearing centre in Paris, France,

Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom and the
Government of the USSR for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments signed in London on April 6, 1989

The report of Oleg Y. Konnov accompanying R-I (Konnov 1),Mr
Konnov’s second report accompanying R-I (Konnoy Il) and Mr
Konnov’s third report of 11 January 2010 (Konnov II!)

The report of Dr. Abdala and Dr, Spiller of LECG, LLC
accompanying C-I (LECG Report I) and also the supplemental Expert
Report of Dr. Abdala and Dr. Spiller of LECG, LLC accompanying
C-II (LECG Report II)

The administrative regions in the Russian Federation in which Yukos
had a presence and which included the regions of Mordovia,
Kalmykia, Evenkia, Baikonur and a number of other regions classified
as ZATOs

The reports of Professor Peter Maggs attached at Exhibit A to C-I
(Maggs I) and the second report of Professor Mages accompanying C-
JY (Maggs II) and the third report of Professor Maggs dated 21
December 2009 (Maggs IIT)

Page

Paragraph

Procedural Order

SCC asbitretion V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 6

22, DEC. 2010 13:26

4

ay

SV

Pp

R-I

R-II

R-1 et seq.
RHB

RLA

RM

RPHB-I

RPHB-I

RosInvest

Russian Federation
RSlide, date, name, page

scc
SCC-Institute
SCC Rules
Tr

VAT
VCLT
YNG
Yukos

A HOVRATT NR. 3986S. 8

Pages

Respondent’s Statement of Defence of 20 April 2009
Respondent’s Surreply to Claimant’s Reply of 16 November 2009
Respondents’ Exhibit (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Respondent's Hearing Binder (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Respondent’s Legal Authority (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Respondent’s Memorial (followed by the exhibit’s number)
Respondent's First Post-Hearing Memorial of 26 March 2010
Respondent’s Second Post-Hearing Memorial of 4 May 2010
Claimant

Respondent

Respondent’s Slide (followed by relevant date, counsel’s name and
page number)

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the SCC

Transcript of the Hearing from 18 to 22 January 2010 (followed by
the page reference)

Value added tax

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of May 23. 1969
Yuganskneftegaz

Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rasiavest v Russia 7

2D. DEC. 2019 13:26 SVEA HOVRATT

A. The Parties

The Claimant
Represented by
LU
-

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia

RosInvestCo UK Ltd.
6-8 Underwood Street
London N1 73Q
UNITED KINGDOM

V.V. Veeder, Q.C.
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln Inn’s Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United KINGDOM

Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér
Dr. Nils Eliasson,
Mannheimer Swartling
Norrlandsgatan 21
Box 1711

111 87 Stockholm
SWEDEN

John M. Townsend
Marc-Olivier Langlois

James H. Boykin

Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP
1775 I Street, N.W.
Washington D.C. 20006-2401
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

22. DEC. 2010 13:26 SVEA HOVRATT

o

“4

The Respondent:

Represented by

SCC Axbintion V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia

The Russian Federation

His Excellency the President of the
Russian Federation

4, Staraya Square

103132 Moscow

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

His Excellency the Minister of Foreign
Affairs

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

32/34 Smolenskaya Sennaya PI.
121200 Moscow G-200

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

His Excellency the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation to the
UnitedKingdom

6/7, Kensington Palace Gardens
London W8 4Qp

UNITED KINGDOM

William B. McGurn III

Robert T. Greig

Dr. Claudia Annacker

Matthew D. Slater

Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP
12, rue de Tilsitt

75008 Paris

FRANCE

22. DEC. 2010 13:26 SVEA HOVRATT

B. The Tribunal

Professor Dr. Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel, Chairman
Parkstrasse 38

D-51427 Bergisch-Gladbach

GERMANY

The Right Honourable The Lord Steyn
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln Inn’s Fields

London WC2A 3EG

UNITED KINGDOM

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln Inn’s Fields

London WC2A 3EG

UNITED KINGDOM.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

10

22. DEC. 2010 13:26 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. 12

C. Short Identification of the Case
C.l. The Claimant’s Perspective

1. The following quotation is from the Statement of Claim and
summarises the main aspects of the dispute from the Claimant’s

; perspective as follows (C-I, fj 1-7):
“1. Claimant RosInvestCo UK Lid (“Claimant” or
“RosInvestCo”), an investment company incorporated under

3 English law and based in London, England, purchased a total
of seven million ordinary shares of OAO NK Yukos Oil
Company OJSC (“Yukos”), a Russian oil company then traded
on the Moscow and other stock exchanges, on two occasions on
17 November and 1 December of 2004.

2. Claimant is an investor, and its shares of Yukos are an
investment, under the Agreement between the Government of
the United Kingdom and the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (“USSR”) for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “UK-Soviet BIT”).

4 Respondent the Russian Federation is under international law
the successor or “continuator” of the USSR.

3. Article 5.1 of the UK-Soviet BIT expresses the agreement
of the United Kingdom and the USSR that investments shall not
be expropriated, except for a purpose in the public interest that
is not discriminatory and against the payment of prompt and
effective compensation. Article 5.2 of the UK-Soviet BIT
expressly confers on an investor such as RosInvestCo rights
under Article 5.1 in the event of an expropriation of assets of a
company in which it has a shareholding.

4. Respondent expropriated all of the assets of Yukos by a
series of measures carried out from 19 December 2004 to 15

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia i

22, DEC. 2019 13:27 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. 13

Ca

August 2007. RosInvestCo therefore brings this claim under
Articles 5.1 and 5.2 of the UK-Soviet BIT to seek compensation
for the injury to its investment in Yukos caused by the
expropriation by the Russian Federation of the assets of Yukos,
in the amount of the proportional value of those assets
represented by its shareholding.

5. At the time that Claimant made its purchases, Yukos
shares were trading at prices well below their historic highs,
due in large part to the menacing tone that had been taken
toward Yukos by the Government of the Russian Federation. By
the autumn of 2004, the CEO and other top managers of Yukos
had been arrested and were being detained on various charges,
and the tax authorities of the Russian Federation had begun to
assert enormous claims for back taxes against Yukos going
back to the year 2000. The hostility of the Russian Government
toward Yukos was manifest, and the fall in the price of Yukos
stock suggests that investors had begun to sell their shares.

6. Many investment firms such as RosInvestCo specialize in
purchasing shares at such moments of market distress, judging
that the market has overreacted to transient events and has
undervalued a company’s underlying assets. Some of these
investments turn out to be profitable, and some do not, and the
investor may be presumed to understand the market risks when
it makes the investment. But when an investment becomes
worthless, not because of market movements, but because of
unlawful government action, an investor does not lose its rights
under treaties such as the UK-Soviet BIT simply because it
bought its shares at a moment of uncertainty. Yukos would
have appreciated in value after Claimant’s purchase of shares,
but for the unlawful acts of Respondent,... [7.

7. When Claimant purchased its Yukos shares, it was far
from certain that the company’s troubles would prove to be

anything other than temporary. At that time:
-  Yukos was still operating as a_ successful oil
company, with very large current production and

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 12

22. DEC. 2010 13:27

SYEA HOVRATT NR. 3805 S$. 14

proven petroleum reserves, and substantial revenues
reported in financial statements prepared in
accordance with Western accounting standards;
Yukos was contesting the tax assessments against it;
and

Officials of the Russian Federation, including
President Putin himself, had __ recently made
public statements professing Russian adherence to
the rule of law and denying that the Russian
Government had any intention of destroying Yukos
or of driving it into bankruptcy.

2. Claimant’s Reply of 21 September 2009 (C-II, §§ 1-11) summarises
the case further:

Claimant seeks in this arbitration compensation under the

Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom and
the G::ernment of the Unic:: of Soviet Socialist Re:ublics for
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the

“UK-Soviet BIT”) for the expropriation by the Russian

Federation of the assets of Yukos, a company organized under
Russian law, in which Claimant, a U.K. investor, had a
shareholding. While the Russian Federation seeks to defend its
taking of Yukos’ assets as a proper exercise of its power to

enforce its tax laws, the evidence before the Tribunal shows that

the tax measures directed against Yukos were an unconvincing

oY

2.

pretext for an unlawful expropriation.

The first step in that expropriation was taken on 19

December 2004, when the Russian Federation conducted a so-
called auction at which all of Yukos’ common shares in

Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”), Yukos’ principal production facility,

were conveyed to Baikalfinansgroup (“BFG”), an unknown
company with no assets. BFG has already been shown to have
been a special purpose vehicle created to protect Rosneft, the
state-owned company that was the ultimate recipient of almost
all of Yukos’ assets. Since filing its Statement of Claim,

Claimant has learned that Rosneft owned at least twenty
SCC Asbisration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 13

22. DEC. 2010 13:28 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886 = S.15

14

percent of BFG at the time of the 2004 auction, so that BFG
itself was at least a partially state-owned company at the time
of that auction.

3. In the days that followed the YNG auction, Andrei
Illarionov, then-President Putin’s economic advisor and the
Russian Federation’s representative to the G-8, confirmed what
the rest of the world already knew: that the YNG auction was
/ the “swindle of the year” motivated by nothing less than “a
NS great desire to expropriate private property.” The subsequent
forced bankruptcy, seizures of Yukos’ remaining assets, and the
sale of those assets at auction over the course of 2007
completed the expropriation. When the dust settled, the Russian
Federation had bankrupted and liquidated Yukos, and state-
owned Rosneft was in possession of virtually all of Yukos’ oil
producing assets. As President Putin himself put it shortly after
the YNG auction: .
“Rosneft is a 100-percent state-owned company and it has
acquired the known asset, Yuganskneftegaz. . . . Today the
state, using absolutely legal market mechanisms, is
securing its interests. I consider this to be quite normal.”
Claimant would take issue only with the words “absolutely
legal.”

~~ 4. In its Statement of Defense, the Russian Federation
attempts to dismiss RosInvestCo’s claim as a dispute about tax
enforcement and an unproven “conspiracy theory” that is
“utterly implausible.” It is neither. It is a claim for
expropriation based on the documented actions of the Russian
Federation. There can be no dispute that the measures taken by
the Russian Federation deprived Yukos of its assets and
conveyed them by auction to itself, and no dispute that the
Russian Federation paid no compensation for those assets. [ ]
The Russian tax assessments only enter into the picture because
the Respondent seeks to disguise its taking as a legitimate
exercise of its tax power.

SCC Asbitretion Y (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia. 14

22. DEC. 2010 13:28 SVEA HOVRATT WR. 3386S. 16

5. Nor is Claimant alone in concluding that the Russian
Federation’s actions against Yukos amounted to a deliberate
expropriation. The evidence on which Claimant relies is the
same evidence that has convinced courts, government bodies,
and commentators from around the world that the destruction
of Yukos was not a collateral consequence of bona fide efforts
to enforce the Russian tax code, as the Respondent would have
the Tribunal believe, but was rather the calculated outcome of
the Russian Federation’s determination to reassert state control
over strategic petroleum assets, and incidentally to suppress
political opposition.

6. Those bodies came to the following conclusions:

* “Tt can be said with some justification that the Yukos
case involved both what might be described as the re-
nationalisation of strategic assets and the damaging
of a political opponent.” (Lord Justice Moore-Bick,
Court of Appeal (Civil Division;, July 2009.)

[T]he circumstances of the arrest and prosecution of
leading Yukos executives suggest that the interest of
the state’s action in these cases goes beyond the mere
pursuit of criminal justice, and includes elements
such as the weakening of an outspoken political
opponent, the intimidation of other wealthy
individuals and the regaining of control of strategic
economic assets.” (Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly, January 2005.)

“The Yukos/Khodorkovsky trial in Russia was
politicized, that is, not based on criminal arguments
but on the will of the authorities to ruin the political
opposition and to regain control of strategic economic
assets.” (Supreme Administrative Court, Vilnius,
Lithuania, October 2006.)

“The District Court is of the opinion that the course
of affairs as represented... can only lead to the
conclusion that the way in which the additional tax
assessment owed by Yukos Oil, and the size thereof,

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 15

3906

22. DEC. 2010 13:29 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 17

16

was assessed first by the Russian Tax Authorities and
subsequently by the tax court cannot stand the test of
criticism. . .. The subsequent hearing before the tax
court and the appeal are a violation of the
fundamental principles of due process of law as
generally accepted in the Netherlands and laid down
in article 6 ECHR.” (District Court, Amsterdam,
Netherlands, October 2007.)

“Rosneft has insufficiently rebutted that the Russian
judiciary in cases that pertain to the (former) Yukos

group (or parts thereof) or the (former) directors
thereof and which concern interests which the
Russian state considers to be its own, is not impartial
and independent, but allows itself to be led by the
interests of the Russian state and is instructed by the
. executive,” (Amsterdam Court of Appeal, Netherlands,

28 April 2009.)
7. To distract the Tribunal from the evidence that the
Russian Federation used its tax laws to engineer the
expropriation and re-nationalization of Yukos’ assets, the
Russian Federation first attacks Claimant and its relationship
to the Elliott, a private investment partnership, which it
~~ describes as “a notorious US-based ‘vulture fund’ and an

archetype of . . . ‘anything goes’ capitalism.” The Russian
Federation's characterizations of Claimant and Elliott are
mistaken and gratuitous, but utterly irrelevant to the Russian
Federation’s liability in these proceedings. (See Part ILA,
below.)

8 The Respondent next mounts a belated, unfounded, and
scarcely veiled assault on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, more than
a year after the Tribunal issued a detailed award finding that it
had jurisdiction in this case.

(a) The Russian Federation begins by arguing that

Claimant did not qualify as an “investor” under the UK-
SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 16

22. DEC. 2010 13:29

~C

or

4

SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 18

Soviet BIT until 2007. But Claimant qualified as an
investor under the UK-Soviet BIT when, as a company
organized under the laws in force in the United Kingdom,
it purchased 7,000,000 common shares of Yukos in
November and December 2004. Those shares are an
investment. Contrary to what the Russian Federation
would have the Tribunal believe, Claimant’s inter-group
“participation agreements,” in force between late-2004
and early-2007, have no bearing on Claimant’s status as
an investor in these proceedings. The Respondent’s
arguments to the contrary rely on legal authorities from
the field of diplomatic protection, not bilateral investment
treaties. [ ] proven that Rosneft, as the successor in
interest to YNG, had breached its obligation to repay
certain loan agreements between YNG and the offshore
Yukos entity. The Russian courts had annulled the awards,
but the Amsterdam Court of Appeal enforced them,
expressly rejecting the argz:nent that the loan agreements
were part of an illegal tax structure put in place by the
Yukos group.

(b) The Russian Federation next argues that Claimant’s
share purchase should not qualify as an “investment”
under the UK-Soviet BIT because (1) “nominally owned”
assets should not be considered an investment for the
purposes of the UK-Soviet BIT, and (2) the share
purchases allegedly did not further the UK-Soviet BIT’s
stated objective of encouraging investments. This
argument also relies on authorities from the field of
diplomatic protection. It suffices, however, to look at the
plain language of Article 1(a) of the UK-Soviet BIT to
confirm that Claimant has satisfied the treaty’s
requirements for a qualified investment. [ ]

(c) The Russian Federation raises an objection to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis on the grounds
that some of the events described in Claimant’s Statement
of Claim preceded Claimant’s investment. The Tribunal

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 7

22. DEC. 2019 13:30

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3686S. 19

18

should reject this argument, because the Tribunal is
entitled to consider events that preceded Claimant’s
investment to establish the context of the expropriation
and as evidence of the Respondent's true purpose. [ ]

(d) Finally, the Russian Federation argues that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae under Article
11(3) of the Denmark-Russia BIT. Besides being another
emanation of the Respondent’s vain wish to make this a
tax dispute, this argument is without merit, because
Article 11(3) of the Denmark- Russia BIT does not apply
to this claim and does not have the meaning the
Respondent would like to give it. The same argument was
firmly rejected in another arbitration brought by Yukos
shareholders against the Russian Federation. (See Part
IV.B, below.)

9. When these diversionary arguments are put aside, it
becomes clear that the Russian Federation has but one defense:
that its actions against Yukos should be deemed proper,
because its domestic courts upheld them. Similar legal
arguments were advanced about the legal processes by which
two of Henry VIII’s wives lost their heads, and the Russian
Federation’s present arguments are as unconvincing as those
were. The conclusions of the Russian courts are hardly
surprising — Yukos could not have been destroyed without the
acquiescence and complicity of the Russian courts. And in any
event, a party may not invoke its own internal law to excuse
itself from performing its obligations under a treaty. (See Part
ILA, below.)

10. The Russian Federation’s actions vis-a-vis Yukos must be
judged against international standards, as incorporated into the
UK-Soviet BIT. International standards generally exempt a
State’s proper exercise of its police powers — including its
power to tax — from charges of expropriation, but only when the
exercise of these powers is bona fide, non-discriminatory, and
non-confiscatory.

SCC Axbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 18

22. DEC. 2010 13:30

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. (20

19

11. Here, the Russian Federation’s exercise of its power to tax
fails to meet international standards on all three counts. []

12.

(a) The Russian Federation has failed to rebut the
overwhelming evidence that the tax assessments against
Yukos were not bona fide.
© The Russian Federation has failed to demonstrate that
its purpose was other than to cause the return of Yukos’
assets to state control.
© The Russian Federation has failed to rebut the evidence
that the profit tax strategies used by Yukos were legal
during the years in question and that the Russian
government was well aware of Yukos’ use of those
strategies from prior audits of Yukos and of the trading
companies controlled by Yukos.
The Russian Federation’s tax enforcement defense does
not explain or justify its assessment of US$ (3.5 billion
of value added tax (“VAT”) against Yukos for
transactions upon which VAT had already been paid.

(b) Nor has the Russian Federation rebutted the evidence
that the tax assessments were discriminatory, because the
treatment of Yukos by the Russian tax authorities was
drastically different from its treatment of other similarly
situated Russian oil companies.

(c) Finally, the Russian Federation can hardly dispute
that the tax assessments were confiscatory, because they
caused the liquidation of Yukos, the deprivation of all its
assets, and the transfer of such assets to Russian state
control.

The UK-Soviet BIT provides a remedy for such violations

of a state’s obligations. Claimant should be compensated for its
proportional share of the value of Yukos had the assets of Yukos

SCC Arbimation V (079/200S) Rosinvest v Russia 19

22. DEC. 2010 13:31 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3

<

8.21

20

not been unlawfully expropriated by the Russian Federation. [

y
3. Claimant provides a further summary in [1 - 5 of CPHB-I:

“I. On 19 December 2004, the Russian Federation

commenced the process of expropriating and renationalizing

the assets of OAO NK Yukos Oil Company OJSC (“Yukos”) by

transferring at a staged auction all of Yukos’ common shares in
\ Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”), Yukos’ principal production facility,
to Baikalfinansgroup (“BFG”). BFG was a special purpose
vehicle for Rosneft, the state oil company that had owned many
of Yukos’ assets prior to their privatization in the 1990s and
that now owns them again.

2. By 15 August 2007, the Russian Federation’s
expropriation and renationalization of Yukos’ assets was
complete. It had forced Yukos into bankruptcy, seized its
remaining assets, and liquidated those assets in a series of
bankruptcy auctions from which Russian state companies —
principally Rosneft and Gazprom — emerged in possession of
Yukos’ properties.

3. RosinvestCo, an investment company organized under

~ English law, purchased a total of 7,000,000 ordinary shares of
Yukos on 16 November and I December 2004. RosInvestCo
continuously held those shares in its brokerage account at

wo Credit Suisse First Boston until Yukos’ shares were delisted on
21 November 2007 as a result of the Russian Federation’s
actions against Yukos. RosInvestCo and its investment are
entitled to the protections afforded by Article 5 of the IPPA
against the expropriation of its investment.

4, The Russian Federation cannot excuse its taking of Yukos'
assets as a bona fide exercise of its tax enforcement powers. In
fact, the contrary is true: the Russian Federation misused its tax
enforcement powers to achieve and attempt to legitimize its

seizures of strategic petroleum assets from a troublesome
SCC Arbicration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 20

22. DEC. 2010 13:31 SVEA HOVRATT

LC

¢

 

21

political opponent. The Russian Federation disregarded
existing Russian law to impose more than US$ 9.4 billion in
retroactive profits taxes on Yukos, and then imposed a further
US$ 13.5 billion in unjustified VAT assessments. Included in
these amounts was US$ 3.9 billion of repeat offender penalties
imposed with no basis in law. Far from excusing the Russian
Federation’s actions, its power to tax was the instrument by
which it accomplished the unlawful expropriation and
nationalization of Yukos’ assets.

5. The Russian Federation’s expropriation of Yukos’ assets
constitutes an expropriation of RosInvestCo’'s investment.
RosInvestCo should be compensated for this unlawful
expropriation in accordance with the standard set forth in the
Chorzéw Factory case, 1.e., inan amount sufficient to “wipe out
all the consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the
situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act
had not been committed.” Anything les: would reward the
Russian Federation for its illegal actions.

Claimant provides a further summary in {{[l — 4 and 49 — 56

of CPHB-II:

I. In its First Post-Hearing Memorial, the Respondent
continues to defend its expropriation and renationalization of
all of the assets of OAO NK Yukos Oil OJSC (“Yukos”) as a
bona fide exercise of its tax enforcement powers. The
Respondent argues that RosInvestCo “has the full burden of
establishing that the measures it complains of do not benefit
from the presumption of legality to which they are entitled
under international law.” I

2. While Claimant certainly has the burden of persuading
this Tribunal of the elements of its claim, the late-Professor
Thomas Wédilde explained why the Respondent also has the
burden of persuading the Tribunal that its defenses are well
founded:

SCC Arbitation V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia, 21

22. DEC. 2010

VY

13:32

The sequence of events,

SVEA HOVRATT NR,

“A tax or tax enforcement that singles out a

particular investor (or group of investors)
becomes suspect, in particular if such
singling-out and discriminatory enforcement
correlate with political opposition between
that investor and the powers controlling the
State... . In such cases, the burden of showing
a ‘legitimate reason’ has to be much higher
than in cases of differentiated tax treatment
where no particular suspect reason for the
differentiation is available. It is possible to
distil from such principles — or rather
guidelines for assessing the tax and balancing
the criteria for and against its expropriatory
character — a system of presumptions
(involving burden of proof and _ legal
persuasion). As ‘red flags’ attach themselves
to a tax measure, the burden of proof and
legal persuasion is on the taxing state to show
that the measure is not discriminatory, has
legitimate reasons, and is not intended to
harm foreign investors and carry out
expropriation in legallycamouflaged ways”
(CLA-76)

roe

3000

S,

22

The record in this case is replete with “red flags.”
RosInvestCo has rebutted any presumption of legitimacy to
which the Respondent’s actions could reasonably be entitled.

and the sheer number and

accumulation of hostile actions, all point to the conclusion that
the Russian Federation abused its tax enforcement powers to
expropriate strategic petroleum assets controlled by a political
opponent of the Russian State:

SCC Arbimation V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

* As early as 1997, Vladimir Putin advocated that the Russian
State should regain and maintain control over privatized
petroleum resources. After his election in 2000, President
Putin publicly expressed a desire to “liquidate the oligarchs
as a class,” although he then offered the oligarchs a “truce”

22

22. DEC. 2016 13:32

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. 24

23

pursuant to which the perceived sins of the privatizations
would not be revisited as long as the oligarchs stayed out of
politics.

Although the Russian tax authorities identified no material
tax deficiencies when they audited Yukos and its trading
companies in 2002 and early in 2003. First, Mikhail
Khodorkovsky, Yukos’ Chief Executive Officer, publicly
denounced corruption in the Putin administration and began
heavily funding opposition parties. At the same time, Yukos
promoted two private pipelines that would have undermined
the Transneft state monopoly over the infrastructure for
exporting oil from Russia. In addition, by planning to sell a
majority stake in itself to ExxonMobil, Yukos threatened to
put a large part of the Russian Federation’s oil reserves
under foreign control.

In response to these provecations, the Russian «:thorities
arrested Mr. Khodorkovsky in October 2003, on charges
largely related to a company called Apatit, which was not
part of Yukos. The Apatit charges, which the General
Prosecutor’s Office had previously rejected, were revived
after President Putin personally intervened.

RosInvestCo has extensively documented the “supervisory
re-qudit” of Yukos’s 2000 tax year that the Russian
Federation commenced and concluded in December 2003,
after Mr. Khodorkovsky’s arrest. The Respondent's
ostensible “discovery” of a US$ 3.5 billion tax shortfall
during the three-week audit (no trace of which had been
found during the previous audits of Yukos and its trading
companies in 2002 and 2003) is wholly implausible. Equally
implausible are the results of the Russian Federation’s

. subsequent audits of Yukos’ 200] to 2004 tax years, which

cumulatively led to the assessment of an additional US$ 20.6
billion in taxes, interest, and fines. The timing of the audits
and speed with which the tax authorities suddenly uncovered
an alleged US$ 24.1 billion tax fraud are powerful support

'SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 23

22. DEC. 2010 13:33

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3086 0S. 25

24

jor the inference that the tax assessments — lawful or not
under Russian law (and they were not) — were a pretext for
eliminating Mr. Khodorkovsky while renationalizing all of
Yukos’ oil and gas assets.

The Respondent's assessment against Yukos of US$ 13,5
billion of VAT (including US$ 2.3 billion in repeat offender
fines) is perhaps the most glaring “red flag.” It is
uncontested that Yukos’ trading companies had exported the
relevant oil, that no VAT is due on exports, and that the
trading companies had complied with all of the legal
requirements for claiming the 0% rate of VAT applicable to
exports. The Respondent freely attributed to Yukos the
revenues earned by Yukos’ trading companies, but it
steadfastly refused to give Yukos the benefit of the paperwork
filed by those same companies. These two positions are only
reconcilable if the Respondent’s true objective was to
destroy Yukos.

The Respondent’s assessment against Yukos of US$ 9.4
billion of profit taxes (including US$ 1,5 billion in repeat
offender fines) is also striking. After companies affiliated
with Yukos and incorporated in Low-Tax Regions had for
years filed returns and paid billions of dollars in taxes, those
companies were suddenly, using novel legal theories,
declared to be shams.

The Respondent’s actions leading up to the YNG auction
point in the same direction. Rather than seeking to preserve
the continuing ability to do business and pay taxes of the
Russian Federation's largest private company, the Russian
authorities instead consistently exercised their discretion in
such a way as to ensure Yukos’ destruction. To that end, the
Russian authorities (i) gave Yukos the minimum amount of
time possible to pay tax assessments; (ii) obtained an
injunction that froze Yukos’ assets such as to impede Yukos’
ability to pay those assessments; (iii) seized all of Yukos’
shares in Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”), Yukos’ principal

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 24

22. DEC. 2019 1

3:33 SVEA HOVRATT

 

25

production facility, to enforce the assessments; (iv) refused
to accept any of Yukos’ offers to satisfy the tax claims with
other assets; and (v) refused to delay or forego the auction of
the voting shares of YNG even though Yukos had (pending a
resolution of its legal challenges) by the time of the auction
satisfied the entirety of its alleged year 2000 liability.

* The orchestrated auction of YNG to Rosneft, the Russian
Federation’s state-owned oil company, behind an
unconvincing screen known as Baikalfinansgroup (“BFG”),
remains one of the most obvious “red flags.” The lengths to
which the Respondent went to conceal Rosneft’s relationship
with BFG is highly suggestive of a male fide intent. The
Russian tax authorities’ abandonment, after YNG was
transferred to Rosneft, of most of their claim to almost US$
4.4 billion in back taxes that had been assessed against YNG
while it was owned by Yukos is equally instructive.

The Respondent's hidden role (through Rosneft) in
arranging the initiation of bankruptcy proceedings against
Yukos, along with the refusal of Rosneft and the Russian Tax
Ministry to accept a rehabilitation plan sponsored by Yukos’
management that would have allowed Yukos to remain in
business, are additional indications of the Respondent’s
intent to destroy Yukos. The post-bankruptcy transfer of
virtually all of Yukos’ remaining oil and gas assets to state
control likewise points in the same direction.

Finally, the targeting of business people and lawyers
affiliated with Yukos and its shareholders, the procedural
inequities in the Russian court proceedings, and the
disparate treatment of Yukos’ competitors all contradict the
Respondent's continued professions of good faith.

4. Professor Newcombe has observed that, “[w]here there is
evidence of intent to expropriate, it is unlikely that a state could
rely on the good faith exercise of its police powers as
justification for non-compensation.” The conjunction of events

SCC Arbitration V (079/200S) Rosinvest v Russia 25

22. DEC. 2019 13:34

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886 0S. 27

26

described above are not mere happenstance or coincidence,
Claimant has demonstrated that those events cannot be justified
as a bona fide exercise of the Russian Federation’s power to
tax. The liquidation of a company under the pretext of tax
enforcement constitutes an unlawful expropriation. This is true
regardless of whether, and to what extent, the tax enforcement
measures themselves may have complied with Russian domestic
law. Formal compliance with domestic law may not be used to
Justify the destruction of a private company and excuse the
uncompensated transfer of that company’s assets to the state.
Such actions constitute an unlawful expropriation under
international. law, regardless of how they might be viewed
under domestic law, and have been so perceived by
international courts and commentators.

49. The Respondent contends that Claimant has not
established that any post-investment measures deprived it of (i)
the total or substantial value of its investment in Yukos, (ii) any
Jundamental ownership rights in its investment, or (ili) any
legitimate expectation in its investment. The Respondent is
wrong.

50. The Respondent first contends that Claimant was not
deprived of the total or substantial value of its investment
because the YNG auction “occurred long before Claimant
acquired an economic interest in the Yukos shares, in March
2007, and long before the UK-Soviet BIT could have become
applicable to Claimant and the Yukos shares.” Claimant
became a protected investor beginning on 16 November and 1
December 2004. This argument therefore has no merit.

51. The Respondent next contends that, even assuming that
Claimant made its investment in 2004 (as it did), Claimant was
not deprived of the total or substantial value of its investment,
because various tax liens became enforceable prior to

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 26

22. DEC. 2010 13:34 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 28

me

27

Claimant’s purchase of its shares, the shares had lost a
significant part of their market value, and Yukos’ management
had declared that the company was insolvent as of 31 October
2004. Once again, the Respondent's argument must be
rejected.

52. When Claimant made its investment, Yukos was a fully
functioning company. All of its assets remained in its
possession and its business operations were ongoing. By 15
August 2007, the Respondent had taken all of Yukos’ assets.
The forced sale of a company’s assets under the pretext of tax
enforcement constitutes an unlawful expropriation. There can
be no dispute that the taking of Yukos’ assets had the effect of
expropriating Claimant’s shareholding in Yukos, because the
Respondent’s actions left Claimant the owner of shares in an
empty shell. Article 5(2) of the IPPA expressly confers on a
shareholder the right to assert claims under Article 5(1) under
sich circumstances. Thz YNG auction and 2:2 Bankruptcy
Auctions thus deprived Claimant of “the total or substantial
value of its investment.”

53. The Respondent’s argument is premised on the mistaken
belief that the value of Claimant’s Yukos shares must be
determined by reference to their stock market price. Under
ideal circumstances, a company’s share price should reflect the
company’s net asset value and the market’s prediction as to the
effect of future events on earnings. In this case, the market
depressed the share price toward the end of 2004 to account for
the Respondent’s menacing posture toward Yukos. While the
Respondent’s threats may have allowed Claimant to acquire its
Yukos shares at a depressed price, the value of its investment is
properly determined by calculating Claimant’s proportionate
share of the net asset value of Yukos. If the measures taken by
the Respondent against Yukos after Claimant acquired its
shares were unlawful, as Claimant has demonstrated, those
measures deprived Claimant of the full value of its investment —
US$ 232.7 million as of the date of the last bankruptcy auction,
15 August 2007.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 27

 

22. DEC. 2010 13:35 SVEA HOVRATT

28

54, The Respondent also argues that Claimant has not shown
that it was deprived of any “fundamental ownership rights” in
its investment. If the Respondent is correct that “the
appointment of a receiver to liquidate a business or other
property constitutes an expropriation if it does not constitute a
legitimate exercise of the State's regulatory power,” then the
Respondent's appointment of a receiver on 4 August 2006 also
deprived Claimant of fundamental ownership rights in its
investment on that date.

55. Finally, the Respondent contends that it did not deprive
Claimant of any legitimate investment-based expectation,
because it was under no obligation after November/December
2004 to reverse the 2000-2003 tax liens or the order to sell the
YNG common shares at auction, or to do anything to reverse
the decision in 2006 to liquidate Yukos’ remaining assets. ,But a
state always has the opportunity, and the obligation, to pull
back at the brink from committing an unlawful act. Investors
are encouraged by treaties such as the IPPA to invest on the
expectation that states will follow the law and honor their treaty
obligations. The Respondent’s argument to the contrary is
unbecoming a state that professes to adhere to the rule of law.

C.IL. The Respondent’s Perspective

wo 5, Jn Statement of Defence Respondent inter alia states (R-J, at I.
Introduction):

“{The] Claimant [is] seeking, through a treaty claim with no
valid basis in public international law, damages it never
suffered in respect of measures that took place long before it
became a protected investor.

Documents [ ] demonstrate that Claimant first became the
beneficial owner of the Yukos shares in 2007, long after these

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 28

22. DEC. 2810 13:35 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 30

a

~€

29

proceedings were commenced and only months before
completion of Yukos’ liquidation in bankruptcy proceedings. At
all times prior to 2007, the recently produced documents show
the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares to have been a limited
partnership established in the Cayman Islands, a jurisdiction
not covered by the UK-Soviet BIT. Contrary to the
representation made by Claimant in its Statement of Claim that
it had “continuously held” the Yukos shares from the date of
their first purchase in 2004, during the entirety of this period
Claimant was only one in a chain of nominees interposed
between Yukos and the Cayman Islands beneficial owner of the
Yukos shares, which, like Claimant, is owned and controlled by
the Elliott Group.

The Elliott Group is a notorious US-based “vulture fund” and
an archetype of pre-crash Wall Street “anything goes”
capitalism. The modus operandi of the Elliott Group, [ ]
consists of “buying lawsuits” —purchasing the securities of an
issuer not because they offer the prospect of a reasonable
return, but because they furnish a pretext for the Elliott Group
to threaten legal action unless its demands are promptly
satisfied. In this upside-down world, the Elliott Group’s
strategy involves a classical politique du pire: the more
desperate the situation of the issuer becomes, the better the
outcome for the Elliott Group, as they can then leverage the
resulting “losses” into huge damage claims.

The present proceedings also illustrate three other
characteristic features of an Elliott Group “investment.”

The first is greed. Claimant paid only US$ 3.5 million for the
Yukos shares at issue in 2007, when Claimant first became their
beneficial owner, Claimant nonetheless demanded US$ 276.1
million in damages in its Statement of Claim—over 78 times the
amount of its purchase price. Even if measured against the US$
11.66 million purchase price paid by Claimant for the same
Yukos shares in November and December 2004 (though then
only as a nominee of a Cayman Islands limited partnership and

SCC Arbiation V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 29

22. DEC. 2019 13:36 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3686 0S. 31

30

fellow member of the Elliott Group), Claimant is here seeking
more than 23 times that purchase price. And as will be seen
below, for many months after Claimant first became a nominal
owner of the Yukos shares, they could have been sold for what a
reasonable investor would have considered a very handsome
profit—a return of almost 20% per annum. But a decision was
made not to sell the Yukos shares for “small” profits, but
instead to keep the shares, and bring this claim, seeking
damages wholly divorced from the amount of any investment
that Claimant may plausibly be regarded as having made.

Another hallmark of the Elliott Group is secrecy. In the present
case, secrecy has resulted in Claimant's refusal to
~ accommodate most of Respondent’s requests for documents,
and its belated compliance with the few requests that Claimant
has chosen to honor.

The third characteristic feature of the Elliott Group is lack of
credibility. Members of the Elliott Group, including Claimant,
present themselves as traditional investors, better able than
others to assess distressed market conditions, and yet, with
remarkable constancy, the courts hearing the legal actions they
have brought seeking windfall profits have found their proffered
explanations incredible, finding instead that their investments

Vv made sense only if immediately backed by legal action [ ], this
is also the case here in relation to Claimant’s purchase of
Yukos shares.

It is axiomatic [ ] that an investor cannot complain of acts that
preceded its investment. It is also clear [ ] that a mere nominee
cannot qualify as an investor. Accordingly, Claimant can
complain only of actions or events that occurred after it became
the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares in 2007. By then,
however, virtually all of the acts complained of in its Statement
of Claim were already past history.

Chronology would also be fatal to Claimant even if quod non it
were entitled to assert claims based on events occurring from

November-December 2004 onwards, when it was a mere
SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Resinvest v Russia 30

22. DEC. 2010 13:37 SVEA HOVRATT : RR. 3886S. 32

31

nominee for its Cayman Islands affiliate, as Claimant bases its
case on events that occurred even before this period. For
example, all the contested tax assessments for the years 2000-
2003, the related injunction and freezing of Yukos assets, and
all of the procedural irregularities alleged by Claimant took
place prior to the purchases of any of the Yukos shares. Even
though the auction of most of Yukos’ shareholding in OAO
Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”)—the centerpiece of Claimant’s
claim--took place a few days after Claimant’s December 2004
purchase of Yukos shares, all of the Russian Government’s
decisions relating to that auction had likewise been taken
beforehand, and were thus also faits accomplis.

In addition to the foregoing time-based defenses, there are
other equally strong grounds for dismissal of Claimant’s claim
on the basis of the provisions of the UK-Soviet BIT and as a
matter of public international law.
® { ], the post-investment measures con3:iained of did not
result in a total or substantial deprivation of Claimant’s
shareholding, and thus no claim of expropriation can validly
be asserted.
Allegations of due process violations and discrimination
cannot be asserted under Article 5(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT,
unless they rise to the level of measures tantamount to
expropriation, and in this case, the alleged violations of due
process and discrimination do not come close to meeting
that threshold. [ ].

[ J, virtually all the measures complained of are tax

enforcement measures, and selective tax enforcement (even

if it occurred quod non) does not constitute discrimination
within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT.

e The Russian court decisions complained of do not
themselves amount to measures tantamount to
expropriation, and in any event, did not result in a total or
substantial deprivation of Claimant’s shareholding, nor
were any of the tax assessments or related enforcement

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosiavest v Russia 31

2. DEC. 2010 13:37 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3686S. 33

32

measures or bankruptcy proceedings, all of which were
upheld by Russian court decisions, expropriatory. [ ].

The foregoing defenses amply justify the dismissal of this case,
without need for the Tribunal to conduct a detailed examination
of several years’ worth of records relating to tax assessments,
enforcement measures and bankruptcy proceedings.
Respondent has nevertheless addressed ail of these facts in
detail, both in the Statement of Facts [ ] and in the three
Annexes attached to this Statement of Defense, described below.

[ j, this Tribunal is not called upon to sit as an appellate court
of last resort reviewing the Russian court decisions already
exhaustively litigated by Yukos. The Tribunal must instead
determine whether quod non any actions taken by the Russian
authorities were sufficiently egregious as to constitute measures
tantamount to expropriation as a matter of public international
law. [ J, the burden of proof here is squarely on Claimant's
shoulders,

The facts, once understood, also sharply contradict the highly
implausible conspiracy theory Claimant proposes (on the basis
of what it admits is “circumstantial evidence”) as an
explanation for Yukos’ demise. Claimant’s grand conspiracy,
which accuses Respondent of intentionally destroying Yukos in
order to “re-nationalize” its petroleum assets, is essentially
borrowed from the self-serving propaganda that Yukos’ former
managers and controlling shareholders spread throughout the
media in their attempts to intimidate Respondent from enforcing
its laws. The facts undermining Claimant’s conspiracy
theory—which illogically depends to a critical extent on the
significant assistance of the alleged targets of the conspiracy
(Yukos and its core shareholders) and implausibly hypothesizes
the cooperation by third parties with no connection to the
Russian Government [ ].”

SCC Arbitration V(079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 32

22. DEC. 2010 13:38 SYEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 34

«

33

Respondent’s Surreply of 16 November 2009 (R-II, section J)
summarises the case as follows:

Claimant, in its Request for Arbitration, asserted that it had
been the “continuous” owner of seven million Yukos ordinary
shares since late 2004, and that its interest in those shares had
been expropriated as a result of the taxes assessed on Yukos by
the Russian authorities and the sale at auction, in December
2004, of 43 ordinary shares of Yuganskneftegaz (“YNG”) in
partial satisfaction of Yukos’ tax liabilities.

In its Statement of Defense, Respondent demonstrated that
Claimant was not in fact the “continuous” owner of the Yukos
shares from late 2004 onwards, and indeed only first acquired
an economic interest in the Yukos shares in 2007, well after all
the principal events previously complained of had occurred.

In response, Claimant has fundame::ially changed its story. As
set out in Claimant's Reply, Claimant now asserts that it was
the legal (or nominal) owner of the Yukos shares at all times
until they were de-listed in late 2007, and that Yukos’ assets (as
opposed to Claimant’s interest in the Yukos shares) were
expropriated in the YNG auction and in subsequent auctions
held, beginning in March 2007, in implementation of the
bankruptcy court’s order that Yukos be liquidated. Claimant
also now expressly disclaims that the assessment of Yukos’
taxes, which featured so prominently in its prior submissions,
constituted acts of expropriation.

[...] Claimant was in fact never the legal (or nominal) owner of
the Yukos shares, and never had any rights in relation to the
Yukos shares as a matter of Russian law, the law that
determines the existence and scope of ownership rights in Yukos
shares. To the contrary, under Russian law, Credit Suisse First
Boston was at all relevant times the sole legal (or nominal)
owner of the Yukos shares.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest y Russia. 33

22. DEC. 2010 13:38 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886 0S. 35

34

[...] Claimant first acquired an economic interest in the Yukos
shares in March 2007, long after the liquidation of Yukos had
become irreversible. Contrary to Claimant's attempt to
diminish the importance of the Participation Agreements —
initially withheld by Claimant until finally produced on March
6, 2009 — both of the Participation Agreements expressly
transferred 100% of Claimant’s interest in the Yukos shares to
Elliott International, a Cayman Islands company not eligible
Sor investment treaty protection.

As a result, for so long as the Participation Agreements
remained in place, Elliott International was the economic
owner of the Yukos shares and alone enjoyed all of the rights of
a shareholder in a Russian company — the right to receive and
enjoy the use of the dividends paid on the Yukos shares, and the
right to direct how the Yukos shares were voted. Claimant, by
contrast, was during this entire period nothing more than an
uncompensated financial intermediary, obligated to act (for no
fee) solely pursuant to Elliott International's instructions and to
pay over to Elliott International all the dividends received on
the Yukos shares.

Claimant's rights and offsetting duties in relation to the Yukos
shares prior to March 2007 thus did not have — and could not

wv have had ~ any economic value. Indeed, Claimant would have
had to pay someone to step into its shoes for so long as the
Participation Agreements remained in place

It is thus now clear that prior to March 27, 2007, Claimant’s
“rights” in relation to the Yukos shares were not an “asset”
within the meaning of Article 1(a) of the UK-Soviet BIT. There
was, in consequence, prior to that date, no “disput{e] between
an investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting
Party in relation to an investment of the former” within the
meaning of Article 8(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT, and no
“investmen{[t] of [an] investo[r] of either Contracting Party”
entitled to protection under Article 5(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 34

22. DEC. 2010 13:39 SVEA HOVRATT WR 3886S. 36

35

Several consequences follow from this state of affairs, which
serially and collectively mandate the dismissal of Claimant’s
claim.

First, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over, and Article 5 of the
UK-Soviet BIT does not apply to, any of the pre-March 27,
2007 measures of which Claimant complains.

Second, at the critical date — the date of commencement of this
y arbitration in October 2005 — Claimant was not entitled to
most-favored-nation treatment as regards the management,
maintenance, use or enjoyment of a protected investment
. pursuant to Article 3(2) of the UK-Soviet BIT in connection with
4 Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT — the only basis on which
this Tribunal has previously determined that it could assume
Jurisdiction over Claimant's claim.

Third, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over a dispute that arose
pricy to Claimant’s having made an “investment,” and thus has
no jurisdiction to adjudicate this dispute. The present dispute
crystallized long before Claimant even arguably made a
protected “investment” under the UK-Soviet BIT. In 2005,
Claimant notified the Russian Federation (under Article 8(2) of
the UK-Soviet BIT) of a dispute over “expropriatory acts” and
filed a Request for Arbitration formally asserting its

“Sy expropriation claims. Respondent rejected these claims on
February 28, 2006, in its Reply to the Request for Arbitration.
The dispute that had already crystallized by March 2007
Ne includes Yukos’ tax assessments, the seizure and auction of
YNG’s ordinary shares, the alleged denial of the means and
opportunity to challenge Yukos’ tax assessments and the YNG
auction in Russian courts, and the alleged deficiencies in the

YNG auction itself.

The termination of the Participation Agreements on March 27,
2007 could not, in any event, have created a protected
investment, By that time, the tax assessments against Yukos
were final and irreversible, the YNG shares had been sold at
auction, Yukos had been declared bankrupt and the final

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 35

22. DEC. 2010 13:

3
3

9 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. 37

36

decision to sell Yukos’ assets and dissolve the company had
been made. Claimant could then have had no reasonable
expectation that Yukos would have emerged from liquidation as
a viable economic enterprise. Certainly, Claimant has not
produced — despite repeated requests4 — a single document
memorializing the reasons for its supposed “investment” in the
Yukos shares on March 27, 2007, the very day on which the first
of Yukos’ bankruptcy auctions was held

The only plausible explanation for Claimant’s termination of
Elliott International’s economic interest in the Yukos shares in
the midst of Yukos’ ongoing liquidation was the Elliott Group’s
desire to take advantage of the rights thought to be available
under the UK-Soviet BIT — rights that clearly would not have
been available to Elliott International, a Cayman Islands
company. In the absence of a legitimate expectation of realizing
a return from the economic activity of a going concern, even
Claimant’s 2007 acquisition of an economic interest in the
Yukos shares did not constitute an “investment” within the
meaning of Article 1 (a) of the UK-Soviet BIT. The Tribunal thus
also lacks jurisdiction over, and Article 5 of the UK-Soviet BIT
does not apply, to the measures of which Claimant complains
that post-date the termination of the Participation Agreements.

Even assuming quod non that this Tribunal has jurisdiction
over Claimant’s claim, there was no expropriation for which
Claimant could recover. As an initial matter, Claimant itself
expressly disclaims an expropriation of the Yukos shares.
Claimant instead seeks, based on a misreading of Article 5(2) of
the UK-Soviet BIT, to recover for the alleged expropriation of
the assets of Yukos itself, But Article 5(2), in providing that “the
provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article shall apply,” does
not allow a shareholder to recover for the taking of the assets of
a company in which it has invested, but rather merely creates
standing for a shareholder to claim an expropriation of its own
shareholding as a result of the expropriation of the assets of a
local company.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest ¥ Russia 36

22. DEC. 2010 13:40 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3686 = S. 38

37

Second, it is indisputable, for the reasons discussed below, that
virtually all of the complained-of measures had long since
occurred, and had become irreversible, by the time Claimant
first obtained an economic interest in the Yukos shares, in
March 2007. Yukos was permanently deprived of the economic
value, use, and enjoyment, and possession and control, of all of
Its assets in September 2006, at the latest, when the decision to
liquidate Yukos’ remaining assets became final and irreversible
under Russian law. Any measures that occurred thereafter did
yy not concern a viable company and valuable assets to be
expropriated. The expropriation Claimant alleges thus took
place, if ever, before Claimant first acquired even an arguably
protected interest, and, Claimant’s new theory notwithstanding,
4 the same asset may not be expropriated twice.

Respondent has, in any event, demonstrated in its Statement of
Defense — and Claimant has not challenged Respondent’s
showing — that none of the events that oce2::ed after March 27,
2007 caused a substantial or total loss in the value of the Yukos
shares. The bankruptcy auctions were, moreover, conducted in
Full compliance with Russian law and in accordance with
international practice, and, in the event, realized amounts that
corresponded favorably to market values of the auctioned
assets, [...].

Because Claimant did not make a protected investment until
March 2007, if at all, RosInvestCo has abandoned its claim that
the tax assessments were themselves expropriatory measures.
Claimant has instead attempted to argue that the tax
assessments were merely the “pretext” for Respondent's
alleged expropriation of Yukos’ assets. In order to prove that
the tax assessments were a sham or pretext, Claimant must meet
a high standard of proof - a “demanding” one, according to
Claimant.6 Claimant would, in particular, need to show
collusion among several branches of the Russian Government
and the Russian judiciary, as well as the participation in the
conjectured conspiracy of Western financial institutions and
Yukos itself. As discussed in Annex E, the convoluted and

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 37

22. DEC. 2010 13:40 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3686S. 39

38

contradictory positions advanced by Claimant on this issue,
supported only by limited and unconvincing circumstantial
evidence, do not come close to satisfying the required high
standard of proof.

Even if the tax assessments were subject to review under Article
5 of the UK-Soviet BIT, which they are not, Claimant has not
rebutted the presumption of bona fide taxation. As
demonstrated below, Claimant has failed to establish that the
tax assessments were either mala fide or discriminatory or
confiscatory. Annex AA and the supplemental expert report of
Mr. Oleg Y. Konnov rebut each of the arguments raised by
Claimant and Professor Maggs with respect to taxes, and
demonstrate that the actions of the Russian tax authorities were
fully in line with both Russian law and international tax
practice. In particular, Respondent and Mr. Konnov establish
that Yukos’ tax assessments were not discriminatory,
retroactive or excessive, a conclusion supported by
Respondent’s survey of the international tax practices of other
States, which shows that the abusive tax practices used by
Yukos would have been treated more severely under the tax
systems of numerous Member States of the Council of Europe
and many non-European States. Claimant's empty claim that
the tax treatment of Yukos does not meet international

mw standards is not supported by the actual tax practice of other

countries, and Claimant, while it invokes international tax
standards, has neither challenged the authorities from other
countries relied on by Respondent, nor cited any of its own.

In a similar vein, Annex BB and the supplemental expert report
of Professor Elena A. Borisova refute Claimant’s charge that
the YNG auction — which likewise occurred and became
irreversible before March 2007 — was “rigged,” resulted in a
below-market price and was otherwise improper. To the
contrary, the YNG auction comported with Russian law as well
as international practice. Here too, Claimant fails to address
the conduct of the YNG auction in the context of international

practice. Claimant, in its Reply, does not contest Respondent’s
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 38

22. DEC. 2010 13:41 SYEA HOVRATT NR 3866 8. 40

39

demonstration in Annex B to the Statement of Defense that the
starting price, final price and other parameters of the YNG
auction were in compliance with Russian law

and in line with international practice, and that the actions of
Yukos and its management — in blocking the participation of the
most likely bidders and sources of finance — were responsible
for the fact that the price realized for the YNG shares, while
higher than many pre-auction valuations, was not higher still

4 For the foregoing reasons, Claimant has failed to establish a
violation of Article 5 of the UK-Soviet BIT. Even if Respondent
were somehow found to have breached Article 5, Claimant
would, for several independent reasons, still not be entitled to

4 damages.

First, Claimant could not have had a legitimate expectation of
realizing an economic return when it acquired an economic
inter2st in the Yukos shares in March 2007, but was instead
then engaging in impermissible treaty shopping.

Second, Claimant has not challenged either the authorities cited
by Respondent that impose a duty to mitigate. damages or the
facts marshaled by Respondent showing that Claimant had an
opportunity, following its acquisition of an economic interest in
“4 the Yukos shares, not only to mitigate its damages, but to sell its
interest in the shares at a profit. Experience suggests that
Claimant may be alone among investment treaty claimants in
still being able to have realized a profit on its investment more
than 17 months after the filing of its Request for Arbitration,
which, not surprisingly, asserted that its investment had already
been expropriated. But, according to Claimant, realizing a
profit on its investment would have required that it abandon its
treaty claim. Respondent would have thought that it goes
without saying that the purpose of an investment treaty is to
encourage investment, not the filing of treaty claims in lieu of
readily available financial returns.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia. 39

2D. DEC. 2010 13:41

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3886 0S. 4]

40

Third, the damages Claimant seeks are based on an analysis at

odds with the statements in Claimant’s Reply that Yukos’ tax
assessments were not themselves expropriatory measures. As
the supplemental expert report of Professor James Dow shows,
LECG’s calculation of damages, on which Claimant relies, is
based on the same “retroactive” tax claims that RosInvestCo
now acknowledges did not constitute acts of expropriation and,
in any event, occurred well before Claimant first acquired an
economic interest in the Yukos shares,

Fourth, Claimant, having previously offered to update its ex
post calculation of damages only to discover that its prior
estimate had been reduced by roughly a third as a result of the
recent stock-market sell-off, now argues that its damages
should instead be calculated on the date that would produce the
highest possible award, regardless of whether the damages so
calculated correspond to any loss actually suffered. Claimant’s
ex post approach to damages is contrary to economic reality as
well as common sense, and rather than returning Claimant to
its position had there been no alleged treaty violations, would
result in an enormous and unwarranted windfall for Claimant.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rasinvest v Russia 40

22. DEC. 2010 13:42 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886S. 4)

10.

lf.

12.

41

Procedural History

The Award on Jurisdiction dated 5 October 2007 contains a
procedural history up to the release of that Award. The Decision of
the Tribunal in section I of that Award is recalled at the beginning of
the Tribunal’s Considerations below.

Following the Parties’ receipt of the Award on Jurisdiction, on 24
October 2007, the Tribunal invited the Parties to agree and submit a
timetable by 23 November 2007 for the Tribunal’s further
consideration of the case.

The Parties requested (and were granted) an extension of time to
complete negotiations to agree a timetabie and on 29 February 2008
submitted a proposed timetable to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
provided comments on the timetable to the Parties for their
consideration.

On 18 April 2008 the Parties submitted a final proposed timetable
which was accepted by the Tribunal.

On the basis of the proposed timetable provided by the Parties, the
Tribunal issued a draft procedural order on 26 April 2008 requesting
final comments by 2 May 2008.

After receiving comments from the Parties regarding the draft, the

Tribunal issued Procedural Order (PO) No. 2 on 16 May 2008

which set out as follows:
1. Earlier Rulings

Ll. The rulings in Procedural Order No.J remain valid and shall
he applicable also to the procedure on the merits, unless ruled
otherwise in this Order.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 4l

22. DEC. 2010 13:42

1.2.

 

SYEA HOVRATT NR. 3386S. 43

42

However, Section 2.7. of PO-1 shall be applicable as
amended hereafter:

To facilitate that parts can be taken out and copies can be
made, submissions of all d ts including ats of
witnesses and experts shall be submitted separated from
Briefs, unbound in 2-ring binders and preceded by a list of
such documents consecutively numbered with consecutive
numbering in later submissions (CM-1, CM-2 etc. for
Claimants; RM-1, RM-2 etc. for Respondents) and with
dividers between the documents. As far as possible, in
addition, documents shall also be submitted in electronic form
(preferably in Windows Word to facilitate word processing
and citations).

 

To facilitate work for all concerned in this 2nd phase of the
procedure on the merits, rather than referring to the
documents submitted in the earlier phase on jurisdiction, all
documents the Parties wish to rely on in this procedure on the
merits shall be submitted in new ring binders starting with a
new numbering (CM-1, CM-2, etc. for Claimant and RM-1,
RM-2, etc for Respondent).

2. Timetable

The timetable based on the agreement between the Parties and
the Tribunal shall be as follows:

 

Friday, January 18",| Claimant to propound its First
2008 Merits Document Request to
Respondent

 

Friday, March 14,| Respondent to table any objections
2008 to Claimant’s First Merits
Document Request

 

 

 

 

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 42

 

22. DEC. 2010 13:43

ae

~(

SVEA HOVRATT

N8 5886 © $. 44

43

 

 

Friday,
2008

April 04,

Claimant to submit its response to
Respondent's objection to
Claimant's First Merits Document
Request

 

Friday,
2008

April 18,

Respondent to submit reply to
Claimant’s response to
Respondent's objection to
Claimant’s First Merits Document
Request; Respondent to commence
rolling production of documents in
response to requests not objected
to.

 

Friday, June 06,

2008

Respondent to complete response
to. Claimant’s First Merits
Document Request.

 

Friday, August 22,
2008

Claimant to submit its Statement
of Claim

 

Wednesday,
September 24, 2008

Respondent to propound its First
Merits Document Request to the
Claimant

 

Wednesday, October
8, 2008

 

Claimant to table any objections
to Respondent’s First Merits
Document Request

 

Wednesday, October
22, 2008

Respondent to submit its response
to Claimant’s objection to
Respondent's First — Merits
Document Request

 

Friday, October 31,
2008

 

 

Claimant to submit reply to
Respondent’s response to
Claimant's objection to

 

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinyest v Russia

43

22. DEC. 2010 13:43

SVEA HOVRATT

NR 3886S. 45

44

 

Respondent’s First Merits
Document Request; Claimant to
commence rolling production of
documents in response to requests
not objected to.

 

Friday, November

14, 2008,

Claimant to complete response to
Respondent's First Merits
Document Request

 

Friday, February 13,

Respondent to file its Statement of

 

 

 

2009 Defense
i Tuesday, February| Pre-Hearing Conference between
24, 2009 the Parties and the Tribunal, if
considered necessary by the
Tribunal. Location of hearings to
| be determined iy this date.
Friday, March 6,| Claimant to propound its Second
2009 Merits Document Request to
Respondent

 

Friday, March 20,

 

Respondent to table any objections

 

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

 

2009 to Claimant’s Second Merits
Document Request; Respondent to
commence rolling production of
documents in response to requests
not objected to.

Friday, May 29,| Respondent to complete response

2009 to Claimant’s Second Merits
Document Request

Tuesday, June 05,| Preliminary notification of which

2009 witnesses identified by the other

 

party that each party is likely to

44

22. DEC. 2010 13:43

—(

Sf

SVEA HOVRATT

 

wish to cross examine at hearings

 

Friday,
2009

July 24,

Claimant to file its Reply to
Respondent’s Statement —_ of
Defense

 

Friday, August 21,
2009

Respondent to propound its
Second Merits Document Request
to Claimant

 

Friday, September
11, 2009

Claimant to table any objections
to Respondent's Second Merits
Document Request; Claimants to
commence rolling production of
documents in response to requests
not objected to.

 

Friday, September

25, 2009

Claimant to complete response to
Respondent’s Second Merits
Document Request

 

{_
Friday, October 30,
2009

Respondent to file its Surreply to|
Claimant’s Reply

 

Tuesday, November
10, 2009.

 

Parties to submit _ final
notifications of which witnesses
and experts presented by
themselves or by the other Party
that they wish to examine at the
Hearing.

 

| Friday, November
20, 2009.

 

 

L

SCC Arbivration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia.

Parties to submit (1) final list of
witnesses who will appear at the
hearing; and (2) a chronological
list of all exhibits with indications
where the respective documents
can be found in the file.

 

45

22. DEC. 2010 13:44

3.1.

3.2.

3.3,

SYEA HOVRATT NR. 3886S. 47

46

 

 

 

Monday, December| Final Pre-Hearing Conference

 

7, 2009 between the Parties and the
Tribunal, if considered necessary
by the Tribunal.

By Monday,| Tribunal issues PO regarding

December 21,2009 | further details of the Hearing

 

Monday,  January| Parties to submit binders of
18, 2010 Hearing Exhibits to the Tribunal
at the place of the hearings

 

January 18 — 22,| Hearing
with a_ possible
extension to January

29, 2010.

 

 

 

3._Hearing

As indicated in the timetable above, the Hearing shall be from
January 18 to 22, 2010, but after consultation with the Parties,
the Tribunal may extend the Hearing into the next week up to
January 29, 2010. Therefore, as a precaution, all concerned
shall block the full periods of these two weeks for the Hearing.

The Hearing shall be held in Stockholm at a site selected by
the Parties after consultation with the Tribunal. The
Parties shall make the necessary logistical arrangements
and reservations and shall share the respective costs. _ They
shall take the necessary steps and inform the Tribunal as soon
as possible.

Further details and the final Agenda for the Hearing shall be
established by the Tribunal after consultation with the Parties
in a Procedural Order by December 21, 2009.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 46

 

22. DEC. 2010 13:44 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3886 0S. 48

47

3.4, No new documents may be presented at the Hearing. But
demonstrative exhibits may be shown using documents
submitted earlier in accordance with the Timetable.

3.5. To allow all concerned the necessary evaluation of the day
and preparation of the next day, the Hearing will start at
9:00 and end at 17:00 hours, subject to changes decided by
the Tribunal after consultation with the Parties.

\y 3.6. Taking into account the time available during the period

provided for the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal

intends to establish equal maximum time periods both for the

Claimant and for the Respondent which the Parties _ shall

Y have available. Changes to that principle may be applied for
at the latest at the time of the Pre-Hearing Conference.

3.7. A transcript shall be made of the Hearing and sent to the
Parties and the Arbitrators. The Parties, who shall share the
respective costs, shall try to agree on and make the necessary

arrangements in this regard and shall inform the Tribunal
accordingly before the time set for the Pre-Hearing
Conference.

3.8. Should the Parties be presenting a witness or expert not
testifying in English and thus requiring interpretation, they
are expected to provide the interpreter unless agreed
otherwise. However, the Parties are encouraged to agree on

4 interpreters and make common arrangements in this regard.

Should more than one witness or expert need interpretation, to
avoid the need of double time for — successive
interpretation, simultaneous interpretation shall be provided.

=¢

13. On 2 June 2008, in response to the Tribunal’s request, and taking
into account PO No. 2, the SCC-Institute extended the time for
rendering of the Award to 30 September 2010 in accordance with
Article 33 of the SCC Rules.

SCC Arbitation V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 47

 

22. DEC. 2010 13:44 SVEA HOVRATT

48

14. On 23 August 2008, the Tribunal received the Statement of Claim
in addition to a report of Peter B. Maggs and a report of Dr. Manuel
Abdala and Dr. Pablo Spiller of LECG, LLC.

15. Following the sudden illness of one counsel for one of the Parties,
the Tribunal consulted with the Parties and on the basis of
discussions released Procedural Order (PO) No. 3 on 7 January 2009
which set out the following new timetable:

v Procedural Order (PO) No.3 (establishing a new Timetable
Sor the further procedure on the merits)

This PO puts on record the results of the recent e-mail

 

 

 

 

consultations and agreement between the Parties and the
Tribunal regarding modifications of the Timetable of PO-2.
Date from| New Date
Precedural Order
No. 2
Wednesday, Wednesday, | Respondent to submit its
October 22, 2008 October 29,| response to Claimant's
2008 objection to
Respondent's First
Merits Document
V Request.
Friday, October| Friday, Claimant to submit reply
31, 2008 November 7,| to Respondent's response
wu 2008 to Claimant’s objection
to Respondent’s First
Merits Document
Request; Claimant to
commence rolling
production of documents
in response to requests
not objected to.
Friday, November| Friday, Claimant to complete
| 14, 2008 November response to Respondent's

 

 

 

 

 

SCC Acbitmtion V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 48

22. DEC. 2010 13:45

~(

SVEA HOVRATT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

49
28, 2008 First Merits Document
Request.
Friday, February] Monday, Respondent to file its
13, 2009 April 13,| Statement of Defense.
2009
Friday, March 6,\ Monday, Claimant to propound its
2009 May 4, 2009 | Second Merits Document
ee | Request to Respondent.
Friday, March 20,| Monday, Respondent to table any
2009 May 18,| objections to Claimant’s
2009 Second Merits Document
Request; Respondent to
commence rolling
production of documents
in response to requests
not objected to
Tuesday, Tuesday, 19| Pre-Hearing Conference
February 24, 2009| May, 2009 between the Parties and
the Tribunal, if
considered necessary by
the Tribunal. Location of
hearings to be
determined by this date.
Friday, May 29,| Monday, Respondent to complete
2009 July 27,| response to Claimant's
2009 Second Merits Document
Request.
Tuesday, June 5,| Monday, Preliminary notification
2009 August 3,) of which witnesses
2009 identified by the other
party that each party is
likely to wish to cross
examine at hearings.
Friday, July 24,| Monday, Claimant to file its Reply
2009 September to Respondent’s
21, 2009 Statement of Defense.
Friday, August 21,| Friday, __| Respondent to propound

 

 

 

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia

49

22. DEC. 2010 13:45

SVEA HOVRATT

NR 3836S. 51

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

50
2009 October 2,| its Second Merits
2009 Document Request to

Claimant.
Friday, September| Friday, Claimant to table any
11, 2009 October 16,| objections to
2009 Respondent's Second
Merits Document
Request; Claimants to
commence rolling
production of documents
in response to requests

not objected to.

Friday, September | Friday, Claimant to complete
25, 2009 October 30,| response to Respondent’s
2009 Second Merits Document

Request.

Friday, October| Monday, Respondent to file its
30, 2009 November Surreply to Claimant’s
16, 2009 Reply.

Tuesday, Wednesday, Parties to submit final
November 10,| November notifications to each
2009 25, 2009 other and the Tribunal of |

which witnesses and
experts presented by
themselves or by the
other Party that they
wish to examine at the
Hearing. [words in

italics added]
Monday, Monday, 7) Final Pre-Hearing
December 7, 2009 | December, Conference between the
2009 Parties and the Tribunal,
if considered necessary

_ by the Tribunal.

Friday, November| Wednesday, Parties to submit (1) final
20, 2009 December list of witnesses who will
16, 2009 appear at the hearing;

 

SCC Arbicration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

50

 

 

NR, Juur Me RE

 

 

 

7. DEC. 2010 13:46 SVEA HOVRATT
51
and (2) a chronological
list of all exhibits with
indications where the
respective documents can
be found in the file.
By Monday,| Monday, Tribunal issues PO
December 21,| December regarding further details
2009 21, 2009 of the Hearing.
Monday, January| Monday, Parties to submit binders
Y 18, 2010 January 18,| of Hearing Exhibits to
2010 the Tribunal at the place
of the hearings.
Y January  18-22,\ January 18-| Hearing
' with a possible} 22, with a
extension to} possible
January 29, 2010 extension to
January 29,
2010

«

16.

17.

18.

19.

 

 

 

 

 

On 30 March 2009, the Parties communicated their agreement to an
amendment to PO No. 3 extending the deadline for the submission of
Respondent's Statement of Defence from 13 April 2009 until 20 April
2009.

On 20 April 2009, Respondent submitted its Statement of Defence
to the Tribunal.

On 26 April 2009, the Parties communicated a proposal to consider
the pre-hearing conference set down in PO No. 3 for 19 May 2009 as
not necessary and for the hearings scheduled for January 2010 to be
moved from Stockholm io the ICC Hearing Centre in Paris. The
Tribunal agreed to these proposals by e-mail on 28 April 2009 and
revoked §3.7 of PO No. 2. The Tribunal requested that the Parties
make arrangements for a court reporting service for the hearings.

On 22 September 2009, the Tribunal received the Claimant’s Reply
(C-I1)

SCC Arbitretioa V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 51

NR DOUG Oe OF 4 neem

72, DEC. 1010 13:46 SVEA HOVRATT

52

20. On 25 September 2009, the Parties communicated to the Tribunal
an agreed amendment to PO No. 3 allowing the Claimant unti] 26
October 2009 to submit to the Tribunal any additional exhibits from
among the documents provided to it by the Respondent (most of
which are in the Russian language) upon which the Claimant intends
to rely at the hearing on the merits. By e-mail of 26 September 2009,
the Tribunal agreed with the proposal.

— 21. On 26 October 2009, Claimant submitted the additional exhibits
referred to in §20 above together with an index of those exhibits. }

22, On 12 November 2009, the Tribunal provided the Parties with a
draft for a Procedural Order regarding further details of the hearing )
proper and invited the Parties to submit any comments by 25
November 2009.

23. On 16 November 2009, Respondent submitted its Surreply to
Claimant’s Reply (R-II).

24. On 25 November 2009, Claimant and Respondent separately
provided substantial comments by e-mail on the draft for a
Procedural Order provided by the Tribunal to the Parties on 18
November 2009.

25. On 30 November 2009, the Parties were provided with a further
draft for a Procedural Order taking into account their helpful
comments of 25 November 2009 and were invited to make any
comment on it by 16 December 2009.

26. On 16 December 2009 the Parties submitted a joint e-mail of
comments on the draft for a Procedural Order and a proposal for the
division of the hearing days according to when witnesses would be
examined and submissions made.

27. Also on 16 December 2009, in accordance with PO No. 3, the
Parties separately provided the Tribunal with DVD discs containing

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 52

3008 6 ne

77. DEC. 2010 13:46 SVEA HOVRATT

53

chronological lists of all exhibits with hyperlinks to the document
exhibits themselves.

28. On 18 December 2009, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order (PO)
No. 4 which set out as follows:

18 December 2009.
Procedural Order (PO) No.4
regarding further details of the hearing on the merits

Taking into account the very helpful comments received from

the Parties on 25 November 2009, and the agreements of the

wy Parties notified on 16 December 2009, the Tribunal now
; issues this Order in its final form.

1. Introduction

1.1. This Order recai!s the earlier agreemeziis and rulings of
the Tribunal and particularly takes into account the recent
submissions and letters of the Parties.

1.2. In particular, the revised final part of the timetable is
recalled from PO-3:
1.2.a. In view of the submissions received from the Parties
YY regarding the draft of PO-4, the Tribunal does not
consider it necessary to have the Pre-Hearing Conference
anticipated as an option in PO-3 for 7 December 2009.

 

 

 

YY Monday, December | Tribunal issues PO regarding
21, 2009 further details of the Hearing.
Monday, January 18,| Parties to submit binders of
2010 Hearing Exhibits to the
Tribunal at the place of the
hearings.

In this context, to avoid
misunderstanding, the
Tribunal would need four sets
of the Hearing Exhibits so that

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 53

 

 

 

9, DEC. 2010 13:47

SVEA HOVRATT

54

 

each Arbitrator as well as the
Tribunal Secretary have one
set to use.

 

January 18-22, with a\| Hearing
possible extension to
January 29, 2010

 

 

 

1.2.0) In addition to the above timetable, by 21 December
2009, each Party may submit a further statement by one of
its witnesses or experts, but only regarding any relevant
developments which occurred after their last statements
submitted in accordance with the timetable.

1.2.c) In case of such further submissions, by 11 January
2010, the other Party may submit a rebuttal statement by
its own witnesses or experts, however limited to the
subject and substance of the statement rebutted.

1.3. Further, for convenience, the following sections of PO-2
are recalled and hereby confirmed unless changed
hereafter. The Parties are invited to assure that these
provisions are complied with,

3. Hearing

3.1. As indicated in the timetable above, the Hearing shall be
from January 18 to 22, 2010 ,but after consultation with
the Parties, the Tribunal may extend the Hearing into the
next week up to January 29, 2010. Therefore, as a
precaution, all concerned shall block the full periods of
these two weeks for the Hearing.

3.1.a. In this context, the Tribunal takes note of and agrees
with the Parties’ agreed suggestion notified an 16
December 2009 to the effect that the hearing can be
concluded within the first week. Therefore, the Parties

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 54

97. DEC. 2010 13:47

NR DOG Camm

SYEA HOVRATT

55

may cancel the reservation of the ICC Hearing Centre for
the 2nd week.

3.2. The Hearing shall be held in Stockholm (later agreed to
be in Paris) at a site selected by the Parties after
consultation with the Tribunal. The Parties shall make the
necessary logistical arrangements and reservations and
shall share the respective costs. They shall take the
necessary steps and inform the Tribunal as soon as
possible.

3.3. Further details and the final Agenda for the Hearing shall
be established by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties in a Procedural Order by December 21, 2009.

3.4. No new documents may be presented at the Hearing. But
demonstrative exhibits may be shown using documents
submitted earlier in accordance with the Time: able.

3.5. To allow all concerned the necessary evaluation of the
day and preparation of the next day, the Hearing will start
at 9:00 and end at 17:00 hours, subject to changes
decided by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties.

3.6. Taking into account the time available during the period
provided for the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal
intends to establish equal maximum time periods both for
the Claimant and for the Respondent which the Parties
shall have available. Changes to that principle may be
applied for at the latest at the time of the Pre-Hearing
Conference. In view of the cancellation of the Pre-hearing
Conference it is recalled that the respective date is 7
December 2009.

3.7. A transcript shall be made of the Hearing and sent to the
Parties and the Arbitrators. The Parties, who shall share
the respective costs, shall try to agree on and make the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 55

 

97, DEC. 2019 13:48 SVEA HOVRATT

56

necessary arrangements in this regard and shall inform
the Tribunal accordingly before the time set for thePre-~
Hearing Conference. In view of the cancellation of the
Pre-hearing Conference it is recalled that the respective
date is 7 December 2009.

- 3.8. Should the Parties be presenting a witness or expert not
testifying in English and thus requiring interpretation,
they are expected to provide the interpreter unless agreed

w otherwise. However, the Parties are encouraged to agree
on interpreters and make common arrangements in this
regard. Should more than one witness or expert need
interpretation, to avoid the need of double time for
successive interpretation, simultaneous interpretation
shall be provided.

2. Place of Hearing

The Hearing shall be held at
ICC HEARING CENTRE
112 Avenue Kleber

75016 Paris, France

Tel. +33 (0)1 49 53 33 00
Fax +33 (0)1 49 53 33 O1

v www.icchearingcentre.org
3. Conduct of the Hearing

3.1. In addition to the above provisions of PO 2, taking into
account the Parties’ agreement notified on 16 December
2009, the following shall apply:

3.2. The following Agenda is established for the Hearing:
1. Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.

2. Opening Statements of not more than three hours each
for the a) Claimant,
b) Respondent.

SCC Arsbination V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 56

OW DOG Fe ME dm

72, DEC. 2010 13:48 SVEA HOVRATT

37

3. Examination of witnesses and experts in the order and
with the timetable as agreed by the Parties and notified on
16 December 2009.
For each:
a) Affirmation of witness or expert to tell the truth.
b) Short introduction by presenting Party of up to 10
minutes.
c) Cross-examination by the other Party.
“4 d) Re-direct examination, but only on issues raised
in cross examination,
e) Re-cross examination, but only on issues raised in
re-direct examination.
4 J Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal,
but they may raise questions at any time.

4. Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal
examinatio:: by a Party or the members of the Tribunal, i=
such intention is announced in time to assure the
availability of the witness and expert during the time of
the Hearing.

6. Closing arguments of up to three hours each for the
a) Claimant,
) Respondent.

7. Remaining questions by the members of the Tribunal, if
“4 any.
8. Discussion regarding the timing and details of post-

hearing submissions and other procedural issues.

3.3. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties or ruled by
the Tribunal, witnesses and experts may be present in the
Hearing room during the testimony of other witnesses and
experts.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 57

 

SVEA HOVRATT

 

58

3.4. In accordance with section 3.6 of PO-2 cited above, the
Tribunal establishes the following maximum time periods
which the Parties shall have available for their presentations
and examination and crossexamination of all witnesses and
experts. Taking into account the Calculation of Hearing Time
attached to this Order, the total maximum time available for
the Parties (including their opening statements and closing
arguments, if any) shall be as follows;
13 hours for Claimant,
we 13 hours for Respondent
It is left to the Parties how much of their allotted total time
they want to spend on the Agenda items 2, 3, 4, and 6, as
long as the total time period allotted to them is
maintained,

3.5. The Parties shall prepare their presentations and
examinations at the Hearing on the basis of the time limits
established .

3.6. If a witness whose statement has been submitted by a
Party and whose examination at the Hearing has been
requested by the other Party, does not appear at the
Hearing, his statement will not be taken into account by
the Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons for an
M exception from that rule.

3.7. In so far as the Parties request oral examination of an
expert, the same rules and procedure shall apply as for
witnesses.

4. Other Matters

4.1. In order not to delay the hearing by long lunch breaks,
the Parties, in their administrative arrangements with the
ICC Hearing Centre, will make arrangements for catering
to be provided in the breakout rooms of the Parties and
the Tribunal, not only for the coffee breaks, but also for
the lunch breaks

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russis 58

22. DEC. 2010 13:49

29.

30.
4

31.
My

32.

33.

NB, SGUF

SVEA HOVRATT

59

4.2. The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this Order,
after consultation with the Parties, if considered
appropriate under the circumstances.

On 22 December 2010 Claimant submitted the third report of
Professor Peter Maggs (Maggs III).

On 12 January 2010, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit final
lists of the persons attending from their respective sides including
their names and function.

On 13 January 2010, the Parties informed the Tribunal in a joint e-
mail of the manner in which they proposed to use the 13 hours
allocated to their respective sides for the hearing, to which the
Tribunal confirmed its agreement on 15 January 2010.

On 15 January 2010, the Claimant and the Respondent submitted to
the Tribunal their final lists of the persons attending.

From 18 to 22 January 2010, the hearing on the merits of the case
took place in Paris. It was attended by the following persons:

The Tribunal: Professor Dr Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
(Chairman)
The Rt. Hon. Lord Steyn
Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, QC
Tribunal Secretary: Mr Andreas Heuser
Court Reporters: Ms Karyn Semler
Ms Fiona Irving
of BRIAULT REPORTING
SERVICES

On behalf of Claimant: Mr John M Townsend
Mr James H Boykin
Mr Marc-Olivier Langlois
of HUGHES HUBBARD & REED
LLP
Professor Dr Kaj Hober

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 59

i oe

ENT DUO F919 Perm

29. DEC. 2010 13:49 SVEA HOVRATT

60

Dr Nils Eliasson

of MANNHEIMER SWARTLING
ADVOKATBYRA

Also present:

Mr Michael Flynn-O'Brien

Ms Kelly McCullough

Mr Vitaly Morozov

Mr Matthieu Rossignol

Professor Peter Maggs

On Behalf of Respondent: Mr Matthew Slater }

Dr. Claudia Annacker
Mr David Sabel
Mr Robert Greig )
Mr William McGurn II
Ms Giulia Gosi
of CLEARY GOTTLIEB STEEN &
HAMILTON LLP
Also Present:
Mr Rashid Sharapov
Mr Scott Senecal
Mr Ksenia Khanseidova
Mr Lorenzo Melchionda
Mr Milo Molfa

“ Ms Marina Akchurina
Mr Cameron Murphy
Ms Maja Menard

we Ms Laurie Achtouk-Spivak
Mr Dan Fernandez
Mr Michele Maltese
Mr Eno Lacoella
Mr Oleg Konnov

34. On 22 January 2010, during the concluding remarks of the hearing
on the merits, the Parties were asked by the Chairman if there were
any procedural issues that they wished to raise (Tr p. 933). The

Parties confirmed they had agreed a process to exchange comments
SCC arbitration V (079/208) Rosinvest v Russi 60

NR. 2007 seo

22, DEC. 2010 13:59 SVEA HOVRATT

of

61

on substantial corrections to the hearing transcript. The Chairman
further asked the Parties “do the Parties have any objections to the
way the Tribunal has conducted the procedure up to now?” (Tr p.
934). Respondent only noted its continued objection to the inclusion
of document Provisional CM-532 and otherwise had no comment.
Claimant raised no objections.

35. On 22 January 2010, the hearing on the merits concluded.

36. On 26 January 2010, the Tribunal provided the Parties with
Procedural Order (PO) No. 5 regarding further procedure after the
Hearing, which set out as follows:

Procedural Order (PQ) No.5
regarding the further procedure after the hearing in Paris

Taking into account the discussion and the agreements
reached wish the Parties at the Hearing held in Paris frei 18
to 22 January 2010, the Tribunal issues this Procedural Order
No. 5 as follows:

Ll. Post-Hearing Briefs

1.1. By March 26, 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously
submit a Ist round of Post-Hearing Briefs, limited to a
maximum of 60 pages (double-spaced) in length,
containing the following:

LL. Any comments they have regarding issues
relevant in this case in the light of the results of the
Hearing;

1.1.2. Separate sections responding in particular to
the questions and issues mentioned in section 3
below.

1,2. By April 30, 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit

a 2nd round of Post-Hearing Briefs, limited to a maximum
SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 6]

fist

22. DEC. 2010 13:50

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3687S. 13/51

62

of 30 pages (double-spaced) in length, but only regarding
issues raised by the other Party in its Ist round Post-
Hearing Briefs.

1.2.The sections of the Ist round  Post-Hearing Briefs

requested under 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 above and the 2nd round
Post-Hearing Briefs shall include short (in so far as
possible, hyperlinked) references to all sections in the
Party’s earlier submissions, as well as to exhibits
(including legal authorities, witness statements, and
expert statements) and to the sections of the hearing
transcript on which the Party relies regarding the
respective issue.

1.3. Except for the agreed documents handed out during the

hearing, no new documents shall be attached to the Post-
Hearing Briefs unless expressly authorized in advance by
the Tribunal.

1,4, However, as agreed during the hearing:

(a) Claimant may submit new documents in rebuttal to the
new documents handed out by Respondent with its
Closing Statement at the hearing; and

(b) the Parties are invited to submit with their Ist round
Post-Hearing Briefs an agreed English translation of
the full text of “Law 9-Z” of the Republic of Mordovia
of which a partial text has been submitted as RM-644.

2._Cost Claims

2.1. By May 14, 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit

Cost Claims, briefly setting out the costs incurred by each
side, Such Cost Claims need not include supporting
documentation for the costs claimed.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 62

22. DEC, 2010 13:50

WR, JOOT Ve TE A

SVEA HOVRATT

63

2.2. By May 21, 2010, the Parties shall simultaneously submit
any comments on the Cost Claims submitted by the other
side.

3.__ Questions

The Parties are particularly requested to address the
following questions and issues in separate sections of the
Post-Hearing Briefs:

3,.Regarding Claimant's Exhibit CM-532 admitted for the
time being by the Tribunal in a ruling during the hearing,
the Parties are invited to comment in their Post-Hearing
Briefs on the following aspects:
(a) the procedural admissibility of the document;
(b) the evidentiary value of the document; and
(c) the relevance for the issues in the present case.

3.2.In view of the earlier Award of this Tribunal accepting its
jurisdiction and of the exception made in so far in section
14 of its Decisions in that Award by transferring the issue
of expropriation to the merits phase of this arbitration, in
which way can and does Respondent still raise objections
on jurisdiction at the present time?

3.3.In which way is “discrimination”, either between different
competitors in Russia or between domestic and foreign
investors, relevant for the issues to be decided in this case,
and was there such relevant discrimination?

3.4 Given the terms of Article 5(1) of the Investment
Protection and Promotion Agreement between the Soviet
Union and the United Kingdom (IPPA), the Tribunal
would be grateful to hear from the Parties what test
should be applied in order to determine whether a
measure not in itself amounting to “nationalisation or
expropriation” should be considered a measure “having
effect equivalent to” nationalisation or expropriation.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 63

ee

 

77. DEC. 2010 13:51 SEA HOVRATT

64

3.5 Could the Parties explain in more detail:

(a) the various options and steps in Russian law and
practice regarding the registration of shareholders, and
on that basis;
(0) whether Claimant could have been registered as the
owner of the Yukos shares;
(c) what were the legal effects of the procedure chosen for
registration in the present case; and

ve (d) whether similar procedures of registration were used
for other shareholders of Yukos and for shareholders of }
other companies in Russia.

3.6 Given that Article 5(2) of the IPPA foresees expressly the
case of a shareholding in a company of which assets are
expropriated, the Tribunal would be grateful to hear from
the Parties how the terms of Article 5(1) should be
understood to apply to a case in which the claimant’s
interest is one which derives from Article 5(2).

3.7 Regarding the Participation Agreements, what is the
relevance of New York law as the governing law, of
Russian law and of international law, particularly the
VY IPPA, for the issues to be decided by the Tribunal in the :
present case?

ww 3.8 Taking into account the language, context and governing
law of the Participation Agreements, was it permissible
for Claimant to sell the Yukos shares without the consent
of Elliott, and irrespective thereof, if the Claimant would
indeed have sold them, what would have been the legal
consequences for the issues relevant in the present case?

3.9 The Parties are invited to comment in greater detail on the
link that has been alleged to exist between the criminal
prosecutions of Mr. Khodorkovsky and the reassessments

of the taxes claimed to be due from Yukos.
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 64

 

79. DEC. 2010 13:51 SVEA HOVRATT

37.
4 38.

4 39.

40.
eee
4

42.

65

3.10 Without prejudice to any future decision of the Tribunal,
in case the Tribunal makes an award of compensation,
what are the final positions of the Parties regarding intent
on such compensation?

On 26 March 2010 the Parties submitted their first Post-Hearing
Briefs (CPHB-I and RPHB-I) to the Tribunal.

On 15 April 2010 the Tribunal met in person for deliberations on
the hearings, briefs and evidence provided to date.

On 26 April 2010 Respondent requested the Tribunal grant an
extension of time to 4 May 2010 for both parties to submit their
second post-hearing briefs (CPHB-II and RPHB-II) due to counsel
being stranded due to the disruption caused to air travel in Europe by
the Icelandic volcano eruption. Claimant had already indicated to
Respondent its assent to the request. The Tribunal granted the requesi
on 27 April 2010.

On 4 May 2010 the parties each submitted their 2°° round Post-
Hearing Briefs (CPHB-II and RPHB-ID.

On 14 May 2010 the parties each submitted the cost claims.

On 21 May 2010 the parties each provided comments on the other’s
cost claim.

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 65

 

70. DEC. 2010 13:52 SVEA HOVRATT

66

E. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions
El. PPA

43. The principal relevant legal provisions in the IPPA for this
arbitration are:

“!PREAMBLE:]

- The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (hereinafter referred to as the “Contracting
Parties”);

Desiring to create favourable conditions for greater investment
by investors of one State in the territory of the other State;

Recognising that the promotion and reciprocal protection under
international agreement of such investments will be conducive
to the stimulation of business initiative and will contribute to
the development of economic relations between the two States;

Have agreed as follows:

ARTICLE |

Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement:

(a) the term “investment” means every kind of asset and in
particular, though not exclusively, includes:

3

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 66

 

27. DEC. 2010 13:52 SVEA HOVRAT?

67

(ii) shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of, and any
other form of participation in, a company or business
enterprise;

(ad) the term “investor” shall comprise with regard to either
Contracting Party:
() ..
(ii) any corporations, companies, firms, enterprises,
organisations and associations incorporated or
constituted under the law in force in the territory of that
Contracting Party;
provided that that natural person, corporation, company, firm,
4 enterprise, organisation or association is competent, in
accordance with the laws of that Contracting Party, to make
investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

(e)

~C

ARTICLE 2

Promotion and Protection of Investments

(I) Each Contracting Party shall encourage and create
favourable conditions for investors of the other Contracting
Party to make investments in its territory, and, subject to its
right to exercise powers conferred by its laws, shall admit such
investments.

(2) Investments of investors of each Contracting Party shall at
all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall
enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other
Contracting Party. Neither Contracting Party shall in any way
impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures the
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of
investments in its territory of investors of the other Contracting
Party. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it
may have entered into consistently with this Agreement with
regard to investments of the other Contracting Party.

me

{

ARTICLE 3

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 67

20. DEC. 2010 13:52

 

Na. poGf Oe LAS aT

SVEA HOVRATT

Treatment of Investments

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting
Party to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to
investments or returns of investors of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards their
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to investors of any third State.

(3)

ARTICLE 5
Expropriation

(1) Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall
not be nationalised, expropriated or subjected to measures
having effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation
(hereinafter referred to as “expropriation”) in the territory of
the other Contracting Party except for a purpose which is in the
public interest and is not discriminatory and against the
payment, without delay, of adequate and effective
compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the real
value of the investment expropriated immediately before the
expropriation or before the impending expropriation became
public knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall be made
within two months of the date of expropriation, after which
interest at a normal commercial rate shall accrue until the date
of payment, and shall be effectively realizable and be freely
transferable. The investor affected shall have a right, under the
law of the Contracting Party making the expropriation, to
prompt review, by a judicial or other independent authority of
that Party, of his or its case and of the valuation of his or its
investment in accordance with the principles set out in this
paragraph.

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 68

—

 

SVEA HOVRATT

69

(2) Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a
company or enterprise which is incorporated or constituted
under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and in
which investors of the other Contracting Party have a
shareholding, the provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article
shall apply.

E.0. Denmark-Russia BIT

44. The principal relevant legal provision in the Denmark-Russia
af BIT for this arbitration are:

“PREAMBLE:

The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government
of the Kingdom of Denmark (hereinafter referred to as the
"Contracting Parties"),

desiring to create favourable conditions for increasing
investments by investors of one Contracting Party in the
4 territory of the other Contracting Party,

recognizing that a fair and equitable treatment of investments
on a reciprocal basis will serve this aim,

have agreed as follows:

ARTICLE 1
Definitions:

For the purposes of this Agreement:

(1) The term "investment" shall comprise every kind of asset
invested by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 69

22. DEC. 2019 13:

5
2

3

 

SVEA HOVRATT

70

of the other Contracting Party in accordance with its laws and
regulations and shall include in particular;

(a) moveable and immovable property, related property rights,
such as mortgages and guarantees, as well as leases,

(b) shares, parts or other forms of participation in enterprises,

(c) claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to
contracts having an economic value and associated with an
investment,

(d) intellectual property rights, as well as technology, goodwill
and know-how,

(e) any rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake
economic activity, including rights to search for, cultivate,
extract or exploit natural resources.

A change in the form in which assets are invested does not
affect their character as investments.

(2) The term "returns" shall mean the amounts yielded by an
investment and includes in particular: profit, interest, capital
gains, dividends, royalties or other fees.

(3) The term "investor" shall mean with regard to either
Contracting Party:

(a) natural persons having the citizenship or nationality of that
Contracting Party in accordance with its laws,

(b) any corporations, companies, firms, enterprises,
organizations and associations organized in the territory of that
Contracting Party in accordance with its legislation,

provided that those natural persons, corporations, companies,
firms, enterprises, organizations and associations are

SCC Arbitration ¥ (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 0

20. DEC, 2019 13:53

—@

¢

=<

SVEA HOVRATT

71

competent, in accordance with the legislation of that
Contracting Party, to make investments in the territory of the
other Contracting Party.

ARTICLE 2:
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments

(1) Each Contracting Party shall promote in its territory
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party, create
favourable conditions for them and admit such investments in
accordance with its legislation.

ARTICLE 3
Treatment of Investments

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investments or returns of investors of the otier Contracting
Party to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to
investments or returns of investors of any third State.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject
investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards their
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to investors of any third State.

(3) Each Contracting Party may have in its legislation limited
exceptions from national treatment provided for in section I
and 2 of this Article. Any new exception will, however, apply
only to investments made in its territory by investors of the
other Contracting Party after the entry into force of such
exception.

(4) The provisions of this Article relative to the granting of
Most Favoured Nations treatment shall not be construed so as
to oblige one Contracting Party to extend to the investors of the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 7

NR. go0f 0% 2/91

22. DEC. 2010 13:54

AR GOOF de 29

SVEA HOVRATT

72

other Contracting Party, preferences or privileges resulting
Srom:

(a) its participation in a free trade area, customs or economic
union or similar multilateral agreement,

(b) the agreements in the field of economic cooperation of the
Russian Federation with the states that constituted the former
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,

ARTICLE 4:
Expropriation

(1) Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall
not be nationalized, expropriated or subjected to measures
having effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation
(hereinafter referred to as "expropriation") in the territory of
the other Contracting Party except for measures taken in the
public interest on a basis of non-discrimination and against
prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Such
compensation shall amount to the value of the investment
expropriated immediately before the expropriation or
impending expropriation became public knowledge. The
compensation shall be paid without delay, be freely transferable
and shall include interest at the normal commercial rate
established on a market basis from the date of expropriation
until the date of payment.

(2) The investor affected shall have the right, under the law of
the Contracting Party making the expropriation, to prompt
review, by a judicial or other independent authority of that
Contracting Party, of his or its case and of the valuation of his
or its investment in accordance with the principles set out in
this Article,

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia n2

PHA r——

 

72, DEC. 2010 13:54 SVEA HOVRATT

73

ARTICLE Ll.

Application of this Agreement:

(3) The provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to taxation.

~

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest ¥ Russia B

22. DEC. 2010 13:55

ro

 

SVEA HOVRATT

74

F. Relief Sought by the Parties

FI. Relief Sought by Claimant

45, As set out in the Statement of Claim (C-I, para. 274) Claimant
makes the following request for an award:

“\.. Claimant respectfully requests that the Tribunal issue an
Award:

(a)

»

©)

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay compensation for
the injury to the value of Claimant’s shareholding in
Yukos equal to the value that investment would have had
at the date of the award absent Respondent’s unlawful
expropriation of the assets of Yukos in the amount of US$
276.1 million, or, any alternative, compensation in the
amount of US$ 220.4 million as per 15 August 2007;

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay interest on US$
276.1 million at a normal compounded, commercial rate
as of 31 July 2008 until full payment has been made, or, in
the alternative interest in US$ 220.4 million at a normal
compounded, commercial rate as of 15 August 2007 until
Full payment has been made;

Ordering the Russian Federation to Claimant’s costs in
these arbitration proceedings in an amount to be specified
later together with interest thereon, including all
attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, and as between the
parties, alone to bear the responsibility for compensating
the Arbitral Tribunal and the SCC-Institute.”

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 74

o. 29/9!

22.DEC. 2010 13:55

L

47.

 

SVEA HOVRATT

75

46. As set out in Claimant’s Reply (C-II, para. 211) Claimant makes the
following request for an award:
[ ] Claimant respectfully requests that the Tribunal issue an
Award:

(a)

()

(¢)

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay compensation for
the injury to the value of Claimant’s shareholding in
Yukos equal to the value of that investment on 15 August
2007, US$ 232.7 million, or, in the alternative, equal to
the value that investment would have had at the date of the
award absent Respondent’s unlawful expropriation of the
assets of Yukos;

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay interest on the
amount awarded at a normal compounded, commercial
rate from the date of valuation until full payment has been
made, [ ];

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay Claimant’s costs
in these arbitration proceedings in an amount to be
specified later together with interest thereon, including all
attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, and as between the
parties, alone to bear the responsibility for compensating
the Arbitral Tribunal and the SCC-Institute.”

As set out in its First Post Hearing Brief (CPHB-I) Claimant seeks

following relief:

(a)

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay compensation for

the injury to the value of Claimant’s shareholding in
Yukos equal to the value that investment would, but for the
Respondent's unlawful conduct, have had on 15 August
2007, which is USS 232.7 million. In the alternative,
Respondent should be ordered to pay compensation equal
to the value that investment would have had at the date of
the award;

SCC Arbination V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 15

77, DEC. 2010 13:55

()

()

 

SVEA HOVRATT

76

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay interest on the
amount awarded at a normal commercial rate, such as
LIBOR plus 4%, compounded semi-annually from the
date of valuation until full payment has been made;

Ordering the Russian Federation to pay Claimant's costs
in these arbitration proceedings in an amount to be
specified later together with interest thereon ,including all
attorneys’ fees and expert witness fees, and as between the
parties, alone to bear the responsibility for compensating
the Arbitral Tribunal and the SCC Institute.

48. ° As set out in its Second Post Hearing Brieg (CPHB-ID) Claimant
repeated its prayer for relief set out in CPHB-I.

F.IL Relief Sought by Respondent

49, In its Statement of Defence (R-I, at X Respondent seeks the
following relief:

“For the foregoing reasons, the Russian Federation respectfully
requests that the Tribunal issue an Award:

“vw

S (a
6)

Ne

()

@

Dismissing Claimant’s claims in their entirety;

Declaring that Claimant is not entitled to the award of any
damages;

Ordering Claimant to pay the Russian Federation's costs,
expenses, and attorney’s fees;

Ordering that Claimant alone shall be responsible for the
costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of
the Tribunal and the SCC-Institute, and that Claimant
shall reimburse the Russian Federation for its deposits
previously made in regard to the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the SCC-Institute; and

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 16

 

22, DEC. 2040 13:56 SVEA HOVRATT

4

(e) Granting such further relief as the Tribunal deems fit and
proper.”

50. As set out in the Surreply to Claimant’s Reply (R-U, at VIII)
Respondent seeks the following relief:

“For the foregoing reasons, the Russian Federation respectfully

requests that the Tribunal issue an Award:

(a) Dismissing Claimant’s claims on the grounds that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain them;

(b) In the alternative, dismissing Claimant’s claims on the
merits in their entirety;

(c) in the alternative, declaring that Claimant is not entitled
to the award of any damages;

(d) Ordering Claimant to pay the Russian Federation's costs,
expenses, and attorney's fees;

(e) Granting such further relief against Claimant that the
Tribunal deems fit and proper.”
51. In its First Post-Hearing Brief (RPHB-I) Respondent repeated its

prayer for relief set out in R-II.

52. In its Second Post-Hearing Brief (RPHB-II) Respondent repeated
its prayer for relief set out in R-I.

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 7

© £049 |-——

22. DEC. 2010 13:56 SVEA HOVRATT

G.

53.
Ww

GL.

54.

55.

56.

NKSO8 0 aya

78

Statement of Facts

Claimant and Respondent both submitted very detailed statements
of facts which were not always set out in chronological order, rather
in an order reflecting the significance of cettain events. The
following part G is a summary of the Statement of Facts according to
the Claimant and Statement of Facts according to the Respondent.
The detailed Statements have been taken into account by the Tribunal
without repeating all of them. References to amounts of money have
been amended to United States dollars (US$) using the exchange
rates referenced in the Parties’ submissions to ensure uniformity and
ease of comparison.

Statement of Facts According to the Claimant

Claimant points out at the outset that it is a minority shareholder of
Yukos that bought its shares on the open market and had no role in
the management or operation of Yukos and therefore has to rely on
publicly available information to support its case. ({§27 - 28 C-I)

Overview of the post-Soviet history of Russian oil industry

Claimant puts the present case in the context of the post-Soviet
history of the Russian oil industry, illustrating the transfer of oil
industry assets from the USSR’s Ministry of the Petroleum Industry
to its successor, the state-owned company Rosneft and the
subsequent privatisation of the oil industry via the so-called “Loans
for Shares initiative”. ({29 - 30 C-1)

Yukos was acquired from State control in 1995 by a group of
investors led by Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the Menatep Bank after
the Russian state failed to repay loans under the “Loans for Shares
initiative”. Under that initiative, the lenders of funds to the state were
provided with a security interest over shares in state-owned

SCC Arbitration ¥ (0719/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 2B

Wa 38878. 30/51

22. DEC. 2010 13:56 SVEA HOVRATT

L

57.

58.

79

companies, in the present case over shares in Yukos. Upon default on
the loan agreement by the Russian state, the lenders were able to
exercise rights to sell the shares at auction, and in the present case in
1995 those shares were sold to the investors led by Khodorkovsky
and Menatep Bank. Prior to being re-nationalised at the end of 2004
Yukos was the leading producer of crude oil in Russia and had 25%
of its shares traded on markets in Moscow, London, Frankfurt, and
New York. Its accounts were audited under US GAAP standards and
it had Western directors appointed to its board. (931 - 32 C-1)

Yukos lost its status as Russia’s leading oil producer following the
auction of shares in its main asset, YNG, under an auction where a
straw purchaser, Baikalsfinansgroup, purchased the shares as the only
bidder for a price half the value ascribed to the shares by investment
bankers. Immediately following that auction, Rosneft a company
under Russian state control purchased the shares. Thereafter, Rosneft
acquired Yukos’ remaining assets in a series of further auctions with
none of the procceds going to Yukos suiareholders, until evexiually
Yukos was de-registered and ceased to exist under Russian law.
Claimant alleges the auction of YNG shares and other Yukos assets
was an unlawful expropriation and Claimant is entitled to
compensation under the IPPA. ({§33 - 37 C-1)

Tax regime in Low Tax Regions

The basis upon which the Respondent claimed authority to conduct
the auctions is a series of tax audits and court hearings that purported
to have found Yukos to be in breach of various tax laws. Yukos
claimed the benefit of use of the law in Low Tax Regions to reduce
the overall tax obligations of the Yukos group of companies, a
practice Claimant asserts was widespread and routine for other
Russian oil companies. Claimant cites the Maggs Reports and other
sources in support of its claim that tax planning and optimisation
strategies such as the use of the Low Tax Regions were routine and
legal practices utilised to the same extent by other large Russian oil
companies, ({38 - 51 C-D)

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rasinvest v Russia 19

22 DEC. 2010 13:57 SVEA HOVRATT

59.

60.
SS

61.

 

80

Claimant points to the strategy of both Soviet and the successor
Russian government to attract investment in economically depressed
regions, the so called Low Tax Regions. This practice, despite some
resistance from the Ministry of Finance, remained legal and upheld
by the courts for the Low Tax Regions until legislation was passed on
8 December 2003, effective from 1 January 2004, abolished the
system of tax breaks and low-tax in the Low Tax Regions. Up until
this point, use of the Low Tax Regions to minimise tax liability
remained legal, and despite attempts by the Tax Ministry to impose
requirements beyond those in the low-tax laws, courts consistently
rejected anything other than a literal interpretation of the relevant tax
zone’s laws, this, even in cases where a company had a superficial
presence in a Low Tax Region. It was not until the Tax Ministry’s
pursuit of Yukos in 2004 that the interpretation of those laws
changed. Up until that point the Tax Ministry could have elected to
use another legal norm in section 40 of the Russian Tax Code to
challenge the transfer pricing policies of Yukos and other entities
claiming the benefit of the Low Tax Regions, however due to
deficiencies in that law which were not removed until after the
pursuit of Yukos in 2004 by the Tax Ministry. (52 - 64 C-I)

Claimant points to a report on 29 November 2004 by the
Rapporteur to the Committees on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (of which the
Russian Federation is a member) (the “Council of Europe Report”)
regatding the Low Tax Regions laws that confirmed that the change
only occurred after 2004. Further evidence recognising the
inconsistency of the Respondent’s treatment of Yukos with the
applicable law is cited by Claimant in a resolution on 25 January
2005 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. (65
- 66 C-I)

Tax audits

In December 2003 the Tax Ministry undertook extraordinary
retroactive tax audits of Yukos as a pretext to the auctions which
stripped Yukos of its assets. These extraordinary retroactive audits
resulted in an assessment for US$ 20.4 billion in back taxes, penalties

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 80

22. DEC. 2010 13:58 SVEA HOVRATT

—(

62.

63.

 

81

and interest that far exceeded Yukos’ pre-tax profits and, in some
cases, even Yukos’ gross annual revenues. Respondent refused
Yukos to pay these assessments and ultimately this led to the
expropriation of Yukos assets by way of auction. Prior to these
audits, Yukos’ accounts for 2000 and 2001 had in fact been audited
by the authorities and relatively minor amounts of tax were due
which Yukos duly paid. (67 - 70 C-I)

Khodorkovsky targeted

Claimant asserts that the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the Chief
Executive Officer of Yukos on 25 October 2003 was the beginning
of the downfall of Yukos and foreshadowed the nature of events to
follow. The arrest was the result of the public challenging by
Khodorkovsky of President Putin and his administration and, as
Claimant alleges, the plans of Khodorkovsky and Yukos to build
pipelines which would have threatened the monopoly of Transneft, a
state-owned company and a possible sale of a stake in Yukos to a
US. oil company. (70 - 74 C-I)

Tax Ministry second audit and report

The Tax Ministry conducted a second audit of Yukos 2000 tax year
in December 2003 which audit Claimant cites in the Maggs Reports
as being prohibited and without lawful justification. Shortly after the
audit on 29 December 2003, the Tax Ministry produced its report
finding the use of the Low Tax Regions by Yukos were contrary to
the spirit of the law and assessed approximately US$ 3.5 billion in
tax, penalty and interest for the 2000 tax year. The Tax Ministry’s
findings were full of irregularities and inconsistencies with
established laws and they failed to justify their findings with
reference to the relevant laws. Had the Tax Ministry applied the law
correctly, in the case of a transfer pricing re-assessment, under
section 40 of the Tax Code then it could have only assessed
individual pricing transactions in respect of the entities involved and
not Yukos itself. Furthermore, the presumption of good faith was not
observed and some of the claims of the Tax Ministry were time-
barred. The objections of Yukos were provided to the Tax Ministry

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 81

dS. 52/91

22. DEC, 2010 13:58 SVEA HOVRATT

64.

65.

NR. 3887S. 33/51

82

on 12 January 2004, however shortly thereafter on 14 April 2004
the Tax Ministry’s resolution to collect the tax assessment amounts
of US$ 3.5 billion was issued requiring payment in two days on 16
April 2004. Yukos did not receive the order for payment until 16
April 2004. (4975 - 85 C-I)

Enforcement action and Yukos’ appeals to the courts

On 15 April 2004 before expiry of the deadline for payment, the
Tax Ministry filed suit against Yukos in the Moscow Arbitrazh Court
to collect the US$ 3.5 billion demanded for the tax year 2000, At the
same time, the Tax Ministry sought and obtained an ex parte freeze
order from the Moscow Arbitrazh Court preventing Yukos from
selling any of its assets to pay that liability. (the “Freeze Order”)
Those frozen assets were valued at almost US$ 19 billion, more than
five times the amount of taxes, penalty, and interest allegedly due for
year 2000. In effect the Tax Ministry had issued a demand for
payment then the very next day obtained judgment making it
impossible for Claimant to pay the demand. The demand for payment
was not received by Yukos until the day after the judgment freezing
the assets making payment impossible was issued, (187 - 89 C-I)

On 7 May 2004, Yukos commenced a separate suit against the Tax
Ministry asking the court to declare the Resolution unlawful and in
the interim a stay on the enforcement of the resolution. Judge Natalya
Cheburashkina granted the stay but was promptly removed from the
case by her superior. The next judge assigned abruptly resigned and
the third judge assigned was removed after ruling in favour of Yukos.
By the time a fourth judge was assigned in August 2004 the Tax
Ministry’s claim had been tried, adjudicated, appealed and enforced
in separate proceedings leading to the judge who finally heard
Yukos’ claim getting the message and adopting the reasoning and
conclusions of the courts in the Tax Ministry’s proceedings. In
contrast to Yukos’ suit, the Tax Ministry’s claim proceeding swiftly
and was unfairly weighted toward the Ministry, with masses of
unsorted evidence presented by the Ministry and mere hours of time
available to Yukos to prepare its case in contrast to days available to
the Ministry. On 28 May 2004 the court rendered its judgment

SCC Arbitration V (9079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 82

22. DEC. 2010 13:59 SVEA HOVRATT

wf

A

66.

67.

68.

83

awarding the Ministry its US$ 3.5 billion claim and rejecting a very
small portion — US$ 14,960 -— which allowed the Ministry to
immediately appeal. (4990 - 91 C-I)

The appeal process began on 1 June 2004 and was also subject to
irregularities such as truncated time periods available to Yukos to
prepare its case and in turn present it case in contrast to the extended
periods and allowances granted to the Ministry. On 29 June 2004 the
decision was announced and the next day a writ of enforcement was
issued allowing the Moscow Bailiffs Service to initiate proceedings
to execute the USS 3.5 billion judgment. Yukos was given five days
to pay. Yukos, however, was prevented from paying the assessment
by the terms of the Freeze Order, furthermore, its attempts on 2 July
2004 to appeal the Freeze Order to use its Sibneft shares to pay the
assessment were dismissed by the Arbitrazh court. Yukos application,
on same day to the Bailiffs Service to use its Sibneft shares (valued at
USS 4.6 billion at the time) to meet the tax assessment was never
responded tc. (F492 — 95 C-I)

On 7 July 2004 Yukos had its applications both to the Moscow
cassation court for suspension of the execution of the lower courts
decisions and also the Finance Ministry to pay the US$ 3.5 billion
assessment over six months rebuffed. On 9 July 2004 the Bailiffs
Service issued a penalty for failure to pay the assessment within five
days. Yukos promptly successfully appealed the penalty on the basis
that it had made an offer to pay using the Sibneft shares. However,
soon after, their appeal was overturned on formal grounds allowing
the Bailiffs Service to seize all of Yukos’ shares in YNG on 14 July
2004. Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein (“DKW”) was commissioned
to appraise the YNG shares for auction to satisfy the tax assessment.
(196 -— 99 C-T)

After commissioning DKW to appraise the YNG shares, the Tax
Ministry promptly issued payment demands for the 2001 — 2003 tax
years, all premised on the same departure from established Russian
tax law and practice as set out above in relation to the 2000
assessment. Additionally, the Tax Ministry assessed almost US$ 9
billion in VAT against Yukos for export transactions by its trading

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 83

NR. 3967S. 34/51 .

7. DEC. 2010 13:59

69.
70.

TTA 30 FA 9979

SVEA HOVRATT

84

companies, The transactions in question were exempt from VAT,
however, due to a formality, the Tax Ministry charged Yukos and not
the trading companies with the VAT. This charge which amounted to
almost half the US$ 20 billion in retroactive tax claims assessed
against Yukos for years 2000-2003 was plainly inconsistent with
Russian law. (F100 ~ 102 C-I)

The Tax Ministry then moved to enforce the 2001-2003
assessments without involving any court process at all. It issued a
resolution on 2 September 2004 finding Yukos liable for US$ 4.1
billion of retroactive taxes and penalties for 2001 and doubled the
fine on the basis Yukos was a repeat offender. The demand for
payment gave Yukos a mere two days to pay the demand, however,
Yukos was again unable to pay due to the asset freeze. Just three
days after receiving the demand, the Tax Ministry confiscated US$
2.7 billion from Yukos’ banks, then bought suit against Yukos to
collect the fines, in respect of which the Bailiffs service instituted
formal collection proceedings on 9 September 2004. (Y{103 — 104
c-l)

The imposition of liability for the 2002 tax year followed a similar
script and on 16 November 2004 the Tax Ministry found Yukos
liable for US$ 6.8 billion of retroactive taxes and penalties, again
doubling the penalties on the basis that Yukos was a repeat offender.
Collection proceedings were commenced two days after the
resolution and the 2002 liability was promptly combined with the
processes for the 2000 and 2001 tax assessments. The Bailiffs
Service issued an order to the Russian Federal Property Fund
(‘RFFY”’) to sell enough shares in YNG to cover the amount of the
combined (2000, 2001 and 2003 tax years) amount. By this time,
however, Yukos had already satisfied its 2000 liabilities in full and a
portion of its 2001 liabilities. Yukos informed the Bailiffs Service of
this, however its response was to commence proceedings on 18
November 2004 to recover the 2002 taxes and penalties by merging
that collection process with the 2000 and 2001 processes and
announcing that all of the YNG shares would be auctioned to satisfy
the liabilities. The auction was scheduled for 19 December 2004, a
Sunday, and the day before an emergency Yukos shareholder meeting

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest ¥ Russia 84

22. DEC. 2010 14:00

—

—

Ve

71,

72.

73.

SVEA HOVRATT TO TR, GGG 7 5, 30/9!

85

to vote to file for bankruptcy. Finally on 6 December 2004, the Tax
Ministry issued another assessment for the 2003 tax year, again
doubling the fine as Yukos was a “repeat offender”. The total tax
assessments against Yukos now totalled more than US$ 20 billion.
(49105 ~ 108 C-1)

From December 2004 Yukos had a number of outstanding legal
challenges before the Russian courts. In all the suits regarding
Yukos’ tax liabilities, the position of the Tax Ministry was upheld,
Yukos’ rejected and in many cases penalties increased. In all cases
standards of Russian legal procedural faimess were ignored and
judges who ruled in favour of Yukos were removed from the case or
the bench, those who ruled against were awarded the Order of
Friendship and the Medal for Service to the Fatherland. (9109 — 112
C-T)

Meanwhile, Russian government figures consistently denied an
intwiition to destroy Yukos, including statements by President Putin
that the government would “try to do everything not to topple
[Yukos]” leading the share price to soar. Further statements were
made during 2004 in a similar vein denying any intent to nationalise
Yukos. (F113 — 117 C-D

Expropriation and re-nationalisation of Yukos

On 19 November 2004 the RFFI announced it would sell all of
YNG’s common shares at auction on 19 December 2004 (a Sunday).
The Russian government appointed DKW to value YNG for auction.
DKW valued YNG between US$ 15.7 billion and US$ 18.3 billion.
JP Morgan, at Yukos’ request, valued YNG at between US$ 16
billion and US$ 20 billion. The starting price for the auction was set
at US$ 8.9 billion, substantially below either of the valuations. RFFI
procedures normally require that the appraised value of assets be used
as the starting price at auction, The RFFI did not justify the low
starting auction price. At the time, press reports indicated that state
owned Gazprom would use a company called Gazpromneft to bid for
YNG, and furthermore, that two unknown companies First Venture

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 85

 

22. DEC. 2010

74,
wY
NN

75.
Nw

76.
VY

77.

14:00 SVEA HOVRATT

VR. 3887S. 37/9

Co, and Intercom had also registered for the auction to give it the
appearance of legitimacy. ({{120 — 124 C-1)

On 14 December 2004, Yukos made a last-ditch attempt to prevent
the auction by declaring bankruptcy United States Bankruptcy Court
for the Southern District of Texas in Houston (the “Houston
Bankruptcy Court”) and immediately applied for an injunction to
prevent the auction of YNG and compelling arbitration. The court
enjoined Gazpromneft, First Venture Co. and Intercom in addition to
Western lenders ABN Amto, BNP Paribas, Calyon, Deutsche Bank,
JP Morgan and DKW from participating in the auction. This
prevented Western lenders from financing Gazpromneft’s bid forcing
the Russian government to change its plans by creating a mysterious,
unknown company called Baikalfinansgroup (“BFG’) with no

‘physical presence at its registered address which emerged as a new

bidder for the auction. (9125 - 127 C-J)

On 19 December 2004, in an auction that lasted ten minutes, the
voting shares in YNG were acquired by BFG. BFG made the only bid
at the auction while Gazpromneft sat silent. The auction was highly
unusual and departed from normal Russian practice without ground
rules, no appraisal price as the starting price and it appeared the
Parties to the auction had colluded. BFG won the auction, literally
bidding against itself with a resulting price of US$ 9.4 billion.
(G{128-129 C-D

Four days after the auction, and before BFG was required to pay the
sale price, Rosneft (the state owned oil company) acquired BFG for a
token payment of approximately US$ 360, thus returning the voting
shares of YNG to state control. It subsequently transpired from
admissions by President Putin that BFG was created to insulate
Rosneft from any potential liability had it acquired YNG directly at
auction. It is also not clear whether BFG actually paid for YNG with
press reports pointing to a complex structure involving various banks
and state Parties. ({§130 — 134 C-I)

On 25 January 2005 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe adopted a resolution concluding that the tax assessments and

SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 86

22. DEC. 2010 14:01 SVEA HOVRATT WR 3887 0S. 38/51

aL

78.

79.

80.

81.

87

auction of YNG went beyond enforcing laws and were directed at
regaining control of strategic assets highlighting the sale at auction
for a price far below market value following spurious tax
reassessments. (135 C-I)

Following the transfer to Rosneft, the tax assessments which
purportedly caused the low starting price at auction suddenly
vanished. Rosneft also captured most of the “purchase price” paid for
YNG by bringing claims against Yukos for US$ 3.9 billion which
were ultimately credited in full to YNG (i.e, Rosneft) in the course of
Yukos’ bankruptcy. Additionally, Rosneft caused YNG to repudiate a
loan guarantee to a Yukos affiliate worth US$ 1.6 billion. The net
sum of these claims and manoeuvres was that YNG had credited to it
an amount just under the USS 9.4 billion Rosneft had paid for YNG.
(49136 - 137 C-)

Rosneft’s value vastly increased following the acquisition of YNG
and at ine time of Rosneft’s initial public offer cf shares on the
London market in 2006, Rosneft was forced to acknowledge that
YNG was worth far more than BFG had paid for it. In the course of
the IPO, due to the fact that the preferred non-voting shares in YNG
(representing 23.21% of YNG’s equity) were still owned by Yukos,
and due to its bankers’ advice not to politicise the deal, Rosneft was
forced to swap 1,000,000,000 Rosneft shares for the remaining
23.21% in YNG. This swap valued YNG at US$ 46.18 billion by
October 2006. (9138 - 140 C-I)

Bankruptcy auctions

The next step in expropriating the assets of Yukos was to force the
company into bankruptcy so that it could be liquidated under the
supervision of the Russian authorities.

Due to the tax proceedings against Yukos and especially the asset
freeze, Yukos was in a position in breach of a credit agreement with a
consortium of banks led by Société Générale (the “SocGen Group”),
who had informed Yukos on 2 September 2004 that it was in default.
In June 2005 the SocGen Group filed a claim with the High Court of

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 87

22. DEC. 2010 14:01 SVEA HOVRATT

82.
OO

83.

84,

NR 3887) 0S. 39/51

88

Justice in London seeking repayment of the amounts owed by Yukos.
The High Court issued a judgment ordering Yukos to pay the SocGen
group on 24 June 2005. (4142 C-D)

On 8 September 2005, the SocGen Group applied in the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court for the English judgment to be recognised. In a move
departing from established Russian law regarding recognition of
foreign judgments, the Russian courts recognised the English
judgment on 21 December 2005. In the meantime, the SocGen
Group agreed with Rosneft on 13 December 2005 that Rosneft
purchase Yukos’ debt to the group in exchange for the SocGen Group
issuing bankruptcy proceedings against Yukos in Russia, Once the
English judgment was recognised in Russia, the SocGen Group filed
a bankruptcy application against Yukos in the Moscow Arbitrazh
Court on 6 March 2006 and then assigned its claims to Rosneft on 14
March 2006, (9143 — 146 C-D

On 28 March 2006, the Arbitrazh Court appointed Eduard K.
Rebgun as interim manager of the bankruptcy proceedings who
promptly applied for and was granted an injunction to prevent Yukos
from entering into transactions over a certain threshold without Mr
Rebgun’s consent. In the process of proceedings before a United
States bankruptcy court and Dutch courts which the interim manager
had instigated to prevent Yukos from dealing in its foreign assets,
Yukos successfully negotiated a consent order that required the
interim manager to submit a management financial rehabilitation
proposal creditors in advance of the scheduled creditors’ meeting.
The proposal demonstrated Yukos was able to continue as a
profitable enterprise provided that Yukos could continue to challenge
the US$ 11.5 billion tax assessments which were the subject of
pending appeals. (9147 — 148 C-I)

The creditor’s meeting took place on 20-25 July 2006 and creditors
were able to vote on the management of Yukos’ proposal. Sixteen of
the twenty-four creditors voted in favour, however, four creditors —
Tax Ministry, Rosneft, YNG plus a small creditor — representing
93.87% of the votes at the meeting voted against. Those creditors
proceeded to vote to file a petition with the Arbitrazh Court seeking

SCC Asbitration V (079/208) Rosinvest v Russia 88

22. DEC. 2010 14:02

€

85,

86.

87.

SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3887S. 40/51

89

that Yukos be declared bankrupt. The court issued a decision on 4
August 2006 declaring Yukos bankrupt, initiating receivership
proceedings, approving Mr Rebgun as receiver and terminating
Yukos’ management. (49149 — 150 C-I)

From 27 March 2007, Yukos’ remaining assets were sold in a
series of liquidation auctions organised by the bankruptcy receiver.
Again, procedural irregularities and a concerted effort to prevent
Yukos from existing after the receivership proceedings were
apparent. During the proceedings, whenever assets of Yukos were
valued at amounts which would have enabled Yukos to pay its tax
“liability”, the Tax Ministry would recalculate the overdue tax debt to
a higher amount. Finally, despite the tax authorities collecting more
than was actually owed, Yukos was still treated as a bankrupt
company, (151-152 C-I)

Once the auctions had concluded, state-controlled Gazprom had
acquired Yukos shares in Sibneft, Rosneft had acquired all of Yukos
production assets, including the Rosneft shares used to acquire
Yukos’ preferred shares in YNG. In the instances where other bidders
won oil-producing assets, their bids were declared void or they
subsequently sold those assets to Rosneft. The final auction was
completed on 15 August 2007 which left Yukos with no assets at all.
(49153 — 154 C-D

Disparate treatment of Yukos’ competitors

Yukos was not the only Russian oil company to have tax claims
made against it, however it was the only oil company not given the
opportunity to settle the claims, which in comparison were much
larger than those made against other oil companies. For instance in
March 2004, Sibneft was able to settle tax claims against it of US$
1.4 million for a payment of US$ 300 million. Sibneft’s principal
shareholder, Roman Abramovich, sold his 72% share in Sibneft for
USS 13.1 billion to Gazprom, something shareholders of Yukos were
unable to do. In addition, Lukoil, a company which had reported
saving US$ 800 million through the use of on-shore tax havens, was
assessed back taxes, however was able to settle the claims for US$

SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 89

P84

NR. 3887S.

22. DEC. 2010 14:02 SVEA HOVRATT

Ww
88.
89.
90.

90

103 million. The main difference appeared to be connections to and
consultation with the Kremlin. TNK~BP, a joint venture between four
Russian oligarchs and British Petroleum also had more favourable
treatment than Yukos with respect to its tax assessments. In all these
cases the companies concemed were able to settle the tax dispute
whereas Yukos had its assets frozen and then sold at auction. This
discrepancy was highlighted in the Council of Europe Report. (J155
~ 162 C-I)

Harassment and persecution of Yukos executives, shareholders,
Jawyers and accountants

In addition to the arrest, trial and imprisonment of Mikhail
Khodorkovsky, many other persons associated with companies
related to Yukos were also treated to processes lacking fairness,
impartiality and objectivity and to actions excessively in disregard of
fundamental rights of the deference guaranteed by the Russian
Criminal Procedure Code and by the European [Convention] on
Human Rights. A detailed description of the treatment of Yukos
executives and shareholders who had removed themselves from
Russian jurisdiction by foreign courts is set out at §166 C-I, wherein
the foreign jurisdictions generally granted the individuals political
asylum and/or condemned Russian action as politically motivated.
(4{163 — 166 C-I)

Yukos’ lawyers were also targeted by the Russian authorities,
including unauthorised searches, intimidation and interrogations. The
head of Yukos legal department from 1996 to 2003, Vasily
Aleksanyan was specifically targeted following his arrest on 6 April
2006. In clear contravention of orders of the European Cowt of
Human Rights, the Russian Federation failed to transfer Mr
Aleksanyan to a specialised hospital for treatment for advanced
cancer and AIDS. (9167 ~ 169 C-I)

Yukos’ auditor PWC was also targeted and charged with falsifying
its audits in respect of Yukos for years 2002, 2003 and 2004 and
failure to pay approximately US$ 14 million in taxes. PWC took the
extraordinary step of withdrawing a decade’s worth of audits in

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosiavest v Russia 90

 

29. DEC. 2010 14:03 SVEA HOVRATT

a

91.

93.

91

respect of Yukos in order to avoid losing its licence to operate in
Russia. (170 —- 172 C-I)

International condemnation of the Respondent’s treatment of
Yukos

The actions of the Respondent in respect of the expropriation and
re-nationalisation of Yukos’ assets has been uniformly condemned.
The Council of Europe passed a resolution on 25 January 2005
recognising the non-conformity of the proceedings with the rule of
law. The Houston Bankruptcy Court also found that the assessments
against Yukos deviated from established Russian law when it
enjoined Gazprom and Western banks from participating in the
auction of YNG. The Amsterdam District Court declared on 31
October 2007, that the Russian proceedings violated the principle of
due process and that therefore the Dutch courts would not recognise
the Russian bankruptcy. Even before the auction of YNG, the
International Commission of Jurists, a non-profit non-governmental
agency raised its concerns with President Putin himself. The English
courts also recognised the politicised nature of the processes against a
Yukos board member and refused to extradite him. Other courts
around the world have also refused judicial assistance to the Russian
Federation in relation to the extradition of defendants and collection
of documents. ({§173 — 179 C-D

Claimant’s purchase of Yukos shares

Claimant, RosInvestCo, an investment company incorporated under
English law and based in London, England, purchased a total of
seven million shares in Yukos, then traded on the Moscow and other
stock exchanges, on two occasions on 17 November and 1
December of 2004. (1 C-I)

Claimant is specialises in purchasing shares at such moments of
market distress, judging that the market has overreacted to transient
events and has undervalued a company’s underlying assets. Some of

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 91

8. 42/9 |

22. DEC. 2010 14:03 SVEA HOVRATT

ww

94.

95.

WR. 3887 0S. 43/51

92

these investments turn out to be profitable, and some do not, and the
investor may be presumed to understand the market risks when it
makes the investment. But when an investment becomes worthless,
not because of market movements, but because of unlawful
government action, an investor does not lose its rights under treaties
such as the IPPA simply because it bought its shares at a moment of
uncertainty. (47 C-I)

Claimant is an indirect subsidiary of Elliott Associates, L.P., as
openly disclosed in Claimant’s published English accounts, which
state: “The company’s ultimate parent undertaking is Elliott
Associates L.P., a limited partnership organised under laws of
Delaware, United States. (§104 C-I)

Elliott Associates, founded in 1977, has been described, together
with its sister fund, Elliott International, L.P. (“Elliott International”),
as one of the oldest funds of its kind under continuous management.
Elliott is said to manage in excess of US$ 14 billion in assets for
large institutional investors and individuals. Elliott has been
described as preferring to invest in “situations that are complex,”
because those “may have greater discounts and fewer participants.”
Elliott’s reported investments cover a wide range of asset classes,
many of which meet the “complex, greater discounts, fewer
participants” formula. (4105 C-ID)

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 92

2D. DEC. 2010 14:04 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3897

8. 44/51

93

G.JL Statement of Facts According to Respondent

96.
4
4

97.
4

98,
7

99.

Overview

Respondent contends that the conduct of the persons behind Yukos
following its privatisation, namely Mikhail Khodorkovsky and his
associates, amassed wealth on the basis of tax evasion, fraud and
violent crime which ultimately led to the collapse of the company.
Respondent further contends that this collapse of Yukos was
foreseeable on the basis of publicly available information also at the
time when Claimant alleges it purchased the Yukos shares ({¥[45 - 46
R-D).

Respondent rejects Claimant’s presentation of the acquisition of
Yukos by Khodorkovsky and his associates under the Loans for
Shares initiative as a bona fide trarsaction and highlights the
manipulation of the Loans for Shares initiative by the ultimate
beneficiaries based on their tax delinquency, and other practices
including exclusion of rival bidders in the auction for Yukos so that
Khodorkovsky’s affiliate could purchase Yukos at a discount to true
value. Respondent points to the valuation of Yukos’ assets two
months after the aforementioned auction at 17 times the price paid at
auction (947 - 50 R-I).

Respondent goes on to point out alleged criminal, corrupt and
aggressive acts by Khodorkovsky and his associates during his tenure
as the majority owner of Yukos. Respondent alleges that tax evasion
was a consistent feature of Khodorkovsky and his associates
businesses especially in relation to Yukos. (51 R-1)

According to the Respondent the tax evasion scheme of Yukos
“involved two key ingredients: (1) the massive, systematic use of
dozens of Yukos-controlled shell companies organized in special no-
tax and low-tax zones (“internal offshore zones”) within the Russian
Federation (Low Tax Regions) [...] to unlawfully evade taxes, and
(2) the transfer to Yukos of the artificially inflated and untaxed (or

SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 93

387 S. 45/5

©

22. DEC. 2010 14:04 SYEA HOVRATT

94

lightly taxed) profits generated by those shell companies using
various techniques intended to shelter those profits from taxation
upon receipt by Yukos, most notoriously through bogus “donations”
by some of the shell companies. Over the years, the scheme
underwent refinements, but none of the changes altered the basic
structure of the scheme or its ultimate purpose—the evasion of
massive amounts of taxes.” (952 - 54 R-D

100. Respondent explains the establishment of Low Tax Regions by the
na Russian Federation and the intent to foster economic development in
those regions. Respondent alleges the special tax regimes in the Low
Tax Regions were abused by Yukos in its creation of independent
shell companies and shell subsidiaries which would purchase oil
products from other Yukos entities and under a deliberate scheme }
buy and sell the oil amongst themselves until it was ultimately sold to
third parties resulting in profits which were lightly taxed or not taxed
at all as a result of the use of the scheme. Respondent alleges Yukos
employed a variety of methods to ensure the scheme did not attract
the Tax Ministry’s attention such as changing the names of the shell
companies and ensuring the reported profits of each company were
low. The sole object of the scheme was to avoid taxes which Yukos
euphemistically labelled “tax minimisation”. (955 - 59 R-I)

101. Yukos used a further scheme to recover profits from the Low Tax
“ Regions in that it engineered the donation of profits to a sham fund. 1
Respondent points to the disavowal of ZAO PricewaterhouseCoopers
Audit (“PWC”) of its own audit certificate in respect of financials
wv statements which referred to the scheme to pay profits to the sham
fund as evidence that the scheme was contrary to tax laws.
Respondent alleges the scheme was totally artificial without logical
reason other than to evade taxes, Respondent also points to the use of
promissory notes issued by Yukos in exchange for untaxed “loans”
by the shell entities located in the Low Tax Regions. These “loans”
were then co-mingled with the other profits of the company. (60 -
64 R-D)

102. The shell entities had no substance or business activities in the Low

Tax Regions other than on paper with the schemes administered
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosiavest v Russia 94

4

104.

105.

95

centrally from Yukos headquarters in Moscow. Various means were
used to “window dress” the conduct as legitimate business activity,
however the reality was that at all times the schemes were controlled
centrally with little or no actual activity or presence by the relevant
directors or the oil products being traded in the Low Tax Regions.
The contribution to the economic development of the Low Tax
Regions was merely symbolic and presence had no substance. (f65 -
70 R-I)

Respondent uses the example of the exploitation of Mordavia Low
Tax Region to illustrate Yukos’ tax evasion. The purported original
director and founder of one of Yukos’ shell companies Fargoil told
the tax authorities that he had not heard of the name of the company,
nor had he ever been to Mordavia when questioned. Fargoil was one
of many shell entities used in the tax avoidance scheme interposed to
“mark-up” the price of oil products bought and sold between similar
such Yukos entities before eventual sale to third parties. ({{J71 - 78 R-

D
Events leading to Claimant’s first purchase of Yukos shares

Beginning on 2 July 2003, a series of events undermined investor
confidence in Yukos and foreshadowed its bankruptcy. Firstly
associates of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Group Menatep were
arrested and some, including Mikhail Khodorkovsky himself, were
charged with tax evasion charges. These events occurring through
until late October 2003 drove the Yukos share price down. On 30
October 2003 a court order obtained by Russian prosecutors freezing
the sale and transfer of Yukos shares by Khodorkovsky, pushed the
share price further down. Public statements by President Vladimir
Putin and the Deputy Economic Development and Trade Minister
further publicly highlighted the investigations and proceedings in
respect of Yukos. At this point in time it was publicly clear that the
business practices of Yukos were being critically reviewed by
authorities. ({79 — 84 R-I)

On 8 December 2003, eleven months prior to Claimant’s first
purchase of shares, Tax Ministry began a review of Yukos past tax

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 95

22. DEC. 2010 14:05 SYEA HOVRATT N@ 3607 0S. 46/51

48.5887 S.

72. DEC. 2019 14:05 SVEA HOVRATT

106.
VS

107.
4

108.
VY

109.

"96

practices. An audit was concluded on 29 December 2003 and a
report produced setting out in detail the wilful, bad faith schemes
concluding that Yukos owed approximately US$ 3.4 billion in taxes,
default interest and fines with respect to tax year 2000. ({[85 — 86 R-
1)

On 12 January 2004 Yukos filed written objections to the Tax
Ministry’s audit report and Yukos’ counsel met with the Tax
Ministry two weeks later to discuss the objections. ({87 R-I)

On 14 April 2004 a comprehensive 121 page tax assessment was
issued by the Tax Ministry upholding the findings of the audit and
providing a detailed response to the objections of Yukos and finally
concluding that Yukos owed a total of US$ 3.5 billion. Yukos was
given until 16 April 2004 to pay the amounts due which was more
than adequate under Russian law given the circumstances of the
Yukos case. Yukos did not pay the amount due. ({]88 — 89 R-I)

On 15 April 2004, anticipating Yukos’ refusal to pay the amount
due based on its objections to the assessment and with a view to
securing collection of the full 2000 tax assessment amount, the Tax
Ministry commenced civil proceedings to obtain an injunction from
the Moscow Arbitrazh Court preventing Yukos from selling,
transferring or encumbering specified types of assets and restricting
share registries for Yukos subsidiaries from registering changes.
Important assets were excluded from the injunction including all
accounts used in connection with Yukos’ oil business and Yukos’
non-Russian assets. Upon deciding a request by Yukos to vary the
injunction, the Moscow Arbitrazh Court found no evidence that the
injunction was adversely affecting the company’s production or
activities. (90 —91 R-I)

On 26 May 2004, the Moscow Arbitrazh Court upheld the Tax
Ministry’s assessment that Yukos owed USS 3.4 billion rejecting all
of Yukos objections. On 1 June 2004 an affiliate of Yukos filed
appeal against this decision followed on 2 Jane 2004 by an appeal by
the Tax Ministry against the same 26 May ruling. Yukos itself also
appealed, and the matter was heard by the Ninth Appellate Division

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 96

41/5,

~~ TAR, 3837S. 40/9 1-————

79. DEC. 2910 14:06 SVEA HOVRATT

~

110.

ill.

112.

97

of tlie Moscow Arbitrazh Court (“the Appellate Court”) from 18
June 2004 to 29 June 2004. The Appellate Court’s ruling affirmed
the tax assessment for 2000 in all respects. (492 ~ 94 R-D)

The Appellate Court issued a writ of enforcement on 30 June 2004
which the Bailiffs Service commenced enforcement of on the same
day, issuing orders to freeze cash in Yukos’ bank accounts up to the
amount of tax due of RUR 99.3 billion (approximately US$ 3.3
billion, although not indicated in R-J). When Yukos failed to pay, the
Bailiff’s Service imposed a 7% enforcement fee in accordance with
Russian law and practice. On 14 July 2004 the Bailiffs Service seized
Yukos’ shares in YNG as security for the overdue tax, as the amounts
frozen in the bank accounts was insufficient to meet the amount due.
(9995 — 97 R-T)

Respondent asserts that Yukos was given the opportunity to appeal
all Tax Ministry and all court decisions. In some cases there is no
evidence that ‘/ukos exercised its rig’: to appeal. The court decisions
in respect of the tax assessment for 2000 and corresponding
enforcement procedures complied in all material respects with well
settled principles of Russian tax law and practice. (98 R-])

Yukos attempts to resist payment of overdue taxes

In contrast to other Russian oil companies who had back taxes
assessed against them, Yukos did not co-operate with the tax
authorities and pursued a different approach involving media and
many lawyers to belligerently oppose and obstruct the tax authorities’
investigations and subsequent proceedings. Its subsidiaries refused to
comply with audit requests by the tax authorities and Yukos itself
failed to provide key delivery orders which might have exonerated it.
It also obstructed justice by attempting to prevent authorities seizing
securities that it or its subsidiaries held by attempting to terminate the
share registries. Another example of its aggressive strategy was its
attempt to mislead authorities into accepting shares in Sibneft as
collateral for the claims, however, failing to disclose the vigorous
claims by third parties on those shares. Furthermore, it attempted to
mislead the tax authorities and courts by claiming its ability to

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 97

TNR, SBC FS 9909 tm

22. DEC. 2010 14:06 SVEA HOVRATT

98

operate smoothly would be harmed by the April Injunction
preventing it from transferring assets, when in fact the Yukos CFO
was publicly admitting that the April Injunction would have no effect
on the company’s operations. Yukos in fact paid USS 784 million of
its tax bill for year 2000 in a period of six weeks from 30 June 2004
and 11 August 2004 and further payments were made by 19
November 2004. (9999 — 104 R-J)

Market adjusts its expectations for Yukos amid more bad news

113, Yukos maintained its stance that the tax assessments were wrong
and that its practices in the Low Tax Regions was proper. When
Yukos finally did pay part of its tax bills from 30 June 2004 it was

“ too little too late and the Tax Ministry had already begun its )
investigation into Yukos tax schemes in years after 2000. On 2
September 2004 the tax assessment for 2001 was issued finding an
amount owing of USS 4.1 billion. On 16 November 2004 the tax
assessment for 2002 was issued holding Yukos liable for US$ 6.8
billion. Then on 19 November 2004 the tax assessment for 2003 was
issued finding Yukos owed an additional RUR 170.4 billion (USS
5.98 billion, although not contained in the submission R-I). As
expected Yukos vigorously contested each of these assessments,
however the courts upheld in all material aspects the tax assessments
relating to years 2001, 2002 and 2003. (9105 — 107 R-I)

114. The bad news mounted for Yukos during the course of 2004 and its
position became fragile. Yukos’ creditors responded negatively,
CU including the SocGen Group, which notified Yukos of a potential

event of default on a loan agreement and eventually declared default
on the loan on 2 July 2004. Yukos’ affiliate, Group Menatep
declared default on a loan issued to Yukos in September 2003 which
investment analysts saw as an attempt by Group Menatep to become
a creditor of Yukos to gain rights and extract value if Yukos became
bankrupt. Furthermore, Yukos management began openly talking of
bankruptcy and financial ruin of the company following the 26 May
2004 court ruling that the tax assessment for 2000 was upheld. Yukos
persisted in insisting that bankruptcy was imminent, including on 22

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 98

TAR, FEC FA, DUE D emt om

72. DEC. 2010 14:07 SYEA HOVRATT

99

July 2004 and in August 2004 when the company declared that
bankruptcy was imminent. (§108 — 114 R-I)

115. On 2 November 2004, when Yukos announced its shareholder
meeting for 20 December 2004, the CEO noted that Yukos would file
for bankruptcy even without shareholders approval. According to
intemal management calculations as of 31 October 2004 the company
was already effectively insolvent. Investment analysts and oil
industry experts also publicly voiced bleak assessments of Yukos

“4 reflecting its imminent bankruptcy. However, even though
Claimant’s purchase of Yukos shares occurred in November 2004,
negative assessments of Yukos’ situation were being publicly made

uM since April 2004. Credit rating agencies lowered their ratings several
) times in 2004. The stock price plummeted in 2004, dropping 85%
from April until Claimant made its first purchase on 19 November

2004. (q7114 ~ 120 R-I)

Preparations for the YNG auction and other eaforcement actions
prior to Claimant’s first purchase of Yukos shares

116. While the market had taken into account the negative events and
dire warnings of Yukos bankruptcy Russian authorities proceeded
with enforcement measures to collect the outstanding taxes. On 20
July 2004 the Ministry of Justice announced plans to assess the value

~ of the YNG shares and to sell the shares to cover Yukos’ tax bill,
Yukos’ appeals at multiple levels were all dismissed. Respondent’s
commissioned report by Professor Elena A. Borisova declares the
“4 seizure as in compliance with Russian law. (9121 — 122 R-I)

117, The valuation provided by DKW in advance of the auction valued
100% of YNG’s share capital on a going concern basis, i.e. on the
assumption that the entirety of YNG was sold on an arm’s length
basis to a willing buyer with complete knowledge of Yukos’
operations and financial results. The DKW report did not consider
YNG’s tax liabilities in its valuation and was not considered a
recommendation for the starting price of the auction or the ultimate
price of an auction and did not identify all the risks involved in
purchasing the YNG shares. The Bailiffs Service issued an order

SCC Arbitration V (079/203) Rosinvest v Russia 99

22. DEC. 2010 14:07 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3687S. 51/51

118.
NS
119.

120.

100

proceed with the sale of the YNG shares which was then confirmed
by the Ministry of Justice. On 18 November 2004, the Russian
Federal Property Fund (RPPI) was appointed to sell the shares at
auction and provided with the parameters for the auction such as the
starting price of US$ 8.9 billion, an auction date of 19 December
2004. All of these measures were in compliance with Russian law as
confirmed by the Borisova Report. (9123 — 127 R-I)

On 19 November 2004, Claimant purchased two million Yukos
shares at US$ 2.40 per share, almost certainly from an affiliated
member of the Elliott Group. At this point, Claimant may not have
become, even briefly, the beneficial owner of any Yukos shares, as
100% of the beneficial interest in the shares purchased on 19
November 2004 would appear to have been purchased and sold to
Elliott International, a Cayman Islands affiliate of the Elliott Group.
(9128 R-D)

Events after Claimant’s first purchase and prior to its second
purchase of Yukos shares

During this period, Yukos management continued to predict Yukos’
demise including in a statement, issued shortly before Claimant’s
second purchase of Yukos shares, by Yukos management board
reporting that increasing pressure from prosecutors, the upcoming
sale of YNG and massive new tax claims had destroyed any chance
of saving the company. Press reports were also of this view. On 7
December 2004, Claimant made its second, and larger, block of
Yukos shares for US$ 1.12 per share representing a 93% drop from
its high in April 2004. (99129 — 132 R-I)

Events after Claimant’s Second Purchase of Yukos Shares and
Prior to it Becoming the Beneficial Owner of the Yukos Shares

After Claimant’s second purchase of Yukos shares on 7 December
2004 and until Claimant became the beneficial owner of the Yukos
shares over two years later (no earlier than January 24, 2007), Yukos’
management and its controlling shareholders continued their
aggressive behaviour in the hopes of delaying the demise of the

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 100

22, DEC. 2010 14:08

—C

121.

122,

 

SVEA HOVRATT

101

company from the self-inflicted wounds it had suffered prior to
November 19, 2004. On 10 December 2004, Yukos undertook
litigation before the Houston Bankruptcy Court and sought a
temporary restraining order against Western banks which were
reporting to fund bids for YNG. Yukos also publicly threatened
litigation against any potential bidder in a concerted attempt to
disrupt the YNG auction. (9132 — 137 R-I)

On 19 December 2004 the bankruptcy auction for YNG proceeded
as planned, however due to Yukos’ litigation and threatened litigation
bidders were scared off and only Gazpromneft and BFG attended.
BFG won the auction with a bid of US$ 9.4 billion. The price realised
at auction reflected the DKW valuation. Following the auction,
Yukos continued to refuse to pay its creditors (including the Russian
Federation) and the stripped its assets to prevent its creditors from
satisfying their claims against Yukos. Its credit rating was
downgraded to “default” grade.. Then on 31 December 2004 BFG
paid the remaining price on tie auction and was declared official
winner. (9138 — 140 R-I)

Yukos challenged the results of the YNG auction in Russia and the
US., staying true to its promise of a “lifetime of litigation”. In Russia
the claims were dismissed and in the Houston Bankruptcy Court on
24 February 2005, Yukos’ voluntary bankruptcy action was
dismissed on jurisdiction grounds and as it was in the best interests of
creditors, (fJ141 — 142 R-D)

The SocGen Group had already notified Yukos on 2 July 2004 that
Yukos had defaulted on its US$ 1 billion loan agreement with a
syndicate of Western banks. This entitled SocGen Group to demand
immediate repayment. Despite the April Injunction and cash freeze
orders (which Claimant alleges prevented Yukos from paying of its
liabilities), Yukos paid the loan amounts through its affiliate
guarantors of the loan until 31 March 2005, when it defaulted in
payment of a monthly interest instalment. Shortly thereafter, the
SocGen Group initiated bankruptcy proceedings before the English
High Court for recovery of the outstanding loan amount. The court
granted the SocGen Group’s request on 17 and 24 June 2005 and

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 101

 

39, DEC. 2010 14:08 SVEA HOVRATT

102

drew particular attention to an acknowledgment by Yukos’ attorneys
that Yukos had assets outside Russia free from the freezing order
which could have been used to make payments under the loan
agreement. This is evidence of Yukos’ ability to pay its liabilities
despite the April Injunction. Furthermore, Yukos used foreign trust
entities in attempts to shield cash and other assets from the Russian
authorities. (9143 -— 146 R-I)

124. On 19 May 2005 the directors of Yukos resolved to transfer all
VY assets outside the Russian Federation to Yukos International B.V.,
incorporated in the Netherlands, fully controlled by a trust-like entity.
The purpose of this manoeuvre was to “reduce the risk of
interference of by the Russian state” and to evade payments of tax
assessments and other liabilities. (147 - 148 R-I)

125. On 8 September 2005 the SocGen Group applied to the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court for recognition and enforcement. of the English
judgment, and on 21 December 2005 the Moscow court formally
recognised it and issued a writ of enforcement. On 13 December
2005, the SocGen Group entered into an assignment agreement with
Rosneft to assign SocGen’s claim against Yukos in exchange for
payment of a sum certain, The claim was thus transferred to Rosneft.
(49149 — 150 R-1)

Yukos bankruptcy proceedings: Initiation, creditors’ meeting
and receivership

126. On6 March 2006, the SocGen Group filed an application with the
Moscow Arbitrazh Court seeking a declaration of bankruptcy for
Yukos. On 9 March 2006, the court granted petition and initiated
bankruptcy proceedings with respect to Yukos. This order of the
Moscow Arbitrazh Court was in compliance with Russian law and
international practice. (151 R-D

127. On 14 March 2006, Rosneft paid the agreed purchase price and
received an executed assignment of claims from the SocGen Group
later that same day. On 29 March 2006, the validity of the

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 102

77, DEC. 2010 14:09

=?

128.

129.

130.

 

SVEA HOVRATT

103

assignment of the claim to Rosneft was formally recognised by the
Moscow Axbitrazh Court, which authorised Rosneft to take the place
of the SocGen Group as a creditor in Yukos’ bankruptcy proceedings.
Yukos challenged the Moscow Arbitrazh Court’s order to validate the
assignment, but this legal challenge was subsequently dismissed by
the Federal Arbitrazh Court of the Moscow District. (§152 — 153 R-
)

Also on 29 March 2006, the Moscow Arbitrazh Court initiated
supervision over Yukos and appointed Mr. Eduard K. Rebgun as
interim manager of the company. This order too was challenged by
Yukos, but was ultimately upheld by the Federal Arbitrazh Court of
the Moscow District. Mr. Rebgun undertook measures to preserve
Yukos’ property (including the filing of several applications for
interim measures before Russian and foreign courts), he formed a
creditors’ register and provided an interim evaluation of Yukos’
assets and liabilities. Upon concluding that Yukos’ solvency could
not be restored, Mr. Rebgun recommended ‘to the first meeting of
Yukos’ creditors that receivership proceedings should be initiated.
(4154 R-D)

On 20 ~ 25 July 2006, the Yukos’ creditors attended a meeting
convened by Mr, Rebgun to consider, inter alia, whether to accept a
financial rehabilitation plan offered by Yukos’ core shareholders and
management or to initiate receivership proceedings. The
rehabilitation plan was overwhelmingly rejected by the creditors,
with 93.87% voting against it. The creditors were also in near-
unanimity (99.56%) in rejecting a proposal that would have placed
Yukos under extemal management. The creditors instead voted in
favour of filing a petition with the Moscow Arbitrazh Court to
formally declare Yukos bankrupt and initiate receivership
proceedings requiring the receiver to sell off Yukos’ assets in
discharge of Yukos’ creditors’ claims. (155 — 156 R-I)

On 4 August 2006, in accordance with the decision approved at the
creditors’ meeting, the Moscow Arbitrazh Court formally declared
Yukos bankrupt, authorized the initiation of receivership proceedings

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 103

20, DEC. 2040 14:16

131.

Le
eo
132.
133.

SVEA HOVRATT

104

over Yukos, ultimately resulting in its liquidation, and appointed Mr.
Rebgun as Yukos’ receiver. (157 R-I)

In October 2006, Mr. Rebgun held a public tender to select an
independent appraiser to inventory and valuate Yukos’ assets which
was won by a consortium of independent appraisal companies, with
ZAO ROSEKO acting as the general contractor (the “Roseko
Consortium”). From Octeber 2006 to July 2007, the Roseko
Consortium carried out an evaluation of Yukos’ assets, submitting
reports on the valuation of an overwhelming majority of Yukos assets
on 19 January 2007. On 20 February 2007, Yukos’ creditors
committee adopted a procedure for the holding of public auctions for
the sale of Yukos’ properties, which were subsequently divided into

twenty separate lots, (158 R-I)

In the period following Claimant’s second purchase of Yukos
shares on 7 December 2004 but prior to its becoming the beneficial
owner of the Yukos shares, Yukos continued to challenge the Tax
Ministry’s assessments and the bailiffs’ actions to enforce those
assessments. In a series of rulings from June 2005 to December
2005, the Federal Arbitrazh Court of the Moscow District and the
Supreme Arbitrazh Court upheld in all material respects the claims
for back taxes, interest and fines for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and
2003. All of their rulings were final and not able to be appealed. (J
159-164 R-D

From 27 March 2007 to 15 August 2007, 17 public auctions of
Yukos’ assets were held. All auctions were held in accordance with
Russian law and international practice and open to a variety of
participants, Russian and foreign. Rosneft and its affiliates won 9 of
the 17 auctions. The auctions generated US$ 33,3 billion in proceeds
for the bankruptcy estate, In keeping with its aggressive behaviour,
Yukos’ shareholders and management threatened years of litigation
against auction participants. The bankruptcy estate was used entirely
to satisfy creditor claims, however, at the conclusion Yukos’
liabilities still amounted to US$ 9.2 billion. On 15 November 2007
the Moscow Arbitrazh Court acknowledged the completion of
Yukos’ receivership. (9165 — 168 R-I)

SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 104

77. DEC. 2010 14:10

of

134,

 

SVEA HOVRATT

105

Yukos share price

On 7 December 2004 when Claimant purchased its second (and
larger) tranche of shares, Yukos’ share price was US$ 1.12. From
September 2005 to March 2006 the price recovered and did not go
below US$ 1.00. Between 30 December 2005 and 17 January 2006
the price did not close below US$ 2.00. Afier 9 March 2006 the price
dropped incrementally Therefore at any time between 7 December
2005 and 9 March 2006, Claimant could have sold the shares for a
profit.

Implausibility of conspiracy theory of Claimant

Respondent sets out in [172 — 191 R-I that the conspiracy theory
alleged against Respondent is implausible. The more reasonable
explanation is that the injury Claimant alleges it sustained was
ultimately caused by the actions of Yukos’ managemeat and core
shareholders, and not by the Russian Federation. Yukos’ core
shareholders and management knowingly pursued unlawful tax
strategies to avoid tax and conceal assets from the authorities. If
Claimant’s conspiracy theory is to believed then it would necessitate
the complicity of the following to serve as puppets: other private oil
companies in Russia, Houston bankruptcy court, major Western
financial institutions in the SocGen Group, participants in the
bankruptcy auctions and a variety of other individuals and entities.
Furthermore, the theory fails to explain why, if Respondent planned
to nationalise Yukos’ assets, it did not then act in a far more direct
manner which would have had a far greater probability of success.
Yukos and its controlling shareholders ultimately have a long and
varied history of unlawful activity, especially with regard to tax
evasion,

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 105

NR, FBB D8. 179 men

99, DEC. 2010 14:18 SVEA HOVRATT

106

H. Considerations and Conclusions of the Tribunal

136. The Tribunal has given consideration to the extensive factual and legal
arguments presented by the Parties in their written and oral submissions,
all of which the Tribunal has found helpful. In this Award, the Tribunal
discusses the arguments of the Parties most relevant for its decisions.

UL The Tribunal’s reasons, without repeating all the arguments advanced
by the Parties, address what the Tribunal itself considers to be the
determinative factors required to decide the issues arising in this case.
On the other hand, the Tribunal considers the short repetition of certain
of its conclusions in the context of particular issues necessary or at least )
appropriate in order to avoid misunderstandings and avoid the need to

refer to earlier specific sections of its Award.

HI. Jurisdiction

137. It is recalled that, in its Award on Jurisdiction dated 5 October
2007, in the final section I, the Tribunal decided as follows:

1. The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the claims
submitted by Claimant based on Article 8 of the UK-Soviet
~ Treaty. :

2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims submitted by
Claimant on the basis of the Most-Favoured Nation Clause in
Article 3 UK-Soviet BIT in connection with Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT.

3. The claims submitted by Claimant are admissible.

SCC Agbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 106

 

7. DEC. 2010 14:11 SVEA HOVRATT

AL

107

4. The issue whether the actions of Respondent have to be
considered as expropriations under the UK-Soviet BIT is
transferred to the merits phase of this arbitration.

5: The decision on costs of the arbitration is also joined to the
merits phase of this arbitration.

6. After this Award on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal will enter into
consultation with the Parties regarding the further conduct of
the merits phase of this arbitration.

With regard to further arguments on jurisdiction at this stage of the
procedure, the Tribunal has taken note of the new relief sought by
Respondent regarding jurisdiction, and of the parties’ replies to the
Tribunal’s Question 3.2 in PO-5 summarized below. In so far as
relevant, these issues will be considered later in this Award.

ELI. Preliminary Considerations

(A)

Parties’ Answers to Tribunal’s Questions in Procedural Order
No.5:

Hereafter, the parties’ answers to the Tribunal’s Questions in PO-5
are summarized. The Tribunal will take these answers into account in
later sections of this Award in so far as it considers them to be
relevant for the conclusions regarding the respective issues.

Question 3.1:

138.

139.

Regarding Claimant’s Exhibit CM-532 admitted for the time being
by the Tribunal in a ruling during the hearing, the Parties are invited
to comment in their Post-Hearing Briefs on the following aspects:

(a) the procedural admissibility of the document;
(b) the evidentiary value of the document; and
(c) the relevance for the issues in the present case.

Claimant ({128 CPHB-1)
Exhibit CM-532 is a one-page extract from the records of ING
Bank (Eurasia) ZAO. It was submitted in response to the argument

SCC acbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 107

——— oe eee mee HT DOU Umer

77. DEC. 2010 14:11 SVEA HOVRATT

108

made in the Surreply that the Claimant was not the legal owner of its
Yukos shares. Exhibit CM-532 simply demonstrates that ING Bank
did not consider itself the owner of the shares, but rather that it held
them for CSFB, in a sub-account for the Claimant. CSFB has
confirmed in other documents that it, in turn, held the shares for the
Claimant. The Claimant provided CM-532 to the Respondent on the
day its counsel obtained it. It does not form a necessary part of the
Claimant’s case, but it should be accepted by the Tribunal.as fair
evidence in rebuttal of arguments made for the first time in the

te Respondent’s Surreply. Claimant further refers the Tribunal to its
answer to this question as expressed in closing arguments and in )
416-23 of CPHB-I, supra.

Respondent (38 RPHB-1) )
140. Respondent refers to and relies upon the existing record as to the
procedural admissibility. During the hearings, Respondent made
three main submissions contesting the admissibility of CM-532.
Firstly that the submission of CM-532 violates the procedural rules.
Secondly that the document is not a document maintained and created
in the ordinary course of business and it is a document created at
Claimant’s request for purposes of litigation. This makes CM-532
inherently testimony and in effect a witness statement which
Respondent has no opportunity to cross examine. Thirdly and finally,
Claimant had the opportunity to inform the Tribunal and Respondent
a that it had requested and was awaiting the document and it did not do j
so. (pp. 220-223, 228-234, 852-856 Tr.)

~~ — Question 3.2
141. In view of the earlier Award of this Tribunal accepting its
jurisdiction and of the exception made in so far in section 1.4 of its
Decisions in that Award by transferring the issue of expropriation to
the merits phase of this arbitration, in which way can and does
Respondent still raise objections on jurisdiction at the present time?

Claimant ($129 CPHB-D)

SCC Arbitration V (079/200S) Rosinvest v Russia 108

77. DEC. 2010 14:12

142.

143,

y 144.

145,

 

SYEA HOVRATT

109

Claimant notes that this question is directed to the Respondent.
Claimant refers the Tribunal to its position on jurisdiction as
expressed during closing arguments.

Respondent (ff 1-32 RPHB-L)

Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because
Article 3(2) of the IPPA did not apply at the commencement of the
arbitration. The jurisdiction of this Tribunal is based on Article 3(2)
of the IPPA in conjunction with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia
BIT. Article 3(2) applies to “investors of the other Contracting Party,
as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of their investments.”

Respondent has established that the Yukos shares at issue were not
an investment of a UK investor when Claimant commenced this
arbitration on October 28, 2005. As set forth at Jf 1-14 of R-II, pages
1-6 of Annex D to R-II, CSFB LLC, a US company, was at all times
the legal owner of tie shares, which were controlled and beneficially
owned by Elliott International, a Cayman Islands company, until the
termination of the Participation Agreements in March 2007. While
the Participation Agreements were in force, Claimant had no rights to
the Yukos shares having financial value and could not incur any loss
or damage with respect to these shares. On October 28, 2005, the
critical date for purposes of establishing jurisdiction, Article 3(2) of
the IPPA was therefore inapplicable to Claimant and the Yukos
shares at issue, and cannot constitute a basis for this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the
present dispute because it arose prior to Claimant making an
investment. Article 8(1) of the IPPA confers jurisdiction over “any
legal disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the
other Contracting Party in relation to_an investment of the former
either concerning the amount of payment of compensation under
Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement [...].”. Article 3(2) of the IPPA in
conjunction with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT confers
jurisdiction over “any dispute which may arise between an investor of
one Contracting Party and the other Contracting party in connection

SCC Aubitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 109

AR, 3860-—-9. 10/9!

VW/fal

—— IR, 3888.

77. DEC. 2010 14:12 SVEA HOVRATT

110

with an investment on the territory of the other Contracting Party”
other than a dispute over claims based on “taxation,” which are
expressly exempted from the scope of Article 8 by Article 11(3) of
the Denmark-Russia BIT.

146. As set forth at [J 84-86 of R-II with supporting authorities that
stand unrebutted, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over disputes that
arise prior to the making of a protected investment.

.. 147. Respondent has established at [J 87-90 of R-II, and Claimant does
not contest, that the present dispute arose prior to March 2007, )
Claimant having sent a Notice of Dispute on June 2, 2005 and
commenced this arbitration on October 28, 2005.

148. Respondent has also established in J] 91-94 of R-II that the post-
March 2007 measures complained of — the Bankruptcy Auctions — do
not constitute —- and Claimant does not claim they constitute — a new
dispute. Indeed, Claimant acknowledged at the hearing that the “tax
assessments formed the basis on (sic] what subsequently happened to
Yukos and its shareholders. From that perspective, needless to say,
these tax assessments are very important and, indeed, central to the
expropriation of Yukos.” The tax assessments thus were the “real
causes” of and “continued to be central” to the dispute conceming
the Bankruptcy Auctions. The Tribunal accordingly lacks jurisdiction

- over the present dispute because it arose prior to the making of a
protected investment.

5 149. The Tribunal also lacks jurisdiction because Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT does not apply to disputes over claims
premised on “taxation.” As confirmed by Claimant at the hearing, all
of Claimant’s claims are premised on the allegation that the auctions
of Yukos’ assets were expropriatory because the tax assessments
were not bona fide, not non-discriminatory and were confiscatory.

150. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over
claims based on pre-investment acts and facts. As set forth in §¥ 207-
221 of R-l, $f] 66-72 of R-II and at page 163, line 17 to page 164, line
11 of Respondent’s Opening Statement (in Tr.) with supporting

SCC Arbitration V (079/2008) Rosinvest v Russia 10

77. DEC, 2010 14:13 SVEA HOVRATT

st

151.

—

152.

153.

154,

M1

authorities that stand unrebutted, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over
claims based on pre-investment acts and facts.

Claimant alleges that it made a protected investment in November
and December 2004. On Claimant’s own case, the tax assessments
for the years 2000 to 2003 in the amount of approximately US$ 14.6
billion are pre-investment measures outside the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal.

The taxes and interest for the years 2001 to 2003 were enforced
through administrative proceedings, These tax liabilities became
enforceable tax liens upon the expiration of the deadline specified in
the payment demand issued by the tax authorities. Payment Demand
No. 133 (CM-100, p.1), covering taxes and interest for the year 2001
(approximately US$ 2.6 billion), was issued on September 2, 2004
and became an enforceable tax lien two days later, Payment Demand
No. 175 (CM-249, p.2), covering taxes and interest for the year 2002
(approximately US$ 3.8 billion), was issued on November 16, 2004
and became enforceable one day later. Payment Demand No. 186
(CM-250, p.2), covering taxes and interest for the year 2003
(approximately US$ 3.4 billion), was issued on December 6, 2004
and became enforceable one day later.

The tax assessment for the year 2000 and the fines (but not the tax
assessment and interest) for the years 2001 through 2003 were
enforced through court proceedings. For the 2000 tax assessment to
become an enforceable tax lien there had to be a judgment of an
appellate court upholding the tax assessment. That judgment was
issued by the appellate instance of the Moscow Arbitrazh Court on
June 29, 2004 and upheld tax liabilities, including interest and fines,
of approximately US$ 3.5 billion. The judgment that converted the
fines for the year 2001 — approximately US$ 1.3 billion ~ into an
enforceable tax lien was rendered by the Ninth Arbitrazh Appellate
Court on November 18, 2004, one day prior to Claimant’s first
purchase of Yukos shares.

The 2000-2003 tax liens were challenged by Yukos and upheld by
the Russian courts but for negligible amounts after November and

SCC Arbisration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia il

97. DEC. 2010 14:13

s

a

155.

156.

157.

158.

TNR DUO OTT eT AE

SVEA HOVRATT

112

December 2004 but before March 2007. The subsequent substantial
failure of Yukos’ challenges of the pre-investment tax liens neither
establishes the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the tax liens nor
constitutes post-investment expropriatory conduct within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The IPPA does not bind the Contracting Parties in relation to any
pre-investment act or fact. Superior organs, if appealed to after a
State becomes bound by an international obligation, are not
internationally required to overtum or amend conduct of an inferior
organ that occurred while no obligation of the State existed, since
such conduct was not then contrary to international law. Thus, on
Claimant’s own case, the tax liabilities arising from taxes assessed
for the years 2000 to 2003, and default interest as well as the fines for
the year 2001, are outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction even though
Yukos’ challenges of the tax liens were finally dismissed after
Claimant alleges it made its first investment. The taxes assessed for
the year 2993 and default interest became enforceable tax liens on
December 7, 2004, three days prior to the second purchase of the
Yukos shares, and are thus outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over
claims based on Claimant’s alleged second investment even though
Yukos’ challenges of the tax liens were finally dismissed after
Claimant alleges it made its second investment.

Thus, on Claimant’s own case, tax liens in the aggregate amount of
USS 14.6 billion are outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

In any event, Claimant’s allegation that it made a protected
investment in 2004 is unsustainable. First, the record demonstrates
that Claimant never became the legal or even the nominal owner of
the Yukos shares at issue,

Second, Claimant acknowledged at the hearing that an “asset”
within the meaning of Article 1(a) of the IPPA “has to have some
sort of financial value.” Claimant did not, however, acquire
“something of value” in 2004, As the record now shows, Claimant
sold the entirety of the economic interest in the Yukos shares to
Elliott International before it acquired the related shares, and did not

SCC Asbinetion V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 112

at

TT TAR, 38888, 14/91

2D. DEC. 2010 14.14 SVEA HOVRATT

=e

159.

160.

161.

162,

113

under the Participation Agreements retain any right having a financial
or economic value. Following the signing of the Participation
Agreements, Claimant instead took on the obligations of an unpaid
collection agent for Elliott International, and as a result could not
have suffered any loss from any alleged exproptiatory act.

At the hearing, Claimant stressed that Elliott International and
Claimant “are related companies under common management” (p,
755 Tr.) and “[while the Participation Agreements gave Elliott
International an economic interest in the shares for a period of time,
they did not convey the shares themselves.” (p. 754 Tr.)

Neither argument advances Claimant’s case. While both companies
were under the common management of Elliott Associates, L.P., a
Delaware partnership, US companies are not eligible for treaty
protection.

Claimant is aiso mistaken in arguing that “it did not convey the
shares themselves” (meaning, presumably, ownership of the shares)
to Elliott International. The Yukos shares, like all shares, represented
a bundle of rights (including voting rights and rights to receive
dividends and liquidating distributions), and, under the Participation
Agreements, Claimant transferred to Elliott International all the rights
represented by the Yukos shares having financial value. The
ownership rights that Claimant supposedly retained were in fact
nothing more than the obligation to follow the instructions given by
Elliott International as to how CSFB LLP should in tur be instructed
to exercise its rights as the legal owner of the Yukos shares. For as
long as the Participation Agreements remained in place, Claimant did
not retain any right or interest that could constitute ownership within
the meaning of Article 1(a) of the IPPA.

Not a single authority relied upon by Claimant in its written or oral
pleadings supports the proposition that Claimant made a protected
investment in 2004. Claimant studiously ignores the fact that in each
of Saluka v. Czech Republic (CLA-34), CSOB v. Slovak Republic
(CLA-10) and Rumeli v. Kazakhstan (CLA-32), the claimants were
the legal and beneficial owners of the investment at the time of the

SCC Arbization ¥ (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 113

90. DEC. 2010 14:14 SVEA HOVRATT

163,

164.

16S.

166.

114

alleged expropriation. At the hearing, Claimant simply recited these
authorities, ignoring Respondent’s rebuttal arguments set forth at 1]
38-41 and 50-62 of R-II and at pp. 162 -163 Tr.

Claimant’s position is also not supported by the Interim Awards
rendered in the proceedings initiated by the majority shareholders of
Yukos under the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”). The ECT tribunal
interpreted Article 1(6) of the Energy Charter Treaty, which defines
“investment” as “every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by an Investor,” followed by a non-exhaustive list of
examples (see p. 2, RLA-137). The ECT tribunal concluded that
Article 1(6)(b) ECT includes legal or nominal ownership of shares in
a Russian company.

Indeed, unlike Claimant, the claimant companies in the ECT
proceedings were registered with the Russian registrar. In interpreting
the terms “every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or
indirectly” by a protected investor, the ECT tribunal emphasised that
Article 1(6) ECT “extends not only to shares of a company but to its
debt (Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT), to monetary claims and contractual
performance as weil as ‘any right conferred by law”. As stated in
one of the articles cited by the ECT tribunal, for purposes of Article
1(6) ECT, a “right conferred by law” is a protected investment if “it
was created effectively, under the law applicable (mostly national
law) and if this right, for the foreign ‘investor’ has some financial
value (‘asset’).” Respondent did not dispute (except with respect to
Veteran Petroleum), and the ECT tribunal held, that the claimant
companies were the legal and nominal owners of the Yukos shares.

Unlike the claimant companies in the ECT proceedings, Claimant
was not, under applicable Russian law, the nominal or legal owner of
the Yukos shares at issue. The claimant companies in the ECT
proceedings, again unlike Claimant, were thus entitled to receive
dividends and vote the shares, and held all of the fundamental
ownership rights associated with the Yukos shares.

Claimant acknowledges that pre-investment acts and facts may only
be relied upon to inform the meaning of post-investment acts and

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 114

TNR. 3868S. 9/91

77, DEC. 2010 14:15

167.

168.

 

SVEA HOVRATT

M15

facts. Nevertheless, Claimant requests the Tribunal to determine that
the tax assessments were illegal, seeking to extend the protection
under Article 5 of the IPPA to pre-investment conduct. It is
Claimant’s case that the post-investment conduct, ie., the auctions of
Yukos’ assets, were expropriatory on the ground that the tax
assessments were “not bona fide and non-confiscatory, and non-
discriminatory.” A review of the legality of pre-investment conduct,
however, is outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, and on
Claimant’s own statement of its case, the supposed illegality of the
auctions cannot be separated from the alleged illegality of the tax
assessments (and requires an examination of the legality of the tax
assessments). A determination that the auctions are contrary to
Article 5 of the JPPA would thus require an extension of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to acts outside its competence.

Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over post-
March 2007 measures because Claimant attempted to acquire a treaty
ciaim in March 2007, not a protected investment. Respondent has
established at J] 95-100 of R-II and pp. 164-170 Tr. that the
termination of the Participation Agreements in March 2007 did not
give rise to a protected investment because Claimant sought to invest
in its pending expropriation claim (this arbitration, it will be recalled,
was initiated in 2005), not in a protected investment. By March 2007,
Yukos was a bankrupt. company undergoing final liquidation.
Claimant has failed to provide any rationale or justification in its
written or oral pleadings for its acquisition of an economic interest in
the Yukos shares after Yukos had already been declared bankrupt and
after the decisions to liquidate its assets had become final and
irreversible.

According to Claimant, the motivation of the investor “has no role
to play” (p.107 Tr.). While the motivation of an investor who engages
in economic activity in the host State may well be irrelevant to the
investment’s protection under an investment treaty, transactions
engaged in for litigation purposes after a dispute has arisen and after
damages have been incurred are not protected. Economic activity is
the fundamental prerequisite of investment protection, Transactions
undertaken for litigation purposes without economic activity are an

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 115

3. 18/9 |e

wi

 

79, DEC. 2010 14:16 SVEA HOVRATT

116

abuse of the investment treaty system. The authorities relied upon by
Respondent at {J 97-99 of R-If and at the hearing in support of this
proposition stand unrebutted.

169. Respondent argues that it can raise objections on jurisdiction at the
present time. Respondent established in its Closing Statement that
under applicable Swedish law it can raise objections to jurisdiction at
the present time and the Tribunal is not prevented by the Award on
Jurisdiction from finding that it lacks jurisdiction on a ground other

ws than a finding that there was no expropriation.

170. As confirmed by the Svea Court of Appeal, (RLA-186) under the
Swedish Arbitration Act (section 2, RLA-178), the Award on
Jurisdiction is a non-final and non-binding decision, which can be }
changed at any time by the Tribunal, in particular, based on new
circumstances,

171. Claimant did not reveal during the jurisdictional phase that it had
sold the economic interest in the shares even before they had been
purchased, This fact constitutes a new circumstance, which requires
the Tribunal, as a matter of applicable Swedish law, to reconsider the
jurisdictional premises of the Award on Jurisdiction.

172. Moreover, the Award on Jurisdiction did not make factual findings
— as to the existence of a protected investment, but accepted Claimant’s \
assertions as the basis for upholding jurisdiction. Pursuant to the
doctrine of assertion as applied by Swedish Supreme Court, the
UU Tribunal was required to accept Claimant’s assertions concerning the
existence of a protected investment at the jurisdictional phase. In the
final award, the Tribunal is not prevented from dismissing the claims
for lack of jurisdiction or on the merits based on a finding that
Claimant did not make a protected investment.

173. While Claimant characterized Respondent’s jurisdictional
objections as “belated” (ff 7, 164, C-I1), Claimant acknowledged at
the hearing that “these issues are important and have to be addressed
by the Tribunal” (p. 749 Tr.). It is uncontroversial that a party cannot

be deemed to have waived a jurisdictional objection under Article
SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 116

“THR. 3886S. 18/51

22. DEC. 2010 14:16 SVEA HOVRATT

117

34(2) of the Swedish Arbitration Act (RLA-178) unless it knew of
the facts permitting it to raise the objection. Respondent raised
jurisdictional objections based on the fact that Claimant did not
acquire an economic interest in the Yukos shares prior to March 2007
in the Statement of Defense shortly after it had learned this fact in
March 2009. Respondent therefore cannot be deemed to have waived
any jurisdictional objection based on this fact, withheld by Claimant.

S Question 3.3

174. In which way is “discrimination”, either between different
competitors in Russia or between domestic and foreign investors,
relevant for the issues to be decided in this case, and was there such
relevant discrimination?

Claimant ({130 CPHB-1)

175. In this claim for expropriation, no showing of the sort of
discrimination that would be required to support a claim for denial of
national treatment is necessary. Rather the significance of the
Respondent’s discrimination against Yukos is that it impeaches the
Respondent’s claim that its tax measures were legitimate. Despite
having used nearly identical tax structures, no other Russian oil
company was subjected to the same relentless and inflexible attacks
as Yukos. Claimant further refers the Tribunal to its answer to this
question as expressed in closing arguments (pp. 739-741 Tr.)

~€

176. At the hearing Claimant submitted that it is not the Claimant's claim
that RosInvestCo was discriminated against on the basis of its UK
nationality. The relevance of discrimination, to the case, is not that
Yukos was discriminated against vis-a-vis other Russian oil
companies, but that it impeaches the legitimacy of the tax measures,
because the claim is one of expropriation, The Russian Federation
took the assets of Yukos. Under Articles 5(1) and 5(2) of the IPPA,
Claimant was entitled to make a claim based upon the expropriation
of the assets of Yukos. Respondent attempts to claim that the taxation
measures were legitimate. Respondent may only claim that the tax
measures were legitimate provided the laws themselves and the

SCC Arbitmtion V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia, 17

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

ied SVEA HOVRATT

118

enforcement are bona fide and non-discriminatory and non-
confiscatory. (pp. 739 -- 740 Tr.)

Claimant submits that these tax laws, as enforced, met none of the
above three elements. The significance of discrimination is that
Respondent has not shown that its enforcement of its tax laws was
non-discriminatory. If it cannot do that, and it can also show that it
was bona fide and non-confiscatory, then those tax measures are not
entitled to respect, as a matter of international law, and are properly
characterised as expropriation. (p. 741 Tr.)

Respondent (66 — 71 RPHB-1)

Claimant has failed to establish that the auctions were measures
having effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation on the
ground that they were for a discriminatory purpose within the
meaning of Article 5(1) of the IPPA.

Claimant expressly admitted at the hearing that it does not claim
“that RosInvestCo was discriminated against on the basis of its UK
nationality” (p. 739 Tr.). Nor does Claimant contend that the alleged
expropriation of Yukos’ assets was by reason of any foreign
ownership of Yukos. Indeed, Claimant alleges that Yukos was
singled out for domestic political reasons germane to its Russian
majority shareholders.

The authority discussed at |] 287-290 R-I and 4] 154 and 157-159
of R-II supports the proposition that a discriminatory expropriation is
cognizable under Article 5(1) of the IPPA only if there is
discrimination based on foreign nationality. These authorities stand
unrebutted,

Claimant nonetheless contends that discrimination between
competitors in Russia renders the tax assessments illegal.

Claimant’s argument is based on the fundamental misconception
that selective tax enforcement is for a discriminatory purpose under
Article 5(1) of the IPPA. To the contrary, Respondent has established
that selective tax enforcement does not constitute or imply an

SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 118

-oeoeoeoo TNR, SG Gm. LU 0!

2, DEC. 2010 14:17 SVEA HOVRATT

—

183.

19

unreasonable distinction, is a proper use of tax administration
resources and a legitimate means employed by tax authorities around
the world to discourage tax evasion. Again, Claimant has failed to
rebut any of the authorities supporting these propositions.

Claimant has, in any event, failed to establish that Yulkos was in
fact treated differently from other Russian and non-Russian oil
companies, (as discussed in greater detail at J{] 88-92 of RPHB-I).
Given the egregiousness of Yukos’ abuses, their long duration,
Yukos’ concealment of the abuses and its refusal to pay, when it
could, to satisfy the taxes assessed by the tax authorities, Yukos’ case
was unique.

Question 3.4

184.

185.

186.

Given the terms of Article 5(1) of the Investment Protection and
Promotion Agreement between the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom (IPP), the Tribunal would be grateful to hear fiom the
Parties what test should be applied in order to determine whether a
measure not in itself amounting to “nationalisation or
expropriation” should be considered a measure “having effect
equivalent to” nationalisation or expropriation,

Claimant (4131 CPHB-1)

Claimant stands by its statement at the hearings that, in determining
whether a measure (or set of measures) is “equivalent to”
expropriation, the Tribunal should evaluate whether the “net effect”
of the measure (or set of measures) is the same as an outright
expropriation, i.¢., a substantial or total deprivation of the economic
value of an (see also pp. 719-721 Tr.). Claimant’s submission, of
course, is that the Tribunal need not address this question, because it
is confronted with a complete taking of all of the assets of Yukos that
amounts to nationalisation or expropriation of RosInvestCo’s
investment.

Respondent (50 - 63 RPHB-I)
Respondent established in its Closing Statement that the term
“measures having effect equivalent to nationalisation or

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 119

TS TTR, 38585, 21/9 [ee

79. DEC. 2010 14:18 SVEA HOVRATT

120

expropriation” covers indirect expropriation, but without dispensing
with the requirement of a substantial or total deprivation of (i) the
economic value of an investment (as Claimant articulated the
standard at the hearing), (ii) fundamental ownership rights, in
particular, control of an ongoing business, or (iii) deprivation of
legitimate investment-backed expectations.

187. The consensus view of the OECD Member States on the distinction
between taxation and measures having effect equivalent to
No nationalisation or expropriation is articulated in the interpretative
note on Article VIII(2) of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment }
(p. 7, RLA-81), which Respondent emphasised in its submissions, but
Claimant failed to address in its written pleadings and failed even to
mention at the hearing. The interpretative note confirms that (i) )
taxation measures do not generally constitute expropriation, (ii)
taxation measures generally within the bounds of internationally
recognised tax policies and practices do not constitute expropriation,
(ii) taxation measures aimed at preventing the avoidance or evasion
of taxes do not generally constitute expropriation, (iv) a taxation
measure which was in force and transparent when the investment was
undertaken is not expropriatory, and (v) a taxation measure which by
itself is not expropriatory is “extremely unlikely” to be an element of
an indirect expropriation,

\~ 188. Far from requiring Respondent to show that the tax and
enforcement measures against Yukos were bona fide, not
discriminatory and not confiscatory, as Claimant insists throughout

we its written and oral pleadings, Claimant has the full burden of
establishing that the measures it complains of do not benefit from the
presumption of legality to which they are entitled under international
law. For the reasons set forth below, Claimant has failed to meet this
burden.

189. Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to establish that post-
investment measures deprived it of the total or substantial value of its
purported investment in Yukos. Claimant alleged in its June 2, 2005
Notice of Dispute and October 28, 2005 Request for Arbitration that

its purported investment in Yukos was rendered valueless as a result
SCC Asbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 120

THR, 3888, 22/9 2

77. DEC. 2010 14:18 SVEA HOVRATT

121

of the alleged expropriation of Yukos’ principal asset, the YNG
ordinary shares. Claimant thus conceded that the measure allegedly
having effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation of the
Yukos shares occurred long before Claimant acquired an economic
interest in the Yukos shares, in March 2007, and long before the
IPPA could have become applicable to Claimant and the Yukos
shares.

190. Claimant has never put forward an alternative theory of how and
when its purported investment in Yukos was expropriated. Claimant
has instead focused exclusively on the alleged expropriation of
Yukos’ remaining assets through the Bankruptcy Auctions and
specifically on the Bankruptcy Auction held on August 15, 2007, the
date when “Respondent stripped away the last of Yukos’ assets,” i.e.,
approximately US$ 450 million of accounts receivable, without
alleging, much less establishing, any effect of the Bankruptcy
Auctions on its purported investment. As confirmed, for example, in
UJAMI v. Mexico (CLA-42), not every expropriation of an asset of 2
company constitutes an indirect expropriation of the shares of that
company.

—C

~f

191. Applying Claimant’s own standard for establishing a “‘measure
having effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation,” it is
Claimant’s position that the total or substantial destruction of the
value of the Yukos shares occurred shortly after Claimant’s second
purchase of Yukos shares in December 2004, long before Claimant
first acquired an economic interest in the shares in March 2007.

L

192. Even on Claimant’s own case, Claimant has failed to establish that
post-investment conduct caused a substantial or total deprivation of
the value of the Yukos shares. To the contrary, tax liens in the
aggregate of amount of US$ 11.2 billion had become enforceable
prior to Claimant’s first purchase of Yukos shares (i.e., prior to
November 19, 2004), and tax liens in the additional amount of US$
3.4 billion had become enforceable prior to the second purchase of
Yukos shares (i.e., prior to December 10, 2004). The order to sell the
YNG ordinary shares at auction and the resolution setting the

minimum starting price and other parameters of the auction were
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 121

22. DEC. 2010 1

193.

194.

 

 

Nk, 3888

4:19 SVEA HOVRATT

122

issued on November 18, 2004.107 Significantly, Yukos shares lost
approximately 85% of their market value between April 2004 and
November 19, 2004, more than 93% of their market value between
April 2004 and December 10, 2004 and were de-listed on the
Moscow Stock Exchange in 2003 and on the Moscow Interbank
Currency Exchange in 2004.

Claimant has failed to develop any theory that the post-
November/December 2004 measures effected a total or substantial
deprivation of the value of the Yukos shares. Indeed, Yukos’ own
management declared under penalty of perjury that Yukos was
insolvent (in both the balance sheet and liquidity senses of the term)
as of October 31, 2004. Claimant instead alleges that its claim “is
predicated under Article 5(2) on the reversal of the injury that Yukos
suffered as a result of the Russia Federation’s unlawful
expropriations.” Respondent, however, was under no intemational
obligation to undo the 2000-2003 tax liens or the order to sell the
YNG shares, since these acts were not in breach of the IPPA when
they occurred. Claimant’s claim therefore fails even on the false
assumption that Claimant made an investment in November and
December 2004,

Contrary to its allegations, Claimant did not, in any event, acquire
an economic interest in the Yukos shares until March 2007. It cannot
be disputed that by March 2007 Claimant was purchasing shares in a
bankrupt company in the process of undergoing final liquidation. By
March 2007, the 2000-2004 tax assessments, as well as the decisions
to liquidate Yukos’ assets, had become final and irreversible. As of
June 30, 2006, Yukos’ Financial Statements showed liabilities of
almost triple its assets. Post-March 2007 conduct therefore cannot
constitute “a measure having effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation,” because such conduct did not concem a viable
company. As confirmed by the ELSI case (RM-89), measures
concerning a company that is already required to file for bankruptcy
do not constitute an expropriation. They are acts of supererogation.
Tellingly, Claimant had to admit at the hearing that “when the
application for the bankruptcy on Yukos was made [...] Credit Suisse
wanted to have its money back” and no longer accepted the Yukos

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 122

$. 23/5 mene

22. DEC. 2040 14:19 SVEA HOVRATT

=

195.

196.

197.

198.

NR. 5688S. 24/51

123

shares as security for a US$ 2 million loan. The petition for Yukos’
bankruptcy was filed with and accepted by the Moscow Arbitrazh
Court in March 2006, more than one year prior to the termination of
the Participation Agreements.

Between April 2004 and March 2007, Yukos shares lost more than
95% of their value, and in February 2005 were also de-listed from the
Al quotation list of the Russian Trading System. The seven million
Yukos shares at issue thus could not have been sold in any reasonable
timeframe to an independent third party in a market transaction or
otherwise. Indeed, seven million shares represented the entire
aggregate trading volume of Yukos shares for the period between
March 27 and July 24, 2007, and the trading volume in Yukos shares
during this period was frequently zero. Claimant has not and cannot
justify on any economic basis the arbitrary US$ 3.5 million price
assigned in the intra-group transaction terminating the Participation
Agreements in March 2007.

It follows that under Claimant’s own test for establishing “a
measure having effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation,” the total or substantial destruction of the value of the
Yukos shares, occurred before Claimant made an investment and
before the IPPA could have become applicable to Claimant and the
Yukos shares,

Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to establish that the
post-investment measures deprived it of fundamental ownership
rights in its purported investment. Respondent has established that
the appointment of a receiver to liquidate a business or other property
constitutes an expropriation if it does not constitute a legitimate
exercise of the State’s regulatory power, as it deprives shareholders
of the exercise of their fundamental ownership rights, the right to
participate in the management of the company and to reccive
dividends. The case law and scholarly writings supporting this
proposition stand unrebutted.

On August 4, 2006, the Moscow Arbitrazh Court initiated
receivership proceedings requiring the receiver to sell Yukos’ assets

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 123

92. DEC. 2010 14:26

199,

» L9/9

 

SVEA HOVRATT

124

in discharge of its creditors’ claims, appointed Mr. Rebgun as
receiver and terminated Yukos’ management. Thus, Yukos’
shareholders were deprived of the exercise of their fundamental
ownership rights at the latest in September 2006, when the August 4,
2006 decisions became final and irreversible, and the IPPA was
thereafter inapplicable to Claimant and the Yukos shares.

Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to establish that the
post-investment measures deprived it of any legitimate expectation.
The reasonably expected economic benefit of property is one of the
touchstones for determining whether an expropriation occurred.
Claimant does not dispute the authorities relied upon by Respondent
that stand for this proposition. Nor does Claimant justify the purchase
of the Yukos shares in 2004 and 2007 on any ground other than its
expectation that Respondent could and should have reversed the
“unlawful expropriation.” Respondent has demonstrated that even if
the IPPA were applicable to Claimant as of November/December
2004, which it was not, Respondent had no cbligation to undo the
2000-2003 tax liens in the amount US$ 14.6 billion or the order to
sell the YNG shares at auction after November/December 2004. As
regards post-March 2007 conduct, Respondent was not obliged. to
reverse, and could not have reversed the “unlawful expropriation”
since the decisions to liquidate the YNG ordinary shares and Yukos’
remaining assets had already become final and irreversible in 2005
and 2006, respectively.

Question 3.5

200.

Could the Parties explain in more detail:
(a) the various options and steps in Russian law and practice
regarding the registration of shareholders, and on that basis;
(b) whether Claimant could have been registered as the owner of the
Yukos shares;
(c) what were the legal effects of the procedure chosen for
registration in the present case; and
(d) whether similar procedures of registration were used for other
shareholders of Yukos and for shareholders of other companies in
Russia.

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 124

——

72. DEC. 2010 14:20 SVEA HOVRATT

~

125

Claimant (132 CPHB-I)

201. Claimant refers the Tribunal to its answer to this question as
expressed in closing arguments, and submits the following additional
observations:

(a): Shares of Russian joint stock companies are recorded in the register of
shareholders maintained either by the company itself or by an
independent “Registrar.” The register of shareholders may also
contain accounts of nominal holders of shares, such as depositories or
brokers holding shares on behalf of the owner (Law on the Securities
Market, Article 8 (2), RM-848) However, due to the particularities of
Russian securities markets legislation, foreign entities could not be
formally registered as nominal holders.

(b): Claimant could have been the registered “shareholder” if Claimant had
held the shares through a Russian custodian, instead of through its
globai Custodian, CSFB .

(c): The legal effects of the procedure Claimant chose are described in
detail in $29 to 35 of CPHB-I. In summary: (i) CSFB was the
registered owner of the shares under Russian securities market
legislation, but (ii) Claimant was the true owner of the shares under
Russian civil law.

(a): Although some foreign investment banks have subsidiaries in Russia
that can act as licensed depositaries/custodians, it was in 2004 (and
still is today) common practice for investors to use their global
custodians to hold Russian securities. In fact, the claimant in Veteran
Petroleum Ltd. (Cyprus) v. The Russian Federation, one of the
pending Energy Charter Treaty cases arising out of the Respondent’s
expropriation of Yukos, held its shares in the same manner as
RosInvestCo.

Respondent (939 - 41 RPHB-I)
202. Claimant’s unfounded assertion at the hearing notwithstanding,
nothing in Russian law or practice would have prohibited Claimant

from becoming the legal owner of the Yukos shares. Respondent
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 125

72. DEC. 2010 1

203.

204.

7 NR 9060 9 LIS DT
401 SVEA HOVRATT meses

126

cited at the hearing a leading commentary on Russian company law,
and two cases involving foreign parties who had become the legal
owners of Russian shares. These materials stand unrebutted.

Jn order for Claimant to have become the legal owner of the Yukos
shares, Claimant need only have entered into a depositary account
agreement with an authorized Yukos share depositary. Russian
residents and foreigners alike may become parties to a depositary
account agreement,

Had Claimant become the legal owner of the Yukos shares,
Claimant would have been entitled to vote the Yukos shares and to
receive dividends and, more generally, would have enjoyed all of the
rights of a shareholder under Russian law.

Question 3.6

205,

~~ = 206.

207.

Given that Article 5(2) of the IPPA foresees expressly the case of a
shareholding in a company of which assets are expropriated, the
Tribunal would be grateful to hear from the Parties how the terms of
Article 5(1) should be understood to apply to a case in which the
claimant’s interest is one which derives from Article 5(2).

Claimant ($9133, 118 — 121 CPHB-1)

Claimant refers to its answer expressed in closing arguments stating
that it did not need to rely on Article 5(2). While Claimant does rely
on that Article, as a matter of treaty interpretation, Claimant submits
that Article 5 (2) makes it very clear that in the situations described in
(2), the provisions of Article 5 (1) apply mutatis mutandis. (pp. 721-
722 Tr.)

The expropriation and re-nationalisation of Yukos’ assets constitute
expropriation of RosInvestCo’s “Investment” under Article 5(1) of
the IPPA, because the expropriation of the assets of a company has
the same effect as an expropriation of the shares in such company. To
leave no doubt that the expropriation of the assets of a company also
constitutes expropriation of an investment in shares in such company,

SCC Asbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 126

22. DEC. 2010 14:21

Yy

Yy

— THR 3B9E-TS. 28/9

5000

SVEA HOVRATT

127

Article 5(2) of the IPPA expressly confirms that the standard of
protection in Article 5(1) applies:

“Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a
company or enterprise which is incorporated or constituted
under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and
in which investors of the other Contracting Party have a
shareholding, the provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article
shall apply.”

208. Thus, the plain language of Article 5(2) confirms that an
expropriation of the assets of a company incorporated in the
Contracting State, constitutes expropriation of the shares in that
company of an investor from the other state. A claimant demonstrates
an, entitlement to compensation under Articles 5(1) and 5(2) when it
establishes the expropriation of the assets of a company in which it
holds shares. The Russian Federation’s seizures and auctions of
Yukos’ as-ts, without the payment of prompt, adequate 2nd effective
compensation, constituted an unlawful expropriation of those assets
and, under Article 5(1) and 5(2), an expropriation of RosInvestCo’s
investment.

209. The Russian Federation’s effort to avoid the application of Article
5(2) rests on its argument that RosInvestCo did not become a
protected investor until 27 March 2007. RosInvestCo has already
demonstrated that this is not the case.

Respondent (948 — 49 RPHB-D

210, As set forth at [J 239-241 of R-I and §§ 107 and 108 of R-II and
discussed in Respondent’s oral pleadings, Article 5(2) of the IPPA
permits a shareholder, including a minority shareholder, to assert
indirect claims based on an alleged de jure or de facto expropriation
of the assets of a locally incorporated company that deprives the
shareholder of use and benefit of its shares.

211. Claimant therefore has the burden of establishing that (i)
Respondent expropriated all or some of Yukos’ assets and thereby

adopted a “measure having effect equivalent to nationalisation or
SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russi : 127

NR, 3000 Oe LA DL

29. DEC. 2010 14:22 SVEA HOVRATT

128

expropriation” of the Yukos shares and (ii) the conduct that caused
the indirect expropriation of the Yukos shares occurred after
Claimant made an investment.

Question 3.7

212.

ww
213.
214,
N
a

Regarding the Participation Agreements, what is the relevance of
New York law as the governing law, of Russian law and of
international law, particularly the IPPA, for the issues to be decided
by the Tribunal in the present case?

Claimant (§9134 CPHB-I)

Claimant stands by its statement at the hearings, that only the
language of the IPPA — as interpreted on the basis of the rules and
principles of customary international law codified in the Vienna
Convention — is relevant to the question whether Claimant is an
“Gnvestor” with an “investment.” New York Jaw is relevant only to
the construction of the Participation Agreements.

During the hearings, Claimant submitted that Russian law, Russian.
Securities Legislation and the Participation Agreements, are
irrelevant. This case should not, cannot and does not tum on the
interpretation application of Russian law or the law of the State of
New York. Claimant has, at all times qualified as an investor under
the JPPA, While Respondent now argues that Claimant was not a
beneficial owner, this is irrelevant. The Saluka case (CLA-34) and a
recent jurisdiction decision taken by a tribunal reviewing another
case involving Yukos have established that beneficial ownership is
irrelevant. In the other Yukos case, Professor Gaillard summarised
the Tribunal’s findings: "The Tribunal also found that the treaty, by
its terms, applies to an investment owned nominally by a qualified
investor. It held that the Russian Federation's submission that simple
legal ownership of shares does not qualify as an investment under
article 1(6)(b) of the ECT finds no support in the text of the treaty.”
(CLA-83) The Tribunal also found that the drafters of the ECT did
not intend to limit ownership to beneficial ownership.

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia. 128

22. DEC. 2010

215.

216.

\4

217.
“yy

218.
VY

219.
Ms

44:22 SVEA HOVRATT

 

129

Respondent ({933 — 37 RPHB-I)

Article 5 of the IPPA protects “investments of investors of either
Contracting Party.” As stated in EnCana v. Ecuador, “for there to
have been an expropriation of an investment [...] the rights affected
must exist under the law which creates them.” (pp. 33-34, RM-116)

Neither general international law nor the IPPA creates property
tights. The rights associated with the Yukos shares that are protected
under the IPPA are instead created by the laws of Russia, Yukos’
place of incorporation. Russian law therefore determines the
existence and scope of the rights associated with the Yukos shares.

Russian private international law permits the parties to a contract to
select the law that will govern their contractual rights and duties.
Since New York law is the law selected by Elliott International and
Claimant to govern the Participation Agreements, New York law
determines Claimant’s related rights and duties.

The rights associated with the Yukos shares created under Russian
and New York law are protected under the IPPA only if they are an
“asset” of a UK investor for purposes of Article 1(a), i.e., “something
of value” to a UK investor, At a minimum, Claimant must show that
under the legal position created by Russian and New York law it
“would suffer financial loss if the property were damaged and
destroyed.” (Azurix v. Argentina, RLA-181)

The record demonstrates that Claimant was never the legal owner
of the Yukos shares at issue, transferred the economic interest in the
Yukos shares to Elliott International even before it purchased the
shares, and could not have suffered any damage from an
expropriation of the Yukos shares.

Question 3.8

220.

Taking into account the language, context and governing law of the
Participation Agreements, was it permissible for Claimant to sell the
Yukos shares without the consent of Elliott, and irrespective thereof,

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 129

22. DEC. 2010 1

a

221.

222.

 

4:23 SYEA HOVRATT

130

if the Claimant would indeed have sold them, what would have been
the legal consequences for the issues relevant in the present case?

Claimaint (135 CPHB-1F

Claimant refers the Tribunal to its answer to this question as
expressed in closing arguments. The Respondent’s argument relies,
for support, on three cases that are inapplicable to the context before
this Tribunal. The Respondent’s primary support for the proposition
that rights cannot be assigned if they are “inextricably bound up with
a party’s duties” involves a contract for personal services from 1920;
personal services are far afield from the context presented here. The
Respondent’s remaining cases concern the doctrine of adequate
assurance — a doctrine limited to contexts involving the sale of goods
and a limited “type of long-term commercial contract between
corporate entities [like a 25 year contract for the sale of electricity],
which is complex and not reasonably susceptible of all security
features being anticipated, bargained for and incorporated in the
original contract.” As the Claimant demonstrated during closing
argument, the Participation Agreements left RosInvestCo’s ability to
sell the shares unimpeded, and RosInvestCo might indeed have had
good reason to sell the shares if their price had suddenly risen. New
York law does not read implied terms into otherwise complete
agreements (the cases Reiss v. Financial Performance Corp. (CLA-
98), Vermont Teddy Bear Co. v. 538 Madison Realty Co. (CLA-99)),
and no such term would in any event have been needed in these
agreements. If the Claimant had sold the shares, the legal
consequence under the Participation Agreements would have been
that RosInvestCo would have paid the proceeds of the sale, minus
expenses, to Elliott International.

Respondent (442 - 46 RPHB-I)

As an initial matter, a distinction must be drawn between
Claimant’s right and Claimant’s ability to sell the Yukos shares, The
short answer to the first question is that Claimant did not — and knew
that it did not — have the right to sell the Yukos shares while the
Participation Agreements remained in place. Why else would
Claimant have purportedly paid US$ 3.5 million in March 2007 to

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvestv Russia. 130

22. DEC. 2040 14:23 SVEA HOYRATT

223.

Y
Y

224,
L228.

431

terminate the Participation Agreements if Claimant already had the
right to sell the shares?

It is in any event clear as a legal matter that the Participation
Agreements conveyed a property interest in rem in the Yukos shares
to Elliott International. Respondent’s demonstration that New York
law would treat the Participation Agreements as having transferred a
property interest in the Yukos shares to Elliott International stands
unrebutted. Under the long line of cases cited by Respondent, (at 25
R-Il) the Participation Agreements effected a “true” sale of the Yukos
shares such that, in the event of Claimant’s insolvency, Elliott
International — and not Claimant’s bankruptcy estate - would have
been entitled to receive Yukos’ dividends and to exercise the rights of
a shareholder, It follows as a matter of hombook property law that
Claimant, having sold the ownership of the Yukos shares to Elliott
International, did not have the right to turn around and sell the same
shares to someone else.

At the hearing, Claimant for the first time suggested that a New
York court would not read into the Participation Agreements a
prohibition on Claimant’s right to sell the Yukos shares. This
argument is meritless. Inasmuch as the Participation Agreements
already conveyed the entirety of the economic interest in the Yukos
shares to Elliott International, there was no need for the Participation
Agreements to provide that Claimant could not sell the same shares a
second time. Simply to state Claimant’s argument is to refute it.

Respondent clarified at the hearing that a bona fide purchaser (for
value) from Claimant could have acquired good title to the Yukos
shares, even though Claimant was not the legal or economic owner of
the shares. This possible outcome does not, however, say anything
about Claimant’s rights as an owner of the shares, but instead
answers to New York law’s solicitude for the rights of an innocent
purchaser and desire to promote a liquid trading market in securities,
untrammeled by defects in an upstream seller’s title. This is clear
from the fact that, under New York law, even a good faith purchaser
for value from a thief can acquire title. (Indeed, if a thief is defined to
include someone who sells someone else’s property, then Claimant

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 131

NR. 3888 0S. 32/91

22. DEC. 2010 14:24 SVEA HOVRATT

226.

 

132

would have been acting as a thief had Claimant sold the Yukos shares
to a bona fide purchaser for value.)

Respondent submits that a sale of property in violation of the rights
of the lawful owner cannot transform an unauthorized seller into a
protected investor. If Claimant was not otherwise a protected investor
~ and Claimant was not — then Claimant did not become a protected
investor merely because Claimant’s bona fide purchaser would have
been able to acquire good title to the Yukos shares had Claimant
compounded its wrongdoing, and failed to disclose that it was not the
owner of those shares. It cannot be the case either that the violation of
a party’s property rights can give rise to treaty rights or that the
interests of a thief are to be preferred over those of an “honest” seller
who informs his purchaser that he is not the owner of the property
being sold, and as result cannot deliver good title.

Question 3.9

227.

228.

The Parties are invited to comment in greater detail on the link that
has been alleged to exist between the criminal prosecutions of Mr.
Khodorkovsky and the reassessments of the taxes claimed to be due
Jrom Yukos.

Claimaint ({135 CPHB-D
Russian authorities arrested Mr. Khodorkovsky on 25 October 2003

_on charges primarily stemming from the 1994 privatization of Apatit

(a company unrelated to Yukos), even though the General
Prosecutor’s Office of the Russian Federation had concluded that
there were “no grounds for it to take action.” (CM-423) Six weeks
later, in December 2003, tax authorities commenced the re-audit of
Yukos that reversed the findings of their earlier audit and assessed
billions of dollars of tax claims. The Audit Report of the December
2003 re-audit expressly referred to the criminal prosecution of Yukos
executives as a basis for rebutting the presumption of good faith to
which Russian taxpayers are entitled.(CM-60 at 14)

SCC asbitration V (79/2005) Rosinvest v Russie 132

Nie 7000 we I et

22. DEC. 2010 14:24 SVEA HOVRATT

~C

me

229,

230.

231,

133

The 6 April 2004 letter from the Deputy Minister of Taxes and
Levies of the Russian Federation to Yukos again expressly connected
the tax assessments against Yukos to Mr. Khodorkovsky, this time
with reference to his political writings. Taken together with the
numerous departures from established Russian law that enabled the
expropriation and renationalisation of Yukos’ assets, these facts
suggest that the strategic objective of returning petroleum assets to
the control of the Russian State was closely linked to an effort to
suppress a political opponent.

Respondent (F{113 — 125 RPHB-1)

The hearing showed what Yukos’ management could have done to
save the company — but failed to do. As explained by Mr. Konnov,
Yukos ~ following receipt of the December 2003 audit report for tax
year 2000, which quantified the full extent of its tax scheme ~ could
have paid the assessment for 2000 and filed amended returns for the
other years at issue, thereby avoiding all fines (except the single
willful violation fine for 2000) as well as all VAT assessments
(except for the 2000 VAT assessment). As shown with timelines at
the hearing, Yukos was given ample time to make this choice
(RSlide, 22/01/10, McGurn, pp. 107, 109-110) Prof. Maggs did not
disagree, although he suggested that if Yukos had adopted such a
strategy, “it would have essentially lost its right to contest the
legality” of the authorities’ view of Yukos’ scheme. (p. 468 Tr.) This
is simply wrong, as Mr. Konnov made clear on the following day. In
Russia, as in most countries, taxpayers wishing to challenge the
authorities’ position are free to do so even if they have (prudentially)
elected to pay the contested taxes in the meantime. Tellingly,
Claimant chose not to cross-examine Mr. Konnov on this point.

Yukos itself never sought to blame its failure to pay its taxes (or to
file amended returns) on fears that this would jeopardize its right to
challenge the authorities’ position in court. Instead, it falsely tried to
blame its failure to pay its 2000 tax bill on the freeze that the
authorities obtained on April 15, 2004. Prof. Maggs conceded at the
hearing that Yukos could in fact have easily paid that bill, whose
amount had been known to Yukos for 109 days — not two days — as
shown on the table at page 45 of Annex A (whose accuracy Prof.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest ¥ Russia 133

22. DEC. 2010

232.
233.
234,

14:25 SVEA HOVRATT

134

Maggs likewise confirmed). As was also conceded by Prof. Maggs,
prior to the April Injunction, Yukos remained totally free to dispose
of all of its Russian and foreign assets as it pleased, and even after
that date, Yukos retained full control of its cash as well as its very
sizable foreign assets (because the freeze covered only assets in
Russia). Clearly, had Yukos ever wished to pay its 2000 tax bill, it
would not have waited until April 15, 2004 to convert fixed assets
into cash, but would instead have long since generated and set aside
the necessary cash.

The record likewise makes clear that Yukos, had it wanted to, could
also have paid its liabilities for later years, without borrowing, by
following the course of action outlined by Mr. Konnov and by
drawing on its vast resources. Instead, it pursued a disastrous strategy
of die-hard resistance, inside Russia and abroad, trying to frustrate
the authorities’ collection efforts at every turn, including by unlawful
means. Yukos’ actions were almost certainly due in part to the
interrelation between the Yukos tax assessments and the criminal
prosecution of Mr. Khodorkovsky, as to which the Tribunal invited
the parties’ comments.

Mr. Khodorkovsky was arrested on October 25, 2003 on charges
that included — but were not limited to - ranning Yukos’ tax evasion
scheme while serving as that company’s CEO. Under Russian law, a
corporation such as Yukos could not be-held criminally liable. Yukos
was, however, obviously liable for any evaded taxes, independently
of any criminal proceedings against individual managers. It was thus
predictable that the authorities would re-audit Yukos, determine the
amount of taxes evaded, and make the assessments contemplated
under the tax laws — all the more so as there were other circumstances
suggesting that Yukos had been evading taxes.

Given this background, prudent managers would have husbanded
the company’s liquid assets, to facilitate the payment of taxes likely
to be assessed in the near future. Instead, Yukos’ managers did the
exact opposite, declaring on November 28, 2003 — only days before
the start of the authorities’ re-audit — the largest dividend in the
company’s history (US$ 2 billion), which was distributed in cash to

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 134

 

72. DEC. 2010 14:25 SVEA HOVRATT NR. 3888

235.
id
,
5
236.
we
237.

Yukos’ shareholders (with well over half of this amount going to Mr.
Khodorkovsky and his allies, through their holding companies and
trusts),

On December 29, 2003, the authorities issued their audit report,
which quantified Yukos’ liability for 2000 at RUR 99 billion
(approximately US$ 3.5 billion — barely US$ 1.5 billion more than
the just-declared dividend). In that report, the authorities mentioned
Mr. Khodorkovsky’s role in overseeing Yukos’ “tax optimization”
program, which had been charged in the criminal proceedings, as one
reason among several justifying the levying of fine for “willfulness”
—i.e., for the intentional avoidance of taxes. In any event, with or
without reference to the role played by Mr. Khodorkovsky, the
intentional nature of Yukos’ scheme was undeniable. Yukos did not
create, and for years operate, dozens of companies in Low-Tax
Regions — for the avowed purpose of “tax optimization” —
inadvertently or negligently.

From the start, both in the Russian court proceedings and in the
international media, Mr. Khodorkovsky, Yukos and their spokesmen
adamantly denied any wrongdoing, insisting, with respect to Yukos’
taxes, that the company’s “tax optimization” schemes had been
“perfectly legal” at the time, and that he and Yukos were the victims
of politically-inspired persecution through retroactive and
discriminatory tax assessments — notwithstanding the evidence
showing that all of Yukos’ competitors recognised the illegality of
schemes such as Yukos’ (and notwithstanding the fact that in no
country in the world is a claim of political persecution a valid defence
to the payment of taxes otherwise due).

As recognised by Prof. Maggs at the hearing, the management of
Yukos, upon their receipt of the December 2003 audit report, “had to
make a decision.” They could have implemented the strategy
suggested by Mr. Konnov and thereby reduced the company’s tax
exposure to levels that would have enabled the company to survive
(without, as noted above, forfeiting the right to challenge the tax
authorities’ position in the courts). Fatefully, however, Yukos’ key

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia, 135

 

22. DEC. 2010 14:26 SVEA HOVRATT

Le

238.

240,

136

managers — all of whom owed their careers to Mr. Khodorkovsky —
chose to give priority to their loyalty to him over the best interests of
the company, adopting a strategy of die-hard resistance on all fronts,
including in the Russian and international press, in which Mr.
Khodorkovsky and Yukos cast themselves as victims of politically-
motivated persecution.

This is the background against which the Ministry of Taxes and
Levies, on April 6, 2004, sent the letter to Yukos that was discussed
by Claimant at the hearing — in what can now be shown to be highly
misleading terms ~ and which gave rise to Sir Franklin Berman’s
initial question. In that letter, the Ministry had asked:

“Tn connection with the letter by Mikail Borisovich
Khodorkovsky (who in the year 2000 was Chairman of the
Management Board of OAO NK YUKOS) published in
newspaper Vedomosti at the end of this March, the Ministry of
Taxes and Levies requests you to confirm the existence or
absence of non-resolved differences between the tax authorities
and OAO NK Yukos in the context of the tax control measures
for year 2000.”

239. At the hearing, Claimant argued that this letter constituted

retaliation against Yukos for the “problem” created by Mr.
Khodorkovsky’s “speaking up” against the Russian Government by
publishing “a letter addressing the political situation in Russia.”

“{Mr. Townsend: ...] we submit that the fair inference to be
drawn is that there was a connection in the mind of the tax
authorities between Mr. Khodorkovsky and the political
positions taken by Mr. Khodorkovsky, and Mr Khodorkovsky at
this point was in gaol, and the tax assessments against Yukos.”
(p. 717 Tr)

While urging the Tribunal to draw this allegedly “fair inference,”
Claimant also said that it did not consider it “necessary” to put Mr.
Khodorkovsky’s actual letter in the record, for reasons that are now
obvious. At the hearing, Counsel for Respondent, never having seen

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 136

>
Z

2, DEC. 2010 14:26 SVEA HOVRATT

24i.

NR. 3888S. 38/51

137

Mr. Khodorkovsky’s letter, was not in a position to respond. After
the hearing, however, counsel for Respondent were able to download
a copy of the letter (in English) from various websites. That text
totally negates the “fair inference” alleged by Claimant. It instead
shows that the true reason for the Ministry’s inquiry was the exact
opposite of politically-motivated retaliation. The reason is that, in
reality, Mr. Khodorkovsky’s letter contained an astounding mea
culpa, lambasting fellow “liberals” and himself for having been
dishonest, cynical, lawless (including through acts of bribery),
frivolous, selfish, and insensitive to the interests of the country and
its people — and urging that this history of wrongdoing be
acknowledged “with a sense of shame.” Far from criticizing President
Putin, Mr. Khodorkovsky’s letter uncharacteristically urged support
for him as “an institution that guarantees the country’s territorial
integrity and stability.” The letter concluded, “To change the
country, we must change ourselves.”

The tax authorities evidently viewed these unprecedented
admissions by Mr. Khodorkovsky as a possible offer of an olive
branch and, on the equally reasonable assumption that Yukos’
management would on this occasion too follow Mr. Khodorkovsky’s
leadership, wrote to Yukos asking, in effect, whether Mr.
Khodorkovsky’s letter was a signal that Yukos was interested in
settling the tax claims, which it did by requesting the company “to
confirm the existence or absence of non-resolved differences”
regarding taxes for the year 2000 (which at that point was still the
only tax year that had been reassessed). Oddly in light of the
seemingly clear import of Mr. Khodorkovsky’s letter, Yukos instead
rejected this overture. Instead, in its response of April 8, 2004, which
is in the record (RM-1548), Yukos once again reiterated the position
that the tax assessment was contrary to law, adding a legally
irrelevant ~ but politically unambiguous — reference to the support
that Yukos claimed to enjoy from parties “in Russia and abroad,” an
unsubtle signal that Yukos intended to continue to mobilize foreign
allies to put pressure on the Russian Government. Confronted with
this indication that, whatever Mr. Khodorkovsky’s letter might have
meant, Yukos was not interested in compromising its tax liability but
intended instead to continue resisting payment, the authorities one

SCC Arbitration V (079/203) Rosinvest v Russia 137

22. DEC. 2010 14:27 SVEA HOVRATT

242.

NR 3083S. 39/51

138

week later obtained the freeze order of April 15, 2004, citing inter
alia the continuing “unresolved controversies” with Yukos.

Thereafter, Yukos’ management intensified its resistance, failing to
make court-ordered payments of taxes, concealing corporate books to
frustrate attachments, attempting to mislead the authorities into
accepting already-encumbered assets as security, “bleeding” nearly
US$ 2 billion out of YNG when it became clear that it would be
auctioned, trying to sabotage that auction by commencing bankruptcy
proceedings in the United States (on the strength of an 11th hour
deposit of all of US$ 1.5 million in a US bank account), and diverting
additional billions of dollars worth in assets into a Dutch stichting
whose founding instrument recited that its purpose was to defeat
Russian tax claims. While the result of all of this is that Mr.
Khodorkovsky and his allies Gncluding some of Yukos’ former
managers) have so far been able to retain control of those foreign
assets, their strategy was in all other respects unsuccessful, and
disasterous for Yukos’ other shareholdess.

Question 3.10

VY
VV
243.
244,
we

Without prejudice to any future decision of the Tribunal, in case the
Tribunal makes an award of compensation, what are the final
positions of the Parties regarding interest on such compensation?

Claimant (4137 CPHB-I)

Claimant refers the Tribunal to {| 270—71 in C-I for its position on
interest, As described in those paragraphs, Claimant believes that the
interest rate to be applied in this case of an unlawful expropriation,
should be no less than the “normal commercial rate” that Article 5(1)
of the IPPA contemplates for instances of lawful expropriation.
Furthermore, Claimant submits that a “normal commercial rate”
would: (i) be compounded at some appropriate interval; and (ii) take
into account the element of risk associated with the investment and
the unlawful character of the Respondent’s actions. Claimant
suggests that a standard commercial rate, such as LIBOR + 4 percent,
compounded semi-annually, should be added to any award from the
date of valuation to the date of the award.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia . 138

22. DEC. 2010 14:28 SVEA HOVRATT

~¢

245.

246.

247,

248,

VR. 3308 |S. 40/51

139

Respondent (41143 — 146 RPHB-I)

Article 5(1) of the IPPA provides that the compensation in case of
expropriation “shall be made within two months of the date of
expropriation, after which interest at a normal commercial rate shall
accrue until the date of payment.” Respondent submits that if the
Tribunal makes an award of compensation, the normal commercial
rates prevailing in Europe, the one-year LIBOR or EURIBOR rate,
are appropriate interest rates that provide “adequate and effective
compensation.”

Respondent submits that it is not appropriate that the interest
pursuant to Article 5(1) of the IPPA be awarded as compound
interest. As explained by the tribunal in Vivendi II, “[t/he object of an
award of interest is to compensate the damage resulting from the fact
that, during the period of non-payment by the debtor, the creditor is
deprived of the use and disposition of that sum he was supposed to
receive,” (RLA-198)

Claimant sold all of the economic interest in the Yukos shares to
Elliott International even before it purchased the related shares.
Under the terms of the Participation Agreements, Claimant was not
entitled to retain any compensation for damage to the Yukos shares,
or for their expropriation, but was required to pass that compensation
on to Elliott International, While the Participation Agreements were
in force, Claimant thus could not use or invest the amount of
compensation due, nor could it have earned any income from the
Yukos shares.

In March 2007, Claimant acquired in an intra-group transaction, an
economic interest in a block of seven million shares in a bankrupt
company undergoing final liquidation - a block of shares which it
could not have sold at any price to a third party or in a market
transaction within a reasonable period of time. An award of
compound interest would therefore not reflect economic reality or
make Claimant whole, but cause “a benefit, and indeed a profit, to
accrue to the successful party” which is “wholly out of proportion to

SCC Arbitration V (0792003) Rosinvest v Russia 139

NR. 3888S. 41/50

27. DEC. 2010 14:28 SYEA HOVRATT

140

the possible loss that the successful party might have incurred by not
having the amounts due at its disposal.”

(B) Applicable Law

249. The Parties seem to agree, and the Tribunal finds that the law
applicable to the claim under the IPPA is the IPPA itself and
international law. Russian law comes into play only in so far as it is

w relevant in determining whether the Respondent acted in breach of
an international obligation. )

~“ (C) Burden of Proof

250. Taking into account the above contentions of the Parties, the
Tribunal notes that the Parties seem to agree on the principle that
the burden of proof generally lies with the Claimznt to establish the
facts on which the claim is based. The Tribunal confirms that view
and only adds that, however, the burden of proof can shift to the
Respondent with regard to any exception on which the Respondent
relies in its defence.

Ne (D) Whether the contention of Respondent that Claimant has no
standing is relevant to Merits stage.

1. Claimant
251. Claimant argues that the Tribunal should reject Respondent’s
belated objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis.
Claimant became a protected investor under the IPPA at the time of
its share purchases on 16 November 2004 and 1 December 2004. The
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear Claimant’s claim of expropriation
because the measures giving rise to the expropriation — the auction of
YNG and the bankruptcy auctions ~ occurred after Claimant’s
acquisition of the Yukos shares. ({164 C-II)

SCC Arhitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 140

77. DEC. 2010 14:28

252.

253.

254.

256.

~~ NR. 3888S,

SVEA HOVRATT

141

During the Hearing Professor Hobér for Claimant submitted that
Respondent has made a belated objection to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal by challenging the ownership of the Yukos shares and
whether they constitute a protected investment under the IPPA. (Tr p.
72).

Professor Hobér also argued that it was not necessary for Rosinvest
to be registered as the owner of the shares in the share registry. Based
on Russian civil law legislation, Rosinvest was the true owner of the
shares. (Tr pp. 742-743) Notwithstanding that under Russian civil
law, Rosinvest was the true owner, the information on the computer
ptint-out document from ZAO ING Bank (CM-532), demonstrated to
all involved that Rosinvest was the true owner of the Yukos shares.
(Tr pp. 746-748)

2. Respondent

As also set out in section HIV regarding rationae temporis,
Respondent argues that Claimant has no basis whatsoever for
claiming rights under the IPPA based on conduct before Claimant
became the beneficial owner of Yukos shares. Furthermore,
Respondent submits that it is able to object to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal as the participation agreements between Claimant and
Elliott International (RM-16 and RM-19) (hereinafter referred to as
the “Particpation Agreements”) which show that Claimant has no
economic interest in the Yukos shares prior to March 2007 were not
known to Respondent. (fn. 81 R-ID

Respondent also contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction on the
basis of Article 3(2) of the IPPA in connection with Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT on the basis that Claimant was not an
“investor” when the arbitration commenced. Claimant commenced
arbitration on 28 October 2005. Claimant was not legal owner of the
Yukos shares and did not become the economic owner until March
2007. (472 R-ID

The Tribunal expressly reserved the jurisdictional question whether
the actions complained of may constitute expropriations under the

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 141

i/))\-———

8. 43/51

 

22. DEC. 2010 14:29 SVEA HOVRATT

142

IPPA. This question can be interpreted in two ways. On the one hand,
it can be posited that the Tribunal implicitly determined that Claimant
was an investor with a protected investment at the time of
commencement of the arbitration, thus providing a basis for making
the MFN clause in Article 3(2) applicable. On the other hand, the
Award on Jurisdiction could be read as leaving open the question
whether Claimant was an investor having made a protected
investment capable of being expropriated on the date of
commencement of the arbitration. Under this approach, if Claimant

na was not an investor having made a protected investment at the date of
commencement of this proceeding, the MFN clause in Article 3(2)
was not applicable. ({974 — 75 R-II)

257. Respondent respectfully requests the Tribunal to bear in mind that )
both the jurisdictional and merits phases of this proceeding are still
open. The Tribunal can either find that Claimant was neither the legal
or economic owner of the Yukos shares at the critical time.
Alternatively, to the extent that the Tribunal is of the view that the
Award on Jurisdiction implicitly left open the question whether
Claimant was an investor having made a protected investment
capable of being expropriated on the date of commencement of
arbitration, Respondent respectfully requests the Tribunal to issue an
award denying jurisdiction on this basis. ({§76 — 79 R-II)

258. During the Hearing, Dr Annacker for Respondent addressed the
question of whether the Tribunal is prevented by the Award on
Jurisdiction from finding that it lacks jurisdiction rather than going

“ on to address the question of whether there has been an expropriation.

Respondent submits that the Tribunal is not so prevented. The Award

on Jurisdiction did not make any factual findings regarding the

existence of a protected investment, relying only on Claimant’s
assertions. Claimant did not reveal that it had, as Respondent
submits, not acquired an economic interest in the Yukos shares until

March 2007 and that it had not purchased the shares on its own

behalf, rather that it sold the economic interest in the Yukos shares

even before the shares were purchased. Swedish law does not prevent
the Tribunal from reaching a different finding from the Award on

Jurisdiction, this is supported by the fact that Respondent’s own

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 142

22. DEC. 2010 14:29 SVEA HOVRATT

—_

w

259.

©)

260.

 

143

challenge of the Award on Jurisdiction in the Swedish Courts (RLA~
186) was dismissed on the basis that the Award on Jurisdiction was a
non-final decision in the arbitration which can be changed by the
Tribunal in the later merits stage. (pp. 789-795 Tr.)

3. Tribunal

Beyond its comments above regarding jurisdiction, the Tribunal
does not regard it necessary to reopen the matter with respect to
jurisdiction, notwithstanding that some points raised by Respondent
are relevant to the merits stage of the Tribunal’s examination. The
Tribunal further observes that, particularly as its Award on
Jurisdiction, by section 1.4, transferred the qualification as
expropriation to the merits phase of these proceedings, it is not
possible regarding all issues to make a rigid distinction between the
Tribunal’s assessment of the matter with respect to jurisdiction and
the merits of the claim.

Whether the consideration of taxation is excluded due to Article
11 of the Denmark-Russia BIT

1 Claimant

Claimant objects to the Respondent’s claim that the Denmark-
Russia BIT is excluded from application due to Article 11(3). Firstly,
Claimant points out that the Award on Jurisdiction applied more
favourable provisions of the Denmark-Russia BIT and that the
Tribunal is not obliged to now apply less favourable provisions of the
Denmark-Russia BIT. Secondly, even if Article 11(3) applied to the
present dispute, Claimant is not claiming that the tax assessment by
Respondent caused substantial deprivation of value to the investment
(the shares in Yukos), rather, Claimant claims that the unlawful
expropriation occurred when Respondent auctioned Yukos’ assets.
The tax assessments are only relevant to because the Russian
Federation has sought to excuse its taking of Yukos’ assets as
legitimate exercises of its tax power, when in fact those assessments
were nothing more than a pretext for the Respondent’s unlawful
expropriation. (9173 - 174 C-Il)

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 143

y§. 45/)

AR.

 

22. DEC. 2010 14:30 SVEA HOVRATT

144

261. Furthermore, the fact that the Tribunal in the Award on Jurisdiction
applied more favourable provisions of the Denmark-Russia BIT does
not mean that the Tribunal must also apply less favourable provisions
of the Denmark-Russia BIT. (175 C-ID

262. Jn any case, Claimant is not claiming that the retroactive tax
assessments caused a substantial deprivation of the value of its
investment, rather, it claims that Respondent expropriated Yukos

am assets via the auctions. The retroactive tax assessments are relevant
because Respondent has sought to exercise its taking of Yukos’
assets as legitimate exercises of its tax power, when in fact those
VY assessments were nothing more than a pretext for the Respondent’s
unlawful expropriation. ($176 C-II) !

263. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because
“claims based on ‘taxation’ .. . are expressly exempted from the
scope of Article 8 [of the IPPA] by Article 11(3) of the Denmark-
Russia BIT. This argument has no merit. Article 3 of the IPPA
extends to investors more favorable provisions of other treaties. It
explicitly forbids a Contracting Party to subject an investor to less
favourable treatment. (47 CPHB-II)

264. The Respondent raised precisely this argument in Renta 4 S.V.S.A v.
The Russian Federation, (CLA-31) another arbitration arising out of
the Respondent’s expropriation of Yukos’ assets. That tribunal
refused to allow “ten words appearing in a miscellany of incidental

~ provisions . . . [to] provide a loophole to escape the central

undertakings of investor protection.” As the tribunal explained:

“Complaints about types and levels of taxation are one thing.

Complaints about abuse of the power to tax are something else.”

Here, as in Renta, “{aJbuse and pretext are at the heart of Claimant’s

allegations.” Accordingly, even if Article 3 of the IPPA could be

used to import Article 11(3) of the Denmark-Russia BIT,

RosInvestCo’s claims should still be heard on the merits. (948

CPHB-II)

2. Respondent

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest » Russia 144

22, DEC. 2010 14:38

—

265.

266.

267.

SVEA HOVRATT

145

Respondent claims that the Denmark-Russia BIT is excluded from
applying to the present case as Article 11(3) of that treaty provides:
“The provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to taxation.”.
Respondent asserts that therefore all claims premised on Russian
“taxation” should be excluded. Claimant has made no attempt to
show, much less to quantify, that it was totally or substantially
deprived of its investment as a result of acts complained of, if any,
other than taxation. On this basis as well, Claimant’s claim should be
denied. (234 R-I)

In the event that the Tribunal considers that this defence based on
exclusion of taxation matters due to Article 11(3) of the Denmark-
Russia BIT should be classified as another jurisdictional objection,
Respondent claims that the Tribunal has authority and discretion
under Article 22 of the 1999 Stockholm Arbitration Rules to permit
Respondent to amend its pleading. Claimant would not be prejudiced
by such a ruling since Claimant was not a beneficial owner of the
Yukos shares during virtually all of the period in which Russian
“taxation” is alleged to have violated the IPPA. (Footnote 432 R-I)

Article 8(1) of the IPPA confers jurisdiction over “any legal
disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party in relation to an investment of the former either
concerning the amount of payment of compensation under Articles 4
or 5 of this Agreement [...].” Article 3(2) of the IPPA in conjunction
with Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT confers jurisdiction over
“any dispute which may arise between an investor of one Contracting
Party and the other Contracting party in connection with an
investment on the territory of the other Contracting Party” other than
a dispute over claims based on “taxation,” which are expressly
exempted from the scope of Article 8 by Article 11(3) of the
Denmark-Russia BIT. The Tribunal also lacks jurisdiction because
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT does not apply to disputes over
claims premised on “taxation.” As confirmed by Claimant at the
hearing, all of Claimant’s claims are premised on the allegation that
the auctions of Yukos’ assets were expropriatory because the tax
assessments were not bona fide, not non-discriminatory and were
confiscatory (4, 8 RPHB-I).

SCC Arbieration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 145

 

TN FOOT TEE 2 | ee ee

7. DEC. 2010 14:31 SVEA HOVRATT

146

3. Tribunal
268. Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of
the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

C-II 4175
CPHB-II 9947-48
w RPHB-I 94,8
Exhibits:
CLA-31 Renta 4 SV.S.A. v. Russian Federation, Award on
“ Preliminary Objections, Arbitration Institute of the

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Arbitration V '
(024/2007), 20 Mar. 2009

269. Claimant correctly points out that the so-called “most favoured
nation” (MF) provisions in Article 3 of the IPPA are the basis for
the Tribunal, by its Award on Jurisdiction, applying the more
favourable provisions in Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT to the
question whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction for an examination of
a claim of expropriation. The Tribunal considers that if, as
Respondent submits, this reasoning also required the Tribunal to

SS import less favourable provisions in treaties, as well as the more
favourable ones, then many treaties would lose relevance. The IPPA \
does not exclude claims based on taxation and the Tribunal is
considering a claim under that treaty, therefore on a plain reading the -
Tribunal ought not to be bound to importing less favourable
provisions from another treaty.

270. The Tribunal notes that Respondent has not placed much emphasis
on this issue in its presentation of the case. This notwithstanding, the
Tribunal is reluctant to give a shallow treatment to the MFN issue,
Article 3 of the IPPA prevents Respondent from subjecting
investments or returns of investors to treatment less favourable than
that which it accords to investments or returns of investors of any
third state. In interpreting that clause and importing Article 8 of the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 146

TTT TTR, JOG OTA 9, OU 2 bmn

70. DEC. 2010 14:31 SVEA HOVRATT

147

Denmark-Russia BIT to the present dispute, the Tribunal appreciates
that conflicting arguments are possible in this context:

a. On one hand, it could be argued that it is necessary to read that
provision in the context of the treaty of which it forms a part.
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT allows a claimant of one
contracting party to the treaty to claim for expropriation by the
other contracting party. However Article 11 states that the
ww treaty does not apply to taxation, Thus Article 8 of the
Denmark-Russia BIT in its context does not apply to claims
based in taxation. The Tribunal is bound to import Article 8 in
its context, ie. subject to Article 11. Were a Danish investor to
make a claim under the Denmark-Russia BIT for an
) expropriation by way of taxation, the treatment afforded to the
Danish investor under the Denmark-Russia BIT would mean

that the investor was precluded from making a claim.

woe

ss

. On the other hand, the Tribunal notes its prior decision on
jurisdiction which allowed the importing of the broader consent
to arbitration clause in Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT.
That interpretation allowed Claimant to bring its present claim
for an alleged breach of the IPPA by expropriation.

‘\~ 271. The Tribunal notes that its conclusions regarding liability in the

} present case do not depend on these two possible interpretations,
because ~ as will be seen later in this award - its decision on liability
will not consider an expropriation by way of taxation, but rather an
expropriation by a cumulative combination of measures of
Respondent of which taxation is only one. Therefore, for the present
case, this discussion of the MFN issue turns out to be irrelevant to the
final conclusions reached by this Tribunal.

(F) Can the Tribunal review Russian Court decisions?

272. The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that it cannot act as an appeal
court on Russian court decisions.(f305 et seq R-1) However, the

following has to be taken into account:
SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 147

77. DEC. 2010 14:32

=

273.

274.

275.

276,

 

SVEA HOVRATT

148

It is widely accepted, and the Tribunal agrees that the standard of
international law includes the protection against what is generally
considered as the international delict of denial of justice. Therefore,
the obligation provided for in Article 5(1) IPPA for measures which
might be considered expropriatory implies that there is also no
discrimination or taking without compensation by denial of justice.

On one hand, with regard to liability under international law and
specifically the IPPA, the two standards are synonymous with regard
to acts of courts because no support is provided by the IPPA for a
distinction between different organs of the state and particularly
between acts of courts and acts of other State entities. But, on the
other hand, one will have to take into account the different functions
held by administrative organs and judicial organs of a state and the
resulting differences in their discretion when applying the law and in
the appeals available against their decisions. In view of these specific
aspects of the conduct of national courts, the specific criteria for
denial of justice have been developed in international law. As will be
seen later, the Tribunal feels it must consider the totality of
Respondent’s measures in their cumulative effect including the
conduct of the courts, but by no means restricted to them.

The Tribunal emphasises again that an international arbitration
tribunal, and also this Tribunal dealing with alleged breaches of the
IPPA, is not an appellate body and its function is not to correct errors
of domestic procedural or substantive law which may have been
committed by the national courts. The Tribunal stresses that the
threshold of the international delict of denial of justice is high and
goes far beyond the mere misapplication of domestic law.

To determine the scope of denial of justice, the Tribunal takes into
account the several authorities which have been referred to by the
Parties. In Mondev v. United States of America (Ex RA-19), para.
127, the NAFTA tribunal, relying on the ELSI case, held:

“The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but
whether the shock or surprise occasioned to an impartial
tribunal leads, on reflection, to justified concerns as to the

SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 148

mK FOG ORO DUS Fe

22. DEC. 2010 14:32 SVEA HOVRATT

7

VY

tC:

~€

149

Judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in mind on the one
hand that international tribunals are not courts of appeal, and
on the other hand that Chapter 11 of NAFTA (like other treaties
for the protection of investments) is intended to provide a real
measure of protection. In the end the question is whether, at an
international level and having regard to generally accepted
standards of the administration of justice, a tribunal can
conclude in the light of all the available facts that the impugned
decision was clearly improper and discreditable, with the result
that the investment has been subjected to unfair and inequitable
treatment.”

277. The Tribunal further takes into consideration the definition of
denial of justice in Article 9 of the Harvard Law School, Draft
Convention on the Law of the Responsibility of States for Damages
Done in Their Territory to the Person or Property of Foreigners:

“A state is responsible if an injury to an alien results from
a denial of justice, Denial of justice exists when there is a
denial, unwarranted delay or obstruction of access to
courts, gross deficiency in the administration of judicial or
remedial process, failure to provide those guarantees
which are generally considered indispensable in the proper
administration of justice, or a manifestly unjust judgment.
An error of a national court which does not produce
manifest injustice is not a denial of justice.”

278. The Tribunal, finds further support for the above position regarding
the interpretation of denial of justice in the Loewen case, Final Award
(Ex CA-10) pata. 132: “Manifest injustice in the sense of a lack of
due process leading to an outcome which offends a sense of judicial
propriety is enough ....” This qualification seems correct even if one
does not agree with all other conclusions of that award.

279. Taking into account the above authorities, the Tribunal concludes
that the Respondent can only be held liable for denial of justice by
the Russian courts if the Claimants are able to prove that the court
system fundamentally failed. Such failure is mainly to be adopted in

cases of major procedural errors such as lack of due process. The
‘SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 149

22. DEC. 2010 14:33 SVEA HOVRATT NK. 508009. D191

150

substantive outcome of a case can be relevant as an indication of lack
of due process and thus can be considered as an element to prove
denial of justice.

280. Therefore, in addition to this Tribunal not acting as an appeal
court on the decisions of the Russian courts, this high threshold
must be applied in order to conclude that, the conduct of the
Russian courts, by itself, would be a breach of the IPPA in the form’
of a denial of justice. However, this does not exclude that the

“ Tribunal, in the consideration of the totality of Respondent’s
measures in their cumulative effect which it finds to be appropriate
as seen later in this Award, includes the consideration of the

oy, decisions of the courts in that context.

(G) Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals and Courts

281, In the legal arguments made in their written and oral
submissions, the Parties relied on numerous decisions of other
courts and tribunals. Accordingly, it is appropriate for the Tribunal
to make certain general preliminary observations in this regard.

282. First of all, the Tribunal considers it should make it clear from the
vw outset that it regards its task in these proceedings as the very specific
one of applying the relevant provisions of the IPPA as far as that is
necessary in order to decide on the relief sought by the Parties. In
order to do so, the Tribunal must, as required by the “General rule of
interpretation” of Article 31 VCLT, interpret the IPPA’s provisions
in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
them in their context and in light of the IPPA’s object and purpose.
The “context” referred to in the first paragraph of Article 31 is given
a specific definition in the second paragraph of Article 31 and
comprises three elements: (i) the IPPA’s text, including its preamble;
(ii) any agreement between the Parties to the JPPA in connection with
its conclusion; and (iii) any instrument which was made by one of the
Parties in connection with the conclusion of the IPPA and accepted
by the other Party. The “ordinary meaning” as defined above applies

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 150

22. DEC. 2010 14:34 SVEA HOVRATT

~ ¢

283.

284,

285.

286.

ya39e9 8. 2/51

<

151

unless a special meaning is to be given to a tenn if it is established
that the parties so intended, as it is stated in the fourth paragraph of
Article 31.

As provided in the “Supplementary means of interpretation” of
Article 32 VCLT, the Tribunal may have recourse to supplementary
means of interpretation (i) in order to confirm the meaning resulting
from the application of Article 31 VCLT, or (ii) when the
interpretation according to Article 31 VCLT either leaves the
meaning ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is
manifestly absurd or unreasonable. Those supplementary means of
interpretation include the preparatory work of the treaty and the
circumstances of its conclusion. Thus, recourse to the supplementary
means of interpretation of Article 32 may only be had if the situations
mentioned at (i) and (ii) above occur,

While Article 38.1.4. of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice expressly mandates the Court to also take into account
“judicial decisions”, there is no such express rule either in the IPPA
or other applicable part of international law as to whether and if so to
what extent arbitral awards are of relevance to the Tribunal’s task, It
is in any event clear that the decisions of other tribunals are not
binding on this Tribunal. The many references by the Parties to
certain arbitral decisions in their pleadings do not contradict this
conclusion.

However, this does not preclude the Tribunal from considering
arbitral decisions and the arguments of the Parties based upon them,
to the extent that it may find that they shed any useful light on the
issues that arise for decision in this case.

Such an examination is conducted by the Tribunal later in this
Award, after the Tribunal has considered the Parties’ contentions and
arguments regarding the various issues argued, and in so far as
considered relevant for the interpretation of the applicable IPPA
provisions, while taking into account the specificity of the IPPA to be
applied in the present case.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 151

 

77. DEC. 2010 14:34

VY

VY

SVEA HOVRATT

152

ALI. Whether IPPA applies rationae personae to the Claimaut

1. Claimant

Overview

287.

288.

289.

290.

Claimant contends that it was a shareholder in Yukos when it
bought a total of 7 million shares on 17 November 2004 (or 16
November 2004 ~ see §21 of C-I) and 1 December 2004 and
therefore it qualifies as an investor with an investment under the
IPPA. Claimant is a private limited company incorporated under the
English Companies Act and has been incorporated in the United
Kingdom since its formation on 29 November 2001 (incorporation
details: CM-4; name change: CM-396) and therefore fulfils the
requirements of Article 1(d) (9110 — 111 C-).

Claimant dismisses the contention of Respondent that Claimant
only became a qualified investor under Article 5 of the IPPA when
the Participation Agreements between Claimant and Elliott
International L.P. were terminated in 2007 (RM-0016 and RM-0019)
(see 2 - 6 R-I). Claimant denies that the Participation Agreements
have any effect on its status as an investor under Article 1(d).

Firstly, Claimant points out regardless of the Participation
Agreements and that they may have transferred some economic
interest to Elliott International L.P., Claimant becarne a shareholder
on 16 November and 1 December 2004 and maintained legal
ownership of those shares until they were de-listed in late 2007.
Claimant relies upon brokerage account statements and a letter from
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC (CM-5, CM-430) to demonstrate
it held the shares in question continuously from November 2004.
(113 — 116 C-IN

Secondly, Claimant asserts that despite the Participation
Agreements whereby Claimant (then called Highberry) sold and

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 152

77, DEC. 2010 14:39

291.

292.

293,

NR. JUG s, ee

nm I

SVEA HOVRATT

153

transferred to Elliott International L.P. “a 100% interest in and to
Highberry’s interest” in total of seven million Yukos shares that
Claimant acquired on 16 November and 1 December 2004
respectively. (CM-398 and CM-399) and had contractual obligations,
Claimant retained legal ownership of the shares with all the attendant
rights, including the right to vote the shares and receive dividends
and other distributions. This temporary transfer of an economic
interest, Claimant argues, had no effect on Claimant’s status as the
legal owner of the shares. Claimant remained at all times the legal
owner of the Yukos shares and an investor under the IPPA. (f{118 —
119 C-I)

Claimant rejects Respondent’s allegation that the Participation
Agreements meant that Claimant was a mere intermediary between
Elliott International L.P. and the ZOA ING Bank (Eurasia), the local
Russian depository for the shares. Claimant points to the contractual
restriction on Elliott International L.P. from transferring or
encumbering the shares without Claimant’s consent which is
inconsistent with rights and protections afforded to mere nominal
holders. (120 — 121 C-I)

Notwithstanding this, Claimant asserts that even if the Participation
Agreements transferred an economic interest in the shares to Elliott
International L.P., such a transfer would not affect Claimant’s status
as a protected investor under Article 1(d) of the IPPA. Claimant
invokes the Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention to support its
argument that Article 1(d) is to be interpreted “in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”
Accordingly, Claimant is an investor under an interpretation of
Article 1(d) consistent with the Vienna Convention, (99122 ~ 125 C-
Il, 998 —- 11 CPHB-I)

Article 1(d) is clear and unambiguous in stating that the decisive
prerequisite for an “investor” under the IPPA is the nationality of the
protected investor. Claimant contends that the only issue for the
Tribunal to consider in order to determine Claimant’s standing as an
investor under the IPPA is whether Claimant is a corporation

SCC Arbitration V (079/200) Rosinvest y Russia. 153

NR. 3909 _ 9s 947!

97, DEC. 2010 14:35 SVEA HOVRAT

154

incorporated in the territory of a contracting party to the IPPA, in this
case the United Kingdom. (126 C-II. 498 - 11 CPHB-D

Respondent’s arguments rejected

294. Claimant rejects Respondent’s argument that the nationality of the
beneficial owner of an investment is essential, The tribunal need not
go further than examining the nationality of the investor and
therefore the Tribunal need not consider Respondent’s arguments in

- Section IV of R-I. Furthermore, Respondent bases its reasoning in
Section I V ({{{197 — 204) in R-I on irrelevant authorities as those
authorities are only relevant to natural persons for the purposes of

wv diplomatic protection claims, and not the definition of “investor”
within the scope of a bilateral investment treaty. The Award on
Jurisdiction in this arbitration underlines the Claimant’s view that the
definition of “investor” ought to be considered in the context of
investment treaties, not diplomatic protection which is governed by
customary international Jaw. Claimant points to two cases (CSOB v.
Slovakia CLA-10, Rumeli v. Kazachstan CLA-32) dealing with
investment treaties which affirm the Claimant’s view that the
definition of “investor” is to be determined with adherence to the
ordinary meaning of the definition and not looking beyond to
beneficial interests or importing restrictions not found in the wording
of the relevant treaty. (9127 -- 135 C-IL)

295. Claimant disputes the relevance of cases cited by Respondent from
the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal and the U.S. Foreign Claims

od Settlement Commission as those decisions do not address whether the
legal owner of an investment covered by the IPPA, if it transferred an
economic interest in such investment, meets the definition of
“investor” contained therein. Claimant goes on to cite the following
authority to support its argument that beneficial ownership by
someone other than the claimant in an investment dispute does not
affect standing to bring a claim: CSOB v. Slovakia (CLA-10) and
Rumeli v, Kazakhstan (CLA-32). Also in the cases Tokios Tokelés v.
Ukraine (RLA-42) and Saluka v. Czech Republic (CLA-34), the
respective tribunals focussed on the text of the treaty, and did not

import restrictions not contained in the wording. Claimant is a
SCC arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 154

39, DEC. 2010 14:36

1, S007 Ve Ms At

lh.

Sy¥EA HOVRATY

155

Corporation incorporated in the U.K. under the English Companies
Act and therefore is an “investor” under the IPPA. (§J136 — 139 C-IlD

2. Respondent

296. Respondent claims that Claimant did not become a beneficial owner

297,

298.

of the Yukos shares until 24 January 2007, when the termination
agreement (RM-20), terminating the Participation Agreements
between Claimant and Elliott International L.P., was first arguably
executed. Until that time, Respondent claims Claimant was merely a
nominee holder, and that the beneficial owner was the Cayman
Islands incorporated limited partnership, Elliott International L.P.
Needless to say, Elliott International LP. as a Cayman Islands entity
does not qualify as an “investor” in terms of Article 1(d) of the IPPA.
($2 - 4, 20-21 and 192 ~ 194 R-I)

Claimant is not an investor protected by the IPPA as it is a nominee
holder. Nominee holders are not protected by the IPPA when the
treaty is interpreted in accordance with general international law.
Respondent cites US Foreign Claims Settlement Commission cases
and decisions decided under customary international law to underline
that the beneficial owner, not the nominal owner, is a protected
investor with a qualified investment. Respondent also points to case
law which consistently disregards nominal ownership and looks at
the beneficial owner to determine standing to bring a claim. (4{J195 —
204 R-I)

Respondent claims that nominal ownership cannot imply
investment as by definition, a nominal owner does not invest any of
its own capital or have any economic interest in the investment. A
nominal owner has less rights than a guarantor. Guarantees have been
disregarded as assets under the definition of investment in bilateral
investment treaties in the case Joy Mining Machinery Limited (CLA-
21). Claimant has effectively acknowledged that nominal ownership
is precluded from protection by the IPPA by misrepresenting its
status as “owner” of the Yukos shares in its Request for Arbitration.
(F§(205 - 206 R-I).

SCC Arbitration V (079/203) Rosinvest v Russia 155

72. DEC, 2018 14:36

299,

300.
we

301.
VY

302.

 

SvEA HOVRATT

136

Respondent argues that since Claimant was not an “investor” in
terms of the IPPA until January 2007, it follows that Claimant cannot
claim protection of Article 5 (1) of the IPPA for alleged
expropriatory acts that occurred before that date. Therefore Claimant
is in a fundamentally different position to someone who purchased
Yukos shares in 2003. Instead, Claimant has purchased shares from
non-UK companies in January 2007 and cannot claim it was an
investor, even on the basis of assignment or succession claims.
(99207 — 212 R-l)

Claimant cannot claim protection for events that occurred before it
qualified for protection under the IPPA. Respondent cites customary
intemational law as confirmed in the case Société Générale v
Domincan Republic (RLA-\8) in support of its argument that a
claimant must have the nationality of the relevant contracting party at
the time of the occurrence of the alleged illegal conduct. A party
cannot acquire or create the protection of a treaty through the transfer
of an investment after the alleged injury occurred. (213 — 214 R-I)

Respondent alleges Claimant acquired shares from Caribbean and
Cyprus sellers. It does not claim to be an assignee or successor of
claims potentially held by a party who sold shares to it. Respondent
also cites the Mihaly award (RLA-35) which sets out that claims
cannot be assigned by a party which is incorporated in a state which
is not signatory to an investment treaty regime (in that case ICSID) to
a patty which is a signatory. On this basis, Claimant enjoyed no
treaty protection whatsoever until it became the beneficial owner of
the Yukos shares in 2007. (215 —217 R-D)

In the alternative, at the very least, Claimant enjoys no treaty
protection on any possible theory with respect to acts alleged to be in
violation of the IPPA that predate 19 November 2004, when
Claimant became nominal owner of the first tranche of shares, or
between 19 November 2004 and 7 December 2004, when Claimant
became a nominal owner of the second tranche of shares. (218 -
219 R-I)

SCC Arbitration ¥ (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 156

72. DEC, 2018 14:37

» 260%

SVEA HOVRATT

157

303. Claimant thus enjoys no treaty protection whatsoever with respect
to the following acts alleged to be in violation of the IPPA:
a, Acts occurring on or prior to the date of Claimant’s acquisition
of beneficial ownership of Yukos shares (i.c., January or
March, 2007):

~¢

‘=
'

the auction of the YNG shares;

the Tax Assessments for years 2000-2003 (and
later years);

the recognition and enforcement of the English
High Court Judgment by the Russian courts;

the formal declaration of Yukos’ bankruptcy; and

the inclusion in Yukos’ receivership proceedings
of the claims relating to Yukos’ unpaid tax
liabilities.

b. Acts occurring on or prior to the date of Claimant’s first
purchase of Yukos shares {i.e., November 19, 200+):

—¢

the Tax Assessments for Years 2000, 2001 and
2002;

the Audit Report for Tax Year 2003;

the entirety of the enforcement measures related
to the Tax Assessment for Year 2000 (including,
inter alia, the June 30, Cash Freeze Order) and the
initiation of enforcement measures with respect to
the Tax Assessment for Year 2001 and the Tax
Assessment for Year 2002;

the April Injunction;

acts concerning the auction of YNG shares
(including, inter alia, (i) the seizure of YNG
shares by the bailiffs, (ii) the valuation process
regarding the YNG shares, (iii) the setting of the
starting price and all other parameters for the
YNG auction, and (iv) the publication of such
parameters);

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 157

NK. 3007 9 af 71
99, DEC, 2010 14:37 SVEA HOVRATT

158

- the alleged infringement of Yukos’ due process
rights with respect to the court proceedings
relating to the Tax Assessment for Year 2000; and

- the alleged impropriety of the refusal of Russian
authorities to accept Yukos’ tax settlement
proposals in liew of full and timely payment,

(9220 R-D)

304. Claimant makes no separate claim based on acts that occurred after
Claimant acquired beneficial ownership in 2007. In any event, no
claim of expropriation could be based solely on such acts, since by

ae that date the Tax Assessments for each of Years 2000-2003 (and later

VY years) had been definitely upheld by the Russian courts, YNG had

already been sold, Yukos had already been formally declared
bankrupt, and its remaining assets were in the process of being
liquidated. (221 R-I)

Contentions in Respondent’s Surreply R-II

305. In its Surreply (R-II) Respondent argues that Claimant was neither
the legal nor was it the economic owner of the Yukos shares before
2007. Respondent also rebuts Claimant’s arguments that
Respondent’s reliance on customary international law is irrelevant.

C)

Claimant not the legal owner

306. With regard to its claim that Claimant was not the legal owner,
“ Respondent argues that the law under which the Tribunal must
evaluate Claimant’s assertion that it is the legal owner of the Yukos
shares is Russian law. Under applicable Russian law, CSFB was the
legal owner of the Yukos shares. Under Russian law, specifically the
Federal Law “On the Securities Market” (RM-841 and RM-845),
only persons listed (in so-called “depo-accounts”) on the books and
records of a licensed securities depository are legally recognised as
the owners of the relevant shares, and no other person has any legally
recognised rights as a shareholder in relation to the company. (ffl —
7R-ID

SCC Axsbitretion V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 158

72. DEC. 2015 14:38

~¢

307.

308,

SVEA HOVRATT

159

CSFB was registered with the depository as the holder of the Yukos
shares and therefore was at all relevant times the only person with
legal ownership of the shares and therefore the only person entitled to
legal rights as a shareholder in relation to the company as a matter of
Russian law. (48 R-ID)

Under the Russian Joint Stock Companies Law, and confirmed by
the Supreme Arbitrazh Court (in a case cited in RM-851), CSFB, as
the legal owner of the shares, was the only person entitled to receive
notices of shareholders’ meetings, attend shareholders’ meetings and
to vote the Yukos shares. CSFB is also the only person entitled to
receive dividends and other distributions from Yukos. Accordingly,
Claimant’s allegation that it “alone had the power to vote the shares
and to receive any dividends or residual funds upon liquidation”
(9149 C-IL) is unsupported and false. Claimant had no rights in
relation to the Yukos shares and was only a financial intermediary
standing between the legal (or nominal owner) CSFB and the
economic owner Elliott International (99 ~ 14 R-ID)

Claimant’s arguments ou ownership under Russian law rejected

309.

310.

Respondent continues its argument that the legal owner under Russian
law was CSFB. In CPHB-I at §32 and 35, Claimant actually concedes
that CSFB was the legal owner on the basis of the same Law on the
Securities Market which Respondent cites as the basis for its argument.
Claimant’s arguments that the shares were held for administrative reasons
through its “global custodian” CSFB is of no basis. Under the Russian
system, CSFB would have been entitled to all dividends and would have
the right to vote the shares, the rights of the depositary was minor. (1-3
RPHB-D)

Claimant’s argument that nonetheless it was the “true owner” of the
shares is deficient: It ignores that Claimant actually sold 100% of its
interest to Elliott International. The argument has been invented for the
purposes of this arbitration and effectively acknowledges that Claimant
was never the legal owner, nor the beneficial owner until March 2007 of
the Yukos shares. Furthermore, under Russian law there can only be one

SCC Arbitration V (79/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 159

77, DEC. 2010 14:38

ww

 

 

SVEA HOVRATT

160

owner of the shares, any other outcome would amount to chaos.
Claimant’s “true ownership” argument is also based on a misreading of
Russian law, and is not supported by the facts in this case. According to
Claimant, (a) the Yukos shares were acquired by CSFB as a “commission
agent on behalf of Claimant, (b) “title” to the Yukos shares passed to
RosInvestCo as “principal” under Article 996 of Russia’s Civil Code and
(¢) the provisions of Russia’s Civil Code take precedence over Russian
civil law statutes such as the Law on the Securities Market, pursuant to
which CSFB, Claimant now acknowledges, was the legal owner of the
shares. (4 - 5 RPHB-Il)

311. The “true ownership” argument is wrong for the following four
reasons:

a. The relationship between Claimant (UK company) and CSFB (US
company) was governed by an agreement under New York law,
therefore any arguments Claimant makes citing the Russian Civil
Code are itrelevant. There was (and is) no provision of Russian law
that would sequire their relationship to be governed by Russin law.

Ss

. Respondent has established that Russian law determines the
relationship between a Russian company and its shareholders. The
Law on the Securities Market sets out in Article 28 that for a
company such as Yukos, the owner of the shares is the person
registered as the owner on the books of the company’s depositary.

c. A 2006 Moscow Arbitrazh Court decision (RM-851) involving a
broker and the broker’s client held that the broker (and not the
client) was entitled to the dividends because the broker was listed
on the depo account as the owner. This decision, discussed at the
hearing, remains unchallenged, and confirms that a Russian
company’s relationship with its shareholders is govemed by the
Law on the Securities Market and the Joint Stock Companies Law,
a conclusion now acknowledged by Claimant.

d, Even if Russian law governed the relationship between Claimant
and CSFB, and even if CSFB had acted as Claimant’s “commission
agent”, Claimant would in fact have been acting as the agent for

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 160

 

97, DEC. Wid 14:39 SVEA HOVRATT
LL. Ju, LUN ‘

161

Elliott International, the principal and beneficial owner of the shares
for as long as the Participation Agreements were in effect.
(5 -9 RPHB-I)

Claimant was not the economic owner —- the Participation
Agreements

312. Claimant was not the economic owner even during the supposed
brief period between initial acquisition of the shares and the entering
into force of the Participation Agreements (RM-16 and RM-19).
Claimant sold its entire economic interest even before Claimant first

¥ acquired any interest in those shares. (§16 and Annex DD, R-II)

~(

313. Respondent contends that in order to determine the rights retained
by Claimant under the Participation Agreements, reference must be
made to their terms and to New York law, applicable in this case
pursuant to Russian private international law rules. Those
Participation Agreements (RM-16 and RM-19) provide that Claimant
“hereby irrevocably participates and sells to [Elliott International],
and [Elliott International] hereby purchases, the Participated
Interest,” defined as “a 100% interest in and to Highberry’s
Interest.” (Highberry later became RosInvestCo, the Claimant).
Furthermore, in section 6 of each Participation Agreement, Claimant
undertook to pay to Elliott International all the cash and other
payments and property received by Claimant in respect of the Yukos
shares (less any related expenses and taxes), and in section 7 to vote
the participated Yukos shares only in accordance with Elliott
International’s instructions. The Participation Agreements transferred
100% of the economic ownership and beneficial interest in the Yukos
shares to Elliott International. ({{17 — 20 R-II)

314.. Claimant retained none of the basic rights of an ordinary
shareholder and rights to receive dividends under Russian law.
Furthermore, under New York law the Yukos shares were the
property of Elliott International. As long the Participation
Agreements were in force Elliott International was the sole beneficial
owner of the Yukos shares, the Yukos shares as property of Elliott

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 161

 

99. DEC, 2019 14:39 SVEA HOVRATT

162

International, were not an asset of Claimant, and had Claimant
become insolvent, would not have been included in Claimant’s
bankruptcy estate; and Claimant was either Elliott International’s
uncompensated collection agent or an uncompensated constructive
trustee acting on behalf of Elliott International, and was obligated, in
either of those capacities, to collect the Yukos dividends paid to
CSFB, and to pay those dividends over to Elliott International. (f§21
~25 R-IL, pp. 8-10 Annex DD to R-II)

‘~ 315. Claimant contends it was not a mere nominal owner because
Claimant retained the right under Section 5 of the Participation
Agreements, to bar Elliott International from transferring or

VY encumbering the shares without the prior written consent of
RosInvestCo. This argument is fundamentally mistaken. First,
Claimant was not even “a mere nominal owner” of the Yukos shares.
Second, the contractual limitation in Section 5 was not an expression
of Claimant’s continuing ownership of the Yukos shares and did not
bestow upon Claimant any right having an economic value. Rather,
Section 5 was an attempt by Claimant to avoid the potentially serious
US securities law consequences that might otherwise have resulted
from Claimant’s sale of the economic interest in the Yukos shares to
Elliott International. (pp. 11 to 17 Annex D R-II) And third, the free
assignability of a company’s shares is not an essential right of a
Russian shareholder, Banks and other creditors, for example,

~ routinely prohibit the transfer of shares pledged as security, without
calling into question the debtor’s continuing ownership of the
encumbered shares, (26 — 28 R-II)

316. From the Claimant’s perspective the Participation Agreement were
at all times a strictly cash-in, cash-out arrangement. Claimant was not
entitled to retain any dividends. This in underlined by the fact that the
Claimant’s interest in the Yukos shares did not appear on Claimant’s
balance sheet in its financial statements until those statements for the
year ended 31 December 2007 (RM-856), the year when the
Participation Agreements were terminated. ({29 — 32 R-II)

Respondent’s argument supported by customary international law

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 162

77. DEC. 2010 14:40

—

3

3

3

ud

17.

18.

19.

- 0

SVEA HOVRATT

163

Respondent points out that Claimant does not contest that the
authorities quoted in 99197 to 204 R-I fairly stand for the proposition
that a mere nominal or record holder has no right to bring a claim
under general international law. The holder of a nominal interest
lacking an economic interest in the subject property lacks protection
under both the IPPA and tules of diplomatic protection. That the
customary international law rules of diplomatic protection are relevant
is fully supported by the authorities set forth in fn 384 of R-I (RLA-1,
RLA-177, CLA-18). Since the IPPA does not derogate from the
general international Jaw rule that a person who has no economic
interest cannot bring an international claim, these authorities are to be
taken into account in interpreting the IPPA pursuant to the rule of
treaty interpretation codified in Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties. ({]48 — 49 R-II)

Respondent points to further authority supporting its claim that a
BIT cannot be read and interpreted in isolation from general
international law in the case Phoenix v. Czech Republic (RLA-124).
(949 R-ID

Respondent argues that the main reason for denying holders of
nominal interests standing to bring international claims under the
rules of diplomatic protection is equally valid in international
investment law. A nominal interest lacks “a real interest in the
subject property” and thus does not deserve protection. A nominal
owner is neither economically harmed by violations of investment
treaty protections nor does it economically benefit from the payment
of compensation for such violations. (50 R-II)

Claimant purports to cite awards in investor-State arbitrations for
the proposition that, derogating from general international law,
investment treaties protect legal owners who have transferred their
economic interest. These awards, however, support Respondent’s
position. The arguments are set out below under Respondent’s
submissions in the rationae materiae section at H.1V.

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 163

» Lil

 

79, DEC. 2010 14:40 SVEA HOVRATT
164

3. Tribunal

321. Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of
the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

CI 21

RI $2 —4, $9195 - 204
. Cl {F110 - 126

R- 21 - 32, 450

Hearing Submissions of Respondent pp. 220 -- 223, 228 — 234,
823 - 831 & 852 ~ 861 Tr.
aa CPHB-I {7-11
RPHB-I 938, 9939-41
RPHB-II pages 1 to 9

Exhibits:
CM-4 Companies House, Company Details for RosinvestCo, 26
May 2005
CM-396 Companies House, Certificate of Incorporation on
Change of Name, Company No. 4331189, 17 January 2005
CM-430 Credit Suisse brokerage statements for RosInvestCo, 1
Nov. 2004 to 29 February 2008
ww CM-532 ING Bank (Eurasia) ZAO, Statement of holding for
safekeeping account K 40043640006
RM-16 Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International, dated 17 November 2004
RM-19 Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International, dated 3 December 2004
RM-20 Termination Agreement between RosInvestCo UK
Limited and Elliott International, dated 24 January 2007
RM-22 Emails between Elliot Greenberg and Oksana Bitetti,
dated 26-27 March 2007

Legal Authorities:
CLA-03 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May 1969

SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 164

2 1!

 

99, DEC. 2010 14:41 SVEA HOVRATT

165

CLA-10 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, AS. y. Slovak
Republic, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/4, 24 May 1999
CLA-32  Rumeli Telekom AS & Telsim Mobil Telekomikasyon
Hizmetleri AS y. Kazakhstan, Award, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/ 16; TIC
344, 29 July 2008
CLA-34 Saluka Investments BV v. The Czech Republic, Partial
Award, UNCITRAL Rules, 17 Mar, 2006
we RLA-42 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, CSID Case No. ARB/02/18,
Award of 26 July 2007

reed

Meeting the definition of “investor”

322. Article 1 (d) (ii) of the IPPA sets out the definition of “investor” as
the Tribunal regards it applies to Claimant. Claimant has asserted and
provided evidence, which the Tribunal has no reason not to accept,
that it is a company incorporated under the law in force in the United
Kingdom. On this basis, the Tribunal considers that Claimant has
proven that it is prima facie an investor in terms of the IPPA.

323. Respondent argues that the Participation Agreements with Elliott
International preclude the definition applying to Claimant as
VY Claimant was a mere nominal owner. This analysis is not supported
} by a plain reading of the definition in the JPPA. The Tribunal is
bound by the Article 31 VCLT when interpreting the definition. The
plain meaning of the definition encompasses Claimant. Claimant’s
} submissions and supporting evidence bear out its qualification as an
investor under the IPPA in light of this plain reading. The Tribunal is
prevented from imposing a stricter interpretation on the IPPA’s
definition in light of its very wide drafting. Accordingly, the
Participation Agreements have no bearing in terms of the definition

of investor contained in Article 1(d)(ii).

324. Respondent’s further argument is that under Russian private law,
Claimant was not the legal owner of the Yukos shares. According to
Respondent, it was not Claimant but CSFB who was the legal owner
under Russian law due to CSFB being registered in the “depo-

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 165

———NR. 3007-9. NI 2h

7. DEC. 2010 14:41 SVEA HOVRATT

166

account” of ING Bank, the licensed securities depository. In this
context, the Tribunal takes note of the parties’ answers to the
Tribunal’s Question 3.5 in PO-5. The Tribunal is not persuaded by
Respondent’s submissions in this regard. Claimant acquired the
shares by way of a purchase for value and the formalities associated
with the recording of the ownership of those shares in a registry are
immaterial to the question whether Claimant is considered an
“Gnvestor” under the definition contained in the IPPA. Any other
interpretation of the facts regarding the financial intermediary, in this
case a share broker and custodian, being held to be an “investor”
under the IPPA would lead to absurd results and would be
inconsistent with the object of the IPPA.

Exhibit CM-532

325. With regard to the question of the admissibility of exhibit CM-532,
the Parties provided argument during the Hearing and in response to
ihe Tribunal’s question in PO-5. The Tribunal does not regard CM-
532 as hearsay. It is certainly not a contemporaneous document and it
was effectively introduced as new evidence. The Tribunal is unable
to assess the quality of the document especially in light of how late in
the arbitration it was produced. However, in any case the Tribunal
considers that the document is not relevant to the Tribunal’s review
of the rationae personae question, as Claimant has already met the
test for a qualifying investor under the terms of the IPPA.

LIV. Nature of Claimant’s Investment in Yukos — rationae
materiae

1. Claimant

326. In its Statement of Claim, C-I, Claimant plainly states it is the
owner of seven million (7,000,000) ordinary shares of Yukos. At all
times relevant to this dispute until its liquidation, Yukos was an
open-joint stock corporation incorporated under the laws of the
Russian Federation. (20 C-D

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvestv Russia 166

97, DEC. 2010 14:41

mee Be tees

SVER HOVRATT

167

327. Claimant purchased its shares of Yukos on two occasions. Initially

A
}
“328
}
329
NS

330.

in C-I, Claimant asserted that the shares were brought on the open
market. Later, in C-Il and in CPHB-I it claimed the shares were
purchased from financial intermediaries. First, Claimant purchased
two million (2,000,000) ordinary shares of Yukos on 16 November
2004. On 1 December 2004, Claimant purchased an additional five
million (5,000,000) ordinary shares of Yukos (CM-5). It has
continuously held its 7,000,000 Yukos shares until the present,
although Yukos’ shares were delisted on 21 November 2007 when
the company was stricken from the corporate register and ceased to
exist as the result of the Russian Federation’s actions. (§21 C-I)

Claimant’s shares in Yukos constituted an “investment” under the
IPPA, which defines that term to include “shares in, and stock, bonds
and debentures of, and any other form of participation in, a company
or business enterprise.” (23 C-D)

Claimant clarified the manner of the share purchase in its CPHS-I.
Claimant stated that the Yukos shares were acquired in two lots, Both
lots were held by two financial intermediaries, CSFB and ING
BANK (EURASIA) ZAO (“ING Bank”). CSFB was RosInvestCo’s
broker as well as its custodian, and held the shares on behalf of
RosInvestCo. In tum, CSFB held the shares through a Russian
custodian, ING Bank, which was registered as the nominee holder of
the shares with the Registrar for the shares of Yukos, ZAO M-Reestr.
(916 — 17 CPHB-1)

CSFB executed RosInvestCo’s first order by acquiring 2,000,000
Yukos shares on RosInvestCo’s behalf from Credit Suisse
Moscow/Credit Suisse Europe on 16 November 2004, RosInvestCo
paid for these shares on 19 November 2004, when RosInvestCo’s
account at CSFB was debited for the price, (18 CPHB-I)

RoslnvestCo purchased the second lot of 5,000,000 Yukos shares,
effective 1 December 2004, through a security sale and purchase
agreement with Alfa Capital Holdings (Cyprus) Ltd. RosinvestCo
paid for those shares on 7 December 2004 when its account at CSFB
was debited for the full price of the shates. (19 CPHB-D)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 167

tte eed

99. DEC. 2010

332:

Ww

~~ = 333
334.

we

\

14:47

ae 0

SVEA HOVRATT

168

It is undisputed that these 7,000,000 Yukos shares were valid under
Russian law from the acquisition of the shares by RosInvestCo on 16
November and 1 December 2004 until they were delisted on 21
November 2007. It is also undisputed that shares in a Russian
company, such as Yukos, are “assets” within the meaning of Article
l(a) of the IPPA, and thus qualify as an “investment.” RosInvestCo
has therefore satisfied what Respondent has described as “the first
condition for an expropriation claim,” i.e., that there is “an
investment of an investor of the other contracting party.” ({20 CPHB-

)

That RosinvestCo, and no one else, acquired the protected
“investment” is confirmed by the account information that CSFB
and ING Bank provided. First, RosInvestCo’s acquisition and
continued holding of a protected investment is proven by the CSFB
monthly account statements, which show that RosInvestCo held the
Yukos shares in its CSFB account from their acquisition until their
eventual delisting on 21 November 2007. (21 CPHB-I)

Second, as the local Russian custodian for the 7,000,000 Yukos
shares, ING Bank held the shares on CSFB ’s account. In tum, CSFB
, acting as RosInvestCo’s broker and custodian, held the shares on
RosInvestCo’s account. Although it does not matter whether ING
Bank knew on whose behalf CSFB was acting, the account
information that ING Bank provided confirms that CSFB held the
shares on RosInvestCo’s behalf, because the shares were held in a
special sub-account #4364072 entitled “CSS LLC/RosInvestCo UK
Ltd (704780)” within CSFB ’s account with ING Bank. (22 CPHB-

})

In Veteran Petroleum Ltd. v. The Russian Federation (CLA-97),
one of the three pending Energy Charter Treaty cases that arise out of
the Russian Federation’s expropriation of Yukos, the claimant - like
RosInvestCo in the present case — held its Yukos shares through
global custodians, in that case UBS AG in London and Zurich. In its
recent jurisdictional award, the arbitral tribunal in Veteran Petroleum
had no difficulty in finding the UBS bank statements “to be

SCC Arbitration ¥ (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 168

 

77. DEC. 2010 14:43 SVEA HOVRATT

169

compelling evidence of ownership” of Veteran Petroleum’s Yukos
shares. (23 CPHB-D

Meeting the definition of investment

336. Claimant claims that Article 5(2) of the IPPA applies in respect of
its investment in Yukos shares as it is an investor, and its shares of
Yukos are an investment under the IPPA (§2 C-I). Claimant asserts
that similarly to other investment companies, it specialises in

) purchasing shares in moments of market distress when the market has
overreacted to transient events and undervalued a company’s
underlying assets (46 C-I). Claimant rejects Respondent’s claim that

it is a “vulture fund” pointing to the fact that Elliott International
} L.P.’s alleged “controversial” sovereign debt holdings comprise only
2% of Elliott International’s investments. Claimant does not pursue a
“Jitigation first” approach to investment, but invests in “situations
that are complex” when markets may have undervalued assets.
Claimant invested in Yukos because it represented an opportunity if
one were to expect that the Russian Federation would respect the rule
of law. (105 C-II)

337. In its Surreply (C-II) Claimant argues that its purchase of a total of

seven million common shares of Yukos in November and December

\ 2004 qualifies as an investment under Article 5(2) of the IPPA. To

) evidence this claim, Claimant relies on documents from its share
broker CSFB (CM-5 and CM-430). (9114-116, 141 C-I).

338. Claimant contends, in response to Respondent’s assertion that
“nominally owned” assets cannot be considered an investment for the
purposes of Article 1(a) of the IPPA (in {195 — 206 R-D), that that
definition of “investment” is very broad. The definition states:

“the term ‘investment’ means every kind of asset
and in particular, though not exclusively,
includes:

(ii) shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of,
and any other form of participation in, a
company or business enterprise,”

SCC Asbitation V (079/2005) Rosiavest v Russia 169

97, DEC. 2010 |

339,

“~ 340.

341,

 

4:43 SVEA HOVRATT

170
(the “Investment Definition”)

Claimant argues that there is no restriction on the class of asset in
the Investment Definition, The only prerequisite is that an
“investment” is an “asset”. Shares in Yukos qualify as an investment
as they are assets. The Investment Definition does contain any
qualification as to the kind of asset in question -- every “asset”
qualifies as an “investment”. (§§143 — 145 C-ID.

The Investment Definition also includes a non-exhaustive list of
assets that are expressly and unquestionably protected under the
IPPA: “shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of, and any other
form of participation in, a company or business enterprise.”.
Claimant argues that under the normal meaning of “share” in a
commercial context from the Oxford English Dictionary: “each of the
equal parts into which the capital of a joint-stock company or
corporation is divided”, it only need demonstrate that it holds such a
part of the capital of joint-stock corporation. Neither the wording of
the IPPA, nor its context, object or purpose lends any support to
Respondent’s claim that “assets only nominally owned are not
covered” (§205 R-I) by the Investment Definition. (]146 - 148 C-I])

Participation Agreements

The Participation Agreements which transferred some economic
interest in the Yukos shares to Elliott International do not support
Respondent’s argument. Ownership remained with Claimant and
consequently, Claimant remained at all times since the purchase in
November and December 2004 the formal and legal owner of the
Yukos shares. Elliott International had no rights it could exercise in
respect of the shares independently of Claimant and therefore
Claimant was the only entity holding an ownership interest in the
shares, and thus a qualified “investment” under the IPPA. The
Participation Agreements were contractual obligations to transfer
payments in respect of the Yukos shares. Nothing in the Investment
Definition excludes an “investment? in which an economic interest
has been transferred to a third party. If the contracting parties to the
IPPA had intended to exclude “investments” where an economic

SCC arbitration ¥ (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 170

77, DEC. 2010 14244

—

—

342.

344.

345.

NK. 2007 UY.

SVEA HOVRATT

171

interest has been transferred to a third party, it would have been
expressly spelled out in the IPPA. (9149 - 150 C-Il)

Respondent cannot justify its argument that “assets only nominally
owned are not covered’ (305 R-I) by the Investment Definition.
Claimant distinguishes the decision in Joy Mining Machinery (CLA-
21) argued by the Respondent on the basis that it related to a claim
for protection under a BIT for a guarantee based claim, not a
shareholding claim. Claimant also distinguishes the decision in
Saluka (CLA-34), as the tribunal in that case had no difficulty
recognising that formal ownership of shares qualified as an
investment under the Czech-Netherlands BIT in that case. Claimant
argues that similarly, the Tribunal may not vary the clear terms of the
IPPA by excluding from its protection Claimant’s investment in the
7,000,000 Yukos shares. (FF151 - 154 C-I1)

During the Hearing, Claimant cited an article published by
Emmanuel Gaillard (CLA-83), counsel for the claimants in another
investment arbitration relating to Yukos in which the Russian
Federation is also defending claims, where he stated that the Russian
Federation’s argument that simple legal ownership did not qualify for
protection under the definition of investment in the Energy Charter
Treaty “finds no support in the text of the Treaty”. (Tr p. 724)

During the Hearing Claimant submitted that the two Participation
Agreements in force between Claimant and Elliott International
(RM-16 and RM-19) did not affect Claimant’s shareholding in
Yukos. The agreements transferred an interest in the Yukos shares to
Elliott, but that interest was something different to the shareholding
in Yukos. (Tr pp. 98-99)

Ability to sell the Yukos shares

There was nothing in the Participation Agreements preventing
Claimant from selling the Yukos shares. The agreements also deal
with the possibility that the participated interest could be considered a
newly issued securities, and therefore something different from the
interest in the Yukos shares purchased by Claimant. The parties went

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 171

77, DEC. 2010 14:44

346.
4

347.
348,
ww

349,

 

SVEA HOVRATT

172

to great lengths in the Participation Agreements to ensure they meet
the requirements of RegulationD of the United States Securities Act
1933 , exempting the interest from stringent United States securities
laws. Those requirements only apply to issuers of securities ~ this
demonstrates that the Elliot’s interest under the Participation
Agreements was something new and distinct from Claimant’s
shareholding in Yukos. (Tr pp. 100-102, 9941 - 42 CPHB-I)

While the Participation Agreements existed, Claimant borrowed
USD 2 million from CSFB using the shares as security for that loan.
(CM-430) This highlights that the shares had a financial value for
Claimant while the Participation Agreements were in force. (Tr pp.
106-107)

Under the Participation Agreements, Claimant retained the basic
ownership right to sell the shares. Under New York law, the absence
of any provision in the Participation Agreements restricting
Claimani’s right to sell the Yukos shares means thai Claimant was
free to sell the shares while the Participation Agreements were in
force. New York law would not imply a term into the Particpation
Agreements making it impossible for Claimant to sell the shares.
(9946 - 47, CPHB-])

Notwithstanding that the IPPA does not require that an investor
hold a beneficial interest in the investment, Claimant retained a
beneficial interest in its Yukos shares while the Participation
Agreements were in force. (945, 49 - 50 CPHB-I)

Respondent’s argument that beneficial ownership is a pre-requisite
is based on irrelevant authority. The U.S. Foreign Claims Settlement
Commission decisions (RLA-6) are based on a rule that expressly
requires beneficial ownership. The definition of “investment” in the
IPPA does not contain such a qualification. Investment treaty
tribunals have reached the opposite conclusion, for instance CSOB v.
The Slovak Republic (CLA-10) and Saluka (CLA-34), in addition to
the three pending ECT cases involving Yukos all set out that the
drafters of the relevant investment treaties in those cases did not set
out to limit ownership to beneficial ownership.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 172

nnn NR GOO FE

97. DEC. 2010 14:45 SVEA HOVRATT

173

Position under Russian law

350. Claimant submits that Respondent’s argument that Russian
securities legislation would see CSFB as the registered owner is
irrelevant and incorrect. ({24, CPHB-D)

m

351. For the purposes of the IPPA, Claimant need not be the registered
w shareholder under Russian securities legislation. There are no
requirements in Article 1(a) of the IPPA requiring the investor to
hold an “investment” in a particular way. The Saluka case (CLA-34)
found that a tribunal “cannot in effect impose upon the parties a
definition of ‘investor’ other than that which they themselves
, agreed.”. Furthermore the tribunal in Azurix Corp. V. The Argentine
Republic (RLA-181) also found that legal ownership was not
required for treaty protection. The tribunal in the recent ECT case
Veteran Petroleum (CLA-97) also had no difficulty in finding that
the claimant was the owner of Yukos shares even though those shares

were held through global custodians. (25 - 28 CPHB-D

352. In any case, Claimant submits that under Russian law, the Civil
Code (CLA-84) is predominant requiring all other civil law legislation
to conform with it. Under the “law on the securities market” (RM-

“ 844), for a company as large as Yukos, shares must be registered

} with an outside registry. Under Russian securities legislation, only

Russian custodians licensed by the Federal Securities Commission

can be registered as nominal holders. Claimant used CSFB as its

' broker and custodian. CSFB, as it was not incorporated or licensed in

Russia, used a local custodian ZAO ING Bank to hold the shares and

appear on the registry as holder. The nature of this legal relationship

is one of a commission agency under Articles 990 and 996 of the

Russian Civil Code (CILA-84). Under Russian law and the concept of

a commission agency, the true owner of the shares was always
Claimant. (Tr pp. 84-98, §§29 — 35 CPHB-I)

Intention to make an investment

SCC Arbitration V (979/2005) Rosinvest v Russia. 173

97, DEC. 2010 1

353.

354.

355,

Oi bs 4

 

4:45 S¥EA HOVRATT

174

Claimant rejects Respondent’s assertion that Claimant merely
bought a treaty claim not an investment (cf. [937 — 44, 247 R-D.
Firstly, as explained above, it bought Yukos shares constituting an
investment under the Investment Definition. Secondly, the limits
Respondent attempts to put on the Investment Definition are not
supported by its wording. The protection of investments under
investment treaties is not conditional on the investment furthering the
goals of the treaty. Claimant points to the Saluka (CLA-34) decision
which concluded that “nothing in [the definition of investment] makes
the investor’s motivation part of the definition of investment”.
Thirdly, even if good faith were a pre-condition of making an
investment under the IPPA, Respondent has not demonstrated that
making an investment in order to bring a treaty claim, should the
host-state breach the treaty, would be illegitimate or in violation of
the principle of good faith. Fourthly, should the Tribunal find that the
reason for an investor making an investment is a relevant
consideration under the IPPA, then it would be up to the Respondent
to prove an improper purpose on the part of Claimant — which cannot
be done. There are various reasons why Claimant may have made its
investment, however, none would deprive it of protection wnder the
IPPA. (49155 — 163 C-II)

2. Respondent

Respondent makes similar submissions to those set out in relation
to rationae personae under XII of this Award. Jt argues that the
actual beneficial owner of the Yukos shares was a Cayman Islands
company until late 2007. Until that time, Claimant was only one in a
long chain of nominal owners of the Yukos shares.

Pursuant to the Participation Agreements (RM-16 and RM-19)
signed in November and December by Elliott International, a
Caymans Islands limited partnership, and Claimant, Elliott
International became the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares, while
claimant became merely a nominal owner of the shares,

SCC Arbitation V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 174

79, BEC. 2914 14,46

)

356.

357,

358.

359,

NK. 007 ENE AO

SVEA HOVRATT

175

Respondent does not dispute that the Yukos shares themselves
qualify as an “investment” under the IPPA. Its argument rests on the
alleged nomina] ownership of the Yukos shares by Claimant.

Respondent directs its main arguments on the rationae materiae
issue at the intent of the Elliott Group and Claimant in purchasing
the Yukos shares. Respondent claims that Claimant obtained
ownership of the Yukos shares in order to putsue a treaty claim in the
hope of realising windfall profits. Claimant has a history of making
highly speculative investments, against the run of the market, which
make sense only if promptly backed by aggressive litigation. The
questionable motive of Claimant and Elliott Group is also highlighted
by the timing of the share purchases, the timing and the amount of
the damages initially sought by Claimant, and the decision not to sell
the Yukos shares in late 2005 or early 2006, when a more than
reasonable return could have been achieved without recourse to
arbitration. (37 ~ 38 R-I)

Investment treaty claims are not an “investment”

Respondent argues that Claimant’s shareholding is a speculative
holding and not an investment in terms of Article 5(2) of the IPPA.
Respondent cites the object and purpose of the IPPA and argues that
Claimant’s “investment” in no way furthers these aims. Claimant
purchased claims or shares reflecting the value of the claims, and
these are not protected. Tribunals have distinguished between
transactions involving real investments on the one hand and
speculative activities on the other in the past. Claimant has not
fulfilled its burden of establishing that it has made an investment in
good faith. To the contrary, as discussed above, all indications point
to the conclusion that Claimant’s real purpose was to buy a treaty-
based claim; indeed, to purchase the possibility of bringing the very
claim presented to this Tribunal. Respondent points to Claimant’s
parent, Elliott International, and its history of investment-by-
litigation strategy. (49242 ~ 243, 247 R-I)

Respondent cites various authority to support its argument that
speculative activities are distinguished from “Gnvestments” (African

SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rasinvest v Russia 176

97. DEC. 2010 14:46

360.

361
362.
Ma
NS

363.

SVEA HOVRATT

176

Holding v. Democratic Republic of Congo RLA~-38) and are not
protected under investment treaties (Société Générale v. Dominican
Republic RLA-18). A qualifying investment must be made in good
faith, (9244 ~ 246 R-I)

Respondent argues that Claimant has not made a reasonable, bona
fide investment. In order to exercise the rights of an investor under
the IPPA to protect an investment, Claimant’s actions must be
reasonable, bona fide and generally for the purpose for which those
rights were conferred. The IPPA confers rights for the promotion and
protection of genuine investments. Claimant’s attempt to claim rights
are an abuse. Claimant has offered no evidence that it had a
reasonable or bona fide investment purpose when it purchased Yukos
shares (as a nominee) in November and December 2004 and also
when it first became the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares in
2007. (99247 — 250 R-1)

In RPHB-I, Respondent argues further that Claimant has failed to
demonstrate that it was owner of an object capable of expropriation
under Article 5 of the IPPA. (47, RPHB-I)

Respondent addresses the rationae materiae issue in its responses to
the Tribunals questions set out supra, in particular questions 3.7
(applicable law), 3.5 (shareholder registration under Russian law),
3.8 (possibility of sale of Yukos shares under terms of Participation
Agreements).

Arguments regarding the Iuvestment Definition

Respondent rejects Claimant’s arguments in {145 et seg C-Il that
the Yukos shares are an “investment” under the Investment Definition
as the shares are “assets”. Respondent points to the plain meaning of
the term “asset” in the Oxford English Dictionary: an “assef” is “an
item of value owned” (RM-860). Having adopted the requirement in
the chapeau of Article 1(a) of the IPPA that an “investment” must be
an “asset,” Claimant then ignores this requirement and jumps to the
dictionary definition of the term “share” in Article 1(a)(ii). It is self-
evident that an interest in a share having no economic value cannot

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 176

aR IS. UG

22. DEC. 2010 14:47 SVEA HOVRATT

177

be an “investment’. The Investment Definition not only expressly
States that an “investment” must be an “assef’ — which carries with it
the requirement that an “investment? must have value — but the object
and purpose of the IPPA would not make sense, indeed, cannot even
be understood, if a protected investment need not have economic
value. (933 — 36 R-ID

364. Respondent cites Nagel v. Czech Republic (RLA-114) which
ww interpreted a definition of “investment” in the UK-Czech and Slovak
Republic BIT and required that an investment was “something which
has a financial value”. The authority Saluka v. Czech Republic (CLA-
34) cited by Claimant as evidence that formal ownership was
evidence of a qualified investment can be distinguished, according to
Respondent, as Saluka was the legal owner of the shares (Claimant in
this case is not) and Saluka enjoyed “the beneficial use of and
interest in” its shareholding. Claimant first acquired a “beneficial use
of and interest in” the Yulcos shares in March 2007. (4137 —41R-ID

365. Prior to March 2007, and as set out in Respondent’s submissions
above regarding rationae personae, , CSFB possessed the right to
vote the Yukos shares and receive dividends in respect of them.
Claimant’s contractual rights to receive dividends paid to CSFB and
to instruct CSFB on how to vote the shares were defeased under the

VY terms of the Participation Agreements by Claimant’s obligation to
pay all the Yukos dividends to Elliott International and to instruct
CSFB to vote the Yukos shares in accordance with the instructions
Claimant received from Elliott International. These are the duties of
an uncompensated financial intermediary, not the rights of an
investor, In short, Claimant’s supposed bundle of rights was, in
reality, a bundle of duties imposed by the Participation Agreements.
(99142 - 44 R-I)

366. Claimant possessed no “asset” within the meaning of the
Investment Definition, but rather owed a bundle of duties to Elliott
International, the holder of the entirety of the economic interest in the
Yukos shares, with the right alone to control all of the essential
powers of a shareholder. Under the plain meaning of the Investment

Definition, Claimant did not hold a qualified investment prior to the
SCC Asbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 177

~~ WR 3389° 7S. 29/91
72, DEC. 2010 14:47 SVEA HOVRATT

178

termination of the Participation Agreements in March 2007. (945 ~
46 R-II)

Further submissions on the Investment Definition

367. In its second Post-Hearing Brief (RPHB-II), Respondent argues that
Claimant’s assertion that as soon as an investment falls within one of
the categories mentioned in Article l(a) of the UK-Soviet BIT, it
automatically, without any further evaluation, constitutes an ‘asset’
and, thus, a protected ‘investment’ ({15 CPHB-I). That reasoning has
recently been rejected in the case Romak v Uzbekistan (RLA-200), )
The tribunal in Romak required a further evaluation, otherwise the
“ definition of “investment” would lose any inherent meaning. The
Romak tribunal also interpreted the definition in light of Article 31(1) '
of the Vienna Convention: together with the ordinary meaning of the
tenns of the treaty, their context, and the object and purpose of the
treaty — the need to promote and protect foreign investments with the
aim io foster the economic prosperity of and ecoriomic cooperation
between the Contracting Parties. Furthermore, the Romak case found
that adopting a mechanical application of the facts to the definition
would produce a result which is “manifestly absurd or unreasonable,”
contrary to Article 32(b) of the Vienna Convention. The case held
that an investment entailed a contribution extending over a period of
o time. (20 - 25 RPHB-II)

368. Claimant’s assertion that the never defined “rights” it held under
the Participation Agreements were “shares” and therefore an
“investment” under the IPPA is rejected. Claimant had no economic
interest and suffered no loss with the rise and fall of the Yukos share
price. Claimant’s own financial records showed that the alleged
“investment” carried no value for Claimant until it appeared in 2007
as an asset following termination of the Participation Agreements.
Claimant acknowledged at the Hearing that an “investment” must
have financial value (Tr. p. 104) but attempts in CPHB-I (at 48) to
enlarge the meaning of the term so as to exclude only “rights or
interests inherently incapable of having financial value”. This is
contrary to the ordinary meaning of “asset”. The case Eureko v
Poland (RLA-166) cited by Claimant established that an

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 178

22. DEC. 2010 14:48 SVEA HOVRATT

179

“Gnvestment” must be something “having economic value”. Claimant
interest was not a bundle of rights, rather it was a bundle of duties.
Claimant was incapable of sustaining injury. (426 — 30 RPHB-II)

369. Claimant cited the tribunal in Azurix v Argentina (RLA-181) for the
proposition that legal ownership is not required for treaty protection,
however suppressed the passage in that award requiring a claimant to
have had a financial or other commercial interest in the shares and,

we accordingly, to have suffered a financial or economic loss.

) Claimant’s reliance on the tribunal’s findings in the Veteran
Petroleum (RLA-195) case is equally misplaced. Unlike this case,
claimant in Veteran Petroleum undeniably held beneficial ownership
from time to time. The Russian law issue was not relevant to that
) case, as it is in this case. (§¥(31 - 34 RPHB-I1)

370. Respondent points to the use of the term “asset” in Article 5
(Expropriation), The use of the term “asset” in the definition of
“investment” in Article 1 of the IPPA must have implied term that
the asset have value. A valueless asset cannot be expropriated.
Respondent not only cites the US Foreign Claims Settlement
Commission and decisions decided under customary international
law but also has previously cited written and oral pleadings on the
interpretation of Articles 1(1) and 5 of the UK-Czechoslovakia BIT

- in Nagel vy. Czech Republic (RLA-114), which fully supports
} Respondent’s interpretation of Article 5 of the IPPA and also
correctly emphasises that financial value is the effect of the rules of
domestic law that create rights and give protection to them. (35 —
: 37 RPHB-I)

Respondent’s argument supported by general international law

371. Respondent further argues that a plain meaning interpretation of the
Investment Definition is confirmed by customary international law
rules applicable between the contracting parties. General international
law supports Respondent’s argument that a protected investment
needs to be something of value. Claimant does not challenge the
authorities cited by Respondent (see {197 — 204 R-I). Further, the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 179

NR, BGI S19

92, DEC. 2010 14:48 SVEA HOVRATT

180

rules of diplomatic protection support Respondent’s arguments: a
nominal interest lacks “a real interest in the subject property” and
therefore does not deserve protection. (47 — 50 R-II)

372. Respondent disputes the arguments of Claimant that investment
treaties protect legal owners who have transferred their economic
interest (see [9134 -— 138 C-IL, detailed under the rationae personae
section of this paper at XIII).

373. Respondent argues that the CSOB (R-23/CLA-10) case requires that
an investor have control over the investment. Claimant cannot even
meet the test for de-facto control of the “investment”. Control over

“ the Yukos shares was held by Elliott International under the
Participation Agreements. Claimant’s “power alone” to vote the
shares was in fact a duty to instruct CSFB to vote in accordance with
Elliott International’s instructions and its tight “alone” to receive
dividends, was a duty to pay the dividends to Elliott International.
(9953 ~— 59 R-ID)

374. The case cited by Claimant - Rumeli v. Kazakhstan (CLA-32), is
also distinguishable. That case involved a transfer of legal and
beneficial ownership after the expropriation and furthermore, the
Participation Agreements involved in the present case, remove

control of the investment from the vehicle used to acquire the
investment. Claimant was never the legal owner of the shares, nor
was it in control of the shares due to the Participation Agreements.
(F160 ~ 64 R-Il)

375. Respondent argues that whether Claimant suffered financial loss is
important to whether it had an investment protected by the IPPA. At
a minimum, Claimant must show it has suffered financial or
economic loss if the Yukos shares had been expropriated (Tr p. 798).
The analogy is drawn to insurance contracts, and if a party was
capable of insuring an interest for economic or financial Joss then it
could claim under a BIT in the Azurix v Argentine Republic case
(RLA-181), even if that party is not the legal owner. In the present
case, Claimant did not suffer any financial loss from an expropriation
of Yukos shares under the terms of the Participation Agreements. It

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 180

2, DEC. 2010 14:49

ww

)

376.

ALT UU Ammen

SVEA HOVRATT

181

was Elliott International, the Cayman Islands entity, which would
have suffered loss or benefited from any gain in value. Where there is
nothing left of value, public international Jaw cannot create a
protected investment. (Tr pp. 799-801; RSlide, 22/01/10, Annacker,
pp. 14-17)

Participation Agreements — Right to sell the shares

Respondent reiterates in RPHB-II that Claimant did not hold a
“protected investment” in terms of the IPPA and that Claimant’s
position that the Participation Agreements transferred to Elliott
International only “contractual” and “economic rights” is wrong for
at least three related reasons. Firstly the only ownership rights
Claimant had were contractual in origin. These rights could in theory
give rise to in rem rights, however Claimant transferred all its Yukos
related rights under the Participation Agreements. Second, Claimant
did no transfer to Elliott International something other than the
entirety of its interest in the Yukos shares. Claimant transferred the
entirety of its interest (and retained no rights at all) in relation to the
Yukos shares, As a result, prior to March 2007, Elliott International
was the only owner of the Yukos shares and Claimant was a mere
collection agent with no more rights than an uncompensated
custodian. Third, the fact that the Participation Agreements may have
constituted separate securities for purposes of the US securities laws
does not mean that the Participation Agreements did not also transfer
all of Claimant’s interest in the Yukos shares. (10 - 14 RPHB-Il)

Claimant’s argument that nothing in the Participation Agreements or
in New York law prevented it from selling or pledging the shares is
fundamentally wrong. Claimant transferred 100% of its interest to
Elliott, agreed not to take any action other than in accordance with
Elliott International’s instructions and exercise care in respect of the
shares as if it were the beneficial owner. It is abundantly clear as a
matter of New York Jaw that Claimant did not have the right to sell
or pledge the Yukos shares for so long as the Participation
Agreements remained in effect. The essential right of ownership — to
transfer property — was Elliott International’s right. This was

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 181

22. DEC. 2010 14:49

378.

SVEA HOVRATT NR, 50GF od 39/41

182

unaffected by its agreement not to exercise its right to transfer
without RosInvestCo’s consent. (915 — 16 RPHB-I!)

Respondent has previously noted that no one has the right to sell
property that belongs to someone else. Claimant pledged the shares to
secure borrowings from CSFB. Respondent contends this occurred as
Claimant did not inform CSFB of the existence of the Participation
Agreements and Claimant’s silence on this point compounds the
fraud perpetrated at the time on CSFB. Claimant concedes in CPHB-I
that even its supposed right to sell the Yukos shares did not represent
an economic interest in the shares because, in the event of a sale,
Claimant would have been obligated to pass on the net sales proceeds
to Elliott International, thus confirming that Claimant was nothing
more than an uncompensated collection agent. Claimant’s
concession has important consequences as well for its supposed right
to pledge the shares. As Claimant had no right to retain any of the
net sales proceeds, (a) Claimant did not have the right to pledge the
sales proceeds as collateral for 2 loan (and Claimant’s pledge of the
shares was thus in breach of both New York law and the Participation
Agreements) and (b) it is completely implausible that CSFB would
ever have knowingly accepted collateral for a loan having no market
value in the hands of the borrower. (17 - 18 RPHB-I)

Claimant also argues that it was the owner of the Yukos shares by
virtue of the “account information” maintained by CSFB. CSFB’s
account statements are not at all helpful to Claimant’s case. A
broker’s statement of account by definition shows the security
positions held by the broker for the benefit of the broker’s client.
CSFB’s account statement thus provides further support for
Respondent’s position that CSFB (and not Claimant) was the legal
owner of the shares. The fact that, insofar as CSFB was concerned,
the shares were still being held for the benefit of its client completely
misses the point that Claimant was then itself nothing more than an
uncompensated custodian. A custodian’s custodian is not a protected
“investor.” (19 RPHB-D)

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 182

 

79. DEC. 2010 14:50 SVEA HOVRATT

~~

183
3. Tribunal

Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of
the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

CI yal - 22

RI 49120 - 21

C- 97143 — 148, fn. 233,
RI 4942 — 44, 99120 -

CPHB-I ffl6 - 23
RPHB-I 417-19

RTr. pp. 799 - 801
Exhibits:
CM-5 Letter from Matthew Gregory, Credit Suisse Securities

(USA) LLC to RosInvestCo UK Ltd, 17 June 2008

CM-398 Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International dated 17 November 2004

CM-399 _ Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International dated 3 December 2004

CM-400 Termination Agreement between RosInvestCo and Elliott
International dated 24 January 2007

CM-430 Credit Suisse brokerage statements for RosInvestCo, 1
November 2004 to 29 February 2008

CM-513 Credit Suisse First Boston, Confirmation and Statement
for Trade No. FTG20, 16 November 2004

RM-16 Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International, dated 17 November 2004

RM-19 Participation Agreement between Highberry Limited and
Elliott International, dated 3 December 2004

RM-20 Termination Agreement between RosInvestCo UK
Limited and Elliott International, dated 24 January 2007

RM-22 Emails between Elliot Greenberg and Oksana Bitetti,
dated 26-27 March 2007

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 183

9. 39/) ——

o>

22, DEC. 2010 14:50 SVEA HOVRATT

184

RM-18 Securities Sale and Purchase Agreement between
RosInvestCo (then Highberry Ltd.) and Alfa Capital Holdings
(Cyprus) Ltd., 1 December 2004

Legal Authorities:
CLA-03 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May

1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331
CLA-10 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, AS. v. Slovak
Republic, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/4, 24 May 1999
CLA-21 Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic of }
Egypt, Award on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, 6 Aug.
“ 2004
CLA-34 Saluka Investments BY v. Czech Republic, Partial Award, '
UNCITRAL Rules, 17 March 2006
CLA-97 Veteran Petroleum Ltd. (Cyprus) v. Russian Federation,
PCA Case No. AA 227, UNCITRAL Rules, Interitn Award on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November 2009
RLA-16 Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and
Power Company, Limited (New Application: 1962) (Second Phase)
(Belgium v. Spain), International Court of Justice, Judgment of 5
February 1970, ICJ Reports 1970
RLA-181 9 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
Y ARB/01/12, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the
Argentine Republic, 1 September 2009

Meeting the definition of “investment”

381. The Tribunal notes that, while Claimant meets the definition of
“investor” (as set out above), the arguments presented by Respondent
in respect of that definition equally apply to whether Claimant’s
holding of shares meets the definition of “investment” under the
IPPA.

382. The Tribunal considers that a purchase by an investor of shares in a
company incorporated in a host state is an investment in the territory

of the host state, in this case Russia. The IPPA defines “investment”
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 184

OO TNR, FEOF 9. 90/9

22. DEC. 2010 14:51 SVEA HOVRATT

185

as “shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of, and any other form
of participation in, a company or business enterprise.” This definition
is very wide and therefore leaves little doubt that on a prima facie
assessment, Claimant held an investment under the terms of the
IPPA.

383. The present case is unlike the case in Joy Mining v Egypt cited by

Respondent which involved a contingent liability and not a clear

a shareholding. In the present case, the internal custodial arrangements

with CSFB did not affect the clear status Claimant enjoyed as a

shareholder in Yukos, notwithstanding Claimant’s internal
arrangement with Elliott International.

_

} 384. The Tribunal has considered the arguments of Respondent in
respect of the manner in which the shares were acquired. From the
file, the Tribunal accepts as correct Claimant’s submission that the
shares were purchased in two tranches, first in a purchase
arrangement via CSFB on 16 November 2004 and then by way of a
security sale and purchase agreement from Alfa Capital Holdings
Ltd. effective 1 December 2004.

385. Following the purchase of the shares, the Tribunal is satisfied that

Claimant was the owner in terms of the IPPA despite the points

~ raised by Respondent in relation to the recording of the shareholding

} under Russian law. The purchase of the shares via brokers and the

recording of ownership via broker and custodian accounts is a

v standard practice in both national and international securities
, transactions and also those in Russia.

Participation Agreements

386. In addition to the above summary of the parties’ arguments, in this
context, the Tribunal takes note of the parties’ answers to the
Tribunal’s Questions 3.7 and 3.8 of PO-S.

387. Claimant entered into the Participation Agreements with Elliott
Group even before it had purchased the shares, The Tribunal is faced

with arguments by Respondent that it should examine the beneficial
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 185

————

PZ DEF | ce

 

29. DEC. 2010 14:51 SVEA HOVRATT

186

ownership of the shares, not the legal ownership. Respondent submits
that Claimant did not hold an investment under the IPPA until the
Participation Agreements were terminated on either 24 January 2007
(RM-20) or 27 March 2007 (RM-22).

388. Despite the arguments of Respondent as to the underlying nature of

the rights and duties of Claimant under the Participation Agreements,

the Tribunal must answer the question whether Claimant’s

shareholding meets the definition in Article 1(a) with reference to the

IPPA. The very wide wording of that definition does not contain any
term limiting “investment” to something created under applicable )

national law. The definition states that “investment” means every

kind of asset and goes on to set out a non-exhaustive list of types of
asset including “shares in, and stock, bonds and debentures of, and }

any other form of participation in, a company or business

enterprise”. In drafting this straightforward and very wide definition,

the State parties to the IPPA clearly expressed the intention that any

asset should be included and the Tribunal considers Claimaat’s

holding of Yukos shares to be such an asset. Accordingly, the

Tribunal considers that the Participation Agreements are immaterial

to the question whether Claimant had an investment under the IPPA.

However, the value attributed to that investment for the purposes of

assessing the damage caused is a separate question and will, also

v taking into account the Participation Agreements, be considered later
in this Award in so far as relevant. :

389, Yn that context, the Tribunal notes the inconsistency between the
exhibits RM-20 and RM-22 as those documents relate to the
termination of the Participation Agreements. The Tribunal is unable
to determine from exhibit RM-22 any conclusive evidence that the
Participation Agreements were in fact terminated on 26 Match 2007.
Faced with a choice between accepting the evidentiary value of the
two exhibits, the Tribunal notes RM-22 refers to an already executed
termination agreement. Therefore the Tribunal is more inclined to
accept that RM-20 represents evidence of the termination of the
Participation Agreements on 24 January 2007. Respondent’s
reference in §4 of RPHB-II to a concession by Claimant (in fn. 38 of
CPHB-I) that the Participation Agreements were terminated on 26

SCC Arbitration ¥ (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 186

NN, DO Tee

92. DEC. 2010 14:52 SVE HOVRATT

187

March 2007 rather than 24 January 2007 is not borne out by a plain
reading of that footnote. Claimant appears to be referring to
Respondent’s argument that “Claimant did not become an investor
until March 2007” rather than conceding that the Participation
Agreements were terminated in March 2007.

ee

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 187

20. DEC. 2010 14:52

TT NR, 5GB97 8. 99/91
SVEA HOVRATT ee

188

H.V. Whether the IPPA Applies rationae temporis to Claimant
Having Regard to the Timing of the Share Purchase

a
390.
391
\

392,

1. Claimant

As already stated, Claimant became a protected investor under the
IPPA at the time of its share purchases on 16 November 2004 and 1
December 2004. Respondent’s belated objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction rationae temporis should be rejected. The Tribunal has
jurisdiction as the measures giving rise to expropriation (auction of
YNG and bankruptcy auctions) occurred after Claimant’s acquisition
of the Yukos shares. (4164 C-II)

Claimant contends that the tax assessments were the pretext for an
expropriation of Yukos’ assets that commenced with the auction of
YNG on 19 December 2004 and concluded with the Russian
Federation’s auction of the last of Yukos’ assets during the final
bankruptcy auction on 15 August 2007. Claimant cites Duke Energy
International Peru Investments v. Republic of Peru (CLA-17) in
which the tribunal explained that the decisive element for jurisdiction
rationae temporis is the point in time when the instant legal dispute
between the parties arose, not the point in time during which the
factual matters on which the dispute is based took place. (4165 C-II)

Claimant goes on to outline the differences between direct and
indirect or creeping expropriation. It argues, however, that regardless
of the form of expropriation, there is no doubt that the Russian
Federation expropriated all of Yukos’ assets through a series of
auctions. Claimant’s claim is based on this permanent deprivation of
Yukos of all of its property and the resulting series of direct transfers
of the majority of Yukos’ property to the Russian state. These
transfers occurred after Claimant’s investments on 16 November
2004 and 1 December 2004. (99166 - 170 C-Il)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 188

79. DEC. 2010 14:52

—

393.

394,

 

SYEA HOVRATT

189

While the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine whether an
expropriation of Yukos’ assets occurred from 19 December 2004 to
15 August 2007, it may also consider events which occurred prior to
this, and prior to Claimant’s investment, to the extent that they may
assist in understanding the acts that fall within the scope of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction rationae temporis. Claimant cites the
Commentary to the ILC Articles on State Responsibility (CM-451) in
this regard to support its view that a court is not prevented from
taking into account earlier actions or omissions for the purpose of
establishing the factual basis for a later breach or to provide evidence
of intent. (§171 ~ 172 C-I)

In CPHB-II, Claimant points out that it is common ground that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione temporis to determine whether the
Russian Federation’s conduct after Claimant acquired a protected
investment constitutes an unlawful expropriation in violation of
Article 5 of the IPPA. It is also common ground that the Tribunal
may evaluate pre-investment measures to inform the meaning of
post-investment conduct. Claimant became a protected investor under
the IPPA when it made its share purchases on 16 November 2004 and
1 December 2004. The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione temporis to
determine Claimant’s expropriation claim, because the measures
constituting the expropriation ~ the auction of YNG and the
Bankruptcy Auctions — occurred after Claimant’s acquisition of the
Yukos shares, contrary to what the Respondent claims. (f43 — 45
CPHB-II)

Claimant submits that it has never asked the Tribunal to determine
that the tax assessments themselves constituted an unlawful
expropriation of Claimant’s investment under Article 5 of the IPPA.
The relevance of the tax assessments is that they were the pretext for
— and also form the basis for the Respondent’s defense of ~ the
expropriation of Yukos’ assets that commenced on 19 December
2004 and concluded on 15 August 2007. The tax assessments made
prior to 16 November 2004 simply inform the meaning of the post-
investment measures (the auctions) that constitute the unlawful
expropriation. Those tax assessments also fail, as discussed above, to
provide a defense for that expropriation. (46 CPHB-II)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 189

 

NR 38895. 41/9 |=

22, DEC. 2010 14:53 SVEA HOVRATT

190

2. Respondent

396. Respondent claims that the events which Claimant alleges amount to
expropriation, predate Claimant’s becoming an investor and
Claimant’s having made an investment and therefore are not subject
to review under the IPPA. (§207 R-I)

397. Respondent relies on its arguments relating to rationae personae
that Claimant did not become an “investor” under the IPPA until it )
became the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares in 2007. As

Claimant was not an “investor” at the time of the alleged
expropriation, it follows that it cannot claim protection of the IPPA. i
(49208 —217R-I)

398. Alternatively Respondent argues thateven if quod non Claimant, as

a mere nominee, qualified as a protected investor prior to 2007, all of

the material acts critical to the foundation of Claimant’s complaint

had already occurred on or prior to 19 November 2004. By 19

November 2004, Yukos had already received the tax assessments for

the years 2000, 2001 and 2002, and the audit report for the year 2003.

Claimant could not have had a serious expectation that these

assessments would have been reversed. (See also Respondent’s
arguments on damages at H.IX.). (4228 R-I)

399. At the time Claimant became (nominal) owner of Yukos shares,
Yukos was already bankrupt in the balance sheet sense (liabilities
exceeded assets) and therefore any expropriatory act alleged to have
occurred after 19 November 2004 could not have resulted in a total or
substantial deprivation of Claimant’s shareholding. By 19 November
2004, Yukos was already afflicted with a terminal illness and its
ultimate death was simply a matter of time. (See also Respondent’s
submissions on damages at H.IX). (229 ~ 230 R-I)

400. In its Surreply, Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over disputes between the Russian Federation and a UK
investor relating to measures that predate an investment by such UK

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 190

79. DEC. 2019 14:53

ee

~

401.

402.

403.

TSN, GUO ge TEL

SVEA HOVRATT

19]

investor. Respondent argues that to Article 8(1) of the IPPA, the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over “any legal disputes between an
investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in
relation to an investment of the former [...] concerning the amount or
payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement.”
The Tribunal accordingly lacks jurisdiction over disputes between
Respondent and a UK investor relating to measures that predate an
investment by such UK investor. ($66 — 67 R-II)

Pursuant to Article 5(1) of the IPPA, “/iJnvestments of investors of
either Contracting Party shall not be nationalised, expropriated or
subjected to measures having effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation (hereinafier referred to as ‘expropriation’) in the
territory of the other Contracting Party except for a purpose which is
in the public interest and is not discriminatory and against the
payment, without delay, of adequate and effective conypensation.”
Article 5 is thus inapplicable to acts and omissions that predate an
investment by an investor of a Contracting Party. (68 R-II)

Respondent points to further authority than that which it cited in R-I
(at 213 — 216 R-D). First Phoenix v. Czech Republic (RLA-124)
supports the contention that a tribunal has no jurisdiction rationae
temporis to consider a claimant’s claim relating to an “investment”
made prior to the alleged act in breach of the investment treaty.
Europe Cement v. Turkey (RLA-125) and Cementownia v. Turkey
(RLA-126) stand for the same proposition. Accordingly, since
Claimant only became an investor under the IPPA by March 2007,
when virtually all of the measures complained of had become
irreversible under Russian law including the December 2004 auction
of YNG, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over those acts complained
of. (9969 — 72 R-ID)

Respondent also argues that the dispute at issue had only
crystallised at the latest by 28 February 2006. The tax assessments on
Yukos, seizure and auction of YNG shares, alleged denial of any
means or opportunity to defend before the Russian courts against
these tax assessments and the auction of YNG ordinary shares, and
the alleged substantive and procedural deficiencies of that auction

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 19)

I
_

7. DEC. 2019 4
404,
Ww
NY
405.
VY 406
407.

NK. 5607S TAA A

SVEA HOVRATT

4:54
192
had all occurred before Claimant became an “investor” under the
IPPA. (84 -— 94 R-ID)
3. Tribunal

Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of

the following documents on file:
Party Submissions:
C-I §§i20 - 121; 9qi4i - 154
R-I 138; 94151 - 168
C-Il 164 - 172
CPHB-Il 46

The Tribunal considers as an initial matter that, on the basis of its
findings in relation to the meeting of the definitions of “investor” and
“investment”, it has jurisdiction over the dispute as Claimant was an
investor with an investment from the date of the share purchases in
late 2004 until the date that Yukos ceased to exist. During that period
the IPPA applied to Respondent and investors from the United
Kingdom.

The major alleged acts of Respondent breaching the IPPA, namely
the auction of YNG shares and the bankruptcy auctions, all occurred
after Claimant was an investor under the IPPA.

Certain tax assessments and related acts and conduct of Respondent

that are material to Claimant’s claim occurred prior to Claimant
becoming an investor. The Tribunal considers that it is not prevented
from reviewing those acts and the conduct of Respondent in order to
inform its decision on whether Respondent breached the IPPA and
damaged Claimant’s investment during the period Claimant owned
the shares and qualified as an investor. The alleged acts (YNG
auction and bankruptcy auctions) that occurred during the period
Claimant was an investor under the IPPA were inextricably linked to
the taxation assessments and audit reports that occurred prior to
Claimant becoming an investor. The tax assessments, audits and

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 192

92. DEC. 2010 14:54

408.

 

SVEA HOVRATT

193

enforcement actions may therefore be taken into account when
considering the YNG auction and bankruptcy auctions.

The Tribunal, therefore, considers that it is able to review factual
matters and legal steps that occurred prior to Claimant’s purchase of
Yukos shares in order to inform its investigation of the alleged acts
which, taking into account the Tribunal’s conclusion on meeting the
definition of “investor” and “investment”, indisputably occurred
when Claimant held Yukos shares.

However, while the Tribunal is not prevented from finding that
Respondent breached the IPPA in respect of Claimant on the basis of
rationae temporis, the Tribunal may take into account the timing of
the share purchase in its consideration of damages and their
valuation. The Tribunal considers that the timing of Claimant’s share
purchase will inform the Tribunal’s consideration of the quantum of
any damages awarded.

EVIL. Whether Respondent Breached the IPPA

410.

The Parties have argued in great detail the factual and legal issues
involved in the disputed measures taken by Respondent, particularly
regarding taxation assessments and the auctions. The Tribunal also
notes in particular the submissions of the parties on the cumulative
effect of the various strands of Respondent’s actions in respect of
Yukos. The Tribunal considers that an assessment of whether
Respondent breached the IPPA can only be effectively made if and
after the conduct as a whole is reviewed, rather than isolated aspects,
Therefore, hereafter, the arguments presented by the Parties regarding
each major disputed issue are recalled by short summaries and
commented, but the Tribunal will only after all these summaries,
taking into account these submissions by the Parties, turn to its own
considerations as to whether Respondent’s measures, seen together
and in their cumulative effect, can be considered as a breach of the
IPPA.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 193

79, DEC. 2010 14:55

4il.

412.
413,
YS
wY
414,

NR. SOG 29. TA 2 E

 

SVEA HOVRATT

194
(A) The Taxation Laws Applicable to Yukos

Claimant and Respondent have submitted opposing views of the
taxation laws applicable to Yukos during the relevant period (tax
years 2000 up to and including 2003) supported by the Maggs
Reports on Claimant’s side and Konnov Reports on Respondent’s
side. The tax assessments by the Russian tax authorities focussed on
the activities of Yukos in the Low Tax Regions. The Parties disagree
on what laws and rules applied to companies claiming the benefit of
operating in the Low Tax Regions.

1 Claimant

Bad Faith Doctrine

Claimant argues that the “bad faith” doctrine which the tax
authorities attempted to impose was inconsistent with the laws
providing the low-tax regimes in the Low Tax Regions and
furthermore, was inconsistent with the Russian Constitutional Court’s
decisions. (J{93 and 103 Maggs 1)

The doctrine was radically expanded in the case of Yukos to hold
that Yukos was in bad faith for minimising taxes through the Low
Tax Regions and as a basis for not applying the statute of limitations.
None of the court cases Respondent cites (in the Konnov Reports) to
show the application of the doctrine occurred prior to the Yukos case.
The cases Respondent cites from the Kalmykia region relating to the
“bad faith” doctrine (RM-655) concem only Kalmykia law and are
not relevant to the Yukos case. (pp. 3-4 Maggs III)

Respondent arbitrarily applied the ‘bad faith’ doctrine to disguise
the preordained destruction of Yukos. Respondent deviated from
established law and practice. This doctrine was notoriously vague.
(991 CPHB-I)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 194

92. DEC, 2010 14:55

~C.

—€

415.

416.

417.

 

SVEA HOVRATT

195

Professor Maggs explains that, before the first case against Yukos,
no Russian court had ever declared a company to be a “sham” lacking
“economic substance” and then attributed its income to another
company. By declaring the companies “shams,” the Tax Ministry
avoided the rigorous showing required by the Tax Code for
challenging transfer pricing and attributing a subsidiaries’ obligations
to its parent..Respondent contends that Yukos’ use of a network of
“sham” trading companies in Low-Tax Regions to claim for itself
profit tax incentives available only to companies incorporated in
those regions amounted to “bad faith.” The Russian Federation
argues that this “bad faith” was established by Yukos’ failure to meet
two requirements: (a) that the tax benefits be proportional to
contributions made to the regional economies; and (b) that the
company claiming the tax benefits have “economic substance.” Both
alleged requirements lack objective criteria and both were applied
against Yukos in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner. (F992 - 93,
CPHB-I)

Respondent’s justification for imposing US$ 9.4 billion in profit tax
and related interest and fines on Yukos has shifted throughout these
proceedings. In his first report, Mr. Konnov argued that Yukos’
trading companies did not qualify for the tax breaks because they
failed to achieve the stated goals of the regional legislation. In his
second report, Mr. Konnov took a different position, arguing that
“{t}ne amounts of tax assessed on YUKOS were primarily based on
the breach by YUKOS of federal rather than regional legislation.” In
its RPHB-I, however, the Respondent concedes that Yukos’ trading
companies complied with the requirements of both the regional and
the federal statutes. | Now, the Respondent argues that Yukos
violated amorphous “federal jurisprudential ‘good faith taxpayer’ and
‘substance over form’ doctrines, which . . . require that the local
company have economic substance and that investments be made in
the local economy . . . in amounts that are ‘proportional’ to the tax
benefits received.” (412 CPHB-ID)

Respondent contends that its tax authorities “brought literally
thousands of ‘bad faith taxpayer’ cases, hundreds of which involved
abuses of Low-Tax Regions similar to Yukos’.” But the Respondent

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 195

TN SCG pO TE 7 Nn

77, DEC. 2010 14:56 SVEA HOVRATT

196

has never identified a single instance before the Yukos case where
the Russian tax authorities applied these “jurisprudential doctrines”
to attribute one company’s profits to another. Nor does the summary
table contained in a study published by S.V. Savseris fill the gap.
Respondent has not produced or even cited a single instance among
the cases referred to in Mr. Savseris’ table in which the Russian
Federation applied the “bad faith taxpayer” doctrine in the same way
it was applied to Yukos. This application against Yukos was novel
and expansive and has never been as blatantly abused by the tax
V authorities as it was against Yukos. (14 — 15 CPHB-II)

Ww Proportionality Principle

418. Claimant submits that there was no requirement in the laws of the
Low Tax Regions which set out any requirement that the tax benefit
gained must be commensurate with the amount invested in the Low
Tax Region. Neither the law of Mordavia (a Low Tax Region wixere
Yukos had a subsidiary which claimed a substantial tax benefit), nor
any individual investment agreements between Yukos companies and
a Low Tax Region government, nor even federal law, provided for
proportional investment. In any case, in Mordovia, Yukos paid one
billion rubles over three years under an investment agreement entered
into under the tax benefit law (Law 9Z, RM-644) providing Mordavia
with the benefit it bargained for. Mr Konnov confirmed in cross
examination that there was no accusation that the Yukos parties did
not perform their obligations under those agreements. Nevertheless,

~ Yukos was accused suddenly in December 2003 of having underpaid

its corporate profits tax. (Tr pp. 761-762)

419. Respondent has stressed the importance of the alleged lack of
proportionality between the investments by Yukos’ trading
companies in the Low-Tax Regions and the tax benefits conferred, At
the hearings, however, Mr. Konnov testified that “proportionality”
was only one piece of “evidence” that demonstrated that Yukos’
trading companies were shams that lacked economic substance. Mr.
Konnov’s shift was understandable. The Respondent cannot explain

how or why a requirement of “proportionality” should prevail over
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 196

77. DEC, 1019 14:56

~¢

~ (>

—¢

420.

421.

Yo TOL ZS

--— NN

SVEA HOVRATT

197

the express terms of investment agreements negotiated by regional
governments (such as Mordovia) pursuant to authority given to them
under federal statutes. (494, CPHB-I)

Yukos’ trading companies made investments in the Low-Tax
Regions. This is undisputed. They also complied with the
requirements of the investment agreements and local law which fixed
the amount of required investment independently from any amount of
tax savings. The position of Respondent is illogical with regard to the
proportionality requirement. In the case of a taxpayer making large
tax savings, that taxpayer would not be able to “...g0 back and say,
‘My benefit is very significant, I want to pay more taxes’” (p. 569,
Konnov, 20/01/10, Tr), rather a taxpayer (according to Mr Konnov’s
testimony) is required to approach regional authorities and make
unspecified amorphous voluntary donations of indeterminate
amounts to special “non-budgetary” funds. This alleged requirement
of the law is fundamentally inconsistent with the rule of law and
invites corruption and abuse. It is also inconsistent with Russian tax
law which — as Mr Konnov acknowledged, requires tax laws to be
specific. Yukos complied with the letter of the law in the Low-Tax
Regions, and Respondent concedes this, yet attempts to claim that an
amorphous proportionality standard applies. (995 — 98 CPHB-I)

Respondent relies on a series of decisions from the Federal
Arbitrazh Court for the North-Caucasian District. These decisions
assessed additional profit tax liability against Kalmykia companies
based upon an alleged lack of “proportionality” between those
companies’ local investments and the profit tax benefits they
obtained. Mr. Konnov effectively rejected the reasoning of those
decisions when he conceded that a lack of “proportionality” could not
result in additional tax liability, because “taxes are fixed.” It is
likely for this reason that no court outside of the Federal Arbitrazh
Court for the North-Caucasian District, until the Yukos case, ever
applied this alleged principle of “proportionality” to increase a
taxpayer’s tax liability. But even the Federal Arbitrazh Court for the
North-Caucasian District never assessed liability against any taxpayer
other than the entity based in Kalmykia that had claimed the tax

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 197

99, DEC. 2010 14:57

 

SVEA HOVRATT

198

benefit. Yukos’ case was, as the Respondent itself puts it, “unique.”
(14 CPHB-ID

Transparency of Yukos and Awareness of Tax Authorities

422. Claimant points out that Yukos was transparent in its disclosures of

we
423.
424.

use of the Low Tax Regions. In its US GAAP public financial
statements contained in its annual reports (CM-15), Yukos reported
the many billions of dollars of tax savings. As Yukos was the largest
privately held Russian company at the time, and its reports carefully
analysed by the market it is inconceivable that the Russian tax
authorities were unaware of Yukos’ tax minimisation methods. (Tr
pp. 57-58; p. 5 Maggs III)

Applicable VAT Law

Under Russian law (Articles 20 and 40 of the Tax Code ~ CM-242)
as interpreted by the Constitutional Court (CM-~-283), the tax
authorities could not use formalistic interpretations of the tax laws to
disregard separate legal identities and to deny refunds of VAT on oil
actually exported. The tax claims filed against Yukos in 2004
demanded that Yukos pay VAT on oil exported by the trading
companies, as they had taken the position that Yukos was the real
exporter. (ff 111-128 Maggs J).

Claimant argues that Article 164 of the Tax Code (CM-363)
provided for a 0% rate of VAT on exported goods. Yukos was held
liable in the tax assessments following December 2003 for VAT on
goods sold by its subsidiaries. The Tax Ministry took the position
that Yukos and its trading companies were a single consolidated
enterprise and did not credit Yukos with the VAT already paid by
the trading companies. The Tax Ministry did not dispute that the oil
exports of the trading companies were exempt from VAT nor did it
dispute that the trading companies had submitted the necessary
documentation to qualify for the VAT exemption. Instead the Tax
Ministry refused to pay the refunds to the trading companies and took
the position that Yukos could not receive the VAT refunds because
the trading companies — and not Yukos had submitted the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 198

72. DEC. 2010 14:57

wt

~¢

—C

425.

426.

427.

ye al 4 *

or

g¥EA HOYRATT

199

documentation in support of the VAT refund. This was a novel
interpretation of the Tax Code and allowed the total tax assessments
against Yukos to increase by US$ 9 billion. (4211-213 C-))

Charging VAT on oil actually exported was inconsistent with
Russian law as interpreted by the Constitutional Court. The
Constitutional Court had previously indicated that a 0% rate should
be granted if it was clear that goods had been exported, even though
there was some formal defect in documents submitted (CM-39). The
courts in the Yukos case ignored this rule to uphold the substantial
VAT assessments against Yukos, The courts in the Yukos case also
ignored the right of the taxpayer Yukos to submit VAT declarations
later in its own name, in order to comply with the novel interpretation
of the law. ({128 Maggs 1; 9773-75 Maggs I)

Respondent does not articulate a credible theory to justify its
assessment against Yukos of the more than US$ 13.5 billion in VAT-
related taxes, penalties and interest. This amount represented the
largest single block of tax assessed against Yukos. Were it not for the
VAT assessments, Yukos would have remained a profitable, viable
company. None of the foreign tax sources cited by Respondent
permits the tax authorities to disregard the existence of separate
entities to justify profit tax assessments, yet for VAT those same
entities are viewed as distinct companies. Respondent took starkly
contradictory positions in order to double the amount of tax that
Yukos would have owed if the tax authorities had collected only the
amounts Yukos saved through its profit tax structures. Therefore, the
collection of a tax which was never owed is compelling evidence that
the tax assessments against Yukos do not satisfy international
standards of bona fide taxation. (102 — 108 CPHB-I)

Respondent’s submissions that there was no inconsistency between
its treatment of Yukos with respect to VAT and profit taxes. The
issue is whether, after attributing the profits and turnover of Yukos’
trading companies to Yukos, the Tax Ministry acted properly in
refusing to attribute to Yukos the VAT returns filed by those same
trading companies. Furthermore, Respondent’s arguments regarding
the “mechanistic” nature of the assessment of VAT are irrelevant.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 199

72. DEC. 2010 1

428.

429.
VY

430.

TOT AR, 5889S. NO!
4:58 SVEA HOVRATT NR 3 2

200

The imposition of the VAT cannot be justified given that it was
imposed on export oil sales that were not subject to tax and for which
the proper paperwork had been filed. (7 - 8 CPHB-ID

Respondent’s continued reliance on the Russian domestic cases Far
Eastern Shipping (RM-650), Korus-Holding (RM-665), and MI4N
decisions is misplaced. Those cases can be distinguished and
involved cases of the secondary companies not complying with VAT
obligations — which Yukos’ trading companies did. Equally telling is
the Respondent’s treatment of Sibneft. The Russian Federation
contends that Sibneft was able to avoid being assessed VAT on. the
revenue earned by its subsidiaries “by merging [its] trading entities
into the parent company” and thereby taking the benefit of those
trading entities’ VAT submissions. Assuming this is true, and
leaving aside the fact that the use of mergers to avoid tax liability can
hardly be considered morally or legally superior to the methods
employed by Yukos, the fact remains that the Russian Federation
effectively terged Yukos’ trading companies into Yukos when they
attributed those trading companies’ revenues and profits to Yukos.
(449 - 10 CPHB-II)

The Russian Federation collected US$ 13.5 billion of VAT from
Yukos that was never owed. The Respondent’s formalistic defense
of these assessments, without which Yukos would still exist, is
logically indefensible and contradicts the asserted basis for the profit
tax assessments. There is no evidence that any other company that
reduced its profit tax obligation through the use of domestic low tax
zones was assessed VAT on the same scale, or at all. This is
compelling evidence that the VAT assessments against Yukos were
not bona fide and were discriminatory. (11 CPHB-ID

Repeat Offender Fines

Claimant submits that Respondent imposed repeat offender fines
which deviated from established Russian law and these illustrate the
confiscatory nature of the tax assessments against Yukos. Prior to the
Yukos case, repeat offender fines pursuant to Articles 112 and 114 of

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 200

 

3890) 8, L/ot

22. DEC. 2010 14:59 SVEA HOVRATT

~¢

~(

€

431,

201

the Tax Code could be assessed only if the commission of the second
alleged offense occurred after the offender had been “brought to
responsibility” for an analogous offense. The first time Yukos was
“brought to responsibility” for the use of Low-Tax Regions to
minimise profit taxes was on 14 April 2004, Thus only conduct after
that date could be used to justify imposition of the repeat offender
fines. Notwithstanding this, Respondent imposed fines for each of
Yukos’ 2001-2003 tax years by pressing two novel interpretations of
Russia’s tax laws. The first was that Yukos was “brought to
responsibility” on the date of the first audit report. Secondly,
Respondent pressed repeat offender fines could be assessed even if
the second “offense” occurred before the taxpayer was brought to
responsibility for the first tax offense. The Russian courts acquiesced
in this departure from the established application of Articles 112-114
of the Tax Code, however, after the Yukos case they reversed that
interpretation.

Respondent defends the US$ 3.8 billion of repeat offender fines by
speculating on their basis. However the Tax Ministry plainly stated —
and the courts subsequently affirmed ~ that the basis for assessing
repeat offender fines for Yukos’ 2001-2003 tax years was the Tax
Ministry’s 14 April 2004 resolution. In so doing, they ignored
established Russian law that a taxpayer could not be subjected to
repeat offender fines for conduct that occurred before that taxpayer
was “brought to responsibility” for an analogous offense. After the
Yukos cases, the Respondent reverted to its prior interpretation of the
Tax Code. Respondent has never identified any analogous offenses
on the part of Yukos that predated the 14 April 2004 resolution, much
less any other analogous offense that the Russian courts specifically
cited. To impose fines for “repeat offenses” allegedly committed
during the 2001-2003 tax years, even though the Tax Ministry did not
establish the predicate first offense until 2004, runs counter to the
most basic requirements of the rule of law (16 — 17 CPHB-II)

2. Respondent

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 201

77, DEC. 2010

432.

SS
ww
433.
434.
~~
Ne

435.

14:59 SVEA HOVRATT

202

Bad Faith Taxpayer Doctrine

Respondent points to the jurisprudence of the Russian
Constitutional Court beginning in 2001 (RM-210) according to which.
taxpayers who have acted in bad faith are not entitled to the same
degree of protection as taxpayers who act in good faith. The existence
of this doctrine is not disputed by Claimant or Professor Maggs. The
doctrine has been applied to cases unrelated to Yukos (RM-44, RM-
153, RM-212, RM-560) to deny benefits that had been claimed on the
basis of Low Tax Region legislation. (Annex A R-J, Konnov Report I
{ 74, RSlide 19/01/10 McGurn pp-55-57)

Proportionality Principle

Related to the “bad faith” doctrine is the claim by Respondent that
there was a principle in effect during the relevant period that required
a taxpayer in a Low Tax Region, who wished to claim the benefit of
the relevant low tax legislation, to make investments in the territory
which were in proportion to the amount of tax savings claimed by the
taxpayer. (pp. 23-25 and p88 Konnov Report I; f{] 31-34 Konnov
Report ID)

During his cross examination, Mr Konnov referred to the
proportionality principle as being applied in various cases and derived
by the Russian judicial practice together with the bad faith doctrine in
order to combat the abuse of law. The principle of proportionality
“basically means what you do is you compare the amount of tax
savings actually which the taxpayer benefitted with the amount of the
investment made.” (Tr pp. 565-566)

The Tribunal should therefore not be led astray by the lengthy series
of questions put by Claimant to Mr. Konnov regarding the minutiae
of Mordovian law, and compliance therewith by Yukos’ Mordovian
affiliates (and to a lesser extent, regarding the federal statute). They
— as well as the discussion of translations of Mordovian law - are
simply irrelevant, because, as Mr. Konnov made clear over and over
again, it is common ground that the literal terms of the Mordovian
statute (and its counterparts elsewhere) were generally complied

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 202

 

97, DEC. 2010 15:06

Hl

—

436.

437.

438.

HOVRATT eR, ET 8D
SVEA

203

with, as were the terms of the federal statute. The real issues, as
made clear by the decisions of the tax authorities and the Russian
courts, have always been different: whether (a) Yukos abused those
statutory provisions in a way that violated the above-cited federal
jJurisprudential doctrines (and in particular, the principle of
“proportionality”), by using sham local affiliates and making only
nominal investments; and whether (b) the Russian tax authorities’
application of those doctrines to Yukos constituted a bona fide
exercise of their taxing powers. (78 RPHB-I)

Yukos itself never seriously contended that the Trading Shells had
genuine economic substance, nor that the investments in local
economies had been significant in comparison to tax benefits.
Instead, Yukos has always contended that at the time, as a matter of
law, the Trading Shells did not need to have substance, and that
“proportional” investments were not required, provided only that the
conditions (if any) expressly spelled out in the local laws had been
met. ({79 RPHB-I)

The critical issue, then, both in the tax litigation in Russia and in
this arbitration, is whether - as Respondent believes it has amply
shown — the jurisprudential requirements of economic substance and
proportionality were already in effect at the relevant times, or
whether — as contended by Claimant (and, before it, by Yukos) — they
were somehow applied to Yukos “retroactively” or
“discriminatorily.” (80 RPHB-D)

Transparency of Yukos and Awareness of Tax Authorities

Respondent contends that contrary to Claimant’s submission that the
tax authorities were aware of Yukos’ tax practices with respect to the
Low Tax Regions, in fact they were not. The alleged disclosure in
Yukos’ US GAAP financial statements (CM-14, CM-15 and CM-16)
of the aggressive techniques used to transfer trading shell company
profits was in fact opaque and a mere discussion of the earnings
of equity affiliates and foreign subsidiaries” and a statement on tax
legislation. The disclosures were named “Investment tax credits and

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia, 203

RNA By OT mee 0S Na

72. DEC, 2010 15:00 SVEA HOVRATT

204

other rates” and did not give the reader any clue whether they had
been legally or illegally obtained. In any case, only 2% of the
Russian population reads English and therefore it is unlikely that the
tax inspectors involved in the initial assessments of Yukos for tax
years 2000, 2001 and 2002 could read those reports. (pp. 10-11
Annex A to R-II; RSlide 22/01/10, McGurn, pp. 65-69)

439. Yukos tried to conceal its trading shell companies by: using straw
men directors, changing their corporate names, restructuring to
Vv conceal affiliation and evade taxes and also failing to submit
documents to and cooperate with audits. (pp. 14-19 Annex A to R-II;
RSlide 19/01/10 McGurn pp. 21-35)

Applicable VAT Law

440. Respondent argues that the nature of VAT as a tax is mechanistic,
applied formalistically. (RSlide, 22/01/10, McGurn, p. 95). Contrary
to the statements in the Maggs Reports, both before and after the
Yukos tax cases, tax authorities and arbitrazh courts interpreted VAT
requirements in a strict formal way. (pp. 26-27 Annex A to R-I;
4137-138 Konnov Report I)

441. The Constitutional Court decision upon which Claimant relies (CM-
39), actually contains a decision that made clear that even if an export
~ has insiputably occurred, full VAT is due. (Tr pp. 418-421; RSlide,
22/01/10, McGurn, pp. 88-89), Yukos did not file, or attempt to file
VAT returns for tax years 2000 or 2001. The returns Yukos
Ne attempted to file for 2002 and 2003 were filed in a manner (annual
basis) which made their rejection inevitable. (RSlide, 22/01/10,
McGurm, pp. 90-94)

442. Respondent submits that the approach of the authorities has no
logical inconsistency as Claimant contends. All over the world, VAT
is imposed on gross revenues — unlike income or profits taxes which
relate to the underlying economic reality. One of the attractions of
VAT is that it is assessed mechanistically. In Russia as in other
countties, exemption from VAT for exports is not applied

automatically but conditional on strict and timely compliance with
SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 204

37. DEC. 2019 15:0!

—

—(

443,

444,

445,

NY

SVEA HOVRATT

205

formal requirements of law. Respondent cites the Russian domestic
Far Eastern Shipping (RM 650) and Korus Holding (RM-665) cases
(also cited in §§139 — 140 of Konnov J) for the proposition that the
imposition of VAT on Yukos for failure to file the correct documents
when an export has indisputably occurred was not unique or
anomalous. ({§93 — 95 RPHB-I)

It also became clear at the hearing that Claimant simply
misunderstands the VAT payments and refunds that were made in this
case. Granting Yukos a refund for “input VAT” paid by its trading
affiliates, as suggested by Counsel for Claimant, would have involved
an unjustified double payment in favor of Yukos, because, as confirmed
by Prof. Maggs, “input VAT” had already been refunded in full to the
Trading Shells. Claimant has also not refuted Respondent’s showing
that Yukos’ modus operandi made it especially vulnerable to VAT
assessments -- a tisk that other companies (such as Sibneft, as explained
by Mr. Konnov) were able to avoid, eg, by merging their trading
entities into the parent company. Finally, Claimant leaves Respondent’s
international precedents completely unchallenged. (496 - 99 RPHB-I)

Repeat Offender Fines

The hearing confirmed that, for each of the years 2000-2004, Yukos
was assessed a 40% penalty for “wilful” violations, instead of the
nonnal 20% rate (p. 679 Tr.). As explained by Mr. Konnoy, it is
sufficient for a company’s violation to be deemed “wilful” that it
resulted from intentional acts of the company’s management (pp. 612,
614, 615 — 616). It is obvious that Yukos’ complex “tax optimization”
scheme was intentional, and not inadvertent (or merely negligent).
Concealment, on the other hand, is not a prerequisite to “wilfulness.”
Even if Yukos had been entirely transparent, its scheme would have
been “wilful.” In any event, Yukos was never transparent: instead, as
shown at the hearing and in Respondent’s prior submissions, it took
great pains to conceal its scheme. (100 RPHB-I)

Respondent’s position regarding the repeat offender fines is that the
concept is broadly interpreted by the courts and even a very small
first fine would have sufficed to make the second offence a repeat

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 205

fat

———

7. DEC. 2010 15:91

‘

446.

447.

448,

449.

SVEA HOVRATT

206

offence. In any case, Yukos could have avoided the repeat offender
fines (as acknowledged by Prof. Maggs (p. 234, Tr)) by simply filing
proper amended tax retums and paying back taxes. The fines are not
dissimilar to fines that would have been imposed in many other
countries. (216, Konnov Report-I and 910J-102 RPHB-I)

3. Tribunal

The Tribunal, having to consider only Respondent’s alleged
liability under the IPPA, is neither an appeal body for the
determination of Russian tax law nor claims that it has expert
knowledge of that law. The Tribunal takes into account the parties’
submissions in this regard the most relevant aspects of which are
summarized above as well as the expert reports the parties have
submitted from Prof. Maggs and Mr. Konnov.

Hereafter, the Tribunal, without repeating the extensive arguments
presented by the parties regarding the various disputed issucs,
presents its conclusions therefrom in so far as they may be relevant
for Respondent’s responsibility under the IPPA in so far as they
might be seen as one of several aspects relevant for the consideration
of the cumulative effect of the totality of Respondent’s conduct
which the Tribunal will examine later in this Award.

Though some of Respondent’s explanations and arguments seem
justified or at least plausible, the Tribunal is inclined to find them not
persuasive particularly regarding the following aspects:

Bad Faith Doctrine

From the sources mentioned, the Tribunal concludes that the bad
faith doctrine and Respondent’s relying on Yukos being a “sham”
without “economic substance”, as applied to Yukos in comparison to
other competitors, was to a great extent a novel application of the
law, rather vague in content and limits, and expansively used against
Yukos in a way not shown to have been used before or against other
comparable tax payers.

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 206

 

NR, 309-9. 0/91
22. DEC. 2010 15:02 SVEA HOVRATT

207
Proportionality Principle

450. This alleged principle undisputedly was not included in any
provision of the law of the Low Tax Region of Mordovia nor in the
investment agreements concluded by Yukos with that Region, it
again is rather vague, and the Tribunal does not see in the file any
application of that principle before Yukos and to another competitor
in a comparable situation. As Repondent itself concedes, “Yukos case
was unique”.({ 71, RPHB I and the sources mentioned there in

t footnote 136)

Transparency and Awareness of Tax Authorities

~(

451. It is undisputed that Yukos disclosed all its billions of tax savings in
its financial statements contained in its annual reports. The Tribunal
finds it unpersuasive that, for one of the largest and most important
companies in Russia frequently discussed in the media, the tax
authoritics nevertheless were not aware or at least could not have
informed themselves in this regard.

Applicable VAT Law

452. The extremely formalistic interpretation of the VAT tax law
regarding Yukos and its trading companies to the effect that, though
exports were undisputedly not subject to VAT, the documentation
also undisputedly submitted by the trading companies could not be
used in relation to Yukos and thus Yukos was liable for more than

“ US$ 13.5 billion in VAT related taxes is difficult to accept as a

justification for a tax liability the size of which was sufficient to lead

Yukos into bankruptcy.

Repeat Offender Fines

453. From the evidence on file, the Tribunal concludes that the
interpretation of Articles 112 and 114 of the Tax Code used on
Yukos was not used before or thereafter in any comparable cases.
Again, this resulted in an extremely large tax liability in the range of
USS 3.8 billion.

SCC asbittation ¥ (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 207

—_——.

7, DEC. 2010 15:02 SVEA HOVRATT

208

Conclusion

454, In view of the above considerations, the Tribunal, again recalling
that it is not an appeal body for Russian tax law, concludes that, even
though some of Respondent’s explanations and arguments seem
plausible, the application of Russian tax law on Yukos must be seen
as a discriminatory and as not a bona fide treatment of Yukos.

\ 455. Even if taxation as such is excluded by Article 11(3) of the
Denmark-Russia BIT in connection with the MFN clause of the
IPPA, in any case, these doubts regarding the application of Russian

UC tax law on Yukos must be taken into account in the context of the
examination later in this award regarding the question whether the
cumulative affect of the totality of Respondent’s conduct is a breach
of the IPPA.

SCC Arbitvation V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 208

ra

70. DEC. 2010 15:03 SVEA HOVRATT

209

(B) Tax Assessments In Respect Of Yukos

456. Claimant asserts that the tax assessments, audits and the reports,
court decisions and administrative proceedings following them were
the precursors to the auctions which expropriated the majority of
Yukos’ assets. Claimant argues Respondent misused its police

} powers in an attempt to re-nationalise Yukos’ strategic petroleum

assets. Respondent counter-argues that the tax assessments were a
legitimate consequence of Yukos’ flagrant breaches of tax laws.

—(

1. Claimant

457. Claimant bases the bulk of its claim in relation to the tax assessment
on the conclusions contained in the Maggs Reports.

458. Claimant contends that the tax assessment in respect of Yukos
commenced by the Tax Ministry in December 2003 and completed on
29 December 2003 was a procedure solely aimed at expropriating the
assets of Yukos, The Tax Ministry undertook an unprecedented
reinterpretation of Russian tax laws to transform previously legal
practices into unlawful tax evasion schemes, without any notice of a
change in the law. It had no statutory or other basis to assert that
Yukos’ trading companies were shams, nor to assert that the trading
companies had failed to comply with the requirements of the
legislation in the Russian Federation’s Low Tax Regions, nor to
assert that either of the foregoing could generate a tax liability for
which Yukos could somehow be responsible under Russian law.
Without any legal authority and without providing notice of its novel
interpretation of Russian law, the Tax Ministry summarily declared
Yukos’ trading companies to be “shams” and held Yukos liable for
those trading companies’ profits at the rates applicable to Yukos
rather than the more favourable rates that applied to the trading
companies located in the low tax zones. (201 ~ 203 C-I)

(

a

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 209

77. DEC. 1010
459.
460.
Nw
461.
=
462,
463.

15:9

3 SVEA HOVRATT

0

210

The radical nature of the interpretation of tax law applied to Yukos
is evidenced by the fact that, immediately prior to the issuance of the
report from the extraordinary re-audit of 2000, the tax authorities had
already audited Yukos’ 2000 and 2001 tax years and had repeatedly
certified that Yukos did not have any outstanding tax liabilities. (204
Cc-)

Claimant argues that Yukos complied with the literal requirements
of the relevant tax laws and the Respondent (Tax Ministry)
retrospectively itmposed the requirement of “intention to improve the
economy fin the low tax zones]” (CM-60). An independent report on
Russian tax policy from December 2003 set out that the Russian
courts had unequivocally rejected arguments that attempted to shift
blame for deficiencies in the tax laws to taxpayers. (205 — 207 C-I)

The Tax Ministry did not allow Yukos to claim the presumption
based on Russian law that it was a good faith taxpayer on the basis
that crimina! cases had been brought, but not yet decided, against its
executives. However, courts in the U.K. (CM-222, CM-223 & CM-
225), Cyprus (CM-224), Switzerland , the Netherlands, Lithuania
(CM-220), Liechtenstein and the U.S. (CM-81) have all found in
various contexts that those charges were politically motivated.
Furthermore, none of the executives had been convicted of any crime
at the time the Ministry prepared the report of the extraordinary re-
audit of 2000, Minimum requirements of procedural fairness should
have barred the tax authorities from relying on unproven and suspect
criminal allegations to brush away legal presumptions that impeded
their pursuit of their policy objectives. (Y{[208 —- 209 C-I)

Respondent’s actions toward Yukos constitute a denial of justice
and a breach of international law. At a minimum, they establish the
non-bona fide nature of the Russian Federation’s tax measures. (210
C-)

Reversal of Prior Audits
Claimant submits that Respondent’s three week supervisory re-
audit of Yukos in December 2003 was not credible. Yukos was the
largest taxpayer in Russia and the Interregional Tax Inspectorate No.

SCC Arbinration V (07912005) Rosinvest v Russia 210

97. DEC. 2010 15:04

~~

464,

465.

466.

NK. SO Vee FEL LN

 

Svea HOVRATT

211

1 ~ a top level specialised division of the Russian Tax Ministry
established for the purposes of monitoring the large oil companies
had already completed a six month audit of Yukos only eight months
earlier, in April 2003. That initial audit had only uncovered minor tax
liabilities, not massive fraud. The same tax inspectorate had audited
Yukos’ trading companies incorporated in Mordavia (Ratmir and
Alta-Trade) and had not expressed any concern about Yukos evident
control over those companies, whereas now, Respondent argues that
Yukos had concealed that control.(f985 — 86 CPHB-1)

While the Russian Federation now argues that its Tax Ministry had
been slowly putting together pieces of the puzzle that eventually
revealed a network of “sham” trading companies controlled by
Yukos, Ministry of Taxation of the Russian Federation, Report No.
66, 28 Apr. 2003 (CM-50). the supervisory audit report itself does
not refer to any such discovery, nor do any of the subsequent audits
conducted with respect to the 2001-2004 tax years, The Russian
Federation has not put forward a single fact witness to testify to this
allegedly sudden discovery of a US$ 24 billion tax fraud by its
largest private taxpayer. (87 — 88 CPHB-I)

The implausibility of the Russian Federation’s shifting explanations
is further demonstrated by the VAT filings. Every month, Yukos’
trading companies provided the Russian Tax Ministry with copies of
every sales contract, bill of lading, customs declaration, and payment
confirmation for the oil they exported. The Tax Ministry. required
this documentation as part of those companies’ applications for
tefunds of input VAT. The Respondent does not dispute that the
trading companies properly filed these applications and received
those refunds. (89 CPHB-1)

Well before the audits of Yukos and its trading companies in 2002
and 2003, the Russian Government had shown that it was acutely
aware of the use of low tax regions by major oil companies. The
Minister of Finance had called for changes in the federal law that
authorized Low-Tax Regions to provide profit tax incentives to
companies registered in their regions. These same laws were
ctiticized in the Duma for allowing oil companies to shelter their

SCC Arbitration V (979/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 21

TNR, SOF 9 19S) ee

79. DEC. 2010 15:04 SVEA HOVRATT

212

profits. Yet in 2002, the Audit Chamber of the Russian Federation
concluded that Sibneft’s network of trading companies in Kalmykia
(which was similar to Yukos’ network in Mordovia) was legal under
existing law, notwithstanding its negative effect on total tax
collections. The Russian Federation’s account of tax investigators
hard at work to unearth an elaborately concealed scam by Yukos
cannot be reconciled to this evidence that the Russian Government
had understood the legal problem for years. (90 CPHB-I)

VY Conclusions of Professor Peter Maggs

467. The assessment of profits tax (and related penalty interest and fines)
w by the Russian Tax Ministry against Yukos in 2004 for the 2000-2003
tax years was inconsistent with established Russian tax law and j
practice governing the use of trading companies in low tax zones.

468. Yukos complied with the tax laws in each of the Low Tax Regions:
Moxdovia (CM-268), Kalsnykia (CM-269), Evenkia (CM-270) and
the former Soviet restricted military areas known as ZATOs (CM-
273 & CM-273). The Tax Ministry, however, in its report (CM-60),
classified the entities in low tax areas as "fake companies" on four
bases: (1) few resident employees and limited assets, (2) strong ties
with banks and other organizations associated with Yukos, (3) de
facto control by Yukos, and (4) lack of physical oil processing

~ facilities. The authorities concluded that since these companies were
"fake," their profits were really profits of Yukos. ({{77 - 111 Mages
D

we

469. The second major change from prior law came in the departure
from the previous strict observance in Russian tax law of formal legal
personality, The tax authorities This “fake company” approach was a
major innovation in Russian tax law. This led to the assessment of
Yukos’ VAT liabilities’ for oil actually exported by the trading
companies, Charging Yukos VAT on oil actually exported by the
trading companies was inconsistent with Russian law. Under
Russian law, as interpreted by the Constitutional Court (CM-283), the
tax authorities could not use formalistic interpretations of the tax
laws to disregard separate legal identities and to deny refunds of

SCC Arbigation V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 212

NR. JO7U ve Tat

22. DEC. 2010 15:05 SVEA HOVRATT

213

VAT on oil actually exported. When this interpretation was reviewed
by the courts when Yukos challenged it (CM-39), the courts ignored
clear precedent from the superior Constitutional Court and imposed a
20% VAT rate when a 0% rate for goods exported should have been
applied . ({] 111 ~ 128 Maggs J)

Court cases following tax assessments

; 470. Claimant argues that there were irregularities in the judicial process
y and failure to follow due process during 2004 following the tax
assessments.

. 471. Maggs I sets out that the courts did not act in accordance with the
} Russian Tax Code (Article 113 CM-283) as interpreted by the High
Arbitrazh Court (CM-280) in applying the statute of limitations to tax
claims against Yukos. The law was re-interpreted in respect of Yukos
on the basis that Yukos acted in “bad faith”. The Arbitrazh Court of
the City of Moscow (CM-67) cited a Constitutional Court decision
(CM-288) incorrectly as that decision related to a very narrow set of
facts resulting in the dramatic expansion of the “bad faith doctrine”.
(§9129 - 134 Maggs D)

472, Furthermore, the courts imposed penalties on Yukos as a “repeat
. offender” which did not accord with Russian law. The tax authorities
4 successfully argued that the fine could be doubled for a second
offence even if the second offence occurred before the taxpayer was
brought to responsibility for the first tax offence. This interpretation
diverged from the plain text of the law (Paragraph 2 of Article 112
CM-283). This interpretation was later overtumed in a case unrelated
to Yukos by the Supreme Arbitrazh Court in 2008 deciding that the
interpretation used in the Yukos case was wrong (CM-292). (144 ~
149 Maggs I)

ro

473, The freezing of assets by the court was in violation of the clear
rulemaking orders of the High Arbitrazh Court as set out in the
instruction issued to lower courts in CM-44 and later in a Resolution
CM-291. (F150 — 152 Maggs I)

SCC Arbitration V(079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 213

97, DEC. 2010

474,

Nw
475,
476,

477.

15:05 SVEA HOVRATT

The Russian courts (in a decision CM-192) recognised the English
court judgment (CM-263) which SocGen Group had sought against
Yukos for payment. The Russian courts enforcement of the decision
in a manner plainly inconsistent with Russian Arbitrazh Procedure
Code (Article 241, CM-297) and on the basis of a plainly false
interpretation of treaties in force between Russia and the United
Kingdom (CM-302). Appeals by Yukos were also denied the correct
application of the law (CM-301). ({153 — 164 Maggs 1)

2. Respondent

Respondent argues that virtually all of the complained of tax
assessments, and related enforcement measures and bankruptcy
proceedings occurred before Claimant became the beneficial owner
of the Yukos shares, however, even if guod non the court decisions
regarding these acts were plainly wrong, they would still not provide
a basis for an exyropriation under Article 5(1) of the IPPA.

Imposition and enforcement of taxes does not generally constitute
expropriation. Taxation measures are intrinsically lawful from a
public international law perspective. Respondent cites a variety of
commentary to support this argument. It also argues that even severe
appropriations under taxation may be justified without incurring
international responsibility. The burden is thus on Claimant to
establish that there has been an abusive exercise of the taxing power,
and that this abuse produced consequences tantamount to
expropriation. States have a wide margin of discretion in exercising
their sovereign right to tax and in particular to enforce tax laws.
(99316 — 323 R-I)

In particular, when taxation is within the bounds of internationally
recognised tax policies, a taxation measure will not be considered to
be expropriation. In this case, nothing in the record suggests that the
Russian authorities ever acted in a way that offended any
internationally recognised norm, or that was incompatible with the
practices of other countries. ({{]324 — 325 R-I)

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 214

72. DEC. 2010 15:06 SVEA HOVRATT

—(

—

478.

479,

480.

481.

482,

The assessments made by Russian tax authorities, and the penalties
they levied against Yukos, were consistent with the practices of tax
authorities in a number of Western countries. ({326 R-I and pp. 1 —
34 Annex A to R-I, RSlide, 19/01/10, McGurm, pp. 36-49)

The accusation that the tax assessments were retroactive is without
merit. The Konnov Report sets out that the tax minimisation regimes
employed by Yukos were being fought by the tax authorities both
before and after the Yukos matter. Yukos itself was aware of the
illegality of its practices, proven by the degree and number of
subterfuges it employed to misrepresent its affairs and that it warned
its shareholders of a risk of reassessment of its taxes. Furthermore,
Yukos engaged in far more aggressive tax evasion practices than its
competitors. (pp. 11 — 14 Annex A to R-I)

Even if the tax assessments complained of by Claimant were the
result of a “change of position” by the tax authorities, this would be
permissible under Russian law and routine in international practice.
Tax authorities worldwide are generally not estopped from changing
their position. (RSlide 19/01/10 McGum pp. 79-88)

Even if, quod non, Claimant could establish that it did receive
particularly severe treatment at the hands of the tax authorities,
Russian law Russian tax law and practice confer a certain degree of
discretion upon the tax authorities as to whom they prosecute, and
how aggressively. This discretion is recognised under Russian tax
practice, and it was therefore readily foreseeable that the courts
would reject Yukos’ attempts to avoid liability for taxes that were
otherwise clearly due on the grounds that the tax assessments of such
taxes were somehow discriminatory. (pp. 15 - 16 Annex A to R-I)

A review of the specific allegations Claimant makes also proves
that its arguments are unsupported: Yukos’ use of tax regions was not
consistent with the legal bases for these tax regions and the related
court cases confirming the assessments were also consistent with
Russian tax law and practice which are required to examine the
substance of commercial relationships. When the tax authorities
investigated the “actual business relationships” of Yukos and the

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rasinvest v Russia. 215

 

LAN DO FEE FE ett

77, DEC. 2010 15:06 SVEA HOVRATT

216

trading shells they found that the control and ownership of oil was
held by Yukos and that the trading shells had been specifically
established to evade taxes. The finding on that basis that Yukos was a
“bad faith taxpayer” led to conclusions of the authorities and courts
that were entirely consistent with Russian law and practice. (pp. 18 —
22 Annex A to R-I)

483. The non-payment by Yukos itself of VAT (and instead having the
trading shells apply for VAT exemption certificates) was also illegal
VL under Russian law. Respondent argues, citing the Konnov Report,
that the imposition of tax by the tax authorities was in compliance }
with Russian law and practice. (pp. 23 - 26 Annex A to R-I)

Court cases following tax assessments )

484. Respondent argues that the question to be determined by the
Tribunal is not whether the alleged procedural irregularities of the
Russian court proceedings, or the alleged substantive defects of the
Russian court decisions, resulted in damages per se, or even whether
they amount to a breach of municipal or international law. Rather,
the test is whether the outcome of the Russian court proceedings
amounts to a measure tantamount to expropriation, ic., an abuse of
the State’s power fo tax that totally or substantially deprived
Claimant of its economic interest in the Yukos shares. ({313 R-I)

485. Respondent submits that the post-investment court decisions did not
result in a total or substantial deprivation of shareholding. Claimant
Ye has not identified any decisions that resulted in a total or substantial
deprivation of Claimant’s shareholding. Even assuming Claimant is
deemed to be a protected investor after 19 November 2004, it has still
failed to establish that court decisions after that date resulted in a
total or substantial deprivation of the economic value of Claimant’s
Yukos shares. As tax assessments and tax enforcement measures
generally cannot be expropriatory, it follows that court decisions
upholding them likewise cannot generally be expropriatory. (314 —

316 R-I)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 216

97, DEC. 2010 15:07

\

486

487.

488.

TT TTT TN BR 9 7 mere

SVE HOVRATT

217

. Respondent’s Konnov Report I sets out in detail that the courts
upholding the tax assessments were acting in accordance with
Russian law and practice.

Claimant’s objections to Respondent’s alleged breach of law and
procedure is based on propaganda. Claimant frequently refers to
66,000 pages of documents that Yukos allegedly had only two days
to review prior to the judicial review of the authorities’ tax claim for
2000. Yukos, in fact, had several months to review those papers,
many of which consisted of routine accounting documents, yet it
chose only to review them on two days. ({{108 — 110 RPHB-I)

Federal Law 163-Z

Claimant erroneously points to the passing of Federal Law 163-Z to
demonstrate that Respondent abolished the Low-Tax Region program
and therefore that the treatment of Yukos was retroactive. That law,
as alsu established by Prof. Maggs, simply capped tax benefits at 4%.
It also did not address the “good faith”, “proportionality”, “economic
substance” and “substance over form” tests which were left with the
courts which was the case both before and after 1 January 2004.

© (9107, RPHB-I)

3. Tribunal

489. Also in the context of the disputed tax assessments, the Tribunal

490.

recalls that, having to consider only Respondent’s alleged liability
under the IPPA, it is neither an appeal body for the assessments based
on Russian tax law nor does it claim to have expert knowledge of that
law. The Tribunal takes into account the parties’ submissions in this
regard the most relevant aspects of which are summarized above as
well as the expert reports the parties have submiited from Prof.
Maggs and Mr. Konnov.

Again, hereafter, the Tribunal, without repeating the extensive
arguments presented by the parties regarding the various disputed

SCC arbitration Y (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia QT

39.96, 2010 15:07

491.

492,

493.

494,
Ne

495.

SVE HOVRATT

issues, presents its conclusions therefrom in so far as they may be
relevant for Respondent’s responsibility under the [PPA in so far as
they might be seen as one of several aspects relevant for the
consideration of the cumulative effect of the totality of Respondent’s
conduct which the Tribunal will examine later in this Award.

Though some of Respondent’s explanations and arguments seem
justified or at least plausible, the Tribunal is inclined to find them not
pusuasive particularly regarding the following aspects:

First of all, the Tribunal refers to its considerations and conclusions
above regarding the applicable taxation Jaw which overlap with the
assessment issue and also apply in this context.

Regarding the assessments themselves, the Tribunal comes io the
following additional conclusions:

As argued by Claimant, indeed, the objectivity of Respondent’s
three week supervisory re-audit of Yukos in December 2003 lacks
credibility: The specialised top level division of the tax ministry
instituted for large oil companies, had, only eight months earlier
completed a six month audit on Yukos which only minor tax
liabilities had been found. The same division, in its audit of Yukos’
trading companies incorporated in Mordavia had expressed no
concern regarding their role and Yukos’ control. The Tribunal does
not find in the file any convincing evidence that the three week re-
audit, or actually other audits, discovered new facts not known before
which would justify the tax fraud amounting to some US$ 24 billion
by Russia’s largest private tax payer at the time.

Further, comparing the expert reports by Prof. Maggs and Mr.
Konnov and the respective evidence on file, the Tribunal finds those
of Prof. Maggs more persuasive to the effect that:

(1) The assessment of profits tax (and related penaly interest and

fines) was inconsistent with established Russian tax law and
previous practice governing the use of trading companies in low
tax zones. (particularly Mages I, p.29)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 218

2. DEC. 2010 15:08 SYEA HOVRATT

,

we
}

£

496.

497.

498.

WR. 3390) 08. 20/

(2) The formalistic interpretations of the tax law used by the tax
authorities to disregard separate legal entities and deny Yukos
refunds of VAT on oil actually and undisputedly exported were
equally inconsistent with established Russian tax law and
previous practice, as interpreted by the Constitutional Court.
(particularly Maggs I p. 48)

(3) Regarding the tax charges for 2000, the courts accepted new
interpretations in the Yukos case that allowd the tax authorities
to escape the effect of the limitation period. (particularly Maggs
Ip. 51)

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that, as in other jurisdictions,
the Russian tax authorities may change their positions regarding the
interpretation and application of the tax law and that they have a
certain discretion in this respect. However, if such changes and the
use of discretion occur in so many respects and regarding a particular
tax payer as compared with the treatment accorded to comparable
other tax payers, doubts remain regarding the objectivity and fairness
of the process.

Therefore, the Tribunal, again recalling that it is not an appeal body
for Russian tax law, concludes that, even though some of
Respondent’s explanations and arguments seem plausible, the tax
assessments on Yukos must be seen as a treatment which can hardly
be accepted as a bona fide treatment.

Again, whether this, by itself, would be sufficient to find a breach
of Article 5 IPPA in spite of the high threshold mentioned above
particularly regarding a denial of justice by the Russian courts, must
not be decided here by the Tribunal. However, in any case, these
doubts in respect to the tax assessments on Yukos must be taken into
account in the context of the examination later in this award
regarding the question whether the cumulative affect of the totality of
Respondent’s conduct is a breach of the IPPA.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 219

a Li/ot

 

22. DEC. 2610 15:08 SVEA HOVRATT

220

(C) Auction Process in Respect of YNG

1. Claimant

499. Respondent expropriated and effectively nationalised Yukos’ assets
when its Government auctioned all of Yukos’ assets to satisfy a series
of specious tax claims that it had assessed against Yukos. The first of
these auctions was the auction of YNG on 19 December 2004. The
Russian Government transferred virtually all of Yukos’ assets to

“ state-controlled Rosneft. This deprivation of Yukos’ control over its
assets, accomplished by the transfer of those assets to the possession
of a state-owned company, falls squarely within the definition of an

Ge expropriation. The auction of YNG was unlawful and conducted with
sole purpose of expropriating Yukos’ assets and re-nationalising
them. (4186 C-I)

500. On 19 November 2004, while Yukos’ challenges to the tax
assessments were still pending vefore the Russian courts, Respondent
announced that it would auction Yukos’ common shares in YNG,
Yukos’ main production asset, in order to satisfy the newly assessed
2001-2003 tax liabilities. Respondent fixed the opening auction price
pursuant to a special resolution that derogated from normal auction
procedures and allowed the starting price to be fixed without
reference to the appraised value of the assets to be auctioned.

501. At the auction, the only bidder for the YNG shares was BFG (CM-
163), a completely unknown company. Notwithstanding the attempts

“ at the time to project the illusion that BFG was an independent
bidder, and the Respondent’s continuation of that effort, it can now

be shown that Rosneft owned at least twenty percent of BFG’s shares
prior to the auction. It has further been reported that Rosneft
furnished BFG with the entirety of the US$ 1.7 billion deposit that

was needed to participate in the auction, and that it arranged a
complex scheme of financing to pay the balance of the purchase price

bid by BFG (CM-179, CM-372). And, of course, Rosneft acquired
BFG, and with it control of YNG, immediately after the auction.

(§13(h) C-Il)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 220

RL GOFE LLL 2

72. DEC. 2010 15:09 SVEA HOVRATT

me

—

~f

502.

503.

504.

505,

506.

221

Even though the Russian Federation seeks to characterize the YNG
auction as competitive and designed to achieve the highest price for
the auctioned assets, the facts are hardly such as to support either
conclusion. The only bidders were two state-owned companies run
by the same people. Rosneft (the controlling force behind BFG) and
Gazpromneft (a subsidiary of state-owned Gazprom and the other,
silent, bidder) shared the same chief executive (Sergey
Bogdanchikov, who was simultaneously President of Rosneft and
General Director of Gazpromneft). Only one of the bidders - BFG —
actually bid (CM-161). And that bidder was merged into Rosneft as
soon as it was successful. (134) C-ID

Immediately following the auction, Rosneft described its purchase
of YNG as “the most monumental bargain in Russia’s modern
history.” (CM-8) In its 2003-2004 consolidated financial statements,
Rosneft effectively elaborated on this statement when it recognised
more than US$ 7 billion in negative goodwill (CM-257). 413G) C-ID

Respondent does not dispute that, as a result of its forced auctions
of Yukos’ assets, virtually all of Yukos assets were transferred to
state-controlled entities, principally Rosneft. Nor does it dispute that
any compensation was paid, (§13(k) C-ID

Maggs I sets out that “the auction of the voting shares of YNG was
not carried out in accordance with normal Russian practice, which
would have: (a) applied published ground rules requiring independent
appraisal, (b) starting the auction in accordance with these rules at the
appraised price, (c) conducted the auction so as to achieve the highest
possible price, (d) forbidden collusion among auction participants.”
(165 Maggs 1)

Maggs I also states that the auction appears to have been a case
where the Russian state controlled both prospective bidders. One of
the two qualified bidders was Gazpromneft, which was owned by
Gazprom, in which the state had a controlling interest. The other was
a mysterious company called Baikalfinansgrup (BFG), which
appeared just before the auction, won the auction, assigned its

SCC Asbiation V (07/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 221

72. DEC. 2010

507.

508.
7
509,

AR. Uses Bane

15:99 SVEA HOVRATT

222

interest to the Russian-state-owned Rosneft, and disappeared. After
the auction, reporters found only a convenience store, dram shop, and
cell phone dealer at the registered address of BFG. Amazingly this
company was able instantly to raise almost US$2 billion for the
required pre-auction deposit. ({167 CM-I

Respondent’s auctions of Yukos’ assets, which deprived Yukos of
all of its assets, were not made for a proper public purpose, that
Respondent’s targeting of Yukos was discriminatory, and that no
compensation was ever paid. Accordingly, Respondent’s auctions of
Yukos’ assets constitute an expropriation and, with regard to those
assets that ended up in the hands of Russian state-owned companies,
a nationalisation of Yukos’ assets. Respondent should be required to
pay adequate and effective compensation to RosInvestCo pursuant to
Article 5 of the IPPA. (419 C-ID

2. Respondent

Respondent’s contends that action taken by Yukos itself in the
media (advertisements warning potential bidders off) and in the
Houston bankruptcy court enjoining banks from funding prospective
bids prevented the auction process from having more bidders. Yukos
effectively sabotaged an auction which was for its own benefit. The
price gained at auction on 19 December 2004 was 5.6% higher than
the starting bid price and was consistent with the DKW valuation.
The auction fully complied with Russian law and followed
parameters set by the Ministry of Justice, the bailiffs and the RFF.
(Annex B to C-II pp. 7-10)

Were it not for the concerted public effort of Yukos to warn off
potential purchasers, the number of participants in the auction would
probably have been much higher based on the number of Western
and other international energy and oil companies which expressed an
interest in the auction (RM-429, RM-431 and RM-115). (Annex B to
R-Ip. 9)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest Russia 222

99, DEC, 2010

~~

~~

—(

510.

51,

512.

513.

514.

1510 SVEA HOVRATT

223

Respondent also points to Annex B of R-I and the Borisova Report
which both explain the legality of the seizure of all of the YNG
shares and the auctions that followed under Russian law and their
compliance with parameters set by the Ministry of Justice, bailiffs
and the RFFI.

The DKW valuation (CM-22) in respect of the shares was actually
lower than the starting price for the auction, once one adjusted the
price to take into account the 76.79% of shares actually sold.
Furthermore, the price actually gained at auction exceed the adjusted
DKW valuation. (Annex B to R-I pp.17 & 24)

Claimant has failed to show that the auctions were a sham, The
standard to prove a sham is high. The modalities of the YNG auction
were entirely consistent with international practice. Claimant fails in
establishing a sham by pointing to Western court decisions relating to
individuals associated with Yukos. In its Annex E to R-II Respondent
sets out how Claimant’s evidence in this regard is deficient.

Claimant has failed to show in the hearings that the YNG auction
was a sham, that it could or should have been conducted otherwise,
or that it could have produced higher proceeds. The record shows that
the YNG auction was in all respects conducted in good faith,
consistently with Russian law and international practice, and that it
was in no way unfair to Yukos. (4126, RPHB-I)

As conceded by Prof. Maggs, “the bailiffs had discretion whether to
accept or reject Yukos’ offers of assets as alternatives to the YNG
shares.” Likewise, Respondent’s showing that Yukos’ offers were not
bona fide (because they related to encumbered Sibneft shares and/or
were subject to an absurd 24-hour deadline) and/or were
unreasonable stands unrebutted. It is not disputed that, under Russian
law, there was no legal requirement that the YNG shares be sold at
auction, a circumstance that fatally undermines Claimant’s central
hypothesis that the authorities’ secret purpose was to “reassert state
control over’ Yukos. If this had been the case, why would the
authorities have run the risk that an auction would be won by a
Russian private sector bidder or even a foreign company, given that

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 223

27, DEC. 2016

515,

516.
~~
a

517.
~~ 518.

519,

T NK, 3O9U ee LO OI
15:19 SVEA HOVRAT ON

224

they were free to sell the YNG shares directly to Rosneft or another
State-controlled company. (§§126 — 130 RPHB-I)

The auction was conducted in accordance with international
practice. At the hearing, Prof. Maggs retracted an earlier claim that
the auction rules were not public, and he also conceded they were
lawful and lawfully adopted. (pp. 439-439 Tr.)

Prof. Maggs also confirmed that, if the YNG Auction did not
achieve an even better result, the only reason was the US bankruptcy
(with which Prof. Maggs was personally familiar, having been one of
Yukos’ witnesses in those proceedings), and conceded that he had no
basis for contradicting the evidence that a number of bidders
(including foreign companies expressed an interest in participating in
the auction, but had refrained from doing so out of fear of risks
created by the US bankruptcy proceedings (and for no other reason).
(131, RPHB-D)

Claimant has never questioned the international precedents showing
that, in similar circumstances, most countries would not have been
more favourable to the debtor, and that some countries would have
allowed starting prices as low as 50% - 60% of fair market value.
(9133, RPHB-I)

3. Tribunal

Also in the context of the disputed auction process, the Tribunal
recalls that, having to consider only Respondent’s alleged liability
under the IPPA, it is neither an appeal body for the determination of
Russian domestic law nor does it claim to have expert knowledge of
that law. The Tribunal takes into account the parties’ submissions in
this regard the most relevant aspects of which are surnmarized above
as well as the expert reports the parties have submiited from Prof.
Maggs and Mr. Konnov.

Hereafter, the Tribunal, without repeating the extensive arguments
presented by the parties regarding the various disputed issues,

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 224

22. DEC. 2010 15:11

we

~¢

~-C

$20.

$21.

522,

523,

524.

SVEA HOVRATT

225

presents its conclusions therefrom in so far as they may be relevant
for Respondent’s responsibility under the IPPA in so far as whether
they might be seen as one of several aspects relevant for the
consideration of the cumulative effect of the totality of Respondent’s
conduct which the Tribunal will examine later in this Award.

Though some of Respondent’s explanations and arguments seem
justified or at least plausible, the Tribunal is inclined to find them not
pusuasive particularly regarding the following aspects:

First, the Tribunal refers to its considerations and conclusions
above regarding the applicable taxation law and regarding the tax
assessments which are relevant also in the present context because
they lead to the auctions and thus overlap with the auction issue to
some extent,

Regarding the auction process itself, in spite of the doubts
expressed by Prof. Maggs (paiticularly Maggs I p.62 et seq.), the
Tribunal accepts Respondent’s argument that, had Claimant not
discouraged intemational bidders and without the bankruptcy
proceedings in the United States, more bidders might have
participated, and that the process seems to have been conducted
within the limits of discretion awarded by Russian law.

However, on the other hand, it must be noted that the two bidders
actually participating were not only under Respondent’s contro] but
that the winning bidder was a completely unknown company just
created before the auction and disappearing right after the auction and
assigning its interests to Rusian state-owned Rosneft. The
circumstances that this bidder was further found to have no real
offices and nevertheless was able to raise the deposit in the range of
US$ 1.7 billion and then the purchase price with the apparent help of
Rosneft further contribute to the impression that the scheme was set
up under the control of respondent to bring Yukos’ assets under
Respondent’s control.

Therefore, the Tribunal, again recalling that it is not an appeal body
for Russian law, concludes that, even though most of Respondent’s

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 225

ON GO9N Me RU

ONT DOAN EE 2 O eretiaetaiaemnem,

9. DEC. 2010 15:11 SVEA HOVRATT

226

explanations and arguments seem plausible, there remain doubts
whether the YNG auction can be seen as bona fide and non-
discriminatory or as an expropriation for the public interest.

525. Again, whether this, by itself, would be sufficient to find a breach
of Article 5 IPPA in spite of the high threshold mentioned above
particularly regarding a denial of justice by the Russian courts, must
not be decided here by the Tribunal. However, in any case, these
doubts in respect of the YNG auction must be taken into account in
~ the context of the examination later in this award regarding the
question whether the cumulative affect of the totality of Respondent’s )
conduct is a breach of the IPPA.

(D) Bankruptcy Auctions in Respect of Remaining Yukos Assets

1. Claimant
526. The second expropriatory measure after the YNG auction, took
place with the disposition of all of Yukos’ remaining assets at
bankruptcy auctions concluding on 15 August 2007. Respondent
again transferred virtually all of Yukos’ assets to state-controlled
ww Rosneft. This deprivation of Yukos’ control over its assets,
accomplished by the transfer of those assets to the possession of a
state-owned company, falls squarely within the definition of an
expropriation. (4186 C-I)

527. Maggs I sets out that the auctions were conducted under state
pressure to keep bidding down and ensure low number of
participants. Maggs I also sets out the irregularities of the Russian
court’s recognition of the judgment the SocGen Group won in the
High Court in London which in tum enabled the claim to be bought
in Russia,

SCC Arbivation V (079/2005) Rosinves: v Russia. 226

7. DEC, 2010 15:12

ft

$28.

529.

WR, SOGN Ve kee

SVEA HOVRATT

227

2. Respondent

In addition to its contention that Claimant has not established that
the auctions were a sham (cf. §179 R-II), Respondent argues that the
bankruptcy auctions cannot be considered expropriatory. The
bankruptcy auctions by themselves thus do not even begin to meet the
standard necessary to establish an expropriation. In its Annex CC to
R-II, Respondent sets out that the results of the bankruptcy auctions
were not unfavourable to the debtor as the amounts realised
corresponded favourably to market values. ({182 R-I)

Furthermore, the bankruptcy auctions were fully in accord with
international practice. As is the case in the United Kingdom and other
States, a majority of bankruptcy liquidations are ordered by courts at
the request of the local tax authorities. The Russian rules applicable
to bankruptcy auctions show a strong concern for the safeguard of the
interests of the debtor and its equity holders, and are significantly
more rigorous than the corresponding rules in many other
jurisdictions, which tend to prioritize the rapid sale of the debtor’s
assets in the interest of the creditors. In particular, in many other
jurisdictions, auction sales are not mandated, and receivers are free to
sell off the assets belonging to the bankruptcy estate on a negotiated,
one-on-one basis — with all the attendant risks. Even when auctions
are used, specific requirements seldom limit the receivers’ broad
discretion in setting the applicable parameters (including whether or
not to set a minimum starting price for the auctioned assets). In many
other countries, receivers are instead simply encouraged to seek the
best price reasonably achievable under the circumstances. (183 R-I])

At the hearing, Prof. Maggs ~ who had previously opined that the
auction “prices” were “low” — readily conceded that he is “not an oil
industry appraisal expert.” Even though the Elliott Group is in the
business of valuing assets, Claimant has never denied that the auction
results exceeded both the appraisals of the expert appointed by the
bankruptcy receiver and contemporaneous fair market value
estimates produced by Claimant itself. Prof. Maggs also admitted that
his prior claim that the Bankruptcy Auctions had been “conducted

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 297

ef

92, DEC. 2019

531,

wS
532.
533.
ww

534,

15:17 SVEA HOVRATT

 

228

under State pressure” in reality “had nothing to do with what
happened actually at the auctions.” (9138 — 139 RPHB-I)

Claimant’s contention that Rosneft won “virtually all” the assets of
Yukos is demonstrably wrong. Other bidders won 8 out of 17
auctions, notably including the foreign entities ENI/Enel, which
acquired gas assets for USS 5.8 billion.. Prof. Maggs — who never
disputed that Yukos’ liabilities exceeded its assets ~ suggested that
those liabilities should actually have been US$ 500 million higher —
totaling at least USS 9.7 billion — if, as he appeared to advocate, the
claim of Moravel had been allowed to the bankruptcy. As a result,
taking into account the tax effect above, the hypothetical additional
proceeds required in order for equity. holders such as Claimant to
receive anything at all would rise even further — from US$ 12.1
billion to US$ 12.8 billion. (140 — 141, RPHB-I)

Claimant has never questioned Respondent’s showing that the
bankrustcy proceedings and bankruptcy auctions were fully
consistent with international practice. (142, RPHB-I)

3. Tribunal

Again, hereafter, the Tribunal, without repeating the arguments
presented by the parties, presents its conclusions therefrom in so far
as they may be relevant for Respondent’s responsibility under the
IPPA in two ways: (1) whether these submissions can be seen as
showing a breach of the IPPA by themselves, or, if not, (2) whether
they might be seen as one of several aspects relevant for the
consideration of the cumulative effect of the totality of Respondent’s
conduct which the Tribunal will examine later in this Award.

Regarding the bankruptancy auctions, the Tribunal notes that most
of the doubts expressed by Prof. Maggs in his reports (particularly
Maggs I fj 71, 153 et seq.,213 as well as Maggs Ill {| 10) were either
withdrawn or put into a more relative perspective during his oral
testimony (particularly Tr. 440 et seq.).

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 228

4

—¢

-

535.

536.

537,

538.

GVEA HOVRATT

229

Indeed, taking into account the wide discretion available in this
regard, the Tribunal cannot find any evidence on file sufficiently
showing that these auctions were either breaching Russian Jaw or
even breaching the higher standards to be applied under the IPPA.

(FE) Whether the Alleged Expropriatory Acts Were
Discriminatory

1. Claimant
To be entitled to respect under international law, a state’s exercise
of its power to tax must be non-discriminatory. Claimant argues that
the tax assessments, which were the pre-cursor to the auctions which
expropriated the assets of Yukos, were discriminatory. Claimant cites
LG&E v. Argentina (CLA-23) to support its contention that a
measure is discriminatory if the intent is to discriminate or if the
measure has a discriminatory effect. Claimant contends that
Respondent chose to reinterpret its tax laws in respect of Yukos
alone, and not in respect of any other oil companies. (9215 — 216 C-

)

Respondent intended to discriminate against Yukos as compared to
other oil companies, however Claimant need not prove intent.
Whether intentional or not, the Russian Federation discriminated de
facto against Yukos as compared to other Russian oil companies both
by (i) levying taxes against Yukos far in excess of the amounts levied
against other oil companies for the same tax planning strategies; and
(ii) enforcing and collecting those assessments in a manner that
resulted in the complete transfer of Yukos’ assets to a state-owned
enterprise, while permitting other Russian oil companies to settle the
claims against them on comparatively reasonable terms. (217 C-I)

Yukos was treated differently to other oi] companies. The amount of
back taxes assessed against Yukos were far in excess of the amounts
assessed against other Russian oil companies. Claimant sets out in a
variety of tables at [218 — 223 C-I that for the years 2000 to 2003,

SCC Arbitration V (079/2008) Rosinvest v Russia 229

TTT SU ATS —_—

72. DEC. 2010 15:13 SYEA HOVRATT

230

the gross discrepancies between reported tax savings prior to 2004,
profit taxes, VAT, penalty interest and fines and total tax liabilities.
Claimant submits that it is clear from the tables that Yukos was
discriminated against.

539. Maggs I sets out at 9173 that: “The treatment of Yukos by the
Russian tax authorities was inconsistent with the treatment of other
comparable taxpayers. The authorities developed, and secured court
approval of totally new theories of tax liability for the Yukos case.

“V Even though a number of other large oil companies had made
extensive use of trading companies in low tax zones, these companies !
were not subjected to ruinous tax consequences.

540, Claimant argues that Respondent confuses the standard for a claim j
of unlawful discrimination against foreign investors under Article 2
of the IPPA with the standard for determining the lawfulness of a
state’s expropriation of assets under Article 5 of the IPPA. While the
nationality of the investor may be relevant for a claim brought under
Article 2 of the IPPA, the nationality of the investor is not relevant in
a claim for expropriation under Article 5. (fa 44 and §97 C-Il)

541. Respondent does not provide any evidence to support its claim that
Yukos was not discriminated against. It ignores the ample public
evidence that Yukos was one of a number of Russian oil companies
that also saved significant sums in profit taxes by using trading
companies in the Low Tax Regions. Respondent’s attempts to argue
that Yukos “always stood at the opposite end of the spectrum” and

Se was “the most extreme” (both Annex A R-I p.{3) in its tax practices

fail because Respondent merely highlights the steps Yukos took to
defend itself after the Tax Ministry unlawfully assessed it for billions
of dollars of retroactive profit taxes and VAT. Respondent’s
argument is Kafkaesque, Yukos is said to be guilty because it
proclaimed its innocence and tried to defend itself. (985 ~ 91 C-I)

542. Respondent’s arguments used to justify discriminatory treatment of
Yukos, by stating that Western courts would have reached the same
result, ignore the fact that every Western court that has considered the
events surrounding the destruction of Yukos has concluded that the

SCC Asbixation V (079/2008) Rosinvest v Russia 230

70, DEC. 2010 15:14

—¢

543.

544.

545,

546.

WR GUsY Me Aan

SVEA HOVRATT

231

tax assessments were politically motivated and in bad faith. ({q92 —
93 C-I)

In respect of the VAT assessments in particular, Respondent has not
pointed to a single instance where the Tax Ministry treated a taxpayer
as differently as it treated Yukos. (§94 C-ID)

The Russian courts’ interpretation of Article 251 of the Tax Code
(CM-242) differed depending on whether the case involved Yukos or
Rosneft. As Maggs I points out, the courts applied one interpretation
against Yukos but then took Article 251 on its plain meaning when
dealing with a former Yukos subsidiary when it was controlled by
Rosneft. (§95 C-I1)

2. Respondent
Respondent argues that even if Claimant were abie to demonstrate,
which it cannot, that Yukos was the subject of discriminatory action,
no claim of discriminatory conduct is cognizable in the absence of an
allegation that the actions complained of targeted Yukos’ foreign or
British shareholders. It cites various authority (ELSI case ~ R-89;
Emanuel Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance Associates and the
U.S.A. — R-115) to support its claim that if Claimant is to substantiate
a claim of discrimination, certainly in a tax context, it would have to
allege that it was discriminated against on the basis of foreign or
British nationality, It is not sufficient for Claimant to allege that
Yukos was disfavoured as a result of selective tax enforcement.

(49288 — 290 R-T)

Differential treatment as a result of legitimate governmental
policies or based on reasonable and objective justification is not
discriminatory within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the [PPA.
Discrimination necessarily implies an unreasonable distinction
(Amoco International Finance Group v. Jran - CLA-5). Respondent
argues that reasons specific to an expropriated enterprise may justify
a different treatment. As Yukos was the largest and most blatant tax .
avoider of all Russian oil and gas companies, Yukos was a logical

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 231

AR. GOFE Me ae A

29. DEC. 2010 15:14 SVEA HOVRATT

232

candidate for tax assessments, penalties, and enforcement actions.
(99291 — 294 R-I)

547. Not every violation of tax law can be prosecuted and this is
recognised (e.g. by the European Court of Human Rights - RLA~77).
Yukos presented a highly visible target for tax enforcement. Not only
was its conduct egregious in its misuse of domestic tax heavens, but
the volume of taxes it evaded exceeded that of any other oil company
operating in Russia by far. (294-295 R-I)

548. Respondent has not, as Claimant asserts (fn 44 to C-II), confused )
the standard for a claim based on the prohibition against
discriminatory measures in Article 2(2) of the IPPA and a claim
based on a discriminatory expropriation cognizable under Article 1
5(1). Claimant offers no explanation for the different interpretations
of the term “discriminatory” in Article 2(2) and Article 5(1), and
there is none. Article 2(2) prohibits discriminatory measures that
impair the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of
investments. Article 5(1) extends the prohibition of discriminatory
treatment in Article 2(2) to expropriatory measures, prohibiting
expropriatory measures for a discriminatory “purpose.” To be for a
discriminatory “purpose” within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the
IPPA, an expropriation must target foreign investment. ({J155 - 157
R-II)

549, Claimant makes no attempt to show that the measures complained

of were based on foreign ownership of Yukos’ shares. ({154 R-II)

wv Ample authority confirms the requirement that discriminatory

conduct must target foreign investment in order to establish a claim

under either Article 2(2) or 5(1) of the IPPA. Respondent relies on

further authority for its interpretation of the term “discriminatory” in

the case Noble Ventures vy. Romania (R-308) which required that “the

Claimant has to demonstrate that a certain measure was directed

specifically against-a certain investor by reason of his, her or its
nationality”. (158 — 159 R-ID)

550. It is not enough for Claimant to allege that the local company is the

victim of discrimination, Claimant’s own submissions stress that
SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 232

NR DOPE eT

2. DEC. 2010 15:15 SVEA HOVRATT

ag

551.

552.

553.

554

233

Yukos was singled out for domestic political reasons germane to its
Russian majority shareholders, and not because of any foreign
ownership of Yukos shares. Claimant merely relies on Western court
decisions that it characterises as concluding “that the tax assessments
against Yukos were politically motivated” and otherwise does not
support its allegation with evidence. The Western court cases are
irrelevant to this Tribunal, they involve distinct issues of fact and
law, employed markedly low standards of proof, and have no
precedent value even in their own domestic context. Claimant does
not come close to meeting its heavy burden of proof with respect to
its allegations of improper political motives on the part of the Russian
Federation. (§{160 ~ 163 and Annex E R-II)

A claim of discrimination is factually unfounded. It is a matter of
public record that Russian tax authorities also collected taxes from oil
companies that had used and abused the special tax regimes. As a
legal matter, “discrimination” is likewise another line of defense that
tax authorities around the world would strongly resist, voth because it
would be incompatible with their legitimate interest in remaining free
to treat taxpayers differently, when deemed appropriate, but also
because, as a practical matter, the collection of revenues would be
paralyzed if a taxpayer could, in contesting an assessment, demand —
as Claimant does here — that the authorities demonstrate that they
have treated no other taxpayer more favourably. ({168 R-II)

The issue of discrimination is also addressed in Respondent’s
answer to the Tribunal’s Question 3.3 set out supra.

3. Tribunal
With regard to the alleged discrimination, in addition to the parties’

submissions summarised above, the Tribunal takes into account what
the parties have answered to the Tribunal’s question 3.3 in PO-S5,

. The term “discrimination” seems to have been used by the parties

regarding two different standards which are not identical:

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 233

22. DEC. 2010 15:15 SVEA HOVRATT

555.
S556,
557.

 

234

The IPPA uses the term in Article 2(2) regarding discriminatory
measures and in Article 5(1) regarding discriminatory expropriations.
Tn the view of the Tribunal, in both provisions, the term focuses on a
discrimination between nationals and foreigners. In this regard, the
Tribunal finds no evidence on file that Respondent’s measures
disputed in the present proceedings included such a discrimination.
The focus of Respondent’s measures was clearly on Yukos
irrespective of its domestic or foreign shareholders.

The second kind of “discrimination” which the parties and
particularly the Claimant refer to is whether Yukos was discriminated
against in comparison to the Respondent’s treatment of Yukos’
competitors. In this respect, the Tribunal can refer to its above
considerations which concluded that, indeed, in the application of the
tax law, in the tax assessments and in the conduct of the YNG
auction, Yukos was treated by Respondent quite different to the
treatment accorded to its competitors and other comparable tax
payers and no convincing reasons have been shown by Respondent
for this differentiation.

And here again, the Tribunal concludes that, even though some of
Respondent’s explanations and arguments for the distinctions made
seem plausible, there remain doubts whether they can be seen as a
fair and equitable treatment. Again, whether this, by itself, would be
sufficient to find a breach of Article 5 IPPA in spite of the high
threshold mentioned above particularly regarding a denial of justice
by the Russian courts, must not be decided here by the Tribunal.
However, in any case, these doubts in respect to the distinctions
perceived between Yukos and its competitors and comparable
taxpayers must be taken into account in the context of the
examination later in this award regarding the question whether the
cumulative affect of the totality of Respondent’s conduct is a breach
of the IPPA.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 234

dS DIS

79, DEC. 2010 15:16

~

558,

559.

561,

SVEA HOVRATT

235

(F) Whether Alleged Expropriatory Acts Were Bona Fide

1 Claimant

Claimant submits that a State’s exercise of its police powers is not
bona fide if the State’s object and purpose in exercising those powers
goes beyond its legitimate interest in enforcing its laws. The evidence
in this case overwhelmingly demonstrates that the measures
undertaken by the Respondent against Yukos were, at a minimum,
grossly disproportionate to Respondent’s legitimate interest in the
enforcement of its tax laws. At best the tax proceedings against
Yukos were a transparent attempt to legitimise the re-nationalisation
of assets that had been transferred from state control to Yukos in the
1990’s. (4192 C-I)

Claimant argues that Respondent failed to satisfy the most basic
requirements of due process. The measures taken against Yukos were
not a bona fide exercise of police powers and the measures were
“tantamount to expropriation” and demonstrate a concerted effort by
Respondent to re-nationalise Russia’s oil assets. President Putin set
out to “liquidate the oligarchs as a class” and targeted Mr
Khodorkovsky when he broke the truce requiring that the oligarchs
stayed out of politics. The non~bona fide nature of the efforts taken
by Respondent are highlighted in the auction of YNG, which
President Putin’s own adviser later described as the “swindle of the
year” (CM-186). It is simply impossible to conclude that the
destruction of Yukos arose out of a bona fide exercise of the Russian
Federation’s power to enforce its tax laws. ({§192 - 200 C-I)

In addition to the arguments set out above regarding the tax
assessments in section (A) above, C-I Claimant sets out in C-II that
the explanation offered by Respondent for the pursuit of Yukos for
profit taxes and VAT as it contradicts Respondent’s own position on
those matters. (45 C-II)

Firstly, the profit tax assessments were not bona fide because
Respondent had for a period before it undertook the extraordinary
assessments tried to change the laws and had been aware of Yukos’

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 235

NR, FOF UENO FUE S| eter,

49. DEC. 2010 15:16

ww

562.

WA. JO2Y Mew it ee

SVEA HOVRATT

236

use of Low Tax Regions as Yukos publicly disclosed it in its audited
accounts. The Russian Government did not effect change to the tax
laws relating to Low Tax Regions until the beginning of 2004.
Furthermore, the use of trading companies in the Low Tax Regions
was legal. The Russian authorities and courts had to depart from well
established law to find Yukos guilty (cf. Maggs Reports). The use of
trading companies in the Low Tax Regions was legal as set out in the
Maggs Reports. The only authority the Konnov Report cites to
demonstrate “consistent” interpretation by the Russian courts is the
judgments relating to Yukos. The lawfulness prior to 2004 of Yukos’
use of trading companies located in the Low Tax Regions is powerful
evidence that the retroactive assessment of profit taxes against Yukos
was not a bona fide exercise of the Russian Federation’s power to
tax. (7146 — 58 C-ID)

The Russian Federation knew of Yukos’ tax structures as early as
1998, and Respondent’s argument that it became aware of Yukos’ tax
structure only in 2003. Claimant cites various examples of the tax
authorities knowledge of Yukos’ tax structures, in particular its own
audits in respect of trading companies in the Low Tax Regions, well
before the extraordinary assessments in 2004. Furthermore, the report
compiled by PwC for 2002 (RM-47), which Respondent argues is
relevant as it served as a warning to Yukos, does no identify any
significant tax issues and particularly any profit tax issues, most
likely because Yukos’ use of the trading companies was legal at the

. time the report was written in 2002. (59 — 74 C-II)

563.

Secondly, the VAT assessments were not bona fide because no
VAT was due on exported oil. There was no legal basis for the legal
formalism used to impose the US$ 13.5 billion VAT assessment.
Respondent argues that that Yukos itself should have to pay the VAT
because its trading companies filed the documents necessary to prove
that the oil had been exported and to claim a VAT refund. This legal
formalism is contradictory to the reasoning used for the profit tax
assessment and is also contrary to the Russian Constitutional Court’s
interpretation of the tax code in this regard (Decision No. 12-P - CM-
39). The VAT assessments cannot be considered a bona fide
collection of tax. (475 — 84 C-II)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinyest v Russia 236

22. DEC. 20°C

15.47 SVEA HOVRATT

237

2. Respondent

564. Respondent attacks Claimant’s arguments that the Russian

4
J 565.
4

566.

SCC Art

Federation’s tax assessments were not bona fide. Claimant makes no
attempt to show that the tax assessments were mala fide. At most,
Claimant argues that Yukos’ tax schemes were lawful under Russian
law and that assessing taxes on lawful tax schemes is “powerful
evidence” that the tax assessments were not a bona fide exercise of
the Russian Federation’s power to tax. In addition, Claimant alleges
that since VAT is not due on exported oil, the VAT assessments were
also not bona fide. (151 R-ID)

Claimant correctly states that “[t]he Russian Federation’s actions
must be judged by international standards, not by Russian domestic
standards,” but makes no attempt to evaluate the Russian
Federation’s actions under international standards. Even if it were
shown that the the tax assessments did not com:ly with Russian law
does not establish that they were mala fide. In any event, Respondent
has demonstrated that the tax assessments were consistent with
Russian law and, more importantly, comport with international
standards. (152 — 153 R-II)

3. Tribunal

With regard to the parties arguments on the bona fide issue, in
addition to the patties’ submissions summarised above, the Tribunal
takes into account what the parties have submitted and what has been
summarized above regarding the application of the tax law, the tax
assessments, and the auctions.

And with regard to its conclusions regarding the bona fide issue, the
Tribunal can refer to its conclusions above on these respective issues
to the effect that, even though some of Respondent’s explanations
and arguments seem plausible, the application of the tax law, the tax
assessments on Yukos and the conduct of the auctions must be seen
as a treatment which can hardly be accepted as bona fide.

bitration V (079/200) Rosinvest v Russia 237

77.020. 2040

568,

VY
VY
569
570.
UY

571.

NA GUZE Me aA

15:47 SVEA HOVRATT

238

And again, whether this, by itself, would be sufficient to find a
breach of Article 5 IPPA in spite of the high threshold mentioned
above particularly regarding a denial of justice by the Russian courts,
must not be decided here by the Tribunal. However, in any case,
these doubts must be taken into account in the context of the
examination later in this award regarding the question whether the
cumulative affect of the totality of Respondent’s conduct is a breach
of Article 5 of the IPPA.

(G) Whether Alleged Expropriatory Acts Were Confiscatory

1. Claimant

. The auction of the entirety of Yukos’ assets was by definition

confiscatory: It was carried out in such an arbitrary and unreasonable
manner as both to establish the bad faith of the process and to be
itself tantamount to expropriation. The Respondent’s actions thus
cannot be considered a proper exercise of its power to tax. (4191 C-1)

The total effect of the VAT tax assessment and the profit tax
assessment against Yukos amounted to being confiscatory. The
resultant effective tax rate for Yukos was 54%, vastly higher than the
average corporate income tax rate of 30%. (498 C-ID)

2. Respondent
Respondent argues that States have a wide latitude in imposing and
enforcing taxation laws even if resulting in substantial deprivation. In
the present case, Respondent’s assessments were consistent with
international practice. All tax authorities and courts that reviewed
Yukos’ case required or were authorised to review the case giving
precedence to the economic substance over legal form. This is
exactly what counterparts in other jurisdictions would have done.

(99164 — 167 R-ID)

SCC Asbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 238

22. DEC, 2010 15:18 SVEA HOVRATT

~(

 

239

572. Claimant has not made any attempt to show that Respondent’s tax

573.

574.

575.

measures were inconsistent with international practice. Indeed, strong
support exists in international practice for the levying of penalties,
assessment of VAT on improperly documented exports, tolling the
statue of limitations for tax year 2000, conducting a repeat audit and
rejecting Yukos’ claims of “political persecution” and “confiscation”.
Furthermore, the effective tax rate of 80% is much lower than
equivalent rates imposed by EU Member States, and in any case,
much lower than the 1300% rate charged in the Corn Products
(CLA-15) case Claimant cites as support for its argument on
confiscation, (9168 — 178 R-II]

3. Tribunal

Regarding the question disputed between the parties as to whether
Rspondent’s actions were confiscatory, there is little to add by the
Tribunal to its considerations above in this award.

It is undisputed that Respondent’s measures resulted in the
deprivation of Yukos’ assets. It is also undisputed, as Respondent
correctly argues, that States have a wide latitude in imposing and
enforcing taxation laws even if resulting in substantial deprivation.
The only question is whether Respondent’s measures can be justified
as falling within this latitude of discretion. In this regard, the Tribunal
refers to its considerations above with respect to the application of
Russian tax law, the tax assessment, and the auctions which resulted
in the conclusion that Respondent’s actions towards Yukos cannot be
justified by its authority to apply and enfotce its tax laws. Therefore,
Respondent’s measures were indeed confiscatory.

However, again, whether this, by itself, would be sufficient to find a
breach of Article 5 IPPA in spite of the high threshold mentioned
above particularly regarding a denial of justice by the Russian courts,
must not be decided here by the Tribunal. However, in any case, this
qualification must be taken into account in the context of the
examination later in this award regarding the question whether the
cumulative affect of the totality of Respondent’s conduct is a breach
of the IPPA.

SCC Arbiteation V (079/200) Rosinvest ¥ Russia 239

72. DEC. 2610

576

578.

579

OR, DOP UTES OTE A

SYEA HOVRATT

45:18

(HE) Compensation for Alleged Expropriation

L Claimant

. Although Article 5(1) of the IPPA recognises a Contracting Party’s
tight under certain conditions to expropriate or nationalise property,
the failure of a Contracting Party to respect the conditions under
which that article permits such a measure renders an expropriation or
nationalisation unlawful. (4187 C-I)

It is undisputed that Respondent has never paid any compensation
whatsoever to Yukos or its shareholders. The facts demonstrate that
the expropriation of Yukos’ assets was discriminatory, and that the
public purpose articulated by Respondent ~ “legitimate measure of
taxation” — is simply unbelievable, Claimant is therefore entitled to
be fully compensated by the Russian Federation for the unlawful
expropriation of its investment and for the injury to that investment
caused by the expropriation of the assets of the Russian company in
which it invested, as set forth in Claimant’s Argument on Quantum.
(4188 C-1

2. Respondent

Respondent does not make any submissions regarding
compensation to Claimant for any alleged expropriation. It relies on
its arguments, above, regarding Claimant’s standing and that an
expropriation has not been made out.

3. Tribunal

. As in the previous chapter of this award, regarding the question of

compensation, there is little to add by the Tribunal to its
considerations above in this award.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 240

27. DEC, 2010 15:18

a

al

580

581.

582.

Td MF ees

SVEA HOVRATT

241

. It is undisputed that Respondent’s did not offer or pay any

compensation to Yukos or its shareholders for the measures which
resulted in the deprivation of Yukos’ assets. It again is also
undisputed, as Respondent correctly argues, that States have a wide
latitude in imposing and enforcing taxation laws even if resulting in
substantial deprivation without compensation. The only question is
whether Respondent’s measures can be justified as falling within this
discretion. In this regard, the Tribunal refers to its considerations
above with respect to the application of Russian tax law, the tax
assessment, and the auctions which resulted in the conclusion that
Respondent’s actions towards Yukos cannot be justified by its
authority to apply and enforce its tax laws.

However, again, whether this, by itself, would be sufficient to find a
breach of Article 5 IPPA by expropriation without compensation, in
spite of the high threshold mentioned above particularly regarding a
denial of justice by the Russian courts, must not be decided here by
the Tribunal. However, in any case, this qualification must be taken
into account in the context of the examination later in this award
regarding the question whether the cumulative affect of the totality of
Respondent’s conduct is a breach of Article 5 of the IPPA.

Q) Whether, in any event, Claimant had no legitimate
investment-backed expectations

1. Claimant
Apart from highlighting in its arguments on damages, at {196 C-II
ef seq., that Claimant had a legitimate expectation that Respondent
would follow its laws and not expropriate Yukos’ assets, Claimant
does not address Respondent’s contention that a protected investment
under an investment treaty requires a reasonable expectation of profit.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 24}

INR GI Oe TDL J ne

22. DEC, 2010 15:19 SVEA HOVRATT

242

2. Respondent

583. Respondent argues that a protected investment depends upon a
reasonable expectation of a profit, It cites Consortium RFCC v.
Morocco (RLA-58) to support its claim that Government action must
deprive the investor of a distinct, reasonable investment-backed
expectation. Respondent also argues that even if Claimant qualified
as an investor after 19 November 2004, Claimant must have accepted
the tax regime as it existed at the time of the making of the
investment and should have expected the enforcement measures that
followed. Speculation that tax measures might not be enforced does

not amount to a reasonable expectation, (252 — 257 R-D)

3. Tribunal

584, Regarding Respondent’s arguments with respect to Claimant’s
alleged lack of legitimate expectations, the Tribunal recalls that,
above in this award, it has already concluded that Claimant is an
“Gnvestor” and has made an “investment” as provided for by the
IPPA.

585. Further, this issue may be relevant for the determination and
valuation of any possible damages to be awarded to Claimant in so
far as Respondent is found to be liable under the IPPA. This matter
will be examined below in this award.

(J) Whether Cumulative Effect of the Various Strands of
- ' Respondent’s Actions Constituted a Breach of the IPPA

1. Claimant
586. Claimant argues that the Russian Federation seized Yukos’ assets
which may have been in hindsight “an effort to reassert control over
strategic petroleum resources that had escaped from Government
control during the privatisation process that had followed the collapse
of the USSR and incidentally to suppress political opposition.” (42-6
C-ID

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 242

22. DEC. 2010 15:19

587,

588.

TNR 90 FUE

SVEA HOVRATT

243

The Russian Federation pursued a series of specious and retroactive
tax enforcement measures against Yukos that culminated in the
expropriation of Yukos’ assets and the transfer of virtually all of its
assets to state-owned companies. This was due in part to a change in
treatment toward Yukos after Mr Khodorkovsky publicly challenged
the Putin administration and after various projects proposed by
Yukos seemed to threaten the Russian State’s control of its petroleum
resources. As a result, Mr Khodorkovsky was arrested and
imprisoned on charges of tax fraud and other offences — one of many
examples where Yukos’ management and outside advisors would be
targeted. Following the arrest of Mr Khodorkovsky, the tax
authorities undertook a hasty “supervisory” audit of the Yukos group
of companies, just in time to get under the statute of limitations for
the tax year 2000 (Tr p. 26), followed by further audits for later tax
years, leading ultimately to a US$ 16.7 billion assessment in back
taxes, penalties, and interest and VAT assessments. The Russian
Federation then commenced expedited proceedings in 2004 to
enforce the assessments while taking steps to prevent Yukos from
paying or challenging the assessments. It then proceeded to auction
Yukos’ assets, commencing with the YNG auction where the
“winning” company was set up by Respondent to provide an illusion
of independence. YNG eventually ended up in the hands of state-
owned Rosneft, which later described the purchase of YNG as the
most monumental bargain in Russia’s modem history. Respondent
then went on to take further steps via Rosneft to liquidate Yukos by
purchasing Yukos debt from the SocGen Group in exchange for the
consortium filing for Yukos’ bankruptcy. The bankruptcy involved
auctions of Yukos’ remaining assets which were then acquired by
state-owned Gazprom and Rosneft. ({13 C-Il)

The Russian Federation’s auctions of Yukos assets constitute an
expropriation and, with regard to those assets that ended up in the
hands of Russian state-owned companies, a nationalisation of Yukos’
asserts. (19 C-II)

SCC Arbitration V (07972005) Rosinvest v Russia 243

Ape

97. DEC. 1040 15:26

€

589.

590,

SVEA HOVRAL |

244

2. Respondent

Respondent contends that the Claimant’s characterisation of
Respondent’s actions in respect of Yukos is conspiratorial. The
assertion that Yukos’ collapse was the result of a coordinated and
elaborate plot by the Russian Federation in order to “reassert state
control over strategic petroleum assets, and incidentally to suppress
political opposition” (C-II 95) is neither plausible nor proven. There
is a heavy burden of proof of demonstrating the anti-Yukos
conspiracy. Claimant relies mainly on circumstantial evidence
including the report by the Special (CM-~46) Rapporteur to the
Council of Europe, who conducted a fundamentally flawed report
based on press articles and Yulos’ own high-powered lobbyists. It
deliberately avoided an examination of the tax claim. This resulted in
a non-binding political resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe (CM-48). Unfortunately, this resolution was
relied on by the judiciary in non-Russian jurisdictions deciding cases
concerning extradition of individuals connected with the Yukos case.
Furthermore, the statements by Russian officials cited by Claimant
are also of no relevance as they stemmed from extremist figures. The
Russian judiciary are alleged by Claimant to have been strongly
pressured to rule against Yukos. This claim is unfounded as Claimant
has failed to address the rebuttals put by Respondent in Annex A to
R-I setting out that Yukos had ample time to review documents, the
removal of judges was proper and complied with Russian law and
that there is no evidence to support an improper connection between
service medals to judges and the Yukos case. (Annex E to R-II, pp.1-
24)

Claimant’s “conspiracy theory” fails to acknowledge the complicity
of Yukos’ own management and controlling shareholders in the
company’s collapse. Yukos continued to use the system of tax
evasion in the Low Tax Regions long after its competitors had
stopped, nor did Yukos attempt to file amended tax returns to
minimise their liability. Furthermore, Yukos frightened away
potential bidders from the YNG auction which had the effect of
reducing the proceeds at auction. (Annex E to R-II, pp. 25-26)

SCC arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia 244

2 GOS)

 

22. DEC. 2010 15:20 SVEA HOVRATT

245

591, Claimant’s conspiracy theory also fails to address why parties
unrelated to Yukos such as the SocGen Group were complicit in the
alleged scheme of the Russian Federation when their reputation
would be risked and they would risk the “lifetime of litigation”
threatened by Yukos, Finally, Claimant has failed to demonstrate that
if Respondent had indeed a malicious intent to “destroy Yukos”, why
it then had not pursued quicker and less uncertain taxation remedies.
(Annex E to R-II, pp. 27-29)

Y 3, Tribunal
592, The Tribunal recalls its findings in various sections above in this
award that, without repeating the extensive arguments presented by
y the parties regarding the various disputed issues, it needs to and
would discuss its conclusions therefrom only in so far as they may be
relevant for Respondent’s responsibility under the IPPA in so far as
they might be seen as one of several aspects relevant for the
consideration of the cumulative effect of the totality of Respondent’s
conduct which the Tribunal will examine later in this Award.

593. The Tribunal will deal with that latter aspect in section H.VIII
“Conclusions of Tribunal on Liability” below.

“

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 245

NNR, JOP Ummm TEL AO

27, DEC. 2010 15:21 SVEA HOVRATT

246

H.VIL. Exhaustion of Local Remedies

1. Claimant

594. Claimant is silent on local remedies except to the extent that it
argues that Yukos was restricted from exercising its right to due
process, and as highlighted above, Yukos was victim of a concerted
effort by executive and judicial branches to re-nationalise its assets,

2. Respondent

~ 595, The acts alleged by Claimant only give rise to an obligation on
Respondent to make domestic legal remedies available for Claimant.
To comply with Article 5(1), it is only necessary (and therefore
sufficient) that relief could have been sought in Russian courts to
remedy the alleged expropriatory conduct. There is no free-standing
due process requirement in the IPPA that Claimant can invoke to
redress the alleged violations of due process that Claimant contends
constitute elements of an expropriation. There are numerous
examples of investment treaties which require due process to be
breached to allow an investment claim. In order to comply with such
a requirement (of which Article 5(1) is an example) it is only
necessary that relief could have been sought in Russian courts to
remedy the alleged expropriatory conduct. Since Claimant has chosen
not to avail itself of those remedies, no violation of Article S(1) is
possible. (7266 — 272 R-I)

596. Respondent argues that the Russian monist legal system would have
allowed Claimant to directly claim rights based on an international
treaty such as the IPPA in the Russian courts. (273 — 282 R-I)

3. Tribunal
597, For the reasons outlined above in this award, the Tribunal is
satisfied that Claimant has standing to bring a claim under the IPPA.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 246

29. DEC. 2019 19:21 SVEA HOVRATT

247

The IPPA contains no requirement that domestic legal remedies must
be exhausted before a claim can be made.

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia, 247

RK. FO 2 Vm TEA

27. DEC. 2010 15:21 GVEA HOVRATT

H.VUI. Conclusions of Tribunal on Liability

598. Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note
of the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

CI 91236 ~ 242
“ RI 9134 — 142
R-I Annex B pp. 19 - 23
CI qy169 - 170
v R-II {9147 - 178
CT. pp. 57-58, pp. 756 ~ 757

CPHB-I 60-115
RPHB-I $76 —77, 83, 101 - 102
CPHB-I 9749-52

Exhibits:
CM-60 Ministry of Taxation for the Russian Federation,
Inspection Report No. 08-1/1, 29 December 2003

Legal Authority:

CLA-19 GAM Investments, Inc. V. Government of the United

Mexican States, Final Award, UNCITRAL Rules, 15 November 2004

CLA-80 CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic,

Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, 17 July 2003

“ CLA-81 Enron & Ponderosa Assets, LP. v. Argentine Republic,
Decision on Jurisdiction, [CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, 14 January 2004
RLA-16 Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and
Power Company, Limited (New Application: 1962) (Second Phase)
(Belgium v. Spain), International Court of Justice, Judgment of 5
February 1970, ICJ Reports 1970
R-89 Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (US v.
Italy), International Court of Justice, Judgment of July 20, 1989, ICI
Reports 1989

SCC arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 248

97. DEC. 2019

y 599.

600.

601,

NR, TOT Eee

15:22 SVEA ROVRATT

249

Witness Statements:

Maggs] = 777 — 121, 150 - 152

Mages II = 943 — 47, 118,

Mages Tr. pp. 442 ~ 443

KonnovIl $94 -102, 126 -134, 142 - 143 , 216
Konnov I 931 --34, $972 - 82

Konnov Tr. pp. 469, 568 — 569

Further, the Tribunal takes into account the submissions by the
Parties regarding the various disputed measures and aspects
summarized above, and notes in particular the submissions of the
Parties on the cumulative effect of the various strands of
Respondent’s actions in respect of Yukos. And further, the Tribunal
refers to its own considerations and conclusions above with respect to
these individual measures and aspects. As mentioned above, the
Tribunal considers that an assessment of whether Respondent
breached tiie IPPA can only be effectively conducted i; the conduct
as a whole is reviewed, rather than isolated measures or aspects.

1. Scope of Jurisdiction

From its decisions in its Award on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal recalls
section 1.2:
The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims
submitted by Claimant on the basis of the Most-
Favoured Nation Clause in Article 3 UK-Soviet
BIT in connection with Article 8 of the Denmark-
Russia BIT.

Under the Denmark-Russia BIT, as there is no limiting language, it
is quite clear that its arbitration clause in Article 8 provides
jurisdiction regarding the protection granted in Article 4 of that BIT
for expropriation. Therefore, via the MFN clause in Article 3 IPPA,
the present Tribunal does have jurisdiction in that regard as well.

SCC Arbitration V (079/200S) Rosinvest v Russia 249

INES

72.060. 2010 4

Whe wee

5:22 SVEA HOVRAII

250

2. Attributability

602. The Tribunal notes that neither Party addressed the question

603
604.

whether the acts alleged by the tax ministry, courts, officials and
other bodies were in fact acts of organs of the State and attributable
to Respondent. As the Parties seem to do, the Tribunal regards the
evidence for attributability for the alleged acts to the State for
consideration of a possible responsibility under the IPPA and
international law to be clear.

The courts are also organs of the Russian state. From its
considerations above in this Award regarding the possible
examination of decisions of the Russian courts, the Tribunal recalls
its conclusion that on one hand, in addition to this Tribunal not acting
as an appeal court on the decisions of the Russian courts, a high
threshold must be applied in order to conclude that, the conduct of
the Russian courts, by itself, would be a breach of the obligation of
fair and equitable treatment in the form of a denial of justice, but that
on the other hand however this does not exclude that the Tribunal, in
the consideration of the totality of Respondent’s measures in their
cumulative effect which it finds to be appropriate, includes the
examination of the conduct of the coutts in that context.

The Tribunal has raised the question with the Parties whether there
ought to be any distinction between the measures taken by
Respondent toward Yukos during the period in which the
Participation Agreements were in force and the measures taken
thereafter. In view of the Tribunal’s above conclusion that Claimant
held an investment during that period, the Tribunal considers that
Respondent must be held responsible for measures taken in respect
of the investment during the period the Participation Agreements
were in force.

3. Applicable Provisions of IPPA for Claimant’s Claim in
respect of its shareholding

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 250

22. DEC. 2010 15:23 SVEA HOVRATT

rm

605.

606.

607.

608.

 

251

Traditionally, under international law the starting point for
considering what rights shareholders of a company have for measures
taken by a state is the Barcelona Traction case decided by the ICI.
That case held that shareholders can only realise the rights which
their shares entitle them to, not rights held by the company in which
they own shares. However, it must be noted that this ruling was made
long ago in a case on diplomatic protection in which two states were
the parties and not a case in which investors could and did directly
raise claims against a state as they can and do in modern BITs. As the
Court pointed out in paragraph 90 of its Judgment, the matter is
normally regulated by specific agreements, notably those for the
protection of foreign investments, as indeed is the case here.

In this regard the Tribunal notes that the IPPA deals explicitly with
the rights of shareholders in Article 5(2) stating that:

“Where a Contracting Party expropriates the
assets of a company or enterprise which is
incorporated or constituted under the law in
force in any part of its own territory, and in
which investors of the other Contracting Party
have a shareholding, the provisions of paragraph
(1) of this Article shall apply.”

For the IPPA, it is therefore expressly clarified that also
shareholders, be they majority or minority shareholders, also have a
claim for protection under Article 5 if expropriatory measures falling
under paragraph (1) are taken “only” against the company and not
directly against the shareholders themselves.

In this context, the Tribunal notes that, even without express
provisions such as Article 5(2), the recent jurisprudence from
investment arbitration tribunals considering other investment treaties
has confirmed the ability for shareholders to claim for measures taken
against the company in which they hold shares and has been
developed to the point accepting that minority shareholders have
made claims for indirect damage. The Tribunal notes in this regard
the cases ELSI (R-89), GAMI (CLA-19), CMS Gas Transportation

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 25]

Oo Lf ID

AR GY IO 31D tn

97, DEC. 2010 15:23 SVEA HOVRATT

252

Company (CLA-80) and Enron & Ponderosa (CLA-81). These
decisions confirm that modern investment treaty arbitration does not
require that a shareholder can only claim protection in respect of
measures that directly affect shares in their own right, but that the
investor can also claim protection for the effect on its shares by
measures of the host state taken against the company

609. In view of the above, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that
shareholders rights are expressly protected by Article 5 (2) IPPA
against exproriatory measures falling under paragraph | of the same
provision

4, The alleged measures in breach of Article 5 of the IPPA
610. Itis recalled that Article 5 IPPA provides:

“Expropriation

(I)Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not
be nationalised, expropriated or subjected to measures having
effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation
(hereinafter referred to as “expropriation”) in the territory of
the other Contracting Party except for a purpose which is in the
public interest and is not discriminatory and against the
payment, without delay, of adequate and defective
compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the real
value of the investment expropriated immediately before the
expropriation or before the impending expropriation became
public knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall be made
within two months of the date of expropriation, after which
interest at a normal commercial rate shall accrue until the date
of payment, and shail be effectively realizable and be freely
transferable. The investor affected shall have a right, under the
law of the Contracting Party making the expropriation, to
prompt review, by a judicial or other independent authority of
that Party, of his or its case and of the valuation of his or its

SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rosinvest v Russia. 252

77, DEC. 2010 15:24

“

y

611.

612,

SVEA HOVRAI |

253

investment in accordance with the principles set out in this
paragraph,

(2)Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a
company or enterprise which is incorporated or constituted
under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and in
which investors of the other Contracting Party have a
shareholding, the provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article
shall apply.”

In its examination as to whether the totality of Respondent’s
measures in their cumulative effect must be considered as a breach of
Article 5 IPPA, the Tribunal refers to its considerations above when
examining the application of Russian tax law, the actual tax
assessments, the conduct of the auctions, and later the parties
arguments and the Tribunal’s considerations with respect to bona
fide. Without repeating the extensive arguments presented by the
parties regarding these various disputed issues, it was already pointed
out above that the Tribunal has to reach conclusions therefrom only
in so far as they may be relevant for Respondent’s responsibility
under the IPPA as to whether they might be seen as one of several
aspects relevant for the consideration of the cumulative effect of the
totality of Respondent’s conduct which the Tribunal will examine
later in this Award,

Further, to avoid repetition, the Tribunal also recalls its conclusions
that, even though some of Respondent’s explanations and arguments
for the justification of the measures taken seem persuasive or at least
plausible, there remain doubts whether the measures can be seen as
bona fide and non-discriminatory. It was also pointed out that the
Tribunal did not have to decide whether any particular measures, by
themselves, would be sufficient to find a breach of Article 5 IPPA, in
spite of the high threshold mentioned above particularly regarding a
denial of justice by the Russian courts, but that these doubts must be
taken into account in the context of the examination later in this
award regarding the question whether the cumulative affect of the
totality of Respondent’s conduct is a breach of Article 5 of the IPPA.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 253

77, DEC. 1010 15:24

613.

614.

615.

616.

SVEA HOVRATT

254

The Tribunal now tums to this latter examination of the totality of
Respondent’s measures and the respective application of Article 5
IPPA .

In this context, the Tribunal takes note of the parties’ answers to the
Tribunal’s Question 3.9 of PO-5, and of particularly the following:

As Claimant points out, the treatment of Yukos and of Mr.
Khodorkovsky changed dramatically after the latter had publicly
criticized the Putin administration and after several projects
suggested by Yukos seem to have been understood as threatening the
government’s control over the Russian petroleum resources. The
Russian authorities arrested Mr. Khodorkovsky on 25 October 2003
on charges primarily stemming from the 1994 privatization of Apatit
(a company unrelated to Yukos), even though the General
Prosecutor’s Office of the Russian Federation, in its letter to
President Putin had, towards the end of the letter, concluded that
there were “no grounds for it to take action.” (CM-423) (In this
context, the Tribunal has taken note of the Decision of the European
Court of Human Rights accepting the Application of Mr.
Khodorkovsky complaining against his treatment (CM-381), but in
view of the different criteria established by the European Convention
of Human Rights this Tribunal does not consider this decision as
relevant for the present case based on the IPPA.)

Six weeks later, in December 2003, the tax authorities commenced
the re-audit of Yukos that reversed the findings of their earlier audit
and assessed billions of dollars of tax claims. The Audit Report of the
December 2003 re-audit expressly referred to the criminal
prosecution of Yukos executives as a basis for rebutting the
presumption of good faith to which Russian taxpayers are entitled.
(CM-60 at 14)

The 6 April 2004 letter from the Deputy Minister of Taxes and
Levies of the Russian Federation to Yukos (RM-1548) expressly
connected the tax assessments against Yukos to Mr. Khodorkovsky,
this time with reference to his political writings in a letter published
end of March in the newspaper Vedomosti.

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 254

22. DEC. 2010

xe

617.

618.

619.

620.

19:25 SV¥eA HOYKALT

These facts suggest that measures taken were linked to the strategic
objective of returning petroleum assets to the contro! of the Russian
State and to an effort to suppress a political opponent.

This has to be seen together with the numerous departures from
earlier application practice of Russian law which the Tribunal found
above in its examination of the application of that law, of the actual
tax assessments, of the auctions, and of the bona fide issue. In this
context it should be pointed out that, even if taxation as such is
excluded from qualifying as a breach by Article 11(3) of the
Denmark-Russia BIT and thus also for the IPPA under its MFN
clause, this does not exclude to take taxation measures into account,
besides other measures of Respondent, in considering the cumulative
effect of a general pattern of treatment in the examination whether
that qualifies as “measures having effect equivilant to nationalisation
or expropriation” and as “discriminatory” (Article 5(1) IPPA).

The Tribunal also recalls from its considerations above that it is
able to review factual matters and legal steps that occurred prior to
Claimant’s purchase of Yukos shares such as the application of tax
law in order to inform its investigation of the major alleged acts,
namely the auctions, which, taking into account the Tribunal’s
conclusion on meeting the definition of “investor” and “investment”,
indisputably occurred when Claimant held Yukos shares.

On that basis, without repeating its above considerations of the
individual measures of Respondent, the Tribunal comes to the
following conclusions:

a. VAT: The Tribunal is not satisfied that the enormous VAT
assessment plus fines and interest was a bona fide measure of
taxation on Yukos. The staggering scale in addition to the
inconsistency of approach between the profit tax assessment
and VAT assessment must be seen as evidence of intentions
toward Yukos which go beyond mere application of the tax law

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 255

70. DEC. 2010 15:25

NM

°

SVEA HOVRATT

256

and cannot be considered as a bona fide and non-discriminatory
treatment.

. Profit taxes: The Tribunal considers that the legal landscape in

effect during the period in which Yukos claimed the tax
benefits from the Low Tax Regions was defined by ambiguous
legislation which Yukos clearly used to its advantage,
However, the subsequent re-application of amorphous
principles of “good faith” and “proportionality” with fluid
levels of investment to be made in the Low Tax Regions are a
weak defence by Respondent given the scale of the tax assessed
in the re-assessment audits beginning in December 2003 and
Yukos’ openness in taking advantage of that tax regime when
the initial audits were conducted and also were against bona
fide and discriminatory in view of the treatment of other
comparable companies using similar methods to avoid taxes.

Repeat offender fines: The US$ 3.8 billion repeat offender
fines on the basis of conduct pre-dating the tax audit again
appears to the Tribunal as a departure from practice applied
earlier and from that granted to other companies and thus to be
one part of a cumulative effort to prevent Yukos’ ongoing
existence,

YNG auction: The Tribunal recalls the circumstances
described above when considering this auction. In particular, it
has been noted that the two bidders actually participating were
not only under Respondent’s control but that the winning bidder
was a completely unknown company just created before the
auction and disappearing right after the auction and assigning
its interests to Rusian state-owned Rosneft. The circumstances
that this bidder was further found to have no real offices and
nevertheless was able to raise the deposit in the range of US$
1.7 billion and then the purchase price with the apparent help of
Rosneft further contribute to the impression that the scheme
was set up under the control of Respondent to bring Yukos’
assets under Respondent’s control. Therefore, from the

SCC Apbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 256

22. VEC, ZY 19:26

SYEA HUVKATI

257

evidence on file, the Tribunal concludes that the auction on 19
December 2004 in which Baikalfinansgroup company, a front
for Rosneft, acquired Yukos’ main asset, the YNG shares, was
organised in a manner to ensure state control was ultimately
asserted over the asset. In short the Tribunal is convinced that
the auction of YNG was rigged.

. Bankruptcy Auctions: The last measure to consider in the

scope of a claim under the IPPA was the last bankruptcy
auction on 15 August 2007. In that context, the Tribunal notes
the rationae temporis jurisdiction contentions of Respondent
regarding the relevance to the liability question of measures that
predated Claimant’s purchase of shares in late 2004. In this
regard, the Tribunal considers, consistently with its
jurisdictional conclusions above, that those measures which
predated Claimant’s purchase of shares as well as measures
predating the final auction inform the legal evaluation of the
totality of Respondent’s measures, Though the Tribunal did not
find the banktruptcy auctions to be conducted contrary to
Russian law, this does not change the general impression from
the evidence on file for the Tribunal, since the application for
bankruptcy by the SocGen Group was also conducted by
association with the State-controfled company, Rosneft, and
that they fitted into the obvious general pattern and obvious
intention of the totality of the scheme to deprive Yukos of its
assets.

621. In conclusion therefore, the Tribunal considers that the totality of
Respondent’ measures were structured in such a way to remove
Yukos’ assets from the control of the company and the individuals
associated with Yukos. They must be seen as elements in the
cumulative treatment of Yukos for what seems to have been the
intended purpose. The Tribunal, in reviewing the various alleged
breaches of the IPPA, even if the justification of a certain individual

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 257

RN DOP LTS FE DF ee ae

27. DEC. 2019 15:26 SVEA HOVRATT

258

measure might be arguable as an admissible application of the
relevant law, considers that this cumulative effect of those various
measures taken by Respondent in respect of Yukos is relevant to its
decision under the IPPA. An illustration is, as Claimant has pointed
out, that despite having used nearly identical tax structures, no other
Russian oil company was subjected to the same relentless and
inflexible attacks as Yukos. In the view of the Tribunal, they can only
be understood as steps under a common denominator in a pattern to
destroy Yukos and gain control over its assets.

~ 622, The Tribunal now tums to the examination of the criteria provided '
in Article 5 (1) IPPA. In this regard, the Tribunal, without repeating
- them, refers to the extensive arguments by both Parties summarized

above in this Award on the various aspects of the alleged taking and )
the Tribunal’s respective comments.

623. A measure constitutes an expropriation if it has the effect of a
substantial deprivation of property forming all or a material part of
the investment, and if the measure is attributable to Respondent. If it
is an expropriation, it is lawful if the requirements set forth in Article
5 IPPA are complied with.

624. In this context, the Tribunal has taken note of the parties’ answers
to the Tribunal’s Questions 3.4 and 3.6 of PO-5. The Tribunal shares

w Respondent’s view that that the term “measures having effect :
equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation” covers indirect
expropriation, but without dispensing with the requirement of a
substantial or total deprivation of (i) the economic value of an
investment (as Claimant articulated the standard at the hearing), (ii)
fundamental ownership rights, in particular, control of an ongoing
business, or (iii) deprivation of legitimate investment-backed
expectations. However, in that regard Claimant’s argument is indeed
relevant that, in determining whether a measure (or set of measures)
is “equivalent to” expropriation, the Tribunal should evaluate
whether the “net effect” of the measure (or set of measures) is the
same as an outright expropriation, i.e., a substantial or total
deprivation of the economic value of an asset (see also pp. 719-721

Tr.). The Tribunal agrees with Claimant’s submission that the
SCC Arbitration V (0792005) Rastnvest v Russia 258

97, DEC. 2010 15:2! SEA HOVRALI

¢

625.

626.

627.

628.

629.

259

Tribunal need not address this question, because it is confronted with
a complete taking of all of the assets of Yukos that amounts to
nationalisation or expropriation of RosInvestCo’s investment.

Indeed, it is undisputed that Yukos, as a result of the various
measures of Respondent described in the Parties submissions and
summatised above in this award, was deprived of its assets and that
this affected Claimant’s shares in Yukos. The taking of Yukos’ assets
could be understood as constituting expropriation of RosInvestCo’s
“Investment” under Article 5(1) of the IPPA, because the
expropriation of the assets of a company has the same effect as an
expropriation of the shares in such company. But the application of
paragraph (2) of Article 5 makes it unnecessary to rely on paragraph
(1) directly.

Therefore, it needs no further explanation that a taking took place.

The only question is whether this takiz:g was justified and thus there
is no breach of Article 5.

It is undisputed, and in the present case confirmed by Article 11(3)
of the Denmark-Russia BIT, that the normal application of domestic
tax law in the host state cannot be seen as an expropriatory act. On
the other hand, it is generally accepted that the mere fact that
measures by a host state are taken in the form of application and
enforcement of its tax law, does not prevent a tribunal ftom
examining whether this conduct of the host state must be considered,
under the applicable BIT or other international treaties on investment
protection, as an abuse of tax law to in fact enact an expropriation.

The Tribunal in particular refers to the following sources (also
cited by Claimant) in support of its conclusions:

a. Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United
States | 712 (1987), cmt. (g) (“[A]n expropriation can be
executed through ‘taxation, regulation, or other action that is
confiscatory, or that prevents, unreasonably interferes with, or

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 259

NR.5891 S. 11/39

22. DEC. 2010 15:2? SVEA HOVRATT

ww

260

unduly delays, effective enjoyment of an alien’s property or its
removal from the states’ territory.”).

b. Occidental Exploration & Production Co. v. Republic of
Ecuador, Final Award, 1 July 2004, at § 85 (“Taxes can result
in expropriation as can other types of regulatory measures.”).

c, B.A. Wortley, . EXPROPRIATION IN PUBLIC
INTERNATIONAL LAW, at 106 (1977).

d, Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance Associates, Iran-US Claims
Tribunal, Award No. 460-880-2, 29 December 1989, TUSCTR,
vol. 23, 378, at 387.

e, Paul Guggenheim, Les Principes de Droit Intemational Public,
Recueil des cours, 1952-I, vol. 80, 1 (“[A]mong the measures
that cause such a transfer [of acquired rights], taxation and
criminal measures must still be excluded, which — as for
example the confiscation of the private property of a foreigner
by virtue of a criminal judgment — obviously do not give rise to
compensation ~ on the condition, however, that they do not
constitute an abuse of right, ie. that they do not have a
confiscatory character.”).

630. As seen above in the consideration of Respondent’s measures, these

631.

measures in their totality, including but going beyond application of
tax law, can only be understood to have had the aim to deprive Yukos
from its assets. Such a taking would only be admissible under Article
5 if the conditions of that provision are fulfilled.

The first of these conditions according to Article 5(1) is that the
taking must be for a purpose which is in the public interest. Even if it
could be argued that, in the judgement of the Russian Government, it
was indeed in the public interest to take Yukos’ assets, the Tribunal
notes that this has never been claimed or shown by Respondent in
these proceedings as it does not concede that there was indeed an
expropriation.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 260

uw ue’ wee

22. 0E6, NTU 19228 SVEA HUYKAI|

x

632,

633.

634,

635.

261

And even if this were so, according to Article 5 IPPA the taking
would have to be “not discriminatory and against the payment,
without delay, of adequate and effective compensation”. From the
above considerations in this award it can be seen that these conditions
were not fulfilled. Even if one interprets the term “discriminatory”
only as dealing with discrimination between nationals and foreigners
and not as dealing with discrimination between various domestic
companies as here between Yukos and its competitors in Russia, it is
clear that Respondent did not offer or pay any compensation to
Claimant for the taking.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s measures,
seen in their cumulative effect towards Yukos, were an unlawful
expropriation under Article 5 IPPA.

5. Yukos’ Contributions to the Loss of its Assets

The Tribunal notes that Yukvs did in some respects contribute to its
own demise, The individuals associated with it acquired the company
during a tumultuous time in Russia — acquiring the company’s shares
“at discounted prices” (31 C-I). Yukos was a strategic asset that was
once state controlled. It would stretch the bounds of plausibility if the
Tribunal had to accept that Yukos’ management expected its
belligerent response to the tax assessments and enforcement
measures to be successful in preserving the company as it was in late
2003. Furthermore, in the view of the Tribunal, Yukos took some ill-
advised steps which affected its own fate. These included the
bankruptcy proceedings in Houston, United States which were
subsequently dismissed but which dissuaded a number of foreign
bidders in the YNG auction. Furthermore, the Tribunal notes the
evidence presented by Mr. Oleg Konnov that Yukos had a number of
opportunities to pay the tax obligations assessed against it.

While these contributions of Yukos to its own demise do not
change the conclusion that Respondent breached the IPPA with
regard to Claimant’s shares, they may be relevant in the consideration
later in this Award of the quantum of any damage due to Claimant
which will be examined hereafter in this award.

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 261

22. DEC. 2010

15:28 SVER HOVRATT

R589) 8. 13/35

262

HIX. Damages

~~ 636.
wa
637.
638

1. Claimant

Standard for Compensation

Claimant’s claim is based on the proportionate ownership of
Yukos’ expropriated assets represented by its shareholding in Yukos.
It points out that Article 5(1) of the IPPA requires that compensation
be paid to the investor within two months of expropriation, in the
case of a lawful expropriation. In this case the expropriation is
unlawful, not in the public interest, discriminatory and without
payment of compensation. ({]248 ~ 254 C-I)

The IPPA is silent as to the standard of compensation in the case of
an unlawful expropriation. Thus, the standard of compensation for
an unlawful expropriation is the standard under customary
international law. Claimant argues it is entitled to compensation for
the expropriation pursuant to the Chorzow Factory (CLA-08)
standard: “[r]eparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the
consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which
would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been
committed.” Claimant points out that the Chorzow Factory standard
has been upheld in multiple tribunals and courts and the case
articulates the general principle of the consequences of the
commission of a wrongful act. ({§255 — 261C-I)

As the expropriation took place over a period of almost three years,
from 19 December 2004 (the YNG auction) to 15 August 2007 (the
last bankruptcy auction), the breach of Respondent’s duty may be
deemed to occur when the process is completed. The Chorzow
Factory standard to “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act

SCC Arbitzation V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 262

ns ur’

21. VE 2010 19:29 dVtA HUVKAL I

AL

4

640.

263

and re-establish the situation which could, in all probability, have
existed if that act had not been committed” requires the Tribunal to
look at what Yukos would be worth today if its assets had not been
unlawfully expropriated. To fix the moment of valuation earlier, in
these circumstances, would amount to compensating Claimant as if it
had liquidated its investment in Yukos as of that earlier date and
transferred its funds to a fixed-rate security. Yukos ~ and its
underlying and valuable oil assets - are what Claimant invested in.
In this proceeding, Claimant seeks compensation equal to its share of
the real value of the assets that the Russian Federation expropriated
from Yukos as of the date of the final award. Re-establishing the
situation that would have existed but for the Respondent’s unlawful
conduct requires an examination of what Yukos would be worth
today. (97262 — 265 C-I)

639. Claimant relies on the LECG Report to demonstrate that
Claimant’s share of the real value of Yukos’ expropriated assets
could conservatively be valued at US$ 183.2 million, as at 31
August 2009. (§§266 C-I and 180— 184 C-II)

Legitimate expectation of compensation

In response to Respondent’s argument that Claimant deserves no
compensation because “by the time Claimant acquired beneficial
ownership of the Yukos shares in 2007, virtually all of the allegedly
wrongful acts complained of had already since long occurred” such
that Claimant deserves no compensation. (309 R-I) The Respondent
argues further that “[e}xpectations based on the assumption that the
State will abdicate its responsibilities and relinquish the exercise of
its duty to prevent unlawful business practices deserve no
protection.” Neither of these arguments has merit. First, Claimant’s
inter-group Participation Agreements have no bearing on its
entitlement to compensation in these proceedings. The Respondent
does not cite a single case to support the argument that Claimant’s
temporary transfer of an economic interest in the shares in any way
affects Claimant’s entitlement to compensation. Claimant, as the

SCC Arbitration ¥ (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 263

2. DEC. 2010

641.
wm

642,
NS

NR, F091 8. F909
15:29 SVEA HOVRATT mee

264

legal owner of seven million Yukos shares since at the latest 1
December 2004, is entitled to claim compensation for its
proportionate share of the expropriation of all of Yukos’ assets. This
is plain from Article 5(2) of the IPPA. The Participation Agreements
did not assign Elliott International any direct rights vis-a-vis the
Yukos shares. To the contrary, these agreements made clear that
Claimant in the first instance retained all rights to collect and receive
any cash, payments, or other property in respect of the shares.
Accordingly, Claimant should be compensated for the expropriation
of Yukos’ assets. (186 ~ 188 C-I)

Furthermore, in any event, Respondent’s acts of expropriation
became final well after termination of the Participation Agreements
in March 2007.

Claimant had obligation to sell its shares

Respondent argues that Claimant should be denied compensation
because in its view, Claimant exercised “unreasonable business
judgement” and failed to mitigate its damages by not selling its
Yukos shares between 7 December 2005 and 9 March 2006.
Respondent further argues that Claimant exercised unreasonable
business judgement when it purchased its second lot of shares on 1
December 2004. Claimant submits neither of these arguments carries
weight. Respondent is essentially asserting that Claimant should have
abandoned its then-pending claim to compensation. Respondent’s
own submission in its 28 February 2006 Reply to the Request for
Arbitration asserted that such a decision would not be good business
judgement, and that the economic outcome of Yukos was not known
at that stage and there was no way of knowing whether Claimant
would eventually realise a loss or a profit, Even as late as the
jurisdictional hearings on 25 July 2007, Respondent’s counsel was
expecting there to be a financial retum from Yukos in the form of
substantial surplus payouts to shareholders following the auctions.
(F191 — 196 C-I1)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2003) Rosinvest v Russia 264

Deel

7). VEC. WY 19330

@

643.

SVEA HUYKAT!

265

It was reasonable for Claimant to expect that the Russian
Federation would follow the law and stop short of expropriating
Yukos’ assets by carrying out the announced auction of YNG.
Furthermore, public announcements by senior Russian figures,
including President Putin (CM-139, -140, -141, -142, -143, -144) and
Finance Minister Kudrin (CM-145, -146, -147, -148) were made to
the effect that the Russian Government had no intention to destroy
Yukos, None of the statements were retracted by the time Claimant
bought the Yukos shares. In addition, Yukos remained a viable
company after the YNG auction, and SocGen group did not petition
for Yukos’ bankruptcy until March 2006, more than a year after
Claimant bought the shares. In such circumstances, it was still
reasonable to invest in Yukos on 1 December 2004. (9197 — 201 C-
1)

Respondent’s criticisms of LECG Report on quantum are
misplaced

644. Respondent’s report on quantum provided in the Dow Report and

645.

its criticisms of Claimant’s LECG Report fundamentally
misunderstands Claimant’s case. Claimant is entitled to claim
compensation for its equity share of the damages that resulted from
the illegal expropriation of Yukos’ assets. Claimant purchased the
shares when the price was depressed following the Russian
Federation’s attacks on Yukos and its management but before the
YNG auction or any announcement of further auctions or that the
complete destruction of Yukos would follow. If the Russian
Federation had found a reasonable solution, and not resorted to action
putting it among rogue states, the price would have recovered to a
value closer to Yukos asset value, The LECG Report, therefore,
correctly reflects the situation if the expropriatory auctions had not
occurred. (202 ~ 206 C-ID)

The Dow Report ignores the certainty that the value of Claimant’s
equity share would have substantially increased. Furthermore, it fails
to assess the real value of Yukos in the absence of the expropriatory
measures. The Dow Report methodology would simply reward
Respondent for its unlawful actions. Under that approach Respondent

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 265

22. DEC. 2010

646.
NY

647.

648.

— NR. 3919. TE aD

15:30 SVEA HOVRATT

266

would retain more that 96% (USS 120.41 million) of Claimant’s
share of the value of Yukos assets that were expropriated and
Claimant, the owner of the assets, would receive at most US$ 3,89
million. (49207 — 210 C-I)

Claimant dismisses Respondent’s argument that RosInvestCo is not
entitled to compensation because its investment was made for the
purpose of speculation and awarding damages would amount to an
unwarranted windfall. Claimant argues that it should be awarded just
compensation for the loss of its investment while ensuring that the
Russian Federation does not continue to profit from its illegal acts.
(9122 — 126 CPHB-1)

2. Respondent

Respondent relies on its arguments above setting out that Claimant
did not become beneficial owner of the Yukos shares until 2007.
Once Claimant became beneficial owner, all of the alleged wrongful
acts Claimant complains of had occurred. On this basis, Claimant is
not entitled to damages.

Claimant had no legitimate expectations and deserves no
compensation

An investor obviously cannot have a general legitimate expectation
of the non-enforcement of a host State’s tax law, or of the reversal of
tax and court decisions already taken. An investor’s expectations as
to such matters might be legitimate, if at all, only if they are based on
clear and unambiguous representations given by the host State.
Expectations based on the assumption that the State will abdicate its
responsibilities and relinquish the exercise of its duty to prevent
unlawful business practices deserve no protection. Claimant should
have been aware at the time it became beneficial owner of the Yukos
shares in 2007, that it was purchasing the shares of a company
already in the advanced stages of receivership that would inevitably

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 266

22. DEC. 2010 15:31 SYEA HOVRAI | NR, 3671 0 O10 3)

(

649,

650.

651.

267

lead to its liquidation. Claimant cannot be excused for its failure to
properly assess the risks, of which it must have been aware, and
should therefore bear all the negative consequences of its bad
business judgment. (330 — 332 R-I and 9186 — 188 R-I1)

Claimant is not entitled to select whatever date yields the highest
value to determine the measure of damages. The time to assess the
legitimacy of Claimant’s expectations is the time of the making of the
investment as the case Duke Energy v. Ecuador (RLA-159)
established. (190 R-II)

Claimant cannot assert it was ignorant of Yukos’ dire circumstances
and its statement of facts in the Statement of Claim (C-ID) proves that
it knew by late November 2004 that Yukos faced difficulty.
Furthermore, the public statements of Russian Federation officials
Claimant points to as placating an investment decision, should not be
interpreted as an inducement to invest in Yukos as Claimant attempts
to make out. (]192 — 193 R-II)

Claimant’s losses are its business risk

Even if Claimant had acquired beneficial ownership of the first
tranche of Yukos shares on 19 November 2004, the loss resulting
from a measure tantamount to expropriation was in fact the direct
consequence of unreasonable and risky business decisions for which
Claimant is responsible. Claimant exercised unreasonable business
judgment in both not selling the Yukos shares and purchasing
additional shares in December 2004.

Tribunals have in the past recognised a foreign investor’s obligation
to “manage and operate its investment reasonably” and have reduced
or excluded compensation where a loss was the result of the
investor’s own contributory negligence. Respondent cites MTD v
Chile (C-48) which stood for the proposition that an investor that
continues to invest despite clear signs that a project was in difficulties
ought to have damages reduced because of that unreasonableness.
(99334 - 338 R-l)

Claimant had a duty to mitigate damages

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 267

3091S. V9/30
22. DEC, 2010 15:31 SEA HOVRATT NR. 3091 19/39

268

653. Claimant is precluded from claiming damages due to the duty under
public international law (Report of the International Law
Commission - RLA-94), Russian law (Article 404, Russian Civil
Code ~ RLA-510), English law (Golden Strait Corporation v. Nippon
Yusen Kubishika Kaisha ~ RLA-104), under the law recognised in
the investment treaty context (Middle East Shipping — CLA-20) and
the jurisprudence constant of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal (RLA-107,
-108, ~109, -110) to mitigate damages it could have reasonably
avoided. The facts demonstrate that Claimant has irresponsibly, or

we even intentionally, failed to avoid losses altogether or allowed its
alleged losses to be greatly increased. (1339 — 344 R-I)

654. The value of the shares declined before Claimant alleged purchased
w the shares on 19 November 2004 and 7 December 2004 and
continued to decline thereafter with the exception of a five month
period from end of September 2005 to February 2005. If Claimant
had sold its shares during this period it could have reasonably
realised an annualised profit of 20%. Any reasonable investor would
have seized its opportunity to realise this substantial profit during this
period. Claimant’s failure to sell the shares is inconsistent with the
basic principle of good faith. The only rational explanation for
keeping the Yukos shares is that Claimant only had a view to
bringing a treaty claim, an explanation consistent with the
investment-by-way-of-litigation strategy long pursued by Elliott
Ye Group. (99345 — 350 R-I)

655. Claimant does not deny its duty to mitigate damages under
international law. The only contention Claimant makes in this regard
is to argue that there is no “obligation for an investor to abandon its
claim under the pretext of mitigation” (4194 C-II). This amounts to
an admission that the basis of Claimant’s investment decision was the
hope of creating a treaty claim. The alleged expropriatory acts had all
occurred by the time Claimant purchased shares in March 2007
(when the termination agreements were terminated) and there were at
least 11 trading days available for Claimant to sell those shares,
which it should have done to meet its duty to mitigate damages.
(G9196 — 200 R-II)

SCC Asbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 268

22. DEC. 2010 15:32 SVEA HOVRATT

us

656.

657.

658.

NR. 3091) 8. 20/39)

269

Claimant not entitled to a windfall

Any award in this proceeding beyond the amount set out in the
Dow Report If would amount to a windfall. The Chorzow Factory
(CLA-08) standard that Claimant attempts to rely on, is misplaced.
The only authority Claimant can point to for its argument that this
novel damages theory is an article by the authors of its own expert
report (LECG Report). (4201 — 205 R-II)

Claimant and LECG fundamentally misapply the but-for approach.
This approach, if used properly should not yield windfalls. The error
in the LECG Report is that rather than consistently assuming that
none of the alleged violations had occurred, LECG instead assumed
both that the tax assessments and announcement of the YNG auction
had occurred (thus reducing the price of Yukos’ shares and enabling
Claimant to purchase seven million Yukos shares for US$ 3.5
million), and that neither of those events had occurred (in caiculating
the amount of Claimant’s damages at more than US$ 275 million).
LECG’s methodology is both illogical and fundamentally
inconsistent with the premise of a but-for analysis — to determine
Claimant’s position had none of the alleged violations in fact
occurred. (4206 — 207 R-II)

Claimant is not due compensation for the “Retroactive Tax Claims”
as defined in R-II. Claimant’s view of the damages calculation relies
on an ex-post analysis of events. This approach has been criticised
and disfavoured by economists. It leads to inconsistent outcomes and
could even result in a claimant owing a payment to a respondent.
This is illustrated by Claimant’s adjustment downward of the
damages claim in the LECG Report II on the basis of the decline of
four Russian oil companies. Ex post analyses inevitably produce
upwardly biased results as they necessarily assign greater weight to
those shares that have risen the most. LECG acknowledges this
problem, but states it is merely a minor trade off between an
analytically sound method and one that utilises the most up to date

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 269

T NR 3O9] 8 21/90
72. DEC. 2010 15:32 SVEA HOVRATT VK. 309

270

information. The Dow Report dismisses this reasoning as untenable.
(W211 - 216 R-I)

Claimant cannot claim damages for acts that occurred before it
became an investor

659, The expert report provided by Respondent in the Dow Report
explains that Claimant did not suffer any damages from the alleged
expropriatory acts that occurred or were announced before Claimant

~ acquired ownership of the Yukos shares because the effects of any
such acts had already been incorporated into the Yukos share price.
. Claimant avoids addressing this issue by relying on the LECG Report

which uses a “but for” estimation of value of Claimant’s interest.
This, Respondent submits is internally inconsistent and suffers from a
fundamental logical flaw that would result in windfall profits for
Claimant. (9351 ~ 353 R-I)

660. The reasoning in Claimant’s LECG Report lead to absurd results. It

does not return Claimant to the position it would have been in had the

alleged expropriatory acts not occurred, but a far better position - a

windfall. If Claimant has a legitimate claim for damages, its claim

would lie between zero and US$ 3.5 million, plus interest. This is

because the impact of virtually all the tax assessments and the YNG

L auction had already been incorporated into Yukos’ stock price prior

to Claimant’s purchases, a claim for damages may not be based on

either Yukos’ tax assessments or the YNG auction. Put simply,

Claimant could not here have suffered damages based on a drop in

Yukos’ share price that took place before it actually owned any

shares. The most Claimant can claim, the US$ 3.5million, is the

price of its shareholding at the time it gained beneficial ownership in

2007, plus interest, It is not feasible to put Claimant in the position of

a hypothetical Yukos investor who purchased shares in early 2003

and assume the shares would increase in value. To allow this would

be to unfairly reward Claimant for damages it did not suffer. (9354 —
360 R-D)

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 270

22. DEC. 2010 15:33

~C

661.

662.

WR. 2071 Ve LEI AS

SVEA HOVRATT

271

Claimant could not have suffered any economic injury before it
acquired an economic interest in the Yukos shares, and this first
occurred in March 2007. In the absence of any injury, Claimant is not
entitled to any damages, and the Chorzow standard invoked by
Claimant is simply irrelevant. Claimant’s damages claim is also
based on a faulty “but-for” analysis, in which Claimant seeks
compensation for acts that occurred and had full economic effect well
before Claimant acquired an economic interest in the Yukos shares
and, in the case of publicly disclosed tax liens in the amount of USS
14.6 billion, even before the Elliott Group first purchased any Yukos
shares, Although Claimant concedes that it is not entitled-to damages
based on any of the tax assessments or the initial steps taken to
enforce those assessments, virtually all of the damages sought by
Claimant are in fact attributable to what Claimant calls the
“Retroactive Tax Assessments and the initial steps taken to enforce
those assessments.” These actions, however, were already reflected in
the reduced price paid by Claimant for the Yukos shares in
November ari December 2004. Gace this fundamental error is
corrected, Claimant’s potential damages, assuming damages are
warranted at all, fall within a range bounded by zero and US$ 3.5
million (plus interest). The US $ 232.7 million sought by Claimant is
pure fantasy, an unjustified windfall and not compensation for “the
loss of its investment”. (4958 - 59 RPHB-II)

3. Tribunal

Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of
the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

 

 

RI F105 — 132
RI 920i -217
CPHB-II 30
RTr. pp. 930 - 931

SCC Arbitration V (079/200S) Rosinvest v Russia 271

22. DEC. 2010

663.

664.

TNR, SEIN 9

15:33 SVEA HOVRATT

272

Exhibits:

CM-91 Yukos Oil Company, Statement by Yukos Oil Company
Regarding Its Current Financial Situtation, 22 July 2004

CM-111 Notice of the Russian Federation’s Federal Property Fund,
19 November 2004

RM-89 = Yukos Oil Company, Statement in connection with the
court decision on collection of additional profit tax for the year 2000,
dated 27 May 2004

Legal Authority:
CLA-08 Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Claim for

Indemnity) (Merits), Germany v. Poland, P.C.LJ. Series A., No. 17
(1928)

Witness Statements:
Dow Report] 925-28, 49 -50, 52

In its damages claim, Claimant has asked the Tribunal to apply the
Chorzow Factory case standard and “wipe out all the consequences of
the illegal act” and assess what the investment would be worth today.
Claimant’s expert reports, the LECG Reports, assume that the value
of Claimant’s investment would be the pro-rata value of Yukos had
the tax assessments, enforcement measures, auction of YNG and the
bankruptcy auctions not taken place. The Tribunal is asked to assess
damages at an amount at which the shares in Yukos would be worth
at the date of the award, if Respondent had not breached the IPPA.

Respondent, on the other hand, is primarily presenting its argument
that Claimant was not an investor under the IPPA until, at the
earliest, when the Participation Agreements were terminated in 2007.
The Tribunal’s conclusion on the question whether Claimant was an
investor have been answered in the affirmative above. Respondent
also submits that Claimant had no legitimate expectation of a return
of the quantum Claimant seeks. Respondent further points to the

SCC Arbitcation V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 272

———

72. DEC. 2010 15:34 SVEA HOVRATT

665.
+
Tt 666,
667.
Yy
“y
668.

273

nature of Claimant’s investment, the business rationale behind it and
an alleged duty to mitigate damages.

The Dow Report I submitted by Respondent pursuasively identifies
that the market knew of both the seizure of Yukos’ YNG shares and
the announcement of the Ministry of Justice’s intention to sell those
shares, The market was fully informed of Respondent’s likely action
in respect of Yukos from July 2004, well before Claimant’s purchase
of the shares on 16 November and 1 December 2004, Accordingly, at
the two points in time when Claimant purchased the shares, the
market had “priced in” the likelihood and effect of the Russian
Federations actions in respect of Yukos.

By Claimant’s own admission, it is a company which specialises in
“purchasing shares at such moments of market distress, judging that
the market has overreacted to transient events and has undervalued a
company’s underlying assets.” (6 C-I) The Tribunal finds it can
acce;st Claimant’s assertion that it made an investment at such a point
in time when the market had in fact overreacted to transient events
and the price of the shares was unjustifiably low, but that it cannot
simply accept Claimant’s alleged optimistic expectations regarding
the future development of the value of the investment.

While it is difficult to make an assessment of the “true value” at the
time of purchase, Respondent’s contention that the market price of
the shares reflected the likelihood of Yukos ceasing to exist as a
viable company is plausible. Respondent has established, and
Claimant’s evidence supports that view, that the information
available to the public and investors regarding the likely outcome of
the bankruptcy proceedings, court proceedings and YNG auction was
that Yukos would cease to exist as a viable company — irrespective of
the legality or other aspects of those proceedings. Indeed, before
Claimant’s first and second purchases of shares, Yukos had itself
announced it would likely enter bankruptcy before the end of 2004.

Claimant made a speculative investment in Yukos shares. The
Tribunal must take this into account when awarding damages (if
any)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 273

TO TNR, 392 TD £97 9 Demme

3). DEC. 2010 15:34 SVEA HOVRATT

274

669. Although the Tribunal might steer into dangerous territory by
attempting to enter its own economic valuation into the findings of
the respective economic experts’ opinions contained in the Dow
Reports and LECG Reports, nevertheless, the Tribunal finds that
these Reports are detailed and clear enough to enable it to come to
conclusions regarding the disputed valuation. The Tribunal finds
Respondent’s submissions regarding compensation to be more
persuasive. The approach in the LECG Report (termed the “but-for”
approach in that report) does not sufficiently take into account the
nature of Claimant’s investment and that Claimant made a
speculative investment consistent with the modus operandi of }
Claimant and the Elliott Group.

“670. Claimant admits that “some of [its] investments turn out to be !
profitable, and some do not, and the investor may be presumed to
understand the market risks when it makes the investment.” (6 C-I)
Having regard to this underlying nature of the investment, the
Tribunal finds that any award of damages that rewards the
speculation by Claimant with an amount based on an ex-post analysis
would be unjust. The Tribunal cannot apply the most optimistic
assessment of an investment and its return. Claimant is asking the
Tribunal not only to realise and implement the Elliott Group’s “buy
low and sell high” strategy, but to go further and apply a best-case
approximation of today’s value. The Tribunal considers the Dow

UY Report correctly identifies that at the point in time at which Claimant |

purchased the legal title to the shares, the market had already taken

into account the effect of the Russian Federation’s measures and any

possibility Yukos would (profitably) endure beyond the enforcement

of those measures.

671. An assessment of damages on the basis put forward by Claimant
and in its LECG Report would reward Claimant’s speculation in a
manner only reflecting the small possibility of upside risk at the time
of investment but disregarding the high likelihood of no retum on
investment and would be inconsistent with the aim of the IPPA, set
out in its preamble. The LECG Report assumes that the taxes were
imposed on Yukos, enforcement actions announced and expected by

the markets and Claimant bought the shares at a price in which the
SCC Asbitation V (07912005) Rosinvest v Russia 274

22. DEC. 2010 15:35

~C

672,

673.

674.

675.

Whe sZt Me eur

SVEA HOVRATT

275

market had taken these events into account or had overestimated the
impact of those events on the price. The LECG Report also then
assumes that following Claimant’s purchase of the shares, the taxes,
enforcement measures and auctions would not have taken place. This
approach is divorced from reality.

The Tribunal has concluded above that Claimant possessed an
investment in terms of the IPPA starting from 16 November 2004 and
from 1 December 2004 — the dates on which Claimant purchased its
Yukos shares. While the Participation Agreements did not stop
Claimant from being an investor under the wide definition of the
IPPA, their effect was that any risks regarding the investment were
transferred to Elliott during the validity of the Participation
Agreements. Claimant had no real economic interest of its own in the
Yukos shares during the period the Participation Agreements were in
force and thus “had nothing to lose”. Therefore, for valuation
purposes of damages, the date must be applied where that risk was
taken over by Cisimant at the time the Participation Agreements were
terminated.

The Tribunal concluded above that the Particpation Agreements
were terminated on 24 January 2007. Accordingly, the Tribunal
considers that the alternative in the Dow Report I paragraph 50
should be applied by which a purchase date for the shares on 24
January 2007 is made the basis of the calculation.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the calculation of damages
in the Dow Report I “all corrected” test shall be applied as from 24
January 2007.

On that basis, in section 50, the Dow Report I submits a present
value of damages of US$ 3.70 million as of 3 March 2009. However,
as expressly mentioned at the beginning of section 50, that amount
already includes interest up to 3 March 2009. The Tribunal considers
that, after establishing the principle amount of the damages due, the
interest should be considered and calculated separately in a following
section of this Award. Therefore, while accepting the approach of the
Dow Report, the Tribunal concludes that the best reflection of the

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 275

AR GOFF De EEE SATS

72, DEC. 2010 15:35 SVEA HOVRATT

276

damages without interest is what the Claimant undisputedly paid to
Elliott as the purchase price for the shares at the time the
Participation Agreements were terminated, which was, as recalled in
section 51 of the Dow Report, US$ 3.5 million.

676. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the principal amount of
damages due by Respondent to Claimant is US$ 3.5 million.

SCC Arbiretion V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 276

7), DEC. 2010 15:35

677,

678.

679.

680.

IRA SOFT Me LMS

SVEA HOVRATT

277

HX. Interest

1. Claimant

Claimant requests interest, compounded, on all amounts awarded.
Article 5(1) of the IPPA contemplates interest “at a normal
commercial rate” for cases of expropriation. Claimant submits that
the normal commercial rate should be compounded at some
appropriate interval and take into account the element of risk
associated with the investment. Claimant suggests that a standard
commercial rate, such as LIBOR + 4 percent, compounded semi-
annually, should be added to any award from the date of valuation to
the date of the award. (270 — 271 C-I, 4137 CPHB-1)

2. Respondent

Respondent argues that the interest rate should be a risk free rate,
such as the US Treasury rate, (48 Dow Report II)

Respondent submits that if the Tribunal makes an award of
compensation, the “normal commercial rate” referred to in
Article 5(1) of the IPPA should be the normal commercial rates
prevailing in Europe. Respondent considers the one-year LIBOR or
EURIBOR rate, are appropriate interest rates that provide “adequate
and effective compensation.” (4143 RPHB-I)

Respondent submits further that it is not appropriate that the interest
pursuant to Article 5(1) of the IPPA be awarded as compound
interest. The tribunal in Vivendi Il, (RLA-198) established that
interest awarded must compensate for the damage resulting from the
period of non-payment. An award of compound interest would not
make Claimant whole for this alleged period of non-payment, but
provide it with a windfall profit. (144 RPHB-I)

SCC Asbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 277

Re DOF 1 Re EAE Fee mene

79. DEC. 2910 15:36 SVEA HOVRATT

681. Respondent argues that due to the Participation Agreements, the
economic interest in the Yukos shares was with Elliott International
and therefore any compensation would have to have been passed on
to Elliott Intemational. While the Participation Agreements were in
force, Claimant thus could not use or invest the amount of
compensation due, nor could it have earned any income from the
Yukos shares. Once Claimant acquired an economic interest in the
shares in March 2007, it only acquired an interest in a parcel of
shares in a bankrupt company which could not have been sold to a
third party. Compound interest would not reflect economic reality or '
make Claimant whole but cause a disproportionate benefit to any
possible loss. ({§145-146 RPHB-I)

682. Respondent points out that Claimant concedes that interest should
be limited to a “normal commercial rate,” but then it inexplicably
attempts to rely on a much higher commercial rate, LIBOR +4%,
compounded semi-annually. Respondent submits that the relevant
interest rate, assuming quod non that damages are awarded, is the
one-year LIBOR or EURIBOR rate (compounded, if at all, on an
annual basis), commencing on March 27, 2007, the date Claimant
first acquired an economic interest in the Yukos shares. (60 RPHB-
ID

3. Tribunal

~~ 683. ~~ Without repeating the contents, the Tribunal takes particular note of !
the following documents on file:

Party Submissions:

C1 9270-271
CPHB-I 137, fn. 229
RPHB-I 143 - 146, fn. 337, 338

Exhibits:

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 278

TNR, SFT, 987

27. DEC, 2010 15:36 SVEA HOVRATT

684.

685.

686.

687.

279

RM-16, -19 Participation Agreements between Highberry Ltd
and Elliott International of 17 November 2004

RLA-198 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija et al. v. Argentina,
(Vivendi IN) Award of Aug. 20, 2007

The Tribunal takes into account the parties’ answers to the
Tribunal’s Question 3.10 of PO-5 and particularly notes that the
parties both refer to and agree that Article 5(1) of the IPPA requires
that for an expropriation under Article 5(1), “interest at a normal
commercial rate shall accrue until the date of payment” on the
amount of “adequate and effective compensation. The Tribunal is
aware that this ruling in Article 5 refers to a lawful expropriation and
that, in the present case as seen above, the Tribunal considers the
expropriation to be in breach of Article 5 and thus unlawful therefore
requiring the standard of damages in international law also for the
calculation of interest. However, the Tribunal notes that the parties
have both referred io the interest provision of Article 5(1) also with
regard to a finding of unlawful expropriation.

On the basis of the parties’ similar submissions on this matter and
in view of the IPPA providing guidance for that rate in Article 5, the
Tribunal finds it acceptable that interest at a normal commercial rate
is also due on the sum awarded as damages.

Regarding the question what is in fact the normal commercial rate,
Claimant requests LIBOR + 4 percent, compounded semi-annually,
while Respondent considers the one-year LIBOR or EURIBOR rate
as applicable uncompounded. The Tribunal considers, that in view of
the term “normal” in Article 5(1), the LIBOR rate should be
applicable without any addition.

The question of whether the interest should be calculated on a
simple or compound basis is one which the Tribunal has sought to
answer by reviewing the conduct of Claimant and its ultimate owner,
Elliott International.

SCC arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvest v Russia 279

IR DOF Te 9 RZD aim

99. DEC. 2010 15:37 SVEA HOVRATT

280

688. The Tribunal considers that in the case of a damages award the
payment of interest is necessary in order to ensure full reparation for
the act which caused damage, but that the mode of calculation should
be set so as to achieve a result of full reparation. The Tribunal
considers that full reparation in this case must take into account the
nature of Claimant’s investment.

689. While recent investment treaty arbitrations have awarded
compound interest to claimants, the Tribunal notes that this practice
is by no means unanimous. If, as above, the Tribunal finds it should

VY
award interest at a normal commercial rate, this does not mean the )
Tribunal is bound to award compound interest. It must consider the
damage done and nature of Claimant’s investment in its assessment

we

of the interest due. )

690. The Tribunal considers that applying compound interest to the
damages sum in this case at anything more frequent than an annual
basis would be unjust in light of the speculative nature of the
investment by Claimant and its parent Elliott International. The
Tribunal therefore considers that interest ought to be applied to the
damages award at a base commercial lending rate, namely LIBOR.

691. The point in time for the commencement of the interest calculation
ought to reflect the economic reality of the relationship between
Y Claimant and its parent Elliott International and accordingly the \
amount of any loss to Claimant. As seen above, the Tribunal
considers that the Participation Agreements detracted from the value
of the investment to Claimant. Noting again the requirement that the
Tribunal award interest to compensate Claimant adequately and
effectively for the deprivation of the use and disposition of the sum it
would have otherwise had, the Tribunal considers that the date of the
termination of the Participation Agreements, i.e. 24 January 2007,
plus the two month grace period expressly provided in Article 5.1.
IPPA, i.e. 24 March 2007, should be the starting point for the interest
calculation

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosiavest v Russia 280

TTR, 309 I 8. | 9LE 2D

22. DEC. 2010 15:37 SVEA HOVRATT

281

692. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that, as from 24 March 2007,
Respondent has to pay the actual London interbank overnight rates
(LIBOR) on the amount of US$ 3.5 million till the time of payment.

HLXI. Costs of Arbitration

Y 1. Claimant
693. In its prayer for relief, Claimant has requested that Respondent be
S ordered to pay Claimant’s cost of arbitration.

694. By its Cost Claim dated 14 May 2010, Claimant has requested that,
accordingly, the Tribunal’s final award include, pursuant to Articles
40 and 41 of the Rules, an order:

a. apportioning all of the Arbitration Costs to the Respondent and
requiring Respondent to compensate Claimant for the US$
883,878.00 of those costs that Claimant has paid to date; and

a b. awarding to Claimant the US$ 11,000,762.09 in legal fees
incurred by Claimant for its legal representation; and

c. awarding to Claimant the US$ 2,398,002.73 of other expenses
incurred by Claimant in presenting its case.

695. By its submission dated 21 May 2010, Respondent has commented
on Claimant’s cost claim,

2. Respondent

SCC Arbitration ¥ (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 281

27. DEC. 2010 15:37 SVEA HOVRATT

\

 

282

696. In its prayer for relief, Respondent has requested that Claimant be
ordered to pay Respondent’s cost of arbitration.

697. By its Cost Claim dated 14 May 2010, Respondent has requested
that, accordingly, Claimant be ordered to pay all of the costs incurred
by Respondent in connection with this arbitration. Respondent has
submitted that its costs incurred are as set out below:

 

 

 

 

 

Advance on Arbitration Costs paid during EUR 370,500.00

the merits phase

Attorneys’ Fees US$ 3.25 million

Expenses and Disbursements (including US$ 796,469.86

expert fees)

Total Merits Costs USS 4,064,469.86, plus
EUR 370,500.00

 

 

 

698. By its submission dated 2! May 2010, Claimant has commented on
respondent’s cost claim.

3. Tribunal

699. The Tribunal has taken note of the relief sought by the parties
regarding costs, of the cost claims submitted by the Parties, and of
their respective comments submitted by the Parties.

700. The length and complexity of this arbitral procedure shows that
neither of the Parties could have easily identified the procedural and
substantive outcome of this dispute. Claimants have prevailed on
jurisdiction and with regard to liability. Respondent has succeeded in
so far as the quantum of damages claimed by Claimant, i.e. USS
232.7 million was reduced to a small portion of that amount, i.e. to
US$ 3.5 million, Thus, both sides have been partly successful and

SCC Arbitration V (079/205) Rosinvast v Russia 282

22, DEC. 2010 15:38

SVEA HOVRATT

AK

Joes

PT ee

283

partly unsuccessful in their arguments and claims raised in this
proceeding.

701.

Taking into account the circumstances of the case and using its

discretion under Articles 32(6) and 39 to 41 of the SCC Arbitration
Rules, the Tribunal considers it fair and concludes that

a. each Party bears its own costs of legal representation (Article

wh

41 SCC Arbitration Rules),

b. the arbitration costs (Article 39 SCC Arbitration Rules) shall be
borne in equal shares between the Claimant on one side and the

Respondent on the other side.

702. The SCC has determnined the Costs of Arbitration as follows:

Prof. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel

Fee EUR 425 000 plus any VAT
Expenses EUR 10337 plus any VAT
Perdicmallowance EUR 1450

The Rt Hon Lord Steyn
Fee EUR 255 000 plus any VAT
Expenses EUR 7979 plus any VAT
Per diem allowance EUR 1800

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, OC
Fee EUR 255 000 plus any VAT
Expenses EUR 8 748 plus any VAT
Per diemallowance EUR 1500

Stockholen Chamber of Commerce

Administrative fee EUR 48 238 plus any VAT
Administrative Secretary:

Fee EUR 10201

Costs EUR 1400

Per diem Eur 1050

(The Decisions and Signatures of the Tribunal appear on the following separate page of this Award)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia

 

TAR, 3891S, 35/94

72. DEC. 2010 15:38 SVEA HOVRATT

284

I. Decisions

1, The Tribunal confirms its decision in its Award on Jurisdiction dated 5

October 2007 to the effect that it has jurisdiction over the claims for
expropriation submitted by Claimant.

2. Respondent has breached Articles 5 of the IPPA and is liable for

damages in this regard.

3. As the principal amount of damages, Respondent has to pay to Claimant }
US$ 3.5 million.

V 4. On this amount of US$ 3.5 million, as from 24 March 2007, Respondent
has to pay the actual London interbank overnight rates (LIBOR) till the
time of payment,

5. The arbitration costs (Article 39 SCC Arbitration Rules) shall be borne
in equal shares between the Claimant on one side and the Respondent on
the other side.

6. The Parties shal] each bear their own costs of legal representation and

other expenses in this arbitration (Article 41 SCC Arbitration Rules).

U 7, Ail other claims and counterclaims are dismissed.
Fate. Steg / w=
“ The Rt. Hon, The Lord Steyn Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC '
(Co-Arbitrator) (Co-Arbitrator)

ifn 4

rr duh

Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
(Chairman of Tribunal)

SCC Arbitration V (079/2005) Rosinvest v Russia 284

