INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between

RREEF INFRASTRUCTURE (G.P.) LIMITED AND

RREEF PAN-EUROPEAN INFRASTRUCTURE TWO LUX S.AR.L.

(“Claimants”)

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

(“Applicant”)

ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30

 

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE
AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Professor Lawrence Boo, President
Professor Enrique Barros Bourie, Member
Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Mr Gonzalo Flores

Date: 28 October 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Representing the Kingdom of Spain:
Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure
Two Lux S.d rl:

Mr Jeff Sullivan Mr José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Mrs Stephanie Collins Mr Pablo Elena Abad

Ms Helen Elmer Mr Rafael Gil Nievas

Mr Theo Tyrrell Mr Alberto Torré Molés

Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP Ms Gabriela Cerdeiras

Telephone House 2-4 Temple Avenue, Ms Maria del Socorro Garrido Moreno
London, EC4Y 0HB Ms Elena Offoro Sainz

United Kingdom Ms Gloria Maria De la Guardia Limeres

Ms Ana Maria Rodriguez Esquivias

Mr Juan Antonio Quesada Navarro

Mr Javier Comerén Herrero

Ms Estibaliz Hernandez Marquinez

Ms Maria Eugenia Cediel Bruno

Abogacia General del Estado

Ministry of Justice of the Government of Spain
c/ Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16, 2? planta
28001, Madrid

Spain

I. THE PARTIES.
II. | PROCEDURAL HISTORY.
Ill. PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF
IV. PARTIES’ POSITIONS.

A.

Cc.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

The Law Applicabl
(1) Applicable Legal Standard

a. Applicant's Position

 

 

b. Clai ’ Position
(2) Burden of Proof.

a. Applicant's Position
b. Clai ’ Position

 

1
1
4
5
5
5
5
6
7
7
7

 

The Circumstances of the Present Case.....

 

(1) Whether or not the Annulment Application is Frivolous or Dilatory....
a. Applicant's Position 8
b. Clai ’ Position 8

 

(2

&

Whether the Applicant is likely to Comply with the Award.......
a. Applicant's Position 9
b. Clai ’ Position 10

(3) Prejudice to the Claimants if the Stay is Continued and the Annulment
Application Unsuccessful 10

 

a. Applicant's Position ..
b. Clai ’ Position 11

4) The Applicant’s EU Obligation rl
¢ pp!

Raw]

 

 

a. Applicant’s Position ..
b. Clai ’ Position 11

(5

7

Possibility of Recoupment of Funds from the Claimants if the Stay is Terminated
and the Award subseq' ly Annulled 12

 

a. Applicant's Position ..
b. Clai ’ Position 12

 

Whether Security should be Ordered...

 

a. Applicant's Position ...
b. Clai ’ Position 14

V. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS 14

A.

The Law Applicabl 14
(1) Applicable Legal Standard.
(2) Burden of Proof. 17

 

 

The Circumstances of the Present Case

 
 

 

 

 

 

(1) Whether or not the Annulment Application is Frivolous or Dilatory. 19
(2) Whether the Applicant is likely to Comply with the Award.. 20
(3) Prejudice to the Claimants if the Stay is Continued and the Annulment
Application Unsuccessful 21
(4) The Applicant’s EU Obligation: 22
(5) Possibility of Recoupment of Funds from the Claimants if the Stay is Terminated
and the Award subseq' ly Annulled
C. Whether Security should be Ordered... wn 24
VI. COSTS. 24

 

VII. DECISION 25

iii

TABLE OF KEY ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

Annulment Application

Spain’s application dated 8 April 2020 for annulment
of the Award

 

Applicant or Spain

Kingdom of Spain

 

Arbitration Rules or ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
2006

 

 

 

Award Final award rendered on 11 December 2019 in the
original arbitration proceeding

Claimants First and Second Claimants

Committee Ad hoc annulment committee constituted on

17 July 2020 comprising Professor Lawrence Boo
Geok Seng (president), Professor Enrique Barros
Bourie (member), and Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau
(member)

 

Convention or ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States dated
18 March 1965

 

First Claimant

RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited

 

 

ICSID International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes
Parties Claimants and Applicant

 

 

Second Claimant

RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux S.a r.l.

 

 

 

. THE PARTIES

1. The claimants are RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited, a private limited liability company
incorporated in 2005 under the laws of Jersey, and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two
Lux S.a rl, a private limited liability company incorporated in 2006 under the laws of

Luxembourg (together, “Claimants”).
2. The applicant is the Kingdom of Spain (“Applicant” or “Spain’”).
3. The Claimants and the Applicant are collectively referred to as the “parties”. The parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page i.

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

Date Event

 

8 April 2020 ICSID received from Spain an application for the annulment of the award
rendered on 11 December 2019 in the original arbitration proceeding,
together with annexes 001 through 009. In its Annulment Application,

Spain also requested a stay of the enforcement of the Award.

 

15 April 2020 The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Annulment Application, in
accordance with Rule 50(2)(a) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Together
with the notice of registration, the Secretary-General informed the parties
of the provisional stay of the Award, in accordance with Rule 54(2) of the

ICSID Arbitration Rules.

 

17 July 2020 The Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, notified the parties that all members of the ad hoc
Committee had accepted their appointments, and that the Committee was
therefore deemed to have been constituted, and the annulment
proceedings to have begun, as of 17 July 2020, pursuant to Rules 6(1) and
53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The Committee is composed of Professor Lawrence Boo Geok Seng, a
national of Singapore, as president; Professor Enrique Barros Bourie, a
national of Chile, as member; and Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, a national

of The Bahamas, as member. All three members of the Committee were

 

 

 

 

 

appointed by the Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council, in accordance

with Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention.

On the same date, the parties were notified that Mr Gonzalo Flores, Deputy
Secretary-General of ICSID, had been appointed as Secretary of the

Committee.

 

24 July 2020

The Claimants filed their Opposition to Spain’s Request for a Permanent
Stay of Enforcement, together with exhibits C-300 through C-301 and legal
authorities CL-246 through CL-262 (“Opposition”).

 

29 July 2020

The Committee directed that the provisional stay of the enforcement of
the Award would be maintained until it has had an opportunity to review
all of the parties’ submissions and to issue a further decision on the matter,
thereby extending the time limit under Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules. The Committee also invited the Applicant to file its Reply to the
Claimants’ Opposition (“Reply”) by 10 August 2020.

 

30 July 2020

The Applicant requested an extension until 12 August 2020 to file its Reply
and sought confirmation from the Committee that the Reply could be filed
in Spanish. The Applicant also confirmed that it would make submissions

in Spanish during the first session.

On the same date, the Claimants confirmed that they had no objections to
the Applicant's request for extension, and that they would make

submissions in English during the first session.

On the same date, the Committee invited the Applicant to file its Reply by
12 August 2020 in view of the parties’ agreement and noted the parties’
comments regarding the languages that would be used during the first

session.

 

12 August 2020

The Applicant filed its Reply, together with annexes 010 through 054.

 

13 August 2020

The Claimants requested leave to file further submissions in response to

the Applicant's Reply.

 

14 August 2020

The Applicant agreed for the Claimants to file further submissions, if it too

could file further submissions thereafter.

 

 

17 August 2020

 

The Claimants agreed for both sides to file further submissions, as
requested, provided that each side was granted the same amount of time

for such further submissions.

 

 

 

18 August 2020

The Committee directed the Claimants to file their Rejoinder to the
Applicant's Reply (“Rejoinder”) by 20 August 2020, and the Applicant to
file its Sur-Rejoinder (“Sur-Rejoinder”) by 28 August 2020.

 

 

20 August 2020 The Claimants filed their Rejoinder, together with exhibits C-001 and C-
302 as well as legal authorities CL-263 through CL-271.
28 August 2020 The Applicant filed its Sur-Rejoinder, together with annexes 055 through

063. It also agreed to make its submissions in English during the first
session, if the hearing on the stay of enforcement of the Award was to be
held in a separate session, and without prejudice to making submissions

in Spanish during such hearing.

The Committee directed that the first session would be held on
3 September 2020 only in English, and that the hearing on the issue of stay
of the Award would be held on 17 September 2020, in English and

Spanish, with simultaneous interpretation in both languages.

 

3 September 2020

The Committee held the first session by video conference, with the

following participants:

Members of the Tribunal:

Professor Lawrence Boo, President of the Committee
Professor Enrique Barros Bourie, Member

Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member

ICSID Secretariat:
Mr Gonzalo Flores, Secretary to the Committee
Ms Daniela Argiiello, Legal Counsel

On behalf of the Claimants:
Mr Jeff Sullivan, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP
Ms Helen Elmer, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP

On behalf of the Applicant:
Mr Alberto Torr6é Molés, Abogacia General del Estado
Ms Maria del Socorro Garrido Moreno, Abogacia General del Estado

 

8 September 2020

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, which provides, inter alia,
that the applicable Arbitration Rules are those in force as of 10 April 2006,

and that the procedural languages are English and Spanish.

 

 

17 September 2020

 

The Committee held the Hearing on Stay of Enforcement of the Award by

video conference, with the following participants:

Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Lawrence Boo, President of the Committee
Professor Enrique Barros Bourie, Member

 

 

 

Ms Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member

ICSID Secretariat:
Mr Gonzalo Flores, Secretary to the Committee
Ms Daniela Argiiello, Legal Counsel

On behalf of the Claimants:

Mr Jeff Sullivan, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP

Mrs Stephanie Collins, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP
Ms Helen Elmer, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher UK LLP.

On behalf of the Applicant:
Mr Alberto Torr6é Molés, Abogacia General del Estado
Ms Maria del Socorro Garrido Moreno, Abogacia General del Estado

 

 

 

 

III. PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

4. The Applicant requests in its Sur-Rejoinder dated 28 August 2020:1

[...] that the stay of enforcement of the Award is continued and
maintained in effect, without security or other conditions, until the
decision on the Annulment Application is rendered by the Committee in
this proceeding.

5. The Claimants request the following relief in their Rejoinder dated 20 August 2020:?

a. Spain's request for the imposition of a permanent stay be denied as it
has failed to prove the existence of circumstances that require the
Committee to grant such a stay;

>

Alternatively, if a continuation of the stay is granted, in light of the
risk of non-payment and the prejudice that would be caused to the
Claimants, Spain should be ordered to pay the funds into an escrow
account in the United States; or, in the alternative, provide the
security identified in paragraph 86 above; and

2

Spain should be ordered to pay the Claimants’ costs in responding to
the request for a stay.

6. The “security identified in paragraph 86” in the Rejoinder referred to by the Claimants is as

follows, in order of priority:3

1 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 133.
2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 89.
3 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 86.

a. Spain should be ordered to pay the full amount of the Award, plus
accrued interest, into an escrow account located in the United States
and payable to the Claimants immediately upon receipt of a
Committee decision rejecting annulment. [...]

>

As an alternative, Spain should be ordered to provide a binding
and unconditional written undertaking that it will pay the
Award promptly and in full upon the dismissal of its Annulment
Application, along with the following: (i) the designation of an
agent for service in the United States (along with a waiver of
the service of process requirements otherwise required); and
(ii) a waiver of sovereign immunity as to the attachment of its
assets in order for the Claimants to satisfy the Award if Spain
fails to keep its commitment.

[emphasis in original]

IV. PARTIES’ POSITIONS

7. The parties set forth their respective positions first in relation to the law applicable, and then

according to how the law is to be applied to the circumstances of this case.

A. THE LAW APPLICABLE
(1) Applicable Legal Standard
a. Applicant’s Position

8. | The Applicant submits that Article 53 of the ICSID Convention does not impose any higher
threshold for the stay to be continued. It submits that finality of awards is “not an absolute
principle” and as such finality is subject always to a party’s right to seek annulment and stay of

enforcement of the award under the ICSID Convention.$

9. The Applicant points out that stays of enforcement have been granted by ad hoc annulment
committees in the “vast majority” of cases,° indicating that greater restraint is not needed in

deciding whether to grant a stay.’ On the contrary, it submits , there is “a general rule of caution

4 Applicant's Reply, paras. 15-16; Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 12.
5 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 13.

6 Applicant's Reply, para. 17.

7 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 15.

or prudence” in favour of continuing the stay of awards,® although it accepts that such a stay

ought not to be continued automatically.°

10. The Applicant also accepts that the Committee has the sole discretion to decide whether to

continue the stay or lift the same.19

b. Claimants’ Position

11. The Claimants submit that a stay constitutes an exception and not the rule.!! They submit that
a two-stage analysis is required under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention for the stay to be
continued: first, the standard for a stay to be granted is that “circumstances so require”, and this
must be based on objective evidence relating to the individual circumstances of the present
case; 12 second, the Committee retains the discretion to decide whether to continue the stay,

even if circumstances exist requiring a stay.!3 The Claimants argue that the “prevailing practice”

of stays being granted in the “vast majority” of cases is therefore irrelevant.1*

12. Inresponse to the Applicant’s submissions concerning “prevailing practice”, the Claimants also
contend that previous ad hoc annulment committees have found such practice and the statistics
relating thereto to be uninstructive, given that the circumstances of each case are unique,!5 and
that in cases which are most analogous to the present case (i.e. where Spain is the party

requesting a stay of enforcement), the ‘norm’ is for the stay to be lifted.1¢

13. The Claimants assert that “it has repeatedly been held that the principle of finality under Article
53(1) must be considered, and therefore that greater restraint is needed in deciding whether a

stay should be continued”, citing SGS v Paraguay and Antin v Spain.‘7

8 Hearing Transcript, pg. 7, line 23 - pg. 8, line 15.

9 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 15-16; Hearing Transcript, pg. 4, line 24 - pg. 5, line 1; pg. 77, lines 15-25.

10 Applicant's Reply, para. 20.

11 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 9a and 11.

2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 13 and 19.

13 Claimants’ Opposition, paras. 9 and 29.

14 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 7 and 19.

15 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 17, 20 and 22.

16 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 7.

17 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 15-16: SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/29, Decision on Paraguay's Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 22 March 2013, paras.
84-85; Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Energia Termosolar B.V. (formerly Antin Infrastructure Services
Luxembourg S.a.r.l, and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31, Decision on the
Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 21 October 2019, para. 66.

 

6

(2) Burden of Proof
a. Applicant’s Position

14. It is the Applicant’s position that Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention does not impose a
burden of proof ona particular party to establish circumstances requiring a stay.'® It points out
that Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules only requires an applicant to specify such
circumstances, not to prove them.!° In the same vein, it submits that there is no legal

presumption either way.2

15. The Applicant argues that, given the above, the burden of proof lies on the party making an
affirmative assertion.2! It contends that in line with this legal principle, the burden of proof lies
on it in respect of the circumstances it alleges require the stay to be continued,?? while the
burden of proof lies on the Claimants in respect of those circumstances alleged by the
Claimants.23 Therefore, according to the Applicant, it has to prove that the harm of terminating
the stay is greater than that of continuing it, while the Claimants have to prove the converse,
i.e. that the harm of continuing the stay is greater than that of terminating it.2* The Applicant
then contends that it has discharged its burden of proof in this regard, whereas the Claimants

have failed to do so.25

b. Claimants’ Position

16. The Claimants submit that the burden lies on the Applicant to prove that circumstances exist
that require the stay to be continued,”¢ citing case law including Masdar v Spain?’ and NextEra

v Spain.28

18 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 63.

19 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 81.

20 Hearing Transcript, pg. 5, lines 5-8; pg. 10, lines 8-11.

21 Hearing Transcript, pg. 9, line 12 - pg. 10, line 7.

22 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 18.

23 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 17.

24 Hearing Transcript, pg. 10, lines 1-7.

25 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 20.

26 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 25; Claimants’ Opposition, paras. 22-27.

27 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 25; Claimants’ Opposition, para. 22: Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v Kingdom of Spain,
ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Kingdom of Spain's Request for a Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, 20 May 2020, para. 74.

28 Claimants’ Opposition, para. 23: NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v Kingdom
of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 6 April 2020, para. 80.

7

B. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE PRESENT CASE

17. The following elements in the present case have been raised in the parties’ submissions as
possible circumstances to be taken into account when deciding whether the stay should be

continued.

(1) Whether or not the Annulment Application is Frivolous or Dilatory
a. Applicant’s Position

18. The Applicant says that the Annulment Application is well-founded and made in good faith, and
is neither dilatory nor frivolous.”° It submits that previous ad hoc annulment committees have
found that a stay should be granted unless the annulment application is frivolous or dilatory. It
cites MTD v Chile as an example®° and urges the Committee to consider whether or not the
annulment application is frivolous or dilatory,3! submitting that the “serious” nature of the

Annulment Application is a circumstance in favour of granting a stay in the present case.

b. Claimants’ Position

19. The Claimants submit that while the frivolous or dilatory nature of an annulment application
should lead to a refusal to grant a stay, it does not mean that stay should be granted on the
basis that an annulment application is not frivolous or dilatory.32 The Claimants submit that
the allegedly serious nature of the Annulment Application is therefore irrelevant,33 and that
the merits of the Annulment Application should not influence the Committee’s decision unless

it is frivolous or dilatory.3+

20. The Claimants however submit that the Annulment Application in this instance is in fact
“manifestly frivolous and dilatory in nature’,35 given that the Applicant’s grounds for the
Annulment Application are “based on EU law”,36 and that the tribunal in the main proceeding
did consider the Applicant’s arguments on European Union (“EU”) law before rejecting those

arguments, urging that “[w]hat Spain is really complaining about is that they [i.e. Spain] don’t

 

29 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 49.
30 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 44: MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v The Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/7, Decision on the Respondent's Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, 1 June 2005, para. 28.

31 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 43.

32 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 32-33.

33 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 29 and 34.

34 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 32; Hearing Transcript, pg. 60, line 20 - pg. 61, line 4.
35 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 35; Hearing Transcript, pg. 61, lines 19-20.

36 Hearing Transcript, pg. 61, lines 24-25.

21.

22.

23.

like the finding that the Tribunal ultimately made about the relevance of EU law; not that they
[ie. the Tribunal] didn’t consider it, and, of course, that would turn the annulment into an
appeal.”37 The Claimants suggest that the Applicant’s arguments for annulment do not even
apply to the First Claimant (since it is not an EU entity), thereby making the Annulment
Application even more frivolous.3 Accordingly, the Claimants submit that the stay should be
lifted.

(2) Whether the Applicant is likely to Comply with the Award
a. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that there is no history of non-compliance with “final, confirmed”
arbitral awards by it3? (because the awards referred to by the Claimants are “all pending

annulment”), and that there is no risk of its inability to pay.

The Applicant draws attention to its need to comply with EU law which it submits is not merely
an internal matter but rather an issue of international law,*? and submits that its notification
of the Award to the European Commission is a sign of its willingness to comply with

international law (including the Award) rather than an attempt to evade obligations.*3

The Applicant further “confirms its commitment to pay the Award if it is not annulled in this
proceeding, specifically, by seeking authorization from the European Commission consistent with
its obligations under EU law and regulations, and then to pay promptly upon receiving such
authorization” .** It believes that such a commitment on its part as a sovereign State should be

sufficient under the circumstances of the present case.45

37 Hearing Transcript, pg. 67, lines 14-18.

38 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 36.

39 Applicant's Reply, paras. 77 and 84; Hearing Transcript, pg. 17, lines 17-23.
40 Hearing Transcript, pg. 81, lines 9-11.

41 Applicant's Reply, para. 83.

“2 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 35 and 111.
43 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 40 and 94.
44 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 41.

45 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 42.

24.

25.

26.

27.

b. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that there is a high risk of non-compliance with the Award by the
Applicant, given its history of refusing to honour arbitral awards.*¢ The Claimants also allege
that the Applicant had refused to comply with an order from another ICSID ad hoc annulment
committee‘? to provide an undertaking that the Applicant would comply with its ICSID and

Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”) obligations to pay an award.

The Claimants also argue that the Applicant’s attempt to “condition payment on an internal EU
law process” also signifies the Applicant’s reluctance to comply with the Award.‘® They cite
recent case law which is “consistent in finding that conditioning payment of an award on internal
law reflects a strong risk of non-payment and thus the stay must be lifted or conditioned on

payment of security”.*9

(3) Prejudice to the Claimants if the Stay is Continued and the Annulment
Application Unsuccessful

a. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that the prejudice allegedly suffered by the Claimants if the stay is
continued is hypothetical, and has not been proven by the Claimants.5° The Applicant also
argues that any delay in payment will be “more than adequately” compensated by interest,51
which will result in the Claimants receiving “much more money than they would if they invested
in Spanish government bonds”,52 and that therefore “delay in payment after an annulment of
proceeding cannot be considered as a harm to be taken into account when deciding whether to

suspend or not, or give a stay to an arbitral award’ 53

The Applicant also contends that being in line after other creditors does not justify lifting the

stay, citing NextEra v Spain.5*

46 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 40.

47 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 41: NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v Kingdom of
Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11, Decision Terminating the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 28 May 2020, para. 12.

48 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 43.

49 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 48.

50 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 29 and 30.
51 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 31.

32 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 32.
53 Hearing Transcript, pg. 16, line 19 - pg. 17, line 1.

54 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 33: NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v
Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/14/11, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 6 April 2020, para. 94.

10

28.

29.

30.

b. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants assert that they will suffer the prejudice of “being pushed to the back of a long
line of award-creditors’’5 if the stay is continued and the Annulment Application unsuccessful.
They also argue that the purpose of interest is to compensate, and not to justify undermining

the Award’s finality.5¢

(4) The Applicant's EU Obligations
a. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant maintains that its obligations under EU law pertain to international law, and that
therefore the potential conflict between compliance with the Award and compliance with EU
law is a conflict of international obligations.%? It also submits that it is obliged to obtain
clearance from the European Commission to pay the Award because the Award constitutes
notifiable State aid under Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union (“TFEU”), specifically citing Decision C(2017) 7384 of the European Commission®® to

support its allegation (that the Award constitutes notifiable State aid).5°

b. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the final and binding nature of ICSID awards is not subject to any
restrictions except annulment, and that therefore the Applicant's obligations under EU law are
irrelevant.© In particular, the Claimants submit that the ICSID Convention neither permits the
Applicant to condition payment of the Award on the approval of a third party (here, the EU),

nor allows for a stay to be granted pending resolution of matters of internal or regional laws.®2

55 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 65.
56 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 67-68.
57 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 35 and 111.

58 Annex 51 of Applicant's Reply: Decision C(2017) 7384 of the European Commission, rendered on 10 November 2017,
regarding the Support for Electricity generation from renewable energy sources, cogeneration and waste (S.A. 40348
(2015/NN)), Section 5 Conclusion.

59 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 106-110, 112, 117-119; Hearing Transcript, pg. 31, lines 3-11.
60 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 70 and 75.

61 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 78.

62 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 75.

11

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

The Claimants further submit that the Award does not constitute State aid, arguing that the
Applicant has not established that the requisite conditions exist for the Award to constitute

State aid requiring notification under the TFEU.®

(5) Possibility of Recoupment of Funds from the Claimants if the Stay is Terminated
and the Award subsequently Annulled

a. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that it faces a real risk of not being able to recoup payment if the stay is
lifted and the Award enforced, before being subsequently annulled. This is because the
Claimants do not appear to be sufficiently solvent on the basis of available information.°® It
points out that the Second Claimant is in fact a company with “negative equity” (i.e. its liability
exceeds its assets), and is not “creditworthy”,®’ and as regards the First Claimant, no
meaningful information as to its financial status is available or has been provided by the

Claimants, despite requests from the Applicant.®

The Applicant therefore submits that the Claimants’ assertion that they are “substantial
companies, with significant assets and access to capital” is wholly unsupported, and wrong,

based on the evidence that they have submitted.°°

b. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants maintain that they are “substantial companies, with significant assets and access
to capital’, and that therefore there is no real risk of non-recoupment if the stay is lifted and

the Award subsequently annulled.7°

Specifically, the Claimants indicate that they hold “nearly EUR 1 billion in assets” (emphasis in

original) as evidence that their financial situation is sound.”! They also allege that the First

63 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 71.

64 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 21.

85 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 24-25.

86 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 25.

67 Hearing Transcript, pg. 14, line 18 - pg. 15, line 3.

68 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 26.
89 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 28.
70 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 56.
71 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 53.

12

36.

37.

38.

39.

Claimant has “access to uncommitted capital in excess of EUR 142 million”,72 and argue that the

Second Claimant is not insolvent, whether under Spanish or Luxembourg law.73

To allay any fear of possible inability to recoup, the Claimants also “offer such an undertaking if
the Committee deems it necessary: that they will not distribute any proceeds of any amounts
recovered until the annulment has been decided, and that they would immediately repay those

amounts if the award is annulled”.7*

C. WHETHER SECURITY SHOULD BE ORDERED
a. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that the same circumstances that support the grant of stay, support the
grant of that stay unconditionally, and that the Claimants have not discharged their burden of

proof that any stay granted should be conditioned on a provision of security.”>

The Applicant also argues that payment of the Award plus interest into an escrow account
would incur additional costs, and that this would be equivalent to imposing “a cost or a fine” on
it, which is not contemplated under the ICSID Convention. Doing so would therefore be
penalising it for requesting annulment in addition to curtailing its rights under Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention. The Applicant suggests that there is no legal norm indicating that
provision of security is “an automatic or counterbalancing right” to a stay, citing Azurix v
Argentina,”’ adding that posting security into escrow would put the Claimants in a better
position than they would otherwise be in, and that this is not the purpose of annulment

proceedings.”8

As regards the Claimants’ request in the form of an undertaking, the Applicant refers to its

commitment as offered at paragraph 23 above,” and reiterates that such commitment should

72 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 55.

73 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 57; Hearing Transcript, pg. 56, lines 4-6.

74 Hearing Transcript, pg. 60, lines 2-6; pg. 73, lines 5-16.

75 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 123.

76 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 124.

77 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 125: Azurix Corp. v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 28 December 2007, paras. 22, 25, 37 and
40.

 

78 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 126.
79 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 104 and 127.

13

40.

be “sufficient, without additional onerous conditions or securities’.®° It discloses that it has
“already initiated proceedings to obtain the EC’s clearance as promptly as possible” as an
indicator of its commitment.*! The Applicant also observes that the text of the undertaking
demanded by the Claimants “would be unacceptable for any sovereign country and should never
be considered by the Committee. Indeed, the waiver of sovereign immunity that the Claimants
include would be in direct contradiction with Article 55 of the ICSID Convention, by which the

Parties are to abide.”®

b. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Applicant ought to provide security “to counterbalance the risk
of non-compliance and the prejudice caused to the Claimants”, arguing that case law confirms
the present Committee’s power to condition a stay on such security.®? They contend that
providing such security as requested would allay the Applicant’s concerns regarding both
recoupment of funds and the costs of such recoupment, in the event the Annulment Application

succeeds.®

V. THE COMMITTEE'S ANALYSIS

Al.

42.

The above (paragraphs 8 to 40) is a brief summary of the main contentions and positions
advanced by the parties. In this section, the Committee will discuss some of the arguments
raised and consider them in deciding whether to grant a continuation or to lift the stay of
enforcement of the Award in this matter. While the Committee has heard and read all of the
parties’ submissions and arguments, the discussions below will deal only with those which in

the Committee’s view have an impact on the outcome of the application.

A. THE LAW APPLICABLE
(1) Applicable Legal Standard

The finality of ICSID awards is spelt out in Article 53(1) of the Convention:

80 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 105.

81 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, paras. 105 and 127.
82 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 128.

83 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 85.

84 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 87-88.

14

43.

44,

4S.

Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this
Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the
award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

[emphasis added]

Article 52 of the Convention gives a party the right to seek annulment of the award and when
such an application is pending, the enforcement of the award may be stayed. Article 52(5)

provides:

Article 52
(J

(5) The Committee may, ifit considers that the circumstances so require,
stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant
requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application,
enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.

[emphasis added]

In accordance with Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, to which the
United Kingdom,®> Luxembourg and Spain are contracting parties, treaties “shall be interpreted
in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms [...] in their
context”. It is therefore only appropriate that the Committee first considers the ordinary

meaning of Article 52(5).

On a plain and simple reading, the Committee agrees with the Claimants, that a two-stage
analysis is set out under Article 52(5) of the Convention for the stay to be continued: first, it
must be shown that “circumstances so require” for the enforcement of the Award to be stayed
pending the Committee’s decision regarding the Annulment Application; and second, if such
circumstances are present, the Committee should then exercise its discretion (evident from the

word “may”) whether to continue the stay. As between the parties, there is no disagreement

85 Jersey is a British Crown Dependency and is internationally represented by the government of the United Kingdom.

15

46.

47.

48.

between them as to the second stage of the analysis;* it is the first stage where the parties’

differences lie.

There seems to be some confusion with regard to the threshold past which circumstances can
be said to “require” the stay to be continued. This arises out of the use of the word “except” in
Article 53(1). The Applicant’s position is that no higher threshold than usual is necessary under
Article 52(5). At the oral hearing, the Claimants affirmed their position that they “do not suggest
[that the Committee] need[s] to find exceptional circumstances. [The Committee] must find that

circumstances exist in order to impose the stay.”87

Notwithstanding their position, the Claimants maintain that “greater restraint is needed in
deciding whether a stay should be continued” as a result of the final and binding nature of ICSID
awards under Article 53(1) of the Convention.®® This is contested by the Applicant, which
asserts that the principle of finality is not absolute and that its right to seek annulment and stay

of enforcement is not subordinate to the Claimants’ right to enforce the Award.®?

On a plain reading of Article 53(1), ICSID awards are final and binding, subject only to the
remedies available under the ICSID Convention. There is no suggestion in the text or any
justification in principle to impose the right to enforce an award as ranking superior to that of
an aggrieved party’s right to seek its annulment. If they are each intended to be a
counterbalance of the other, they must each be accorded equal weight and treatment. The
Committee is therefore not persuaded that “greater restraint” should be exercised in deciding
to grant a continuation of stay as submitted by the Claimants or that “a general rule of caution
or prudence” when lifting a stay exists simply because a party has applied for annulment,”
which the Applicant so urges us to adopt. In taking this view, the Committee is conscious that
while past decisions by other ad hoc committees might have taken one view or the other in
relation to the exercise of restraint or caution on the specific facts of those cases, they do not
constitute precedents which this Committee is inclined to follow. In the Committee’s view, each
matter should be decided based on an appreciation of the specific circumstances of the case,

taking into account any burden of proof that has to be discharged by either side. This then leads

86 Applicant's Reply, para. 20; Claimants’ Opposition, para. 9.

87 Hearing Transcript, pg. 42, lines 4-6.

88 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 15-16.

89 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 13.

90 Hearing Transcript, pg. 7, line 23 - pg. 8, line 15.

16

the discussion on to the question of the burden of proof required to be discharged by each of

the parties herein.

(2) Burden of Proof

49. The Claimants submit that “[t]he language of Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention imposes the
burden of proof on Spain to establish that circumstances exist which require a stay”.®! The
Committee however sees Article 52(5) as merely establishing the legal standard to be met
before enforcement may be stayed pending the decision on annulment. It does not speak to the

burden of proof required of the applicant seeking stay.

50. Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which deals with stay of enforcement, provides as

follows:

Rule 54
Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of
an award may in its application, and either party may at any time before
the final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement
of part or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal
or Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains
a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall,
together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the
provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on
whether such stay should be continued; unless it decides to continue the
stay, it shall automatically be terminated.

(3) Ifa stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1)
or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee
may at any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either
party. All stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a
final decision is rendered on the application, except that a Committee
granting the partial annulment of an award may order the temporary
stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion in order to give either
party an opportunity to request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant
to Article 52(6) of the Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A_request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3)
shall specify the circumstances that require the stay or its modification

91 Claimants’ Opposition, para. 22.

17

51.

52.

53.

54.

or termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(J
[emphases added]

The rules quoted above similarly do not indicate specifically which party bears the burden of
proof. The best indication available is Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which
stipulates that the party requesting a stay or modification or termination of stay “shall specify
the circumstances that require the stay or its modification or termination”, and does not specify

that the burden is incumbent only on the applicant seeking the stay.

The Committee is aware that in Masdar v Spain and NextEra v Spain the committees seem to
take the position that the State parties which were applicants for the continuation of the stay
were held to bear the burden of proof that “circumstances exist which require a stay’. This
Committee observes that in each of those cases, the applications for stay were made only by
the State parties, respondents in the arbitration. In the case here, in addition to the Applicant,
the Claimants too filed an Opposition under Rule 54(2) to lift the stay and is thereby a
‘requesting party’ under Rule 54(4) as well, albeit one that is requesting for termination of the
stay. Accordingly, it would not be inconsistent with the reasoning in Masdar v Spain and
NextEra v Spain to require the Claimants to bear the burden of proof in respect of its request
under Rule 54(2).

The Committee is therefore unable to discern any principle under Article 52(5) of the
Convention or Rule 54(4) of the Arbitration Rules that the burden lies positively only on the

Applicant.

Given that the relevant provisions under the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules do not
specify or otherwise indicate which party bears the burden of proof, the Committee believes it
appropriate to consider the general principle of onus probandi incumbit actori: that the burden
of proof lies with the party making a positive assertion. This means that the Applicant has to
prove the circumstances which it alleges require the stay to be continued, while the burden lies
on the Claimants to prove the circumstances that they allege require the stay to be terminated.
This then leaves the Committee to consider if each has so discharged their burden and if so,

how the discretion to lift or continue stay should be exercised.

18

55.

56.

57.

B. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE PRESENT CASE

The parties agree that the question as to whether the stay should be continued is fact-specific
and depends on the circumstances of this case,°2 but they do not fully agree on what
circumstances should be taken into account. Notwithstanding this, the Committee deems it
appropriate to address the following elements, as they have been raised at one point or another
in the Parties’ submissions as possible circumstances to be taken into account in deciding

whether the stay should be continued or lifted.

(1) Whether or not the Annulment Application is Frivolous or Dilatory

The Committee does not accept the Applicant’s submission that a stay should be granted unless
the annulment application is frivolous or dilatory. The mere fact that there is some merit in the
Annulment Application is a neutral factor and cannot of itself be a basis to grant a stay of
enforcement. The Committee agrees that the converse is applicable, such that if the grounds
for stay are frivolous or dilatory, it operates as a factor for lifting a stay of enforcement. The

Applicant in its Annulment Application cited two principal grounds, viz.:

i. That the arbitral tribunal in the original proceeding (“Arbitral Tribunal”) lacked
jurisdiction on the basis that the case at hand was an intra-EU dispute between an EU
member State and investors from different member States, and therefore no arbitration
could be filed under Article 26 of the ECT since that would be in breach of EU law
applicable between member States and particularly of Articles 267 and 344 of the
TFEU;°3 and

That the Arbitral Tribunal failed to properly consider, when analysing the merits of the

dispute, the implications of EU law.%*

Ona plain reading of these pleaded grounds, the Committee could see that they are substantive
grounds both on lack of jurisdiction and excess of powers relating to the applicable law. In the
Committee’s view it would not be proper to tag the Annulment Application with the label of
being “frivolous and dilatory”. The fact that these matters were addressed by the parties during
the arbitration does not render them as lesser grounds for consideration by the Committee. In

the absence of any indication of bad faith motivating the Annulment Application, the

°2 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 16; Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 19.
°3 Applicant’s Annulment Application, paras. 26-37.
°4 Applicant’s Annulment Application, paras. 38-44.

19

58.

59.

Committee cannot agree that the Annulment Application is one that is frivolous or dilatory.
Aside from this, the Committee makes no other observation on the merits of the Annulment

Application.

(2) Whether the Applicant is likely to Comply with the Award

There is no dispute between the parties that the Applicant’s behaviour is a factor that should
be taken into account in considering the continuation of stay.°5 The Claimants have described
the Applicant as a State that has an “undisputed history of non-compliance with other awards
pending against it’,°° none of which have been honoured. That the Applicant has not paid any
of the 14 awards (12 ICSID and two non-ICSID) made against it is true. The Committee notes
however that the Applicant has applied for annulment against each of these awards. So far the
Applicant has succeeded in obtaining annulment in one case®” with the rest still pending before
different ad hoc committees. It is therefore not accurate to say that Spain has an “undisputed
history of non-compliance with other awards pending against it’.°® In the Committee’s view, it
seems premature to conclude that the Applicant has failed or refused to comply with the
awards. The fact that the Applicant had sought to annul the awards does not mean that it is a
recalcitrant defaulter, as it was merely exercising a right and remedy available under the ICSID
Convention and the Rules. Accordingly, the Committee is not prepared to hold that the

Applicant has “a history of refusing to honour awards” .°°

The Committee also agrees that whether the Applicant has the ability to pay on the Award is a
relevant factor to be considered in continuing or granting stay. In this regard, the Committee
accepts that the Applicant is the fifth largest economy in the EU and is ranked 13 among all
countries in the world in terms of its GDP. While there may be other award creditors which
may be seeking payment should the Applicant’s annulment attempts fail, the Committee is not
convinced that the Applicant lacks the funds or the ability to honour the awards, including the
Award in this arbitration. The Committee is therefore not prepared to agree that the Applicant

will be unable to meet the payments under the Award should the Annulment Application fail.1°

95 Applicant's Sur-Rejoinder, para. 93; Hearing Transcript, pg. 49, lines 7-18.

96 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 39.

97 Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.d r.l. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36, Decision
on the Kingdom of Spain's Application for Annulment, 11 June 2020.

98 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 39.

99 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 40.

100 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 39.

20

60.

61.

62.

(3) Prejudice to the Claimants if the Stay is Continued and the Annulment
Application Unsuccessful

The Claimants seek to persuade the Committee that they would suffer continuing prejudice

should they succeed in the annulment proceeding in having to await receiving payment of the

damages much later, and possibly only through enforcement proceedings. They also express

concern that, with other awards pending against the Applicant, they could be pushed to the

back of the line in the queue for payment. In essence, the Claimants’ complaint of prejudice is

one of delay, costs and loss of priority.

As discussed above in paragraph 59, the Committee does not agree that there will be any
solvency issue or risk of non-payment by the Applicant such that if the Claimants succeed, there
would be nothing left for it to recover under the Award. The Award has provided not just for
monetary compensation but also that the same compensation attracts interest at 2.07%
compounded monthly,!°! a rate above the rate for Spanish government bonds1°2 and even
higher than commercial rates that are currently offered by any financial institution.1°3 This
means that for any delay in receiving any money due to them under the Award, the Claimants
would be more than adequately compensated by the interest that would have accrued. While
the Committee agrees with the Claimants that “the purpose of post-award interest is
compensatory, not a pretext to undermine the Award’s finality”, citing Antin v Spain and NextEra
v Spain,'%* the Committee does not agree that granting of stay undermines the finality of the
Award. Permitting a stay is in reality a further step to preserve the Award’s eventual finality so
that if affirmed by the annulment process, there could be no doubt as to its universal finality

and enforceability.

The Committee is also not persuaded that the Committee should lift the stay in order that the
Claimants remain in the front of the queue instead of being “pushed to the back of a long line of
award-creditors” if the stay is continued and the Annulment Application eventually

dismissed. The fear of being at the back of the queue of creditors is only real if the award

101 Applicant's Reply, para. 91.
102 Applicant's Reply, para. 92.
103 Hearing Transcript, pg. 79, lines 18-20.

104 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 67-68: Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.a.r.l. and Energia Termosolar B.V. (formerly
Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/31, Decision on the Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 21 October 2019, para. 82;
NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11,
Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 6 April 2020, para. 93.

105 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 65.

21

63.

64.

65.

debtor could be said to be ina precarious financial situation. If the Annulment Application fails,
the Claimants remain in line and will eventually be paid, whether it is in the front or the back
of the line. There is in fact no added prejudice to the Claimants. In the Committee’s view there
is no legitimate basis, or any need for the Committee to assist the Claimants to jump the queue
ahead of other creditors by lifting the stay. In this respect, the Committee shares the view of
the annulment committee in NextEra v Spain that “such a possibility of being behind the queue
of other creditors is not a significant risk factor that would be sufficient to support the lifting of
the stay” 106

(4) The Applicant's EU Obligations

The Committee recognises that the Applicant may have obligations under the EU framework
and is subject to EU laws which could impose obligations upon it. The Committee is aware that
the Applicant may be caught in a double bind situation such that if the Applicant pays on the
Award without clearance from the European Commission, it could well be exposed to further
financial sanctions to be imposed by the European Commission. This is however related to the
question of whether the imposition of EU laws and obligations on the Applicant is a ground to
annul the Award, which would require further consideration at the substantive hearing of the
Annulment Application. For the moment, the Committee takes the view that the question of
whether there is a risk in recoupment of funds (if paid on lifting the stay) would be the more

important factor to be considered.

(5) Possibility of Recoupment of Funds from the Claimants if the Stay is Terminated

and the Award subsequently Annulled
The parties are in agreement that the possibility of recoupment is a relevant factor in deciding
whether or not to continue the stay. The Committee sees this as one of the main factors to be
considered. While the Applicant is a sovereign State with a sizeable economy and resources
that could pay when required, the question is whether the Claimants as award creditors would
be able to repay all sums paid to or received by them should the Annulment Application

succeed.

The Claimants have described themselves as “substantial companies, with significant assets and

access to capital”.1°7 Unfortunately, there is little by way of evidence to support their financial

106 NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No.
ARB/14/11, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 6 April 2020, para. 94.

107 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 56.

22

66.

67.

standing. The First Claimant did not furnish its financial accounts and had instead tendered a
letter signed by Charlotte Cruickshank! of Jersey, as an alternate director of the First Claimant,

certifying in a single-line letter that it has
Infrastructure Fund LP] as at 19 August 2020 are EUR 142,647,811.42”. The Second Claimant's

undrawn commitments in the [Pan-European

2018 financial statements?” as filed in the public registry in Luxembourg showed the company
as having a negative equity with debts in excess of its EUR 1 billion assets and a cash balance
of only EUR 431,148. The Claimants however argued that the Second Claimant remains a
company with assets of more than EUR 1 billion and that under Spanish and Luxembourg laws,
the Second Claimant is not formally insolvent. In their view, the accounts filed do not reflect
the increased valuation of the assets, which when sold could realise values which could exceed

its liabilities.

On the basis of these observations, the Committee has concerns as to the Claimants’ financial
standing. While the Claimants may not be formally insolvent under Spanish or Luxembourg
laws, the accounts of the Second Claimant show that it is not on strong financial footing and
there is no assurance that the Applicant could obtain recoupment if the sum under the Award
is received by the Second Claimant. The situation with the First Claimant is no better. With no
accounts or evidence to show its financial standing apart from the mere single-line declaration
by Ms Cruickshank, there is little assurance that any sum paid to it could be recouped by the

Applicant.

In their attempt to assure the Committee that funds paid to the Claimants would be recoverable,
the Claimants have offered to provide an undertaking that “they will not distribute any proceeds
of any amounts recovered until the annulment has been decided, and that they would immediately
repay those amounts if the award is annulled”.11° Given the financial situation of the Claimants,
such an undertaking by the Claimants themselves would be faint assurance to the Applicant as
there remains the risk that the Claimants may not be able to make good their undertaking, or

ringfence the funds once released, against the reach of their creditors.

108 Exhibit C-302: Letter from RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited regarding undrawn commitments to the Pan-European
Infrastructure Fund LP, 19 August 2020.

109 Annex-35 to Applicant's Reply: RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux S.a rl. Balance Sheet for financial year
ending 31 December 2018.

110 Hearing Transcript, pg. 60, lines 2-6; pg. 73, lines 5-16.

23

68.

69.

70.

The Committee is therefore of the view that there is a real risk of the Applicant not being able
to recoup the funds if so paid, and that this is an important factor that militates against lifting

the stay of enforcement.

Taking into account all the factors considered above, namely that there is minimal risk that the
Applicant would not honour the Award if the Annulment Application fails, that any delay on
the part of the Claimants receiving payment would be adequately compensated by the payment
of the interest rate as set in the Award, and that there is a real risk that the Applicant may not
be able to recoup payment should it succeed in the Annulment Application, the Committee
reaches the view that the stay request must be granted without condition and the termination

of stay rejected.

C. WHETHER SECURITY SHOULD BE ORDERED

Having decided that the stay should be maintained without condition, there is no longer a need
to consider the Claimants’ request that security be ordered. The Committee nevertheless
wishes to say that it agrees with the Applicant that provision of security would place the
Claimants in a better position than they would otherwise be in, especially vis-a-vis other
creditors. This is not the purpose of annulment proceedings. The Committee also agrees that
the posting of security by the Applicant into escrow would impose an unnecessary burden on
the Applicant. On the basis that the Applicant is not insolvent and will unlikely renege on its
obligations under the Convention, there is really no justification to order it to put funds in
escrow as a condition to continue stay. Accordingly, the Committee declines to order the
security as requested by the Claimants, whether in the form of posting funds into escrow or an

undertaking from the Applicant in the language proposed by the Claimants.

VI. COSTS

71.

The costs of this application will be deferred for determination with the Committee’s final

decision on the Annulment Application.

24

VII. DECISION
For the reasons set out above,
The Tribunal hereby -

I. Grants the Applicant’s request for the stay of enforcement of the Award to be
continued and maintained in effect, without security or other conditions, until the
decision on the Annulment Application is rendered by the Committee in this

annulment proceeding;
Il. Reserves its right to modify or terminate the stay at any time; and

III. Reserves its decision on costs for determination in the Committee's final decision

on the Annulment Application.

(>

Lawrence GS Boo
President of the ad hoc Committee
(on behalf of the Committee)

25

