INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

RSM PRODUCTION CORPORATION
(CLAIMANT)

and

SAINT LUCIA
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10

 

DECISION ON SAINT LUCIA’S REQUEST FOR SECURITY FOR COSTS

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Siegfried H. Elsing, President
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC, Arbitrator
Judge Edward W. Nottingham, Arbitrator
Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Representing Claimant

Mr. Jack J. Grynberg

Mr. Roger Jatko

Ms. Janice Orr

3600 S. Yosemite St., Suite 900
Denver, CO 80237

U.S.A.

Mr. Daniel L. Abrams

Law Office of Daniel L. Abrams, PLLC
31 Penn Plaza, 132 W. 31st Street

15th Floor

New York, NY 10001

U.S.A.

Mr. Karel Daele
Mishcon de Reya
Summit House

12 Red Lion Square
London WCIR 4QD
United Kingdom

Representing Respondent

Mr. Brian King

Mr. Elliot Friedman

Ms. Lexi Menish

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue

31st floor

New York, NY 10022

US.A.

Mr. Jonathan J. Gass

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
65 Fleet Street

London EC4Y 1HS

United Kingdom

Ms. Kate Parlett

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2 rue Paul Cézanne

75008 Paris

France

Date: August 13, 2014

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents
Parties. 1
Claimant 1
Respondent. 1
Procedural History 1
Background of the Dispute 3
Positions of the Parties. 5
Respondent’s Position 5
Claimant’s Position 8
Tribunal’s Analysis 10
Tribunal’s Authority to Recommend Security for Costs as a Provisional Measure 10

Requirements of an Order for Provisional Measures
Prima Facie Subject Matter Jurisdiction ...
Right to be Preserved

 

No Prejudgment of the Dispute on the Merits ......0.0.0c cece ee eeeeeeeeneeneeeteeees

1
2.
3. Exceptional Cir
4
5

Quantum
Decision
Assenting reasons of GAVAN GRIFFITH
Dissenting opinion of EDWARD NOTTINGHAM

 

 

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

IL.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Parties

Claimant

RSM Production Corporation (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant”) is a company
constituted under the laws of Texas, U.S.A. It is represented by Messrs. Jack J. Grynberg
and Roger Jatko and Ms. Janice Orr. Counsel for Claimant in this arbitration is Mr. Daniel

L. Abrams and Mr. Karel Daele of Mishcon de Reya.

Respondent

Saint Lucia (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent”) is represented in this arbitration by
its counsel Messrs. Brian King and Elliot Friedman and Ms. Lexi Menish of Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP as well as Mr. Jonathan J. Gass of the London office of
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP and Ms. Kate Parlett of the Paris office of Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to individually as a “Party” and

collectively as the “Parties”.

Procedural History

On April 2, 2012, Claimant filed a request for arbitration dated March 29, 2012 with ICSID
against Respondent (the “Request” or “RFA”).

On April 23, 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as supplemented
by letters of April 8 and 20, 2011, in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention
and notified the Parties thereof. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited
the Parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance

with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

6.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 26.3(b) of the
“Agreement between the Government of Saint Lucia and RSM Production Corporation”,

entered into on March 29, 2000 (“Agreement”), which provides:

Each party shall appoint one arbitrator, and these two shall designate a third
arbitrator, who shall chair the Arbitration Board. If the arbitrators named by the
parties fail to agree upon a third arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the latter of
the two arbitrators has been appointed, or if any party does not appoint an
arbitrator within thirty (30) days following appointment of an arbitrator by the other
party, such arbitrator shall, at the request of either party, be designated by the
Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID.
The Tribunal is composed of Prof. Siegfried H. Elsing, a national of the Federal Republic of
Germany, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Judge Edward Nottingham, a
national of the United States of America, appointed by Claimant; and Dr. Gavan Griffith

QC, a national of Australia, appointed by Respondent.

On August 6, 2013, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules’’) notified the Parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Aurélia Antonietti, ICSID Team

Leader/Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.
On September 6, 2013, Respondent filed a request for provisional measures.

Claimant filed its opposition to Respondent’s request for provisional measures on September

20, 2013.
On September 26, 2013, Respondent filed its reply on provisional measures.
On October 2, 2013, Claimant filed its rejoinder on provisional measures.

The Tribunal held its first session and a hearing on provisional measures with the Parties on

October 4, 2013, in New York City (“First Session’).

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

20.

21.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

On December 12, 2013, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its “Decision on Saint Lucia’s
Request for Provisional Measures”, obliging Claimant to bear all further advances and to
refund to Respondent the portion it had already paid. The decision on Respondent’s request

for security for costs was suspended.
On January 24, 2014, Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits.

On June 6, 2014, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial.

Background of the Dispute

In order to briefly summarize the subject matter of the arbitration, so far as it can be derived
from the Parties’ submissions to date, Claimant bases its claim on the Agreement. Pursuant
to the Agreement, Respondent granted Claimant an exclusive oil exploration license in an

area off the coast of Saint Lucia, initially for a period of four years.

Subsequently, according to Claimant’s position, boundary disputes developed, affecting the
exploration area, in particular in relation to Martinique, Barbados and St. Vincent, which
allegedly prevented Claimant from initiating exploration. The details concerning the
existence of such boundary disputes and their legal consequences are disputed among the

Parties.

On September 8, 2000, the Parties amended their agreement to the effect that it was
acknowledged that a force majeure situation existed due to the boundary issues and that this
situation excused performance of Claimant’s obligations under the Agreement. Additionally,
the Parties extended the duration of the Agreement and the period allowed for performance

by the period necessary to solve the boundary issues.

In March 2004, the Parties acknowledged the continuance of the boundary issues and agreed

on an extension of the Agreement by another three years.

After a change of the government of Saint Lucia in 2006 and after a further replacement of

Saint Lucia’s prime minister in 2007, an envelope was given to Mr. Earl Huntley on

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

22.

23.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

November 7, 2007 in the prime minister’s office. Whether he was acting as a representative
of Claimant, is disputed among the Parties. According to Claimant, the envelope contained
an agreement signed by the prime minister to the effect that the Agreement was extended by

another three years.

Mr. Huntley was, after collecting the envelope, called and asked to come back and gave

back the envelope which was not returned, neither to Mr. Huntley nor to Claimant.

Claimant refers to its right under the Agreement to begin exploration in the area agreed upon
after resolution of the boundary issues. Claimant requests an award declaring that the
Agreement is still in force, prohibiting Respondent to negotiate with or grant to third parties
any exploration rights in the same area or, in the alternative, an award declaring that
Respondent terminated the Agreement in breach of the same and obliging Respondent to
reimburse Claimant for all damages incurred in reliance upon the Agreement.! Respondent,

in turn, requests an award dismissing Claimant’s claims and declaring that the Agreement

Claimant’s Memorial of January 24, 2014, paras. 83 et seq. (“[...] RSM respectfully requests the following
relief:

to declare that the Agreement remains in full force and effect up to and until nine years, five months and
twenty days have elapsed from the date that St Lucia establishes beyond doubt its ownership and control
over all the petroleum in the entire Agreement Area;

to order that St Lucia is prohibited from initiating a competitive bid to grant third parties any exploration

or development rights in the Agreement Area during the pendency of the Agreement;

- to order that St Lucia is prohibited from granting third parties any exploration or development rights in
the Agreement Area during the pendency of the Agreement; and

- to order St Lucia to pay all the cost and expenses of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal, the ICSID administrative expenses and the legal fees and other expenses incurred by RSM in the

arbitration.

 

~

In subsidiary order, RSM respectfully requests the following relief:
- to declare that St Lucia has terminated the Agreement in breach of Article 27 of the Agreement;

to order St Lucia to pay damages in the amount of at least $200 million;

- to order St Lucia to pay interest on the damages awarded, from the date of the termination of the
Agreement up to and until the full payment of the Final Award;

to order St Lucia to pay all the cost and expenses of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal, the ICSID administrative expenses and the legal fees and other expenses incurred by RSM in the
arbitration.”).

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

has expired or is at least not enforceable and that Respondent has no obligations vis-a-vis

Claimant.”

In its request for provisional measures, which was again reiterated in Respondent’s letter of
June 6, 2014, Respondent seeks an order obliging Claimant to post security for costs in
addition to its request to order that Claimant bear all outstanding advances which has already

been dealt with in the Tribunal’s decision of December 12, 2013.

Positions of the Parties

The Parties’ positions with respect to Respondent’s request for security for costs can be

summarized as follows:

Respondent’s Position

Respondent asserts that the Tribunal has jurisdiction and the power to order security for
costs and makes reference to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration

Rule 39.5

Respondent acknowledges that so far, no ICSID tribunal has eventually ordered security for
costs. However, in Respondent’s opinion, in the present case an order for security for costs

is justified.*

Respondent takes the view that such an order is necessary in order to protect its procedural

right to request that Claimant be ordered to reimburse some or all of Respondent’s costs.°

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial of June 6, 2014, para. 205 (“[...] St. Lucia requests that the Tribunal render
an Award:

(a) declaring that the Agreement has expired or, alternatively, that it is not enforceable;

(b) declaring that St. Lucia has no legal duties or obligations to RSM, under the Agreement or otherwise;

(c) dismissing RSM’s claims; and

(d) ordering RSM to pay in their entirety the costs of this arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the Centre and the reasonable fees and expenses incurred by St. Lucia in defending against
RSM’s claims.” ).

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 24.

Ibid.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Decision on Saint Luci;

 

s Request for Security for Costs

Respondent alleges that there is a material risk that Claimant will be unable or unwilling to

comply with a costs award issued against it.®

In this regard, Respondent makes reference to prior arbitrations under the auspices of ICSID,
in which Claimant failed to honor its obligations under costs awards or requests for payment
of advances. In particular, Respondent refers to an ICSID proceeding where Claimant did
not honor the costs award issued against it’ and to an ICSID annulment proceeding which

was discontinued due to Claimant’s failure to pay the advances on costs.*

Additionally, Respondent points to the conduct of Claimant’s CEO in prior court
proceedings, not limited to ICSID arbitrations, as an expression of Claimant’s alleged

unreliability concerning the compliance with orders of courts and tribunals.°

In its reply, Respondent further points out that Claimant has initiated a number of
arbitrations and litigation proceedings subsequent to the aforementioned costs awards which
it did not comply with. Therefore, Respondent concludes that despite Claimant’s financial
situation it goes on to engage in litigation and arbitration and is thus likely not to honor a

future costs award.’

Respondent alleges that the proceedings initiated by Claimant are funded by third parties
(which Claimant admits!'), and concludes that these third parties fund the initiation of

proceedings, but they will not comply with Claimant’s obligations under a resulting costs

 

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 26.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, paras. 28 et seq.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 28; Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg,
Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6), Award of
December 10, 2010.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 28; RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada
(ICSID Case No. ARB/05/14). The tribunal issued its decision to discontinue the annulment proceeding on
April 28, 2011.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, par:

 

s. 19 et seq.

 

Reply on provisional measures of September 26, 2013, paras. 13 ef seq.
See the transcript of the First Session of October 4, 2013, page 116 line 10.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

34.

35.

36.

37.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

award.'? This, in Respondent’s view, constitutes an exceptional situation justifying an order

of security for costs, which Respondent describes as “arbitral hit-and-run”. 8

Respondent contends that there is an urgent need for an order of security for costs at this
time, since security for costs has to be ordered as early as possible in the proceedings in

order to be effective.'*

Respondent further contends that it is not yet necessary to make any showing regarding the
merits of the dispute in order to obtain security for costs. As an explanation, Respondent
points out that such requirement would lead to the result that security for costs could never
be ordered at the outset of the proceeding until the requesting party has elaborated on the

merits. In Respondent’s view, this contravenes the purpose of security for costs. 1s

Concerning the amount claimed as security for costs

 

Respondent asserts that it contains a

modest calculation of the legal expenses likely to incur in the course of the arbitration. 6
Respondent requests!” the Tribunal to

(a) Direct RSM to post an irrevocable bank guarantee in the amount of $750,000
as security for costs; or

(b) In the alternative, direct RSM to procure from a third party with demonstrably
adequate assets a legally binding undertaking to pay any costs order entered
against RSM, failing which St. Lucia would be granted the primary relief
requested in paragraph 31(a), above; and

(c) Award St. Lucia the costs of this application.

Reply on provisional measures of September 26, 2013, paras. 17 et seq.

 

Reply on provisional measures of September 26, 2013, para. 17.

Reply on provisional measures of September 26, 2013, para. 21.

See the transcript of the First Session of October 4, 2013, page 139 lines 15 et seq.
Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, paras. 31 et seq.

Reply on provisional measures of September 26, 2013, para. 31. Since Respondent’s request concerning the
payment of advances has already been granted, the present decision will merely focus on the request for
security for costs.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

IL.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Claimant’s Position

Claimant denies the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (in terms of power or authority) to order security
for costs. According to Claimant, an order of security for costs would protect a right to an
award of costs which is purely hypothetical; consequently, it cannot constitute a “right to be

preserved” under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39. 1s

In Claimant’s view, even if one assumes that the Tribunal is in principle authorized to order
security for costs, the requirements for such measure are not fulfilled in the case at hand,
since such an order should be issued only under exceptional circumstances not present

here.”

Claimant admits that its financial resources are limited and that it hopes to be in a position to
honor a possible costs award issued against it.2? However, in Claimant’s opinion, limited
financial resources alone cannot constitute a ground for ordering security for costs. Claimant
asserts that a precarious financial situation of the claiming party is common in ICSID

arbitrations and may in many cases be the reason for a claimant to initiate the proceeding.”!

Additionally, Claimant sees its right to pursue its claim unduly limited in case security for
costs is ordered prior to a decision upon the claim.” In Claimant’s opinion, this would also
contravene the purpose and overriding policy of the ICSID Convention, namely to facilitate

. A : 23
dispute resolution between investors and states.

Claimant considers Respondent’s reference to prior proceedings as irrelevant, since

Respondent did not put forth any circumstances regarding Claimant’s current conduct which

Opposition to request for provisional measures of September 20, 2013, para. 18.

Opposition to request for pro nal measures of September 20, 2013, para. 21.

 

Opposition to request for pro nal measures of September 20, 2013, para. 16.
Opposition to request for provisional measures of September 20, 2013, para. 19.
Ibid.

Rejoinder on provisional measures of October 2, 2013, para. 10.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

43.

44.

4S.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

could affect the arbitration at hand. Claimant, hence, concludes that there can be no urgent

need to issue an order for security for costs.™4

Claimant contends that Respondent’s application for security for costs is unjustified since
Respondent does not elaborate on the merits of the case and its position towards Claimant’s
RFA.” In the absence of any, not even prima facie submission on the substance of
Respondent’s defence, the Tribunal is not in a position to balance the legitimate interests of

the Parties and the relative equities of granting the requested relief.”°

Finally, Claimant alleges that also Respondent is being funded by a third party and hence,
Respondent would not suffer any immediate disadvantage. Rather, an order for security for
costs would merely serve the benefit of such third party.?” Accordingly, Claimant opines that
the amount requested is disproportionate because Claimant would have to post security in
that amount whereas on the other hand, Respondent does not face any corresponding, let

alone considerably higher risk, due to its third party funding.**
Claimant requests the Tribunal to

reject Respondent’s request in its entirety.

Opposition to request for provisional measures of September 20, 2013, para. 31.

Opposition to request for provisional measures of September 20, 2013, paras. 32 et seq.
Opposition to request for provisional measures of September 20, 2013, para. 34.

Ibid.

Rejoinder on provisional measures of October 2, 2013, paras. 22 et seq., in particular para. 23.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

46.

47.

48.

49.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs
Tribunal’s Analysis

Tribunal’s Authority to Recommend Security for Costs as a Provisional Measure
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be taken
to preserve the respective rights of either party.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 provides, in pertinent part:

(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that

provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the Tribunal.
The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation
of which is requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.

Thus, there is no question that, in general, the Tribunal has the authority to order provisional
measures to preserve a Party’s right. However, as regularly noted by ICSID tribunals,

we : . . 2
provisional measures should only be granted in exceptional circumstances.”

Meaning of “recommend”

Despite the wording of the cited provision that indicates that the Tribunal may (only)

“recommend” provisional measures, it is well settled among ICSID tribunals that such

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Decision on Provisional Measures of
April 6, 2007, para. 32; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Order of the Tribunal on the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional Measures of September 6, 2005, para.
38; Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7), Decision on Jurisdiction
and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of March 21, 2007, para. 175; Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures of August 17, 2007, para. 59; Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen
M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/6), Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs of October 14, 2010, para. 5.17;
Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/17), Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs of September 20, 2012, para. 44;
Burimi S.R.L. and Eagle Games SH.A. v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18), Procedural
Order No. 2 of May 3, 2012, para. 34.

   

 

 

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

50.

51.

52.

30

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

decisions are binding.” Accordingly, the term “recommend” is to be understood as meaning

“order”.

However, the distinction between a “recommendation” and an “order” in connection with
provisional measures remains a theoretical rather than a practical issue. Irrespective of this
distinction, provisional measures issued by an ICSID tribunal do not have a binding effect in
terms of being enforceable (e contrario Article 54(1) ICSID Convention).*! Hence, the
question whether the Tribunal “recommends” or “orders” provisional measures is in any
case irrelevant for the nature and effect of the respective measure. However, a tribunal can

draw negative inferences from the non-compliance with provisional measures.”

Security for Costs not Expressly Mentioned

Neither Article 47 ICSID Convention nor ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 deals with the
tribunal’s power to order security for costs explicitly. The type of provisional measures a

tribunal may recommend is not specified in those provisions.

The Tribunal notes that a large number of ICSID tribunals have ruled that a measure
requesting the lodging of security for costs does, generally, not fall outside an ICSID

tribunal’s power*? * provided exceptional circumstances exist.

Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7). ‘Procedural Order No. 2 of
October 28, 1999, para. 9; Occidental Petroleum Ce ion and O ion and Productic
Company v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Proviiowal Measures of August
17, 2007, para. 58; Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/1), Decision on Provisional Measures of December 13, 2012, para. 120; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Procedural Order No. 1 of July 1, 2003, para. 4.

Kaufmann-Kohler/. i in: Y; Small (Ed.), Arbitration Under Investment
Agreements: A Guide to the Key Issues, Part V, p. 546.

Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed. 2009,

 

 

 

Kaufmann-Kohler/Antonietti, ibid.;
Article 47 para. 16.

See Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision on
Preliminary Issues of June 23, 2008, para. 57; Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 of October 28, 1999; Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold
Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs of
September 20, 2012, para. 45; Victor Pey Casado, Fundacién Presidente Allende v. Republic of Chile (ICSID
Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional Measures of September 25, 2001, para. 88; Rachel S.
Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID

11

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

53.

54.

55.

56.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

No ICSID ruling, however, has been submitted to the Tribunal in which such exceptional

circumstances were found to be established.

The Tribunal, by majority, agrees with the general proposition that security for costs can be
ordered based on Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39.™ The fact
that ordering security for costs is not expressly provided for in those provisions does not
exclude the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to issue such measure. Rather, such provisions are
phrased broadly and encompass “any provisional measures” the Tribunal, after carefully
balancing the Parties’ interests deems appropriate “to preserve the respective right of either
party” under the given circumstances. The fact that other sets of arbitration rules (such as
Art. 25.2 of the London Court of International Arbitration Rules) expressly provide for the
possibility to order security for costs does not lead to a different conclusion: The broad
wording does not address any particular measure but rather leaves it entirely to the
Tribunal’s discretion which measure it finds necessary and appropriate under the

circumstances of the individual case.

The fact that Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 do not expressly
make reference to security for costs in particular — nor to any other particular measure — can
easily be explained by the time at which the ICSID Convention was drafted. In 1965, issues
such as third party funding and thus the shifting of the financial risk away from the claiming
party were not as frequent, if at all, as they are today. Hence, the omission does not allow

any negative inference.

Moreover, the reference to other arbitration rules such as Art. 25.2 of the LCIA Rules and
the explicit mention of security for costs as a provisional measure does not provide a valid
argument against ordering such measure under the ICSID regime. Institutional arbitration
tules are constantly subject to review and modernization as deemed necessary by the
drafters. By contrast, there is no comparable mechanism with regard to the ICSID

Convention. Amending the ICSID Convention in general and in particular to the effect that

 

Case No. ARB/10/6), Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs of October 14, 2010,
para. 5.16.

Arbitrator Nottingham disagrees. His dissenting opinion is attached to this decision.

12

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

57.

IL.

58.

59.

36

Decision on Saint Luci;

 

s Request for Security for Costs

security for costs as a provisional measure is expressly dealt with would require
considerably more effort. Hence, stating that such amendment has not been made cannot
serve as a ground for assuming that the drafters of the ICSID Convention intended to

exclude security for costs.

The Tribunal also fails to see how such power to order security for costs in appropriate
circumstances would contravene the purpose and overriding policy to facilitate dispute

resolution between investors and states.

Requirements of an Order for Provisional Measures

Before ordering any provisional measure, particularly including the granting of security for
costs, under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, an arbitral tribunal

must be satisfied

(1) _ that a right in need of protection exists and

(2) that the circumstances require that the provisional measures be ordered to
preserve such right, which necessitates a showing that the situation is urgent
and the requested measures are necessary to prevent irreparable harm to the
party’s right to be protected.

(3) Moreover, the tribunal in recommending provisional measures must not

prejudge the dispute on the merits.*°

Prima Facie Subject Matter Jurisdiction

It has regularly been held in previous ICSID arbitrations that a tribunal needs to have, on a

prima facie basis, subject matter jurisdiction.*” An argument favorable to that position is that

 

Arbitrator Griffith, while agreeing with the result of the present ruling, formulated assenting reasons which
are attached to this decision.

Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 of
October 28, 1999, para. 21; Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed. 2009, Article 47
para. 157.

See, e.g., Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del
Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Oriente’s

13

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

60.

61.

62.

63.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

a tribunal which evidently does not have jurisdiction lacks the power to render any decision
at all. On the other hand, a respondent may well have a legitimate interest in obtaining

security for costs even in cases where the tribunal does not have subject matter jurisdiction.

In the case at issue, however, the Tribunal need not finally decide upon the exact

requirements, if any, of establishing its jurisdiction.

The jurisdiction of the Tribunal to rule on the merits of the dispute (as opposed to the power
to grant the provisional measures requested) is undisputed among the Parties and was

explicitly confirmed at the First Session on October 4, 201 3.38

The subject matter jurisdiction follows from Article 26.3(a) of the Agreement which

provides:

Any unresolved dispute or difference aforesaid shall be submitted for settlement by
arbitration to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) blished by the Ce ion for the Settl of In Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States of 16 March 1965 and for this purpose
it is agreed that although the Company (as an investor) is a company registered as a
foreign company in Saint Lucia, it is controlled by nationals of the United States and
shall be treated as a national of that State for the purpose of the Convention.

 

Right to be Preserved

Saint Lucia requests provisional measures for the protection of its asserted right to claim

reimbursement of the costs it incurs in the course of this arbitration in the event

(1) _ it prevails on the merits (by dismissal of the claim) and

(2) _ the Tribunal grants a claim for reimbursement of costs.*?

 

Request for Provisional Measures of June 29, 2009, para. 50; Occidental Petroleum Corporation and
Occidental Exploration and Production Company y. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11),
Decision on Provisional Measures of August 17, 2007, para. 55.

See the transcript of the First Session of October 4, 2013, page 123 lines 6 et seg.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 5. See as well Emilio Agustin Maffezini v.
Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 of October 28, 1999, para. 16;
Victor Pey Casado, Fundaci6n Presidente Allende v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2),
Decision on Provisional Measures of September 25, 2001, para. 81.

14

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

64.

65.

66.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Consequently, the right invoked by Respondent can be qualified as a procedural right not
directly related to the subject matter of the dispute (Claimant’s claim for specific
performance and damages under the Agreement) and moreover as a contingent right which

only arises if and when the two conditions spelled out above are met.

Substantive vs. Procedural Right

The Tribunal notes that in Maffezini”® the panel has taken the view that only “rights in
dispute”, i.e. directly relating to the subject matter of the dispute, can be protected by
provisional measures.*' However, this position was contradicted by a number of subsequent
rulings which found that also procedural rights, such as the potential right to obtain
reimbursement of costs, can likewise be protected.” The Tribunal accepts this view because
it is well settled that provisional measures can be ordered to protect the integrity of the

. 3
proceeding as a whole.”

Costs decisions, while contingent upon the tribunal’s ultimate and final decision on the
merits and the exercise of its discretion to grant cost reimbursement, are nonetheless part of
the arbitral process the integrity of which deserves protection by Article 47 ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39.

Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7).

Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 of
October 28, 1999, para. 23.

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Order of the Tribunal on
the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional Measures of September 6, 2005, para. 40; Biwater Gauff
(Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Procedural Order No. | of
March 31, 2006, para. 71; Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal
Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington
Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures of June 29, 2009, para. 60.

Cf. Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Procedural Order No. 3 of January 18, 2005,
para. 7; Quiborax S.A. and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational State of
Bolivia (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2), Decision on Provisional Measures of February 26, 2010, para. 141;
Mouawad/Silbert, A Guide to Interim Measures in Investor-State Arbitration, Arb. Intl. 29 (2013), p. 381,
304,

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

67.

68.

69.

70.

Decision on Saint Luci;

 

s Request for Security for Costs

As was correctly stated in Plama™, where a tribunal consisting of Carl F. Salans, Albert Jan

van den Berg and V.V. Veeder found:

The rights to be preserved [under Article 47 and Rule 39] must relate to the
requesting party’s ability to have its claims considered and decided by the Arbitral
Tribunal and for any arbitral decision which grants to the Claimant the relief it
seeks to be effective and able to be carried out. 48

Respondent’s request for reimbursement of its costs is part of its defence. Whereas Claimant
requests relief to the effect that Respondent be ordered to honor the agreement between the
Parties, Respondent requests to dismiss the claim and, in turn, order Claimant to reimburse
Respondent for the expenses necessary for its defence. Hence, Respondent’s procedural right
to claim reimbursement of its expenses (provided that the respective requirements are met) is

directly linked to the relief it requests.

The predominant objective of provisional measures is to protect the integrity of the
proceedings. This integrity comprises both substantive and procedural rights, such as, e.g.,
the preservation of evidence.*° The right to seek reimbursement of one’s costs in the case of
a favorable award likewise constitutes a procedural right in that sense. Hence, there has to be

an effective mechanism for protecting this right in order to render it meaningful.

Similarly, in Burlington*’, the tribunal (Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler presiding, Stephen

L. Drymer and Prof. Brigitte Stern):

In the Tribunal’s view, the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are not
limited to those which form the subject-matter of the dispute or substantive rights as

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24).

Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Order of the Tribunal on
the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional Measures of September 6, 2005, para. 40.

See, e.g., Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22),
Procedural Order No. 1 of March 31, 2006, para. 84; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Award of September 28, 2007, para. 37 (citing the tribunal’s Decision on
Provisional Measures of January 16, 2006).

Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05).

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

71.

72.

723.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

referred to by the Respondents, but may extend to procedural rights, including the
general right to the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute.*

As discussed above, Respondent’s procedural right is part of its defence and thus is related
to the relief it requests. There is no limitation in the applicable provisions as to the nature of
the rights to be preserved by provisional measures. In many cases, the rights invoked by the
applying party will be of procedural nature*?, e.g. relating to the preservation of evidence.
The exclusion of such rights from the scope of provisional measures would unduly narrow
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39. In order to reasonably
limit the scope, it is sufficient to require that the rights asserted by the requesting party be

related to the requested relief. The Tribunal finds that this requirement is met here.

Existing vs. Conditional Right

Furthermore, the Tribunal finds that the right to be preserved by a provisional measure need
not already exist at the time the request is made. Also future or conditional rights such as the
potential claim for cost reimbursement qualify as “rights to be preserved”. The hypothetical
element of the right at issue is one of the inherent characteristics of the regime of provisional
measures. At the same time, however, the prohibition of prejudging the merits of the case
already at this stage? ensures that the conditional character of the respective right is duly
taken into account. As long as interim measures do not cross the line to a definite judgment,
the right allegedly to be protected need, in the Tribunal’s opinion, not definitely exist at the

time the respective measure is issued.

Therefore, the (conditional) right to reimbursement of legal costs qualifies as a right to be
protected within the meaning of Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule
39 (1).

Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Oriente’s Request for
Provisional Measures of June 29, 2009, para. 60.

See as well Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed. 2009, Article 47 paras. 79 et seq.

See para. 58 above.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

74.

75.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Prima Facie Existence of Right

As far as the discussion is concerned whether or not the party requesting provisional
measures needs to make any showing as to its position on the merits,”! this question need not
be finally decided by the Tribunal. In its Counter-Memorial of June 6, 2014, Respondent has
elaborated on its defence against the claims brought forward by Claimant. Hence, without

a

 

making any prejudgment of the merits, Respondent’s position is at least plausible, i.e.
future claim for cost reimbursement is not evidently excluded. The Tribunal notes in this
context that its power and authority to award reimbursement of Respondent’s costs is in

principle undisputed.”

Exceptional Circumstances

In accordance with Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 (1), an
order of security for costs has to be required by the circumstances. As held by previous
tribunals, such order can be made only in exceptional cases.”* Pursuant to jurisprudence of

ICSID tribunals, ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 (1) is construed to the effect that it requires (1)

Such showing was, e.g., required in City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal
Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21), Decision on Revocation of Provisional
Measures and Other Procedural Matters of May 13, 2008, para. 45 and Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited
v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1), Decision on Provisional Measures of December
13, 2012, para. 117.

Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, paras. 31; Opposition to request for provisional
measures of September 20, 2013, para. 5.

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Decision on Provisional Measures of
April 6, 2007, para. 32; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Order of the Tribunal on the Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional Measures of September 6, 2005, para.
38; Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7), Decision on Jurisdiction
and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of March 21, 2007, para. 175; Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures of August 17, 2007, para. 59; Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen
M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/6), Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs of October 14, 2010, para. 5.17;
Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, Decision on El
Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs of September 20, 2012, para. 44; Burimi S.R.L. and Eagle
Games SH.A. v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18), Procedural Order No. 2 of May 3, 2012,
para. 34.

 

   

 

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

76.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

necessity of the measure to protect a certain right and (2) urgency which leaves no room for

waiting for the final award.

Tribunal’s Prior Decision Based on Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(d)

The Tribunal notes that the requirements of ordering security for costs under the provisions
in Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39 are not necessarily the same
as those of a decision pursuant to which one party is to pay all advances as an exception to
the rule as provided for in Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(d). Regarding the
latter, the Tribunal, in its Decision of December 12, 2013, required that there be a “good
cause” for deviating from the default rule that each Party bears half of the advances to be

paid. In this Decision, the Tribunal summarized its findings as follows:

The Tribunal concludes from RSM’s conduct in the Annulment Proceeding and the
Treaty Proceeding that RSM was unwilling or unable to advance the expenses and
fees of ICSID as required by ICSID Regulation 14 (in the Annulment Proceeding) or
to pay its opponent’s part of those same ICSID expenses as awarded by the Tribunal
(in the Treaty Proceeding). This gives rise to a reasonable inference that this state of
affairs, whether caused by unwillingness or inability to pay, persists to the present
day, unless things have changed or unless there is in the current record some basis
for the inference that the state of affairs does not persist.

The record before the Tribunal, far from allaying apprehensions about RSM’s ability
or willingness to satisfy the awards for ICSID’s expenses and requests for advances
in this proceeding, exacerbates the apprehensions. Claimant’s submissions to the
Tribunal are equivocal, confusing, and contradictory. Claimant plainly
acknowledges that it may not be able to satisfy a monetary award:

Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited y. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1), Decision
on Provisional Measures of December 13, 2012, para. 118; Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited v.
Independent Power Tanzania Limited (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8), Decision on the Respondent's Request
for Provisional Measures of December 20, 1999, para. 18; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Order of the Tribunal on the Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional
Measures of September 6, 2005, para. 38; Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/7), Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of March 21, 2007,
para. 174; Occi Petroleum C and Occidental Exp and Production Company v.
Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on Provisional Measures of August 17, 2007,
para. 59; Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on
Provisional Measures of May 8, 2009, para. 43; Burimi S.R.L. and Eagle Games SH.A. v. Republic of Albania
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18), Procedural Order No. 2 of May 3, 2012, para. 34.

 

19

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Luci;

 

s Request for Security for Costs

The reality is that RSM has financial limitations. This is not surprising given that
RSM lost what the tribunal in the Main Grenada Arbitration observed was a
“relatively close call,” and won [an unrelated arbitration] in a manner which
did not afford it any monetary or other relief. And the investment in St. Lucia has
not borne any fruit to date. RSM will honor any costs award it has the ability to
honor, and would hope to be in a position to honor a costs award in the unlikely
circumstance that one is granted in favor of St. Lucia...

There is no evidence that RSM presently has the funds to satisfy a costs award,
much less that RSM will move funds around in order to avoid such an
award.(Claimant's opposition to request for provisional measures (September 20, 2013), paras. 16 and 30.)

Counsel reiterated that position during the Hearing on Respondent’s request for
provisional measures. (See the transcript of the First Session of October 4, 2013, at 115, Il. 14-16. (“Certainly RSM

doesn't have existing funds that can satisfy a costs award.”).)

Further, as Claimant’s counsel admitted during the Hearing, it is a fair inference
that RSM has third party funding in this matter.(tid. at 116, 11. 10-11.)

The third party funding exacerbates the concern engendered by RSM’s conduct in
the Annulment Proceeding and the Treaty Proceeding. It places an unfunded RSM
and the third party funder(s) in the inequitable position of benefitting from any
award in their favor yet avoiding responsibility for a contrary award.

Thus, unless this Tribunal requires advance payment of ICSID administrative fees
and expenses, it is a reasonable inference, based on RSM’s conduct in the Annulment
Proceeding and the Treaty Proceeding, and its impecuniousness here, that those fees
and expenses will never be paid. It is the view of the Tribunal that these
circumstances constitute a showing of “good cause” to alter the presumptive
allocation of advance payments. Claimant should be required to make all such
interim advances, including Respondent’s one-half share of advances heretofore
ordered, subject to its right to seek reimbursement if required by the Tribunal’s final
award.

Material and Serious Risk that a Cost Award Will Not be Complied With

Against this background and regarding the analysis of exceptional circumstances pursuant to
Article 47 ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 39, the Tribunal wishes to recall
ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/14, in particular the annulment proceeding which led to the

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Provisional Measures of December 12, 2013, paras. 71-74.

20

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

78.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

decision to discontinue the proceeding of April 28, 2011°° (the “Annulment Proceeding”)
as well as the proceeding against Grenada based on an alleged violation of the Grenada-
United States Bilateral Investment Treaty (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6) (the “Treaty

Proceeding”’) and the decision of December 10, 2010.7

In the Annulment Proceeding, Claimant was dilatory in meeting the initial request for
advance payment which it was obliged to make under Regulation 14. Of the USD 150,000
requested, USD 31,895 was not paid until more than four months after the request had been

58 Additionally, Claimant never complied with the additional call that it pays USD

made.
300,000. It did not even pay the USD 100,000 that it had indicated it was prepared to pay
(whereas it rejected the call for USD 300,000 as “unreasonable”).? An explanation for this
has not been provided, neither in the Annulment Proceeding decisions nor in the record
before this Tribunal. Because of this failure by Claimant to pay, the Committee decided to
stay the proceeding as of March 29, 2011. The Annulment Proceeding was eventually
discontinued. Moreover, because of Claimant’s refusal to meet its regulatory obligations by
paying requested advances, ICSID found that it could not even meet actual costs incurred in
the Annulment Proceeding.*! It asked Claimant to advance USD 35,000 to allow recovery of
costs actually incurred before the discontinuance. Claimant did not follow that request.
Instead, Grenada stepped in to pay ICSID USD 31,424.74 to cover these outstanding fees

and expenses. This payment has not been recovered.

RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/05S/14), Order Of The Committee
Discontinuing The Proceeding And Decision On Costs of April 28, 2011.

Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v.
Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6), Award of December 10, 2010.

RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/05S/14), Order Of The Committee
Discontinuing The Proceeding And Decision On Costs of April 28, 2011, para. 16.

Ibid., paras. 11, 16.

Ibid., para. 24.

Ibid., para. 31.

Ibid., paras. 33 et seq.

21

79.

80.

81.

82.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

 

In the Treaty Proceeding, the claimants were ordered to reimburse Grenada for the cost
advances which Grenada had made to ICSID, in the amount of USD 93,605.62. However,

they did not comply with this obligation.

Claimant itself did not satisfy the award. Instead, the award was, in the absence of sufficient
assets on the part of Claimant, executed on the assets of one of Claimant’s shareholders in
the United States District Court for the District of Colorado™, whereas the shareholder was

also a claimant in the Treaty Proceeding.

The Tribunal concludes from Claimant’s conduct in the Annulment Proceeding and the
Treaty Proceeding that it was unwilling or unable to pay the requested advances and, in the
Treaty Proceeding, the opposing party’s share of advances as awarded by the tribunal.
Hence, absent a material change of circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied that also in this
proceeding, there is a material risk that Claimant would not reimburse Respondent for its
incurred costs, be it due to Claimant’s unwillingness or its inability to comply with its
payment obligations. Concerning Claimant’s potential inability, its statements in the present

arbitration as cited in the Tribunal’s Decision of December 12, 2013, raise serious doubts.

Thus, contrary to the situation in previous ICSID cases where tribunals have denied the
application for security for costs (inter alia) because there was no evidence concerning the
financial situation of the opposing party, it has been established to the satisfaction of the
Tribunal that Claimant does not have sufficient financial resources. Whereas it has

previously been held that such financial limitations as such do not provide a sufficient basis

Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v.
Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6), Award of December 10, 2010, para. 9.1.

See Request for provisional measures of September 6, 2013, para. 14 and Exhibit R-4.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Provisional Measures of December 12, 2013, para. 72; Claimant's
opposition to request for provisional measures (September 20, 2013), paras. 16 and 30. See as well above
para. 76.

See, e.g., Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision on
Preliminary Issues of June 23, 2008, para. 59; Victor Pey Casado, Fundacién Presidente Allende v. Republic
of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional Measures of September 25, 2001, para. 89.

 
 
   

22

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

83.

84.

85.

86.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

for ordering security for costs”, the circumstances of the present case are different. In
particular Claimant’s consistent procedural history in other ICSID and non-ICSID

proceedings provide compelling grounds for granting Respondent’s request.

Third Party Funding

Moreover, the admitted third party funding further supports the Tribunal’s concern that
Claimant will not comply with a costs award rendered against it, since, in the absence of
security or guarantees being offered, it is doubtful whether the third party will assume
responsibility for honoring such an award. Against this background, the Tribunal regards it
as unjustified to burden Respondent with the risk emanating from the uncertainty as to
whether or not the unknown third party will be willing to comply with a potential costs

award in Respondent‘s favor.

Claimant’s argument that also Respondent used third party funding, is merely based on

suspicion and not substantiated.

Urgency

It is for these reasons that the Tribunal considers it necessary to order Claimant to provide
security for costs before proceeding further with this arbitration. In light of the fact that in
the above referenced prior proceedings costs accrued on the part of the opposing party (and
the Centre) have not been reimbursed, the Tribunal further finds it inappropriate to wait for

the final award before dealing with Respondent’s legal costs.

The difference between the present proceeding and previous ICSID arbitrations in which the
request for security for costs was in every case denied, is that in this case the circumstances
which were brought forward in other proceedings occur cumulatively. Those circumstances

are, in summary, the proven history where Claimant did not comply with cost orders and

Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v.
Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6), Decision on Security for Costs of October 14, 2010, para. 5.19.

Rejoinder on provisional measures of October 2, 2013, para. 23 (“If, as RSM suspects, [...]”).

23

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

87.

88.

89.

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

awards due to its inability or unwillingness, the fact that it admittedly does not have
sufficient financial resources itself and the (also admitted) fact that it is funded by an
unknown third party which, as the Tribunal sees reasons to believe, might not warrant

compliance with a possible costs award rendered in favor of Respondent.

Against the background of the aforesaid, the Tribunal, after carefully balancing
Respondent’s interest with Claimant’s right to access to justice, is confident that the
described circumstances constitute sufficient grounds and exceptional circumstances as

required by ICSID jurisprudence for ordering Claimant to provide security for costs.

No Prejudgment of the Dispute on the Merits

Ordering Claimant to provide security for costs does not entail any prejudgment of the
merits of the case: the definite allocation of the costs of the arbitration remains subject to
the final award. Moreover, the present decision does not concern the merits of the case, but
merely Claimant’s financial situation in conjunction with the history of its conduct in prior
proceedings as elaborated above. This decision does not imply any ruling to the effect that

the Tribunal considers Respondent’s defence on the merits to be successful.

Quantum

The amount to be provided as security is to be calculated according to an estimate of the
legal expenses that will incur on the part of Respondent during this proceeding. By contrast,
the administrative expenses and the costs of the Tribunal are not to be included in the
security since those costs are meant to be covered by the advances which, according to the
Tribunal’s decision of December 12, 2013, are also to be borne by Claimant. Hence, the
Tribunal considers the amount of USD 750,000 as requested by Respondent to be

reasonable.

With respect to the prohibition of prejudging the merits, see, e.g., Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of
Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 of October 28, 1999, para. 21; Victor Pey
Casado, Fundacién Presidente Allende v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on
Provisional Measures of September 25, 2001, para. 46.

24

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

F.

90.

Decision

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Based on the above analysis, by majority, the Tribunal rules as follows:

()

(ii)

(iii)

Claimant is ordered to post security for costs in the form of an irrevocable bank

guarantee for USD 750,000 within 30 days of this decision.

Failing provision of such guarantee within 30 days, Respondent is granted leave
to request that the Tribunal cancel the hearing date as set forth in the Procedural

Timetable.

The decision regarding the costs of Respondent’s application remains reserved

until a later stage in these proceedings.

25

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Ce Yor

Dr. Gavan Griffith, QC Judge Edward W. Nottingham
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(subject to the attached assenting reasons) (subject to the attached dissenting opinion)

AS te

Prof. Siegfried H. Elsing
President of the Tribunal

26

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Assenting reasons of GAVAN GRIFFITH

Sad

a

Whilst concurring with the President on jurisdiction and in the result, I have three issues
of departure from the reasons propounded on discretionary issues.

In a real sense, the risk to a State of a self-identifying investor claimant under a BIT
having no funds to meet costs orders is inherent in BIT regimes. As a general proposition
it may be said that a State party to a BIT has prospectively agreed to take claimant
foreign investors as it finds them. That the claimant does not have funds to meet costs
orders if unsuccessful is no reason to make orders for security. Commonly, this situation
is contended to arise from the matters of complaint, and it would be inconsistent with the
BIT entitlements for such financial issues arising from its lacks of funds to derogate from
the investor’s treaty entitlements.

It follows, that save in truly exceptional circumstances there is little scope for security for
costs orders being made against a claimant simpliciter under a BIT claim

Paras 59 and 60. Whilst under a BIT treaty claim an investor claimant may be required
to establish prima facie jurisdiction to obtain an order for provisional measures,
conceptually it is inadmissible to apply any such requirement upon a respondent State
party’s application for security for costs orders.

First, it is no function of the respondent State to establish jurisdiction: indeed the
application may be based upon the contention that there is none. Second, a respondent
party has no obligation to advance any case in defence on jurisdiction or on merits before
the claimant has made its case. Third, to require a respondent State to establish the
negative against its own interests, namely, as a pre-condition for the making of such
orders in defence, would be a plain breach of Article 52 of the Convention as a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

For these reasons, I would recast the possibility hinted at paras. 59 and 60 to the level of
an absolute proposition that there is no requirement for a respondent party applying for
provisional measures to establish any, let alone prima facie, position on jurisdiction.

Para. 74. Applications for security are inherently to be made at inception before any
filings or proofs either way in response to the bare claim itself. The Respondent’s
application for security is grounded merely upon on the alleged incapacity in the claiming
party to meet adverse costs orders made at a time when the claimant may not have put
even a summary of its case to establish jurisdiction and merits.

Hence, for essentially the same reasons stated in paras. 4 to 6 above, it is conceptually
impermissible to cast any burden on a respondent applicant for costs security to have any
obligation to proffer any case in refutation in advance of the claimant pleading its case.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Hence, there is no possibility that the respondent applicant could ever be required to
establish ‘any showing as to its position on the merits’, by which I understand the
President to mean as to its defence.

9. Upon the initial exclusion of this factor of prima facie jurisdiction as a possible relevant
consideration, my position is that the Respondent’s costs security application could, and
should, have been determined at the outset on 16 December 2013, at the same time as its
other security application for payment of deposits. The subsequent exchanges of
memorials were (and remain) entirely irrelevant to the considerations determinative of
the costs orders application and its final disposition.

10. Paras 75 to 82. As to discretionary grounds, I accept that if there were ever a case for
such security costs orders to be made, by reason of RSM’s financial circumstances and
prior conduct and history as a claimant in BIT claims, and in other arbitral and curial
litigations (including here cost free jurisdictions such as United States’ courts), a clear
finding of such truly exceptional circumstances should here be made for the reasons
canvassed in the decision. On any view, the adverse factors personal to the Claimant here
rise to the level of being truly exceptional.

11. However, in my view the preferred ground for making such orders here concern the third
party funding issue.

12. It is increasingly common for BIT claims to be financed by an identified, or (as here)
unidentified third party funder, either related to the nominal claimant or one that engages
in the business venture of advancing money to fund the Claimant’s claim, essentially as a
joint-venture to share the rewards of success but, if security for costs orders are not made,
to risk no more than its spent costs in the event of failure.

13. Such a business plan for a related or professional funder is to embrace the gambler’s
Nirvana: Heads I win, and Tails I do not lose.

14. The founders of the Convention could not have foreseen in any way the emergence of a
new industry of mercantile adventurers as professional BIT claims funders. It is no reach
to find that, as strangers to the BIT entitlement, such funders also should remain at the
same real risk level for costs as the nominal claimant. In this regard, the integrity of the
BIT regimes is apt to be recalibrated in the case of a third party funder, related or un-
related, to mandate that its real exposure to costs orders which may go one way to it on
success should flow the other direction on failure.

15. Costs orders may be significant, the more so proportionally to a small State such as the
Respondent here. An extreme recent example of costs awards in a Treaty claim is the
recent Award in Hulley Enterprises Ltd (Cyprus) v The Russian Federation (18 July
2014), where the claimant’s costs were allowed at $79m.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

1

a

1

18.

1

ve

Dated

a

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

. For these brief reasons, my position is that, unless there are particular reasons militating

to the contrary, exceptional circumstances may be found to justify security of costs orders
arising under BIT claims as against a third party funder, related or unrelated, which does
not proffer adequate security for adverse cost orders. An example of contrary
circumstances might be to establish that the funded claimant has independent capacity to
meet costs orders.

For that reason, I am inclined not so much to fix the orders here made to the peculiar, and
truly one-off, defaulting costs history of the RSM Group, but to the discrete third party
funding issue.

My determinative proposition is that once it appears that there is third party funding of an
investor’s claims, the onus is cast on the claimant to disclose all relevant factors and to
make a case why security for costs orders should not be made.

. These supplemental reasons do not qualify my adherence to the majority determination

on jurisdiction and the Decision made in para. 90 to which these assenting reasons are
appended.

12 August 2014

Cor

Gavan Griffith, QC

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Dissenting opinion of EDWARD NOTTINGHAM

1. Relying on Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Majority orders Claimant to post a $750,000 bank guarantee to secure payment
of any monies that the Tribunal may award Respondent as costs and attorney fees in this
proceeding. In my view, the language of Article 47 and Rule 39, properly interpreted,
does not support this unprecedented result. I must therefore respectfully dissent, for two
reasons. First, I do not think that an order requiring Claimant to secure costs which may
be awarded to Respondent is encompassed within the class of “provisional measures”
which may “be taken to preserve the rights” of Respondent. Second, entry of an “order”
simply flies in the face of the explicit direction in both Article 47 and Rule 39 that a

tribunal may “recommend” provisional measures. I will develop each reason below.

2. I begin, as does the Majority, with the language appearing first in Article 47 and
reiterated in Rule 39. Where the language is susceptible of more than one interpretation
(perhaps even multiple interpretations), as is the case here, it is useful and appropriate to
examine the overall purpose and intent of the Convention and its implementing rules.
According to the Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (hereinafter,
“Report’”), the ultimate aim of the Convention is to encourage economic development
through private investment:

The creation of an institution [ICSID] designed to facilitate the
settlement of disputes between States and foreign investors can be
a major step toward promoting an atmosphere of mutual
confidence and thus stimulating a larger flow of private
international capital into those countries which wish to attract it.

Report { 9.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

The Report then recognizes that private investment is fostered by a delicate balance in the
Convention between the interests of investors and those of host states:

While the broad objective of the Convention is to encourage a

larger flow of private international investment, the provisions of

the Convention maintain a careful balance between the interests of

investors and those of host States.

Report { 13.

In my view, the precise language of Article 47 (which I shall discuss momentarily)
reflects the “careful” balance intended by the drafters of the Convention and it should be
given a reasonable construction designed to maintain that balance. To suppose that any
single ICSID tribunal has the power to order security for costs whenever “it considers
that the circumstances so require” (Convention, Art. 47) potentially imposes a sizable
burden on ICSID investor-claimants at the outset, before their claims can ever be heard,

by tribunal rulings that are not only ad hoc but also post hoc. Such unpredictability is

h

unlikely to promote “an e of mutual confidence and thus [e] a larger
flow of private international capital.” (Report { 9). If the drafters of the Convention had
intended to give tribunals the power to award security for costs, it would have been
reasonable to expect that they would have (1) said so, and (2) articulated some standards
or guidance for tribunals’ use in exercising the power. They did not do so. To the
contrary, the words they used and omitted reasonably suggest that individual tribunals do

not have such power.

The precise words used are an instructive expression of intent. The object of provisional
measures is “to preserve the respective rights of either party.” (Emphasis supplied.) The
Merriam-Webster On-line Dictionary defines the word “preserve” as follows:

: to keep (something) in its original state or in good condition

: to keep (something) safe from harm or loss

: to keep safe from injury, harm, or destruction : protect: maintain

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Merriam-Webster On-line Dictionary, found at http://Awww.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/preserve. Accord, The Free Dictionary, found at
http://www.thefreedictionary.com/preserve

As the Majority recognizes, the “right” claimed by Respondent is “contingent” and
hypothetical. It does not presently exist. It may never exist. It will arise if and only if
(1) Respondent prevails on the merits and (2) the Tribunal grants a request for
reimbursement of its costs. It is therefore not entirely sensible to speak of preserving,
maintaining, or protecting such a non-existent thing. Indeed, one may question whether

the contingent claim to a cost award is a “right” at all.

The Majority deals with this issue by holding that Aconditional rights such as the
potential claim for cost reimbursement qualify as “rights to be preserved.” (Maj. Op.
{ 71.) (Italics in original.) That apparently is because, in the Majority’s view, “[t]he
hypothetical element of the right at issue is one of the inherent characteristics of the
regime of provisional measures.” (Jd.) Not so, I think, unless one circularly accepts the
inclusion of a contingent claim for a cost award within the definition of a “right.” There
are surely other existing rights which might be protected under the authority of Article
47. The Tribunal in Maffezini v. Spain gave an example:

An example of an existing right would be an interest in a piece of

property, the ownership of which is in dispute. A provisional

measure could be ordered to require that the property not be sold

or alienated before the final award of the arbitral tribunal. Such

an order would preserve the status quo of the property, thus

preserving the rights of the party in the property.

Maffezini v. Spain, (ICSID Case No. ARB97/7) Procedural Order No. 2, Oct. 29,
1999, | 14. Because Article 47 (carefully, I suggest) uses the verb “preserve,” it
is only by stretching the language beyond sensible limits that individual tribunals

can find that a contingent claim to an award of costs qualifies as a “right” which

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

the Convention authorizes them to preserve. I am therefore inclined to agree with
the suggestion of the Maffezini tribunal that the provisional measures envisioned

in Article 47 are mainly those formulated to preserve the status quo pende lite.

In my view, the language omitted confirms the conclusion reached by considering the
language used. Had the Convention’s drafters intended to include in Article 47 (or
elsewhere) the authority for individual tribunals to order security for costs, a provision
with the potential for significant limitation on investor-claimants’ access to ICSID, it
would have been reasonable to expect that they would use explicit language to tell us that
security for costs was a part of the balance which the Convention reached between the
interests of investors and those of member states. It did not do so, in contrast with other
arbitration regimes. Article 25 of the London Court of International Arbitration Rules,
for example, provides for a number of “Interim and Conservatory Measures.”
Specifically included is

the power, upon the application of a party, to order any claiming

or counterclaiming party to provide security for the legal or other

costs of any other party by way of deposit or bank guarantee or in

any other manner and upon such terms as the Arbitral Tribunal

considers appropriate.
LCIA Arbitration Rule 25.2. Similarly, section 38(3) of the English Arbitration Act of
1996 expressly provides:

(3) The tribunal may order a claimant to provide security for the

costs of the arbitration.

The Majority is unconcerned that the Convention does not contain an explicit, specific
provision authorizing security for costs. (Maj. Op. { 56.) In this view, the fact that other
regimes expressly provide for costs and that the Convention’s drafters could have
included similar provisions is irrelevant. (/d.) Article 47 and Rule 39, rather, “leaves it
entirely to the Tribunal’s discretion which measure it finds necessary and appropriate

under the circumstances of the individual case.” (/d.) This breathtaking assertion of

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

undefined power in individual tribunals ignores both the limitation implicit in the
language of Article 47 and the “careful balance” (Report { 13) which the Convention’s

drafters aimed to achieve. For the reasons stated above, I disagree.

I turn now to the second reason for disagreeing with the Majority’s interpretation of
Article 47: entry of an “order” simply flies in the face of the explicit direction in both
Article 47 and Rule 39 that a tribunal may “recommend” provisional measures. The
ICSID governing documents, considered as a whole, demonstrate that there is a clear
distinction between the power to “order” and the power to “recommend,” and the drafting
history of the Convention demonstrates that the power of individual tribunals to “order”

provisional measures was considered and rejected by the drafters.

The distinction between the power to “order” and the power to “recommend” is explicitly
recognized by ICSID’s Additional Facility Rules:

(1) Unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides, either

party may at any time during the proceeding request that

provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be ordered

by the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall give priority to the

consideration of such a request.

(2) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its

own initiative or recommend measures other than those specified

in a request. It may at any time modify or revoke its

recommendations.

ICSID Additional Facility Rule 46. In contrast, Article 47 of the Convention and Rule 39

of the Arbitration Rules omit use of the term, “order” or any similar term.

I acknowledge, of course, that the Additional Facility Rules do not apply to this dispute
because the parties are a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State.

Thus, the Convention (Article 25) gives ICSID jurisdiction, and the Arbitration Rules

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

apply. The Additional Facility Rules are pertinent here only because the Secretariat in
drafting the Rules and the Administrative Council in adopting them made an explicit,
unmistakable distinction in Rule 46 between a Tribunal’s power to “recommend”
provisional measures in on situation and its power to “order” them in another. If, as the
majority maintains, “recommend” really means “order,” there would be no need for the

consequent redundancy in Additional Facility Rule 46.

In my view, omission of the term “order” or any similar term in Article 47 and Rule 39 is
intentional. As an authoritative commentator on the ICSID Convention has stated:
The legal authority of decisions on provisional measures was a
central question in the drafting of Art. 47. [Footnote omitted.] The
Working Paper, the Preliminary Draft and the First Draft foresaw
the power of an ICSID tribunal to prescribe rather than merely
recommend provisional measures (History, Vol. I, p. 206)... .
Eventually, the word “prescribe” was replaced by the word
“recommend” by a large majority. [Citation omitted.]
The Convention’s legislative history suggests that a conscious
decision was made not to grant the tribunal the power to order
binding provisional measures.
C. Schreuer, et al., THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2d ed. 2009) 1 15-16

(hereinafter “Schreuer”).

The Majority believes that Additional Facility Rule 46 supplies direct authority for
issuing an “order” in this situation. (Maj. Op. { 51.) Its reasoning, however, is based on
the flawed premise that the Additional Facility Rules are directly applicable here. As I
have already said (supra, { 12), they are not applicable. They are relevant only because
they are persuasive evidence that the drafters of the Additional Facilities Rules knew that
the term “recommend” - the only term used in Convention Article 46 and Arbitration
Rule 39 - does not encompass an “order” and that if one wants to give tribunals the

authority to “order” something, one has to say so.

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

Citing rulings by other tribunals, the Majority observes, “‘it is well settled among ICSID
tribunals that such decisions are binding.” (Maj. Op. { 49). Schreuer dryly puts the point
slightly differently:

Despite the apparently clear restriction to recommendations,

tribunals have developed a doctrine under which provisional

measures have binding effect on the parties.

Schreuer { 18.

No matter how many times it is repeated, an order is not a recommendation. Only in the
jurisprudence of an imaginary Wonderland would this make sense:

‘When I use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a scornful

tone, ‘it means just what I choose it to mean C neither more nor

less.’

‘The question is,’ said Alice, ‘whether you can make words mean

so many different things.’

‘The question is,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be master C

that's all.’

Alice was too much puzzled to say anything.

Lewis Carroll (Charles Lutwidge Dodgson), “THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS AND WHAT
ALICE FOUND THERE (1871). Like Alice, I am puzzled, but I will venture to say

something more.

In reaching its decision concerning security for costs, the Majority relies in part on its
conclusion, based on the sketchiest of records, that Claimant has third party funding to
finance its case. (Maj. Op. { 82.) It also justifies its broad interpretation of tribunals’
powers under Article 47 and Rule 39 by observing that, in 1965, when the ICSID
Convention was drafted, “issues such as third party funding and thus the shifting of the

financial risk away from the claiming party were not as frequent, if at all, as they are

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

20.

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

today.” (Maj. Op. { 57.) In my view, this rationale illustrates the wisdom of tribunals’
hewing closely to the words of the governing documents (the Convention and Arbitration
Rules) and the mischief which can follow if individual tribunals adjudicating particular
cases latch on to broad language in the governing documents as a warrant to address
matters which, if they were matters of general concern, could and should be addressed by

the ICSID Administrative Council after input and consultation with all interested parties.

The Majority’s conclusion that there is third-party funding here and that the existence of
such funding supports its decision is based on a one-sentence admission elicited from
Claimant’s counsel during the Tribunal’s First Session. (Maj. Op. { 75, citing Transcript
of First Session of October 4, 2013 at 116 Il. 10-11.) There is no evidence concerning the
identity of the funder or any other information about the funder. There is no evidence of
the funder’s financial means. There is nothing in the record about the arrangement

between Claimant and the funder.

The financing of ICSID arbitrations by persons or entities other than the parties
themselves may well raise issues of general or particular concern. Should third-party
funding ever be permitted? If so, under what conditions? Is such funding a legitimate
tool allowing the pursuit of meritorious claims which otherwise could not be brought? Or
is it a form of reprehensible barrarty? What information about the nature of the funding
or the identity of the funder should be relevant? What are the terms of the funding
contract? Indeed, how is third-party funding defined? Would an insurance contract
under which a State financed the defense of a case fit the definition?

There may be other issues raised by a regime concerning security for costs and the part
which third-party funding may have in deciding whether and when security for costs may
be appropriate. In my view, the general concerns about third-party funding and security
for costs can and should be addressed by the Administrative Council in its rule-making
capacity, if there is a problem that needs to be dealt with. Until the Administrative

Council is more explicit about the matter, an individual tribunal should not be using

RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10)

 

Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs

general language of unlimited elasticity to accomplish the result which the tribunal

regards as appropriate.

August 12, 2014

ore

Judge Edward W. Nottingham

