INTERNATIONAL CENTRE
FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6

RACHEL S. GRYNBERG, STEPHEN M. GRYNBERG, MIRIAM Z. GRYNBERG, AND
RSM PRODUCTION CORPORATION
Claimants
Vv.
GRENADA

Respondent

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal

Edward W. Nottingham
Prof. Pierre Tercier
J. William Rowley QC (President)

Secretary of the Tribunal
Milanka Kostadinova

Representing Claimants

Roger A. Jatko
Janice C. Orr
RSM Production Corporation

Daniel L. Abrams
Law Office of Daniel L. Abrams, PLLC

Representing Respondent

D. Brian King
Elliot Friedman
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

Jan Paulsson
Jonathan J. Gass
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: December 10, 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 The Present Arbitration 1
1.2 Parties and Tribunal 1
1.3 Initial Proceedings 2
1.4 Background to the Present Arbitration... eee ee tees eeeeneeeeneee 3
RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS 4
2.1 The ICSID Arbitration Rule
2.2 The ICSID Convention 5
2.3 The Grenada-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT)............0. 6
2.4 The Agreement. 6

 

CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION
3.1 Nature of the Present Dispute .
3.2 Alleged Breaches of the Treaty

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION ....ccsssssssssssssssssessessesscssesscencencencencenceneeneeneenecsecsneenceee 9
41 Introduction 9
42 The Applicable Standard 10
43 The Prior Arbitration 10
44 The Prior Award 12
45 Allegations of Treaty Breach .0.......ccccccecc cee eeeeeeneeeeeeeseeesceteeeneneneeeneieee 13
4.6 Claims Are Manifestly Without Legal Merit....

 

CLAIMANTS?’ OPPOSITION TO THE OBJECTION ......ccsssssssessessessesseeseeneenes 18
5.1 Overview of Opposition
5.2 Alleged Evidence of Corruption ..0...0...cccccceeeeeeseneeeeseeeseeeeceeeeeeeneneeeaeeeee
5.3 Claimants’ Treaty Claims .............
54 Claimants’ Supplementary Oral Submissions
TRIBUNAL’S APPROACH
6.1 Requirements of Article 41(5) ...
6.2 Questions Arising.

TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION:
TA Binding Effect of the Prior Award
7.2 Merit of Claimants’ Claims .......
73 Fork in the Road Clause / Abuse of Proc:
COSTS 45
8.1 Parties’ Requests for Costs .........cccccsese ee eseseeeeeeneneeeeeseetssesseeeeeeneneeeeeed 45
8.2 Parties’ Claims for Costs .
8.3 Tribunal’s Decision on Cost:

OPERATIVE PART 47

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

(i

1. INTRODUCTION

1

1.1.1

1.2.1

1.2.2

1.2.3

1.2.4

1.2.5

The Present Arbitration

On 15 January 2010, Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration (“Request”)
against Respondent (sometimes also referred to as “Grenada”) alleging
breach of the 1986 Treaty Between the United States and Grenada Concerning
the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment (““Treaty” or
“BIT’). The Request was registered by the Secretary-General on 16 March
2010.

Parties and Tribunal

Claimants in this arbitration are RSM Production Corporation (“RSM”) and
its three shareholders, Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg and Miriam
Z. Grynberg who collectively, and in equal shares, own 100% of the
outstanding share capital of RSM. RSM is a US corporation organised under
the laws of the State of Texas, USA. Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M.
Grynberg and Miriam Z. Grynberg are citizens of the United States of
America with Rachel and Miriam residing in the State of Colorado and

Stephen residing in the State of California.

Claimants’ legal representatives are Roger A. Jatko and Janice C. Orr, RSM,
3600 Yosemite Street, Suite 900, Denver, Colorado 80237-11830, USA, and
Daniel L. Abrams, Law Office of Daniel L. Abrams, PLLC, 2 Penn Plaza,
Suite 1500, New York, NY 10121, USA.

Respondent is Grenada (“Grenada”).

Respondent’s legal representatives are Jan Paulsson, D. Brian King, Jonathan
J. Gass and Elliot Friedman, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP,

520 Madison Avenue, 34h Floor, New York, NY 10022, USA, and Freshfields
Bruckhaus Derringer, LLP, 2 rue Paul Cézanne, 75008 Paris, France.

On 5 August 2010, the Tribunal was constituted, compromising Prof. Pierre
Tercier (Switzerland), Edward W. Nottingham (USA) and J. William Rowley
QC (Canada), with the latter as its President.

1.3 Initial Proceedings

1.3.1 On the same date, Respondent filed: (a) a Request for Security for Costs
(“Security Application”); and (b) an Objection under Arbitration Rules 41(5)
(“Objection”).

1.3.2 By letter dated 13 August 2010, the Tribunal directed Claimants to provide
their written response to the Security Application and to the Objection
(“Response’’), if advised, by 31 August 2010. The parties were also advised
that the Tribunal envisaged being able to reach a decision on the Security
Application on the basis of one round of written submissions and without the

need for oral argument.

1.3.3. On 30 August 2010, Claimants filed separate responses to Grenada’s Security

Application and its Objection.

1.3.4 On 22 September 2010, the Tribunal advised the parties that it did not require
a second round of written submissions on the Objection, but that it would hear
oral argument on the issues raised thereby on the occasion of the parties’ first

meeting with the Tribunal scheduled for 25 October 2010 in Washington, DC.

1.3.5 On 14 October 2010, the Tribunal issued its Decision denying Respondent’s

Security Application.

1.3.6 On 25 October 2010, the parties presented their respective oral submissions on
the Objection at the first session held at the International Monetary Fund in

Washington, DC, USA.!

1.3.7 At the first session, Claimants were represented in person by Ms Janice Orr.
By agreement of the parties and with permission from the Tribunal, Messrs
Roger Jatko and Daniel Abrams, who also represent Claimants, and Mr Jack

Grynberg, CEO of RSM, attended by teleconference hook-up.

' These oral submissions were recorded verbatim in the certified transcript prepared by David A. Kasdan, B&B
Reporters, to which reference is made hereafter.

1.3.8

1.3.9

14.1

1.4.2

1.4.3

At the first
King and Elliot Friedman. The Hon. Mr Rohan Phillip, Attorney General of

 

‘ssion, Respondent was represented in person by Messrs Brian

Grenada, was also in attendance.

It was agreed at the first session by the parties, inter alia, that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted on 5 August 2010; that none of the parties had any
objection to the Tribunal’s members; that the language of the proceeding was
English; and that these proceedings, applying Article 44 of the ICSID
Convention, were to be conducted in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration

Rules (English Text) of 2006.
Background to the Present Arbitration

Claimants’ Request asserts claims under Treaty. The essence of these claims
is that Grenada breached a number of its Treaty obligations to Claimants by
reason of its dealings with Claimants in relation to a written petroleum
exploration agreement between one of the Claimants, RSM, and Grenada,

dated 4 July 1996 (“Agreement”).

The Agreement, in summary, provides for RSM to apply for, and for Grenada
to grant, a petroleum exploration licence within 90 days of the Agreement’s
effective date. On 14 April 2004, RSM applied for an exploration licence. On
27 April 2004, Grenada denied the application as untimely and thereafter, on 5
July 2005, purported to terminate the Agreement. This gave rise to a

contractual dispute between the parties to the Agreement.

The Agreement’s dispute resolution clause calls for disputes arising
thereunder to be referred to arbitration under the ICSID Convention, and on
31 August 2004, RSM submitted a request for arbitration (“Initial Request”).
RSM’s Initial Request was thereafter registered by ICSID and captioned as
RSM Production Corporation v Grenada, ICSID Case No. ARB/0S5/14
(“Prior Arbitration”). Following the exchange of pleadings and a five-day
hearing on the merits (in London in June 2007), a three-member ICSID
tribunal (“Prior Tribunal”) rendered a final award (“Prior Award”) on

13 March 2009, dismissing all of RSM’s substantive claims and all of

Respondent’s counterclaims.

1.4.4 Amongst other things, the Prior Award dealt with RSM’s contractual rights in

relation to the Agreement, in the following declaration:

“The Tribunal declares that the Respondent [Grenada] did
not breach any of its obligations towards the Claimant
[RSM] under their Agreement of 4 July 1996 in failing to
issue an Exploration Licence to the Claimant, such
obligation having lapsed on 28 March 2004 and the
Agreement having been lawfully terminated on 5 July 2005
so that the Respondent had thereafter no further

substantive contractual obligations to RSM. ”

1.4.5 RSM applied for annulment of the Prior Award pursuant to Article 52 of the

ICSID Convention. The annulment application remains outstanding.
Although it has been fully briefed, RSM has declined to pay the advance on
costs requested by the Centre on 13 January 2010, and those proceedings are
currently suspended. RSM having not cured its default by 29 September 2010,
the ad hoc Annulment Committee (“Committee”) may discontinue the

proceedings at any time.

2. RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

2.1

2.1.1

The ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID adopted Arbitration Rule 41(5) in 2006, in response to criticism from
certain states that no procedure existed for the expeditious dismissal of

patently unmeritorious claims.* Rule 41(5) provides, in pertinent part, that:

“Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited
procedure for making preliminary objections, a party may,
no later than 30 days after the constitution of the Tribunal,
[...] file an objection that a claim is manifestly without

legal merit. The party shall specify as precisely as possible

Prior Award, at (503, Exhibit R-1.

Antonio R. Parra, The Development of the Regulations and the Rules of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes, 41 INTERNATIONAL LAWYER, 47, 56 (2007), Exhibit RLA-53.

the basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving the
parties the opportunity to present their observations on the
objection, shall, at its first session or promptly thereafter,

notify the parties of its decision on the objection [...].”

2.1.2. If a Tribunal upholds such an objection, it renders an award and terminates the

case pursuant to Rule 41(6), which provides:

“Tf the Tribunal decides that the dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre or not within in its own
competence, or that all claims are manifestly without legal

merit, it shall render an award to that effect.”
2.2 The ICSID Convention
2.2.1 Article 51 of the Convention provides, in relevant part, that:

“(1) Either party may request revision of the award by
an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-
General on the ground of discovering some fact of such
a nature as decisively to affect the award, provided that
when the award was rendered that fact was unknown to
the Tribunal and to the applicant and that the
applicant’s ignorance of that fact was not due to

negligence.

(2) The application shall be made within 90 days after
the discovery of such fact and in any event within three

years after the date on which the award was rendered.”
2.2.2 Article 53 of the Convention provides that:

“The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those
provided for in the Convention. Each party shall abide by and

comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that

enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant

provisions of this Convention.”
2.3 The Grenada-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT)

2.3.1 Those provisions of the Treaty considered to be pertinent by Claimants

provide that:4

“Investments shall at all times be accorded fair and
equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and
security and shall in no case be accorded treatment less
than that required by international law [...]. Each Party
shall observe any obligation it may have entered into

with regard to investments. ”s

“Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized
either directly or indirectly through measures
tantamount to expropriation or nationalization except
for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner,
upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation; and in accordance with due process of
law and the general principles of treatment provided for

in Article II (2).”®
24 The Agreement

2.4.1 It is common ground that the Agreement provided for the arbitration of all
disputes, differences or questions between the parties with respect to any
matter out of or relating to the Agreement by a three person ICSID arbitration

panel, pursuant to the ICSID Convention and its Arbitration Rules.
2.4.2 Article 26.4 (b) of the Agreement provides:
* Request, at { 10.

° Art II(2), Treaty, Exhibit C-7.
© Art INI(1), Treaty, Exhibit C-7.

“The award resulting from arbitration shall be final

and binding on the parties.”

CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION

3.1

3.1.1

3.2

3.2.1

3.2.2

3.2.3

Nature of the Present Dispute

Claimants say that the present dispute arises under the terms and conditions of
the Agreement; that the Agreement clearly describes an “investment” within
the jurisdiction of ICSID, and that Claimants, through RSM, have to date

made an extensive investment in Grenada.
Alleged Breaches of the Treaty

Claimants rely on five alleged breaches of the Treaty; summarised under

descriptive sub-headings below.’
Expropriation

Claimants argue that, by violating the Agreement and precluding RSM’s filing
of its application for an exploration licence, Grenada expropriated their
investment. Should it be determined that there was not an actual taking,
Claimants say that Grenada’s denial of RSM’s application and the resultant
termination of the agreement is a de facto expropriation. Further, Claimants
also contend that Grenada’s wrongful termination of the Agreement
effectively, if not actually, expropriated RSM’s investment without

compensation, which clearly frustrates the letter and spirit of the Treaty.
Arbitrary, Discriminatory and Illegal Conduct

Claimants submit that Grenada’s termination of the Agreement can only be
justified by its contrived counting procedure (in ascertaining the time limit for

a licence application) which defies fact, logic and the law. Its failure to

” There is a slight uncertainty as to whether Claimants’ allege breach of Article II (1) (most favoured nation
provisions) of the Treaty. In paragraph 11 of their Request, Claimants list the protections provided under the Treaty,
and include inter alia, the MEN protections of Article II (1). Claimants state that they discuss in later paragraphs
“Respondent's violations of these provisions”, in reverse order to the list. However, there is no apparent subsequent
discussion of Respondent’s breach of the most favoured nation provision. Nor, when they quote from what they
consider to be the most pertinent provisions in the Treaty, do they quote from or set out the provisions of Article II(1).
Nevertheless, in the final analysis, we find that nothing turns on this uncertainty.

3.2.4

3.2.5

3.2.6

3.2.7

respond to RSM’s letter of 27 February 2004 for two months, until the
potential deadline had passed, is said to have been unreasonable, and
demonstrates Grenada’s intent to pursue other avenues for the exploration of
its offshore hydrocarbon reserves, to the detriment of Claimants’ investments.

Such actions are claimed to have been arbitrary, discriminatory and illegal.
Breach of Agreement Contravenes International Law

Claimants says that Grenada’s position, that RSM’s application for an
exploration license was untimely, is contrary to the terms of the Agreement,
international law and Grenadian law, and constitutes a breach of the provisions

and spirit of the Treaty.

Claimants also contend that RSM’s letter of 12 January 2004, which it
describes as a “courtesy and non-binding notification of the cessation of the
force majeure,” was not an effective notification of the conclusion of the force
majeure (and did not restart counting for the 90-day period for the licence
application) and that Grenada’s assertion that RSM’s license application was
untimely is ineffective, because under relevant international and Grenadian

law, time is of the essence only if it is explicitly so stated in the contract,

which is clearly not the case as regards to the Agreement.
Full Protection and Security

Claimants assert that Respondent failed to provide their investment with full
protection and security under the Treaty by failing to respond to RSM’s letter
of 27 February 2004 (a second notification of the conclusion of the force
majeure period). Grenada is said to have arbitrarily rejected RSM’s
application, in breach of the Agreement, and that it further breached its
obligation to provide full protection and security by failing to provide RSM
any leeway with its calculation of the filing deadline “which would have been

in conformity with the force majeure provisions of the Agreement.”

Claimants argue that, contrary to the express language of the Treaty, Grenada
nullified Claimants’ investment at the earliest possible time afforded to it. In

doing so, it frustrated the purpose of the Treaty.

3.2.8

Al

4.1.1

4.1.2

4.1.3

* Request, at | 5,

Unfair and Inequitable Treatment

Finally, Claimants say that Grenada’s denial of RSM’s application for an
exploration license constituted a breach of the fair and equitable standard
provided for in the Treaty. Claimants say that Grenada and its agents were
placing personal gain over their obligations under the Treaty and by these

actions violated the terms of the Treaty.

RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION

Introduction

Grenada requests an award dismissing all of Claimants’ claims in this case
under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5), asserting that the legal and factual
contentions on which the present claims depend have already been fully

litigated in the Prior Arbitration.

Grenada argues that all of Claimants’ Treaty claims flow from allegations of
breach of contract (Claimants specifically state that “This investment dispute
arises under the terms and conditions of the “Petroleum Agreement.”*)
However, those contractual claims were fully litigated, resulting in a Prior
Award that not only dismissed such claims, but also found that RSM - not
Grenada - had breached the Agreement. Put differently, the essential predicate
to the present Treaty claims has already been determined, conclusively and

adversely to Claimants.

Grenada notes that Article 53 of the ICSID Convention provides that ICSID
awards are final, binding and not subject to appeal or review apart from the
internal remedies provided by the Convention itself. However, the claims
advanced here attempt to circumvent that basic principle and constitute an

abuse of process.

Exhibit R-2.

4.2 The Applicable Standard

4.2.1 Since Rule 41(5) was adopted, two publicly available decisions have
interpreted its “manifestly without legal merit” standard.° According to those
decisions, a Rule 41(5) objection must raise a “legal impediment to a claim
and not a factual one.” Such legal impediment may go to either jurisdiction or
the merits. In either case, a respondent must “establish its objection clearly
and obviously with relative ease and dispatch.” Put another way, “the exercise
may [...] be complicated; but it never should be difficult.” Assuming these

are the applicable standards, Respondent says that they are satisfied.

4.2.2 Respondent accepts that it is not the function of a Rule 41(5) objection to
dispute a claimant’s factual allegations and says it does not do so here.
Grenada can and does, however, dispute the legal effect that Claimants
attribute to certain events. For example, the Request alleges that on
12 January 2004, RSM sent Grenada a notice that force majeure no longer
applied. Grenada accepts that the letter was sent, but it need not accept
Claimants’ contention that the letter was “non-binding” and “was not [...]
effective.”'° Those are legal assertions - indeed, legal assertions that the Prior

Tribunal rejected.

4.2.3 Furthermore, Grenada says that, to the extent that the “legal impediments” to
the current claims stem from factual findings by the Prior Tribunal, it is
entitled to rely on such facts. The Prior Award is binding and it is accepted
that a subsequent tribunal may consider the content of a prior judgment or

award when ruling on a claim of res judicata or similar doctrines.
43 The Prior Arbitration

4.3.1 Respondent submits that the essential question in the Prior Arbitration was
whether RSM’s application for a petroleum license made on 13 April 2004

was timely and made in accordance with the Agreement.

° Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc., v Jordan ICSID (Case No. ARB/07/25), Decision of 12 May 2008
(“Trans-Global”), Exhibit RLA-30; and Brandes Investment Partners LLP v Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/3), Decision of 2 February 2009 (“Brandes”), Exhibit RLA-7.

' Request, at {ff 6 and 18.

4.3.2 Respondent notes that the Agreement provided for RSM to apply for, and
Grenada to grant an exploration license within 90 days of the Agreement’s
effective date. It says RSM invoked force majeure 14-days after the
Agreement was signed and it did not apply for an exploration license until

some eight years later.

4.3.3 As determined in the Prior Arbitration, RSM sent a notification to Grenada’s
Prime Minister, on 12 January 2004, nearly eight years after the effective date
of the Agreement, “to remove the force majeure” (“First Letter”). '' RSM
sent a second letter on 27 February 2004, this time to the Permanent Secretary
of the Ministry of Finance (“Second Letter”). Unlike the First Letter, the
Second Letter included a purported computation of the 90-day period within
which the exploration license was to be applied for and granted. RSM’s
calculation assumed, amongst other things, that the force majeure period
ended with the sending of the 27 February letter - not the 12 January letter -
and thus, that the 90-day period recommenced on 27 February 2004 and would
end on 10 May 2004.

4.3.4 Grenada, which had responded to the 12 January letter to the Prime Minister,

did not respond to the 27 February letter to the Permanent Secretary.

4.3.5 Grenada says that its silence (until late April) is explained by the fact, not
mentioned in the Request, but found as a fact by the Prior Tribunal after
considering all the evidence, that the Second Letter was not actually delivered

to the Ministry of Finance until 14 April 2004.'”

4.3.6 RSM prepared an application for an exploration license, dated 6 April 2004.
On 27 April 2004, Grenada denied RSM’s license application on the grounds
that it was untimely. After further correspondence, Grenada terminated the

Agreement on 5 July 2005.

" Grynberg-Mitchell letter (12 January 2004), Exhibit R-6.
” Prior Award, at {fj 181-86, Exhibit R-1.

44 The Prior Award

4.4.1 Although the Prior Award dealt with many issues, including a jurisdictional
objection and counterclaims by Grenada, Grenada says that one paragraph
from the dispositif, entirely precludes all the claims made by Claimants in the

current arbitration:

“The Tribunal declares that the Respondent [Grenada] did
not breach any of its obligations toward the Claimant
[RSM] under their Agreement of 4 July 1996 in failing to
issue an Expiration License to the Claimant, such
obligation having lapsed on 28 March 2004 and the
Agreement having been lawfully terminated on 5 July 2005
so that the Respondent had thereafter no further

substantive contractual obligations to RSM. vis

4.4.2 Respondent notes that in reaching this conclusion, the Prior Tribunal made the
following findings on issues that the parties had contested with evidence, legal

authority and argument:

(a) RSM’s 12 January 2004 letter to the Prime Minister had terminated the
period of force majeure and re-commenced the running of the 90-day

period within which RSM had to apply for the exploration license. 4

(b) The 14-days that had elapsed between the signing of the Agreement
and RSM’s invocation of force majeure counted towards the 90-day

limit.'°

(c) Therefore, the 90-day period had ended on 28 March 2004. 6

Prior Award, at { 503.

' Prior Award, at If 173, 343-45.
'S Prior Award, at If] 343-45.

‘© Prior Award, at J 345.

(d)

(e)

(f)

RSM had applied for a license on either 13 or 14 April 2004 (being the
date of its receipt by Grenada), some two weeks after the 90-day

period had expired. "7

The relevant clause of the Agreement, properly construed under
Grenadian law, made RSM’s compliance with the 90-day limit a
“condition” of the contract, which is the term of art in English law for
an obligation whose breach permits the other party to terminate the

18
contract.

RSM’s compliance with the 90-day limit was also a condition
precedent to all of Grenada’s subsequent obligations under the
Agreement. This was an alternative basis for concluding that Grenada
had no further obligation to RSM once RSM failed to make a timely

application.

4.5 Allegations of Treaty Breach

4.5.1 Grenada says that Claimants assert that Grenada violated the Treaty in five

respects:

(a) expropriating Claimants investments without compensation;
(b) acting in an “arbitrary, discriminatory and illegal fashion”;
(c) breaching the Agreement in ways contrary to international law;
(d) failing to provide full protection and security; and

(e) failing to treat Claimants fairly and equitably.

4.5.2 Respondent says that each of these claims depends on RSM’s assertion that,

by failing to grant RSM’s application for an exploration license, Grenada

breached the Agreement - contrary to the dispositif of the Prior Award. It

"7 Prior Award, 4] 203, 345.

'S Prior Award, J 377.
”° Prior Award, J 377.

argues that these claims also depend on the proposition that the Prior Tribunal
was incorrect about each of the factual and legal findings set out in paragraph

4.4.2 above.

4.5.3. Grenada points out that Claimants’ unlawful expropriation claim is headed
“Grenada’s Violation of the Agreement Constitutes an Expropriation in

Explicit Violation of the Terms of the Treaty.”

4.5.4 Claimants’ claim concerning arbitrary, discriminatory and illegal action

rs

attacks Grenada’s “contrived counting procedure” with respect to the 90-day
period and criticises Grenada for not responding until April to the letter dated
27 February 2004 (which the Prior Tribunal found had not been delivered until

14 April 2004).

4.5.5 As regards Claimants’ assertions of violation of international law, Respondent
points out that the heading of this claim reveals its dependence on contractual
breach - “‘Grenada’s Breach of the Agreement is Contrary to International
Law.””! The text also sets out a series of contentions that the Prior Award

expressly rejected.

4.5.6 Claimants’ case based on full protection and security is likewise said to
depend on alleged breaches of the Agreement, and the contractual essence of
Claimants’ case for breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard is said
to be captured in the opening sentence of that claim which asserts that
“Respondent failed to treat Claimants fairly and equitably when it denied the

application.”
4.6 Claims Are Manifestly Without Legal Merit

4.6.1 Grenada advances four arguments in support of its contention that Claimants’

claims are manifestly without legal merit.
4.6.2 First, it says that the essential predicate of every claim in the Request is that

the Agreement required Grenada to grant RSM’s April 2004 license

» Request, at { 25.
7! Request, at {{f 19-20.

4.6.3

4.6.4

4.6.5

4.6.6

4.6.7

application. It follows that, if Claimants cannot prove that Grenada breached
the Agreement by denying the application, then all of their claims must fail.
As to this, it asserts that the municipal-law issues have already been referred to
and decided by the agreed forum. The Prior Tribunal had jurisdiction to
construe the Agreement definitively, and it did so, finding against RSM on all

relevant factual and legal contentions.

Respondent thus says that the Tribunal may not take on the task of deciding
whether Grenada breached the Agreement. Indeed, reopening the findings of
the Prior Tribunal would violate Article 53 of the ICSID Convention: “the
award shall be binding on the parties and not shall be subject to any appeal to

any other remedy except those provided for in this convention.”

Secondly, Respondent asserts that Claimants’ claims must additionally be
dismissed under the doctrine of collateral estoppel. Under that doctrine a
question may not be re-litigated if, in a prior proceeding: (a) it was put in
issue; (b) the court or tribunal actually decided it; and (c) the resolution of the

question was necessary to resolving the claims before that court or tribunal.

Collateral estoppel, it is said, is well established as a general principle of law

applicable in international courts and tribunals being a species of res judicata.

As framed by the Amco I Tribunal, chaired by Professor Higgins (as she then

was), the general principle is that:

“[A] right, question or fact distinctly put in issue and
distinctly determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction as a ground of recovery, cannot be

disputed. 22

Grenada says that the Prior Tribunal’s findings are entitled to such preclusive
effect and its conclusions bind both RSM, as a party to the Prior Arbitration,
and RSM’s three shareholders, who are privies of RSM, and whose claims in

this proceeding are entirely derivative of and dependent on RSM’s alleged

> Amco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Resubmitted Case, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 10 May 1988, at { 30.

rights under the Agreement. Grenada notes that the latter point is clearly made
in the Request, where it is stated that, “Claimants, through RSM, have to date

made an extensive investment in Grenada.””*

4.6.8 Grenada accepts that RSM is a juridical entity with legal personality separate
from its three shareholders. However, it says that this does not alter the
analysis for two reasons. First, the shareholders’ putative investment is a
contract to which RSM is a party and the shareholders are not; the
shareholders seek compensation for damages that they allegedly have suffered
indirectly through RSM for violations of RMS’s legal rights. Second, the
three individual Claimants collectively own 100% of RSM’s stock, and there
is nothing unfair in holding them to the result of RSM’s litigation. Indeed, if
the individual Claimants wish to claim standing on the basis of their indirect
interests in corporate assets, they must be subject to defences that are available

against the corporation - including collateral estoppel.

4.6.9 Grenada thirdly, argues that the Treaty’s fork-in-the-road clause precludes the

current proceeding.

4.6.10 Article VI(3) of the Treaty gives the investor the option of submitting the
dispute to ICSID, rather than in accordance with a previously agreed and
applicable procedure. The investor has thus been given a choice, but it must

make that choice once and live with it:

“Either party to the dispute may institute proceedings
before the Centre provided: (i) the dispute has not been
submitted by the national or company for resolution in
accordance with any applicable previously agreed

dispute settlement procedures ... v4

4.6.11 Here, says Grenada, Claimants concede that the claims raised in the two
proceedings - for breach of contract (the Agreement) in the Prior Arbitration

and the breach of Treaty in the present proceeding - are part of the same

> Request, at 5, Exhibit R-2.
* Treaty, Art. VI(3)(a) - (i), Exhibit R-2.

dispute: “This Request involves a legal dispute, as the issue is whether

Grenada’s action constitute a breach of the Treaty and Agreement.””°
4.6.12 Similarly, after recounting the events of April 2004, the Request notes that:
“Subsequent attempts by RSM itself to amicably resolve the matter were

unsuccessful.””°

4.6.13 However, RSM never tried to resolve the distinct BIT dispute amicably. The
first time RSM every mentioned the instant claims to Grenada was in the

Request.

4.6.14 Article V1(3)(i) of the Treaty is intended to prevent the re-litigation of
disputes. As cases such as Vivendi (first annulment committee) and ATA
Construction confirm, that objective is thwarted if claimants can bring
successive cases that, despite raising formally distinct legal causes of action,
are co-extensive, share the same fundamental basis, or derive from the same
origin or source. That is said to be precisely the situation here - Claimants’
Treaty claims being based entirely on the same events that underlay the breach

of contract claims submitted to the Prior Tribunal.

4.6.15 Finally, Grenada says that the claims here advanced by Claimants are an
attempt to circumvent the basic principles enshrined in Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention — i.e., that ICSID awards are final, binding and not subject to
appeal or review apart from the internal remedies provided by the Convention

itself. As such Claimants’ claims constitute a clear abuse of process.

4.6.16 And, although there is no express provision in the ICSID Convention giving
the Tribunal the power to dismiss this proceeding for abuse of process,
Grenada says that the Tribunal has the inherent power to do so to protect the
integrity of its own process. Here, Respondent relies on the fact that RSM

previously argued, successfully, in favour of such inherent powers:

“The Committee agrees with the Applicant that

international courts and tribunals have certain inherent

> Request, at { 27.
6 Request, at 9.

4.6.17

4.6.18

powers which permit them to exercise powers which
may go beyond the express terms of their constitutive

instruments.”

Respondent points out that notable commentators from common-law
jurisdictions have accepted that successive proceedings should be dismissed
under the doctrines of abuse of process or abuse of rights, even where the
requirements of res judicata may not have been met; this is particularly true if

the successive proceedings are vexatious.

Grenada thus contends that the purpose and spirit of Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention, which precludes any appeal or remedy, other than those explicitly
set forth in the Convention, is thwarted when claimants empanel successive
ICSID tribunals to hear their case, hoping that one panel will eventually side
with them. The ICSID system likewise does not permit subsequent tribunals
to sit in judgment of other ICSID tribunals. To allow Claimants to proceed
with this arbitration would force this Tribunal to act in such ways, forcing it

also to be complicit in Claimants’ abuse.

CLAIMANTS’ OPPOSITION TO THE OBJECTION

5.1

5.1.1

5.1.2

Overview of Opposition

Claimants say that Grenada’s Objection cannot succeed because it fails to

show that any of the claims are manifestly without legal merit.

They note that Grenada relies exclusively, as the basis for its Objection, on
findings in the Prior Award that Grenada was not in breach of the Agreement.
However, Claimants contend that there is nothing inconsistent with finding
that Grenada complied with the terms of its Agreement with RSM, yet
violated the Treaty, it being well settled that BITs provide an independent
source of rights to investors which can, depending on the BIT provisions or
the precise facts, expand an investor’s rights over and above what is contained

in any contract. Thus, a finding that there has been no breach of the

*” RSM Production Corporation v Grenada (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/14), Annulment Proceeding, Decision on RSM
Production Corporation’s Application for a Preliminary Ruling of 29 October 2009 (7 December 2009), at {{ 20,
Exhibit R-10.

Agreement does not stop an ICSID tribunal from determining whether or not

there has been a violation of an applicable BIT.

5.1.3 In the present case, the Prior Arbitration did not involve any allegations of
Treaty violations. Moreover, the three individual Claimants in this case were
not part of the Prior Arbitration. More importantly, the Prior Tribunal was not
asked to, nor did it, examine issues pertaining to corruption. However, it is
now clear that Grenada’s reasons for denying RSM a licence were based on
the corrupt motives of individual officials entrusted with Grenada’s natural
resources, specifically Senator Gregory Bowen, the former Minister of Energy

and Deputy Prime Minister.”*

5.1.4 Claimants assert that the evidence of corruption they will lead will show that
RSM was forced out because Global Petroleum Group Ltd (“Global
Petroleum”), bribed Senator Bowen. They say that Grenada’s corrupt motives
for replacing RSM (a non-bribe-giver) with Global Petroleum (a bribe-giver)

constitutes a clear violation of the Treaty provisions.

5.1.5 Finally, unlike the contract case before the Prior Tribunal, which was decided
under Grenadian law, these proceedings involve, and this Tribunal will be

required to resolve, different issues and interpret different law.
5.2 Alleged Evidence of Corruption

5.2.1 Claimants allege that Global Petroleum was founded in December 2003 (by
Lev Model, a convicted villain of Russian origin, Lev Korshagin, a Russian
attorney, and Eduaro Vasilev) and that, within months of its formation,

Grenada was taking active steps to get out of its Agreement with RSM.

5.2.2 They say that RSM learned of Global Petroleum’s existence for the first time
in August 2005 when Lev Korshagin contacted RSM’s Chief Executive, Jack
Grynberg, in an effort to settle the Prior Arbitration. Mr Korshagin, who

advised that he was a director of Global Petroleum, a Grenadian oil and gas

>§ Claimants say that “RSM did not raise issues of corruption in the Prior ICSID Proceeding because almost all of the
evidence of Grenada’s corruption was uncovered by RSM after commencement of the Prior ICSID Proceeding, with
most of the discoveries coming at or after the June 2007 hearing in the Prior ICSID Proceeding.” Opposition, { 8.

19

5.2.3

5.2.4

5.2.5

5.2.6

5.2.7

company, suggested that he and Mr Grynberg meet in London to resolve any
problems RSM had in Grenada. He further explained that “if his group could
participate as a partner in RSM’s offshore Grenada licence, his group would
work everything out.” He assured Mr Grynberg of a positive outcome because

he claimed that “his group ‘owns’ the Government of Grenada.”

Thereafter, Mr Grynberg received a call from Michael Melnicke, an
ambassador-at-large in the United States, hired by Grenada. Mr Melnicke
offered to be a peace maker with Grenada, and sought compensation for his
efforts by way of a proposed substantial overriding royalty based on the
amount of oil and natural gas that would ultimately be produced pursuant to

the exclusive RSM/Grenada Agreement.

In the course of their many conversations, Mr Melnicke revealed to Mr
Grynberg in early 2006 that two business tycoons with roots in Russia, Len
Blavatnik and Mikhail Fridman, had bribed Senator Bowen so that their group
could develop the petroleum reserves believed to exist in the offshore
Grenadian territory. Messers Blavatnik and Fridman promised to pay
additional bribes to Grenadian Government officials in the future as well as to

pay all Grenada’s legal fees in connection with the Prior Arbitration.

Mr Grynberg calculated that the overriding royalty that Mr Melnicke was
seeking was worth at least US$ 10,000,000 and that most, if not all of that
money, would end up in the pockets of individual Grenadian Government

officials.

In December 2007, William J. Leyton, a California resident who was
incarcerated at the time, provided a declaration to RSM that confirmed Mr
Melnicke’s admission that he was hoping to pay-off Grenadian government
officials, including the then Prime Minister Mitchell, with the overriding

royalty he had hoped to receive from RSM.

During the hearing in the Prior Arbitration, Senator Bowen testified that
Global Petroleum had financed the Arbitration and that it had entered into an

agreement with Grenada pertaining to this funding arrangement. He further

20

5.2.8

5.2.9

5.3

5.3.1

5.3.2

testified that he had negotiated the funding agreement with Messers Vasilev

and Korshagin in September 2005.

The minutes of certain official Grenadian Government proceedings which
have been made public show that Global petroleum had, by July 2007,
invested over US$ 4,000,000 into the legal defence of the Government of
Grenada in the Prior Arbitration. Claimants have also discovered evidence that
Mr Lev Model paid a cheque for US$ 2,500,000 to the Government of
Grenada dated 12 October 2005.

In October 2007, RSM learned that Mr Model, as an illegal bribe payment to

Senator Bowen, paid the college tuition of Senator Bowen’s daughter. In June
2008, the Mitchell Government issued Grenada’s offshore exploration licence
to Global Petroleum just before the July 2008 elections. The licence has since

been suspended by the present Government.
Claimants’ Treaty Claims
Correct Approach for the Tribunal

Relying on the Brandes Tribunal’s analysis of the constitutive elements of an
Article 41(5) objection, Claimants argue that the Tribunal must assume that
the facts they allege are true. Accordingly, the Tribunal must determine
whether, if the alleged facts are proven, they would constitute a violation of

the Treaty. If so, then this case must proceed to the merits.
Inequitable and Discriminatory Treatment

Claimants contend that the corrupt relationship between Global Petroleum and
Grenada’s former high level officials, if proven, supports their position that
the corruption lead to the breaches of the Treaty. This is because Grenada
cannot, in a manner consistent with the Treaty, use a hyper-technical
procedure (Grenada’s so-called contrived counting exercise) as a pretext for
terminating its relationship with RSM (even if arguendo the terms of the
Agreement permitted it to do so) when the real reason for terminating was the

desire of high-level former Grenadian officials to do bribe-induced business

21

5.3.3

5.3.4

5.3.5

5.3.6

5.3.7

with a company founded by a convicted felon. This is precisely the type of

inequitable, discriminatory conduct that is forbidden by the Treaty.

Claimants say that Grenada’s entire argument rests on the false premise that
the Prior Arbitration conclusively resolved all issues in this Arbitration.
Claimants contend that this must be wrong where the causes of action are
different in the two proceedings. Moreover, breach of contract issues do not
dispose of BIT issues because a party may be in compliance with an

international contract but still run afoul of a BIT.

Here, the current arbitration is necessary because Grenada chose to conceal the
corrupt relationship between Global Petroleum and its former Government

officials.
Collateral Estoppel

Claimants accept that Grenada’s description of the requirements for collateral
estoppel are correct but says that it has misapplied them. They assert that
collateral estoppel cannot apply in this instance because the question ‘put in
issue’ in the Prior Arbitration arose out of the Agreement, but no Treaty
question was dealt with. Moreover, the question of corruption which is at the

heart of this arbitration was not considered in the Prior Arbitration.

Claimants also say that Grenada’s collateral estoppel argument obscures the
independent interests that the three individual Claimants possess under the
Treaty. The fact that their investment was made through RSM does not alter

the individual Claimants’ standing under the Treaty.
Fork-in-the-Road

As a threshold matter, Claimants say that even if Grenada’s fork-in-the-road
analysis was correct, it would not bar the individual Claimants’ claims, who
were not parties to the Prior Arbitration. Grenada’s argument that the same
investor “cannot change its mind” does not apply to individual investors who

did not make any choice in the first instance.

22

5.3.8 Claimants rely on the views expressed by the first ad hoc Annulment
Committee in Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA et al. v. Argentina for the
proposition that a tribunal may not ignore alleged treaty violations because

another tribunal has determined contractual issues.

5.4 Claimants’ Supplementary Oral Submissions

5.4.1 During the course of Claimants’ oral submission on 25 October 2010 in
Washington, Ms Orr said that Claimants were not claiming that they could re-
litigate the decision that was before the Prior Tribunal: “We are not trying to

litigate - - re-litigate a breach of contract action.” 9

5.4.2 Nevertheless, she also took the position that “this panel is [not] bound by the
prior panel,” and that “the facts, as developed in this case, could lead to a
different conclusion.” Specifically, it was her position that the facts as
developed in this case could and would lead to a different conclusion as to
whether the allegations of fact as set forth by Grenada were reasonable or
correct. By way of example, it would open to the Tribunal to assess and
determine whether the Second Letter “was not received by them for two

weeks, if that makes any sense.” 30

5.4.3. The rationale for this approach is that, armed with the facts of corruption now
alleged, the Tribunal would be entitled to reach different conclusions from
those reached by the Prior Tribunal on the facts - such as whether Grenada

received the Second Letter only after the 90-day period had expired.

5.4.4 Ms Orr as well confirmed that Claimants were indeed asserting five Treaty

violations.*!

5.4.5 When also asked by the Tribunal to identify what acts or measures of Grenada
(in addition to those set out in their Request) that Claimants considered to

constitute breaches of the Treaty standards, Ms Orr responded as follows:

® Transcript, 157/7-15, 158/13-15.
© Transcript, 148/15-159/8.
*! Transcript 174/18-175/5.

23

MS ORR: “Weil, those will be developed more fully in
our subsequent submissions. The - - what occurred is
that Global Petroleum came in and paid money to some
of the prior Government officials and obtained their
agreement get the licenses that we held at that time, or

we would have held.

PRESIDENT ROWLEY: You would have held if you

took certain steps under the contract to apply for them?
MS ORR: Correct.

And it was in the contract the Agreement was pretty

much that the license applications were fairly much of a
pro forma thing, that Grenada was to grant the licenses
and that - - but that you had to apply for that, and that’s

when they claimed we were untimely in filing them.

But during the time Global Petroleum came in, and they
made the determination that they you were going to
have Global Petroleum do the drilling, which has
apparently turned out not to be the case, but at that time
it is our understanding that Global Petroleum said they
would take care of the finances, financial arrangements
for Grenada to fight RSM and to pay Freshfields and to
pay the Tribunal and that sort of thing, and that they
would then get the licenses. And there were a number -
- there was a number of things that were involved in all
of that, which I won’t go into at length at this time, but
that’s basically what the overview of what occurred, so
that they - - instead of honoring the Treaty and our
involvement, RSM’s involvement at that time, they

decided to take a different route.

ARBITRATOR NOTTINGHAM: So, in some sense,

you’re saying the prior proceeding was a charade on

24

the part of the previous Grenada government? That is
to say, your allegation is that they made the
arrangement with Global Petroleum; and, after having
made that arrangement, they litigated in the Prior

ICSID Tribunal and got a favorable decision?

MS ORR: Yes, sir.”

6. TRIBUNAL’S APPROACH

6.1

6.1.1

6.1.2

Requirements of Article 41(5)

Based on the conclusions of the Trans-Global and Brandes Tribunals, the

parties appear to find common ground as to the requirements of Article 41(5)’s

“manifestly without legal merit” standard. That is, that an objection under

Article 41(5):
(a) may go either to jurisdiction or the merits;
(b) must raise a legal impediment to a claim, not a factual one; and

(c) must be established clearly and obviously, with relative ease and

dispatch.

The Tribunal agrees with these requirements, and also with the Trans-

Global Tribunal’s conclusions that:

“the standard is thus set high 32

“.. as regards disputed facts relevant to the legal merits of a
claimant’s claim, the tribunal need not accept at face value
any factual allegation which the tribunal regards as
(manifestly) incredible, frivolous or vexatious or inaccurate
or in bad faith: nor need a tribunal accept a legal submission

dressed up as a factual allegation. The Tribunal does not

* Exhibits RLA-30, { 88.

25

6.1.3

6.1.4

6.1.5

6.1.6

accept, however, that a tribunal should otherwise weigh the

credibility or plausibility of a disputed factual allegation. 733

The Tribunal’s agreement with the conclusions of the Trans-Global and
Brandes Tribunals’ as to the requirements of Article 41(5), means it is not
necessary to rehash or to seek to supplement their analyses. However, given
the potentially decisive nature of an Article 41(5) objection, we would add
that, for a tribunal faced with such an objection, it is appropriate that a
claimants’ Request for Arbitration be construed liberally and that, in cases of
doubt or uncertainty as to the scope of a claimant’s allegation(s), any such
doubt or uncertainty should be resolved in favour of the claimant. The

Tribunal has proceeded on this basis.

Unlike the Convention’s provisions relating to the registration of a Request for
Arbitration (Convention Article 36(3)), Article 41(5) of the ICSID Rules does
not limit a tribunal’s analysis of the manifest absence of legal merit to a
claimant’s Request for Arbitration. For this reason, the Tribunal considers it
right also to have regard to Claimants’ submissions contained in their
Opposition (explaining their claims) as well as those made by Ms Orr at the

first meeting on 25 October 2010 in analysing the Article 41(5) standard.

It should be noted that the Tribunal’s summaries, contained in this Award, of
Claimants’ claims, submissions and explanations do not pretend to be
exhaustive. Nonetheless, the Tribunal has considered Claimants’ complete

case in coming to the decision reflected in this Award.

As regards the scope of Claimants’ case, even though the Request appears to
assert five claims, limited to breach of Treaty Articles III (1) (Expropriation)
and II (2) (arbitrary and discriminatory measures; treatment in accordance

with international law; full protection and security; and, fair and equitable

% Exhibit RLA-30, { 105. It will be observed that the first component of the quoted conclusion points to a slight
difference between the Tribunal’s and Claimants’ view as to how the Tribunal may approach the facts, (Claimants
asserting that “the Tribunal must assume the alleged facts to be true”). In this case, however, nothing turns on this
slight difference as there is no present dispute for present purposes as to the facts alleged either by Claimants or
Respondent. It is true that Grenada does dispute the legal effect that Claimants attribute to certain events. But such
assertions are legal assertions, and they are a proper subject for assessment on an Article 41(5) application.

26

6.2

6.2.1

treatment), the Tribunal will also consider a possible claim for breach of

Article II (1) (concerning most favoured nation protection).
Questions Arising

Based on these requirements, the Tribunal, in Section 7 below, addresses three

fundamental questions:

(a) Are the findings of the Prior Tribunal in relation to breach of the
Agreement and its termination binding on the Tribunal (the collateral

estoppel and ICSID Convention Article 53 questions)?

(b) If so, can any of Claimants’ five (possibly six) claims of Treaty breach

survive in the face of these findings?

(c) Tf so, is this arbitration precluded by the Treaty’s fork-in-the-road

clause or by reason of Claimants’ alleged abuse of process?

7. TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

7A

TAA

71.2

Binding Effect of the Prior Award
Collateral Estoppel

The disputing parties do not differ as to the requirements for the application of
the doctrine of collateral estoppel. They agree that a finding concerning a
right, question or fact may not be re-litigated (and, thus, is binding on a
subsequent tribunal), if, in a prior proceeding: (a) it was distinctly put in issue;
(b) the court or tribunal actually decided it; and (c) the resolution of the

question was necessary to resolving the claims before that court or tribunal.

It is also not disputed that the doctrine of collateral estoppel is now well
established as a general principle of law applicable in the international courts

and tribunals such as this one.**

* Amoco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (Re-
submitted Case) (10 May 1988) at { 30, Exhibit RLA-1, The analysis in the well known passage of Professor Higgins
(as she then was) which is relied upon by Grenada (quoted at 4.6.6 above) is similar to those used by the mixed claims
commission in the Company General of the Orinoco Case, Exhibit RLA-13, which itself quoted the US Supreme
Court’s Decision in Southern Pacific Railroad Co. v U.S., Exhibit RLA-38. The latter case is of special significance

27

7.1.3 But, Claimants’ argument, that the questions “put in issue” in the Prior
Arbitration concerned the Agreement, and that the Prior Tribunal considered
no Treaty questions, is not an answer to Grenada’s argument. Claimants’
argument confuses issue preclusion and claim preclusion. As the United States
Supreme Court says in Southern Pacific Railroad Co v United States,
168U.S.1, 48-49 (1897), “The general principle announced in numerous cases
is that a right, question, or fact distinctly put in issue, and directly determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction as a ground of recovery cannot be
disputed in a subsequent suit between the same parties or their privies, and,
even if the second suit is for a different cause of action, the right, question, or
fact once so determined must, as between the same parties or their privies, be
taken as conclusively established so long as the judgment in the first suit
remains unmodified.” Here, Respondent does not seek to argue that the Prior
Tribunal determined the Treaty questions that Claimants now raise, but rather
that its findings on a series of rights, questions and fact, bind this Tribunal and
that these findings must apply in the assessment of whether Claimants present

Treaty claims are “manifestly without legal merit.”

Individual Claimants Are Bound

7.1.4 Claimants only other argument against the application of the principle is that
the three individual Claimants’ claims cannot be affected (as regards the
rights, questions and facts that were determined by the Prior Tribunal) since

only RSM and Grenada were parties to the Prior Arbitration.

7.1.5 Inthe circumstances of this case, however, the fact the three individual
Claimants were not parties to the prior arbitration does not assist. This is
because they are, and were at the time of the Prior Arbitration, RSM’s three
sole shareholders. They were thus privies of RSM at the time. As such, they,
like RSM, are bound by those factual and other determinations regarding

questions and rights arising out of or relating to the Agreement.

 

here because of its holdings that the collateral estoppel rule applies in a subsequent suit “{...] between the same parties
or their privies.”

28

7.1.6 Ofcourse, RSM is a juridical entity with a legal personality separate from its
three shareholders. But this does not alter the analysis. First, the Claimant
shareholders’ only investment is a contract to which RSM is a party and the
shareholders are not: the shareholders seek compensation for damage they
allege they have suffered indirectly, “through RSM,” for violations of RSM’s
legal rights.*° Second, the three individual Claimants collectively own 100%
of RSM’s stock and therefore entirely control the corporation. In these
circumstances, we agree with Respondent, that there is nothing unfair in

holding them to the results of RSM’s Prior Arbitration.

7.1.7 It is true that shareholders, under many systems of law, may undertake
litigation to pursue or defend rights belonging to the corporation. However,
shareholders cannot use such opportunities as both sword and shield. If they
wish to claim standing on the basis of their indirect interest in corporate assets,
they must be subject to defences that would be available against the

corporation - including collateral estoppel.
Questions Considered in the Prior Arbitration

7.1.8 Inthe Prior Arbitration, the following findings pertaining to RSM and
Grenada’s rights and obligations under the Agreement arose out of questions
that were put in issue and which had to be addressed to resolve the claims that
were before the Prior Tribunal. They are thus binding on RSM, the individual

Claimants and this Tribunal and may not be re-litigated in these proceedings.

(a) Grenada did not breach any of its obligations towards RSM under the
Agreement in failing to issue an exploration license to RSM, such

obligation having lapsed on 28 March 2004 (Prior Award, J 503);

(b) The Agreement was lawfully terminated by Grenada on 5 July 2005 so
that Grenada thereafter had no further substantive contractual

obligations to RSM (Prior Award, { 503);

*5 The Request describes the investment as “this Agreement [...] clearly describes an ‘investment’ within the
jurisdiction of ICSID. Claimants, through RSM, have to date made an extensive investment in Grenada. Request, at |
5 (emphasis added).

29

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

@

RSM’s 12 January 2004 letter to the Prime Minister terminated the
period of force majeure and re-commenced the running of the 90-day
period within which RSM had to apply for the exploration license
(Prior Award, {J 173, 343-45);

The 14 days that had elapsed between the signing of the Agreement
and RSM’s invocation of force majeure counted towards the 90-day

limit (Prior Award, | 343-345);

Therefore, the 90-day period ended on 28 March 2004 (Prior Award, {
345);

RSM applied for an exploration license on either 13 or 14 April 2004,
some two weeks after the 90-day period had expired (Prior Award, J]
203, 345);

RSM’s Second Letter, of 22 February 2004, revoking force majeure,
addressed to the “Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance,” was not
delivered to Grenada until 14 April 2004. It was only seen by Senator
Bowen after this date. (Prior Award, { 176 and { 186);

Because RSM’s second letter was received by Grenada only on 14
April 2004, Grenada could not have deliberately kept silent before 28
March 2004, as a means of luring RSM into a trap. Thus, there could
be no bad faith or other unconscionable conduct by Grenada in not
responding to such letter before 28 March 2004. (Prior Award, {J 187-
189);

It is manifestly clear from the terms of the Agreement that the
timeliness of RSM’s application was intended to be an important factor
for the further performance of both parties’ obligations under the
Agreement. As a matter of contractual interpretation under the laws of
Grenada, the obligation of RSM to make a timely application for an
exploration license under Article 3.1 is a “condition” and a “condition
precedent” of the Agreement, in the legal sense that RSM’s failure to

act timeously within the 90-day period relieves Grenada from any

30

correlative obligation to proceed with further performance of its
substantive obligations under the Agreement and also entitled Grenada
to terminate the Agreement under Grenadian law (Prior Award, {J

376-377);

(0) Under Article 3.1 of the Agreement, RSM was to be the sole master of
its own application’s timing within the 90-day period. This application
depended on its will alone. It could choose when to make its
application within the time period without any dependence on Grenada
under the Agreement or the 1989 Act. It could make its application on
the first day of the 90-day period. It did not need to wait until the end
of this period, and there was thus no reason to delay the application to

the end of this period (Prior Award, {| 372 to 374).
Article 53 of the ICSID Convention

7.1.9 The Prior Tribunal had jurisdiction to construe the Agreement definitively,
and it did so. That being so, the Tribunal concludes that to re-open the Prior
Tribunal’s findings would also violate Convention Article 53 which provides
that “the Award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any
appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention.”

The provisions of Article 26.4(b) of the Agreement are to the same effect.

7.1.10 The Tribunal also agrees with Respondent that the Convention’s self-
contained system of review is exclusive. That system - which RSM triggered
by instituting annulment proceedings - does not permit de novo review of
factual or legal findings by an annulment committee,” let alone by a successor

ICSID Tribunal.

7.1.11 Even when the contractual forum is not an ICSID Tribunal, BIT tribunals do
not reopen the municipal law decisions of competent fora, absent a denial of

justice.

°° Azurix Corporation v Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Application for Annulment (1
September 2009, at (¥{ 41-42, Exhibit RLA-5.

31

7.1.12 The Helnan Tribunal had to consider this exact question against a similar
factual backdrop.*” There, the claimant contended that Egypt had breached
the BIT by evicting it from the hotel it managed. However, a tribunal
appointed pursuant to the arbitration clause in the underlying management
contract, had already determined that the contract law had become “impossible
to execute” and was therefore terminated pursuant to Egyptian law. As a
result, the state party had no further contractual obligations to leave the

claimant in possession of the premises.

7.1.13 In dismissing Helnan’s subsequently brought treaty claims, that ICSID

Tribunal explained:

“The Management Contract was terminated by the
Cairo Award on 30 December 2004 pursuant to the
arbitration clause included in the Management
Contract. This award [...] is final and binding. It has
been in force and has res judicata effects in the
Egyptian legal order. As Egyptian law was applicable
to the Management Contract, the present arbitral
tribunal cannot ignore its effect, unless it would be
established that rendering of the Award was made in

breach of the Treaty, or general international law. 738

7.1.14 Having regard to the fact similarity between this and the Helnan case, the
Tribunal considers the reasoning in the Hellnan Award is persuasive and

applicable here.
Article 51 of the ICSID Convention

7.1.15 Another basis for review of an ICSID award is provided by Convention
Article 51. That Article states that a party may request revision of an award
by an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General on the ground

of discovery of some fact of such a nature as decisively to affect the award,

* HeInan International Hotels A/S v Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19), Award, 3July 2008, Exhibit RLA-14.
** Helnan, at | 6, Exhibit RLA-14.

32

provided that when the award was rendered, that fact was unknown to the
tribunal and to the applicant, and that the applicant’s ignorance of the fact was
not due to negligence. Such an application is required to be made within 90
days after the discovery of such fact, and in any event, within three years after

the date the award was rendered.

7.1.16 The Tribunal considers the fact that RSM had the possibility to obtain a
revision of the Prior Award pursuant to this provision to be of importance in

this case.
7.1.17 In their Opposition, Claimants allege that:

“At the time RSM commenced the Prior ICSID
Proceeding, RSM was not aware of the real reason why
Grenada was refusing its license - in the following
years RSM would slowly learn the details of Grenada’s
corrupt relationship with an entity called Global

Petroleum Group, Ltd. 3 (emphasis added)

7.1.18 Accepting the literal truth of this statement for the purposes of the Objection,
(i.e., that Grenada’s alleged corruption was not known to RSM when it
commenced the Prior Arbitration), it is nevertheless clear that by the time the
Prior Arbitration came to a hearing in mid-June 2007, Claimants were aware
of virtually everything they now rely on concerning Grenada’s allegedly

corrupt relationship with Global Petroleum.*°

7.1.19 The relevance of this to the question (dealt within the next Section of this
Award), of whether Claimants’ claims can survive in the face of the relevant
findings of the Prior Tribunal, is that it was open to RSM to seek revision of
those findings from the Prior Tribunal, based on evidence of corruption that

was discovered thereafter. RSM sought no such revision.

* Opposition, { 23.

“In the Prior Award, the Prior Tribunal deals with a complaint filed by RSM on | November 2006 (seven months
before the hearing) in the US District Court for the Southern District of New York against Senator Bowen, and others,
raising issues of corruption against them and claiming damages in excess of US$500 million. A review of the
judgment of Judge Wallach in that case, filed on 19 February 2009, which summarises the facts alleged in Plaintiffs’
Third Amended Complaint, indicates that, by at least November 2006, Claimants were aware of the substantial whole
of the allegations of corruption relied on in this case.

33

7.1.20 To the extent that evidence of corruption was discovered following the close
of proceedings at the end of the oral hearing, it was also open to RSM to seek
to reopen those proceedings in order to introduce evidence of corruption that it
wished the Prior Tribunal to consider in its analysis of whether Grenada had
failed to fulfil its contractual obligations. Indeed, it sought to do so, but its
application was denied because the new evidence would not have been

decisive.*!

7.1.21 Similarly, to the extent evidence of corruption was known prior to the oral

hearing, it was of course open to RSM to seek to have it considered.
7.1.22 In their Opposition, Claimants say that:

“None of the facts [set out in J 24-43 of the
Opposition] were known by RSM when it instituted the
Prior ICSID Proceeding, and none of these facts were
adjudicated in the Prior ICSID Proceeding. Nor did the
Prior ICSID Proceeding make any findings or

conclusions with reference to the Treaty.”

7.1.23 Ms Orr went further in her oral submissions when she suggested that “the facts
concerning the bribery and the fraud issues were specifically excluded from
the prior - - by the prior panel.” And although she backed away from this

1,7 the statement in the

assertion when its accuracy was tested by the Tribunal!
Opposition leaves an inaccurate impression that the factual underpinnings to
Claimants’ present corruption allegations were neither before the Prior

Tribunal, nor used by RSM in its contractual breach case.

7.1.24 As noted above, the Prior Tribunal had been provided with the formal court
documents submitted by RSM in the New York State corruption proceedings
it had instituted against Senator Bowen (and others) on 1 November 2006, just

one year after it initiated the Prior Arbitration, and well before the submission

“1 By letters of 4 and 10 February 2009, RSM applied for the Prior Tribunal’s permission to introduce into evidence
certain new materials (corruption related) and to reopen the Prior Arbitration under Article 38 (2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal declined to do so, having concluded that the fresh evidence was not of such a nature
as to constitute a decisive factor in the case. See Prior Award, { 38.

© Transcript, 160/22 — 162/11.
34

7.1.25

of RSM’s written Reply submissions and testimony. These documents make
clear that RSM had knowledge at that time of the facts alleged in {J 24-32 of
the Opposition. And the rest of the facts relating to corruption (Opposition,
33-40) relied on by Claimants were known by RSM before the issue of the
Prior Award: i.e., either by the time of the prior oral hearing or when it sought

to have the Prior Tribunal reopen proceedings in February 2009.

More importantly, RSM sought to rely on its allegations of corruption.*? In

the Prior Award, the Prior Tribunal states plainly that:

“211. Senator Bowen: RSM impugned the honesty and

com ‘e of Senator Bowen, both in these arbitration
proceedings and, to a much greater extent in formal
court documents submitted in the New York
Proceedings and supplied to the Tribunal in these

proceedings.

212. On all the evidence adduced in these arbitration
proceedings, the Tribunal does not accept any of these
personal criticisms of Senator Bowen for the purposes
of its decision in this Award. Moreover, after a firm but
fair cross-examination of Senator Bowen during the
Main Hearings, RSM’s Counsel submitted in his closing
oral submissions that RSM was not requesting the
Tribunal, in these proceedings, to find Senator Bowen
“corrupt” or “incompetent” [...]. Nor does it. ot

(emphasis added)

7.1.26 The fact that in his closing speech RSM’s counsel took the position that he

was not asking the Prior Tribunal formally to find Senator Bowen to be

“corrupt” does not meant that RSM was not asking for its allegations of

* At the hearing, counsel for RSM put it to Senator Bowen that he had accepted a bribe from Global Petroleum in
relation to an oil exploration contract by Grenada. Senator Bowen denied this allegation, but confirmed that Global
Petroleum had provided Grenada with $2.5 million in order to fund the arbitration proceedings. Prior Arbitration,
Merits Hearing, Transcript, Day 4, pages 44-45.

“ Prior Award, ff 211-212. Exhibit R-L.

35

bribery not to be considered. Rather, RSM’s counsel made it abundantly clear
that RSM’s allegations of corruption levied against Senator Bowen, and the
answers he gave during cross-examination, were relevant to and should be
considered by the Prior Tribunal as regards the credibility of Senator Bowen’s
testimony, not least as to the date of Grenada’s receipt of RSM’s Second

letter.“

7.1.27 In the light of these circumstances, Claimants’ statements that ... “here the
second proceeding is necessary precisely because Grenada chose to conceal
the corrupt relationship between Global Petroleum and its former government
officials,” and “Claimants have chosen to interpose Treaty claims because it is
now clear that Grenada had a corrupt motive for refusing of RSM’s license,”
suggest a much more recent discovery of Grenada’s alleged corruption than is,

in fact, the case.*°

7.1.28 For the purposes of the Objection, it is also apparent that RSM had sufficient
evidence of alleged corruption to institute New York State court proceedings
in 2006, and thus could have, but declined formally to put corruption in issue,
as such, before the Prior Tribunal. To the extent that further evidence of
corruption became available after the issue of the Prior Award, RSM could
also have sought revision of that award under the provisions of Article 51. It

did not, but instead instituted annulment proceedings.

7.1.29 At the first procedural hearing convened by the ad hoc Committee on 16
October 2009, RSM applied to have the Committee investigate suspicions of
corruption in connection with Grenada’s refusal of RSM's exploration license.
In its written application of 29 October 2009, RSM sought to show that its
license application had been denied, and the Agreement terminated by
Grenada, by reasons of bribes paid and to be paid to Senator Bowen by Global

Petroleum. *”

* Prior Arbitration, Merits Hearing, Transcript, Day 5, pages 49-50, as quoted in the Decision on RSM Production
Corporation’s Application for a Preliminary Ruling of 29 October 2009 (“Committee Decision”), at { 6, Exhibit R-
10.

“© Opposition, | 40.
#7 Committee Decision, {f 1-4, Exhibit R-10.

36

7.1.30 The Committee denied RSM’ application for a number of reasons, including
the fact that the allegations made by RSM did not fall within any of the
grounds for annulment enumerated in Convention Article 52. In rendering its

decision, the Committee noted that:

(a) The Prior Tribunal had the exclusive power in the post-award phase to

rectify, revise, supplement or interpret the Prior Award;

(b) RSM was asking the Committee to consider and investigate evidence
that was available before the Prior Tribunal, and additional evidence

led in RSM’s New York State court’s proceeding; and

(c) The evidence of corruption relied upon by RSM “was also obtained by
it prior to the delivery of the Award, and, in one case, prior to the
Merits Hearing. In the case of the evidence obtained after the Merits
Hearing, if the Applicant had good grounds to submit that this was new
evidence decisively relevant to the issues in the arbitration, then, even
if the Tribunal had closed the proceedings, the Applicants could still
have applied to the Tribunal to re-open the proceedings under ICSID
Rule 38(1).”*8

7.2. Merit of Claimants’ Claims
Summary Conclusion

7.2.1 For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal concludes that an essential
predicate to the success of each of Claimants’ claims is an ability for the
Tribunal to re-litigate and decide in Claimants’ favour conclusions of fact or
law concerning the parties’ contractual rights that have already distinctly been
put in issue and distinctly determined by the Prior Tribunal. Because the
Tribunal has concluded, in the answer to the first question it has considered,
that it cannot properly revisit those conclusions, the Tribunal therefore finds
that each of Claimants’ claims is manifestly without legal merit. Accordingly,

the Tribunal is obliged to dismiss each of Claimants’ present claims.

8 Committee Decision, {| 28.

37

7.2.2

7.2.3

7.24

Expropriation

Claimants’ case for expropriation is set out in four short paragraphs of the
Request. Claimants’ Opposition and subsequent oral submissions add nothing
of substance. Paragraph 12 of the Request, contains the only description
(allegations) of how the expropriation came about. This claim relies

exclusively on Grenada’s breach of the Agreement:

(a) “By violating the Agreement and precluding
RSM’s filing of the application for exploration,
Grenada’s action constituted an actual and a de

facto expropriation [...]”;

(b) “the denial of the application and the resultant
termination of the Agreement is a de facto

expropriation” ;

(c) “Grenada’s action [the breaches of the
Agreement spelled out above] forecloses the
possibility that Claimants could enjoy the

benefits of their investment.”

Based on the Prior Tribunal’s findings, Claimants’ expropriation claim must
therefore fail. The Prior Tribunal’s conclusions that: (a) Grenada was not in
breach of the Agreement; (b) RSM, which was the sole master of its own
application’s timing, had failed to file in a timely fashion; (c) RSM’s filing
within the prescribed time limit was a condition precedent to Grenada’s
further obligations; and (d) Grenada was entitled under Grenadian law to
terminate the Agreement, preclude any possible finding of expropriation under

the Treaty.

In paragraph 12, of the Request, Claimants allege that Grenada determined to
cancel the Agreement “to benefit itself and its apparent new investors, Global
Petroleum Group of Russia [...].”. This proposition, that Grenada’s behaviour
was motivated by its allegedly corrupt dealings with Global Petroleum was

developed in Claimants’ Opposition and during the first meeting, but

38

7.2.5

7.2.6

7.2.7

7.2.8

Claimants never alleged that Grenada did anything that affected Claimants’

investment that it was not entitled to do under the Agreement.

Accepting all of Claimants’ allegations of the corruption of Grenadian
officials at face value, they cannot, as described, constitute a Treaty breach.
At their highest, they allege the acceptance of bribes by Grenadian official to
grant Global Petroleum rights that RSM might have acquired, had it filed its
application in a timely fashion. But it is nowhere credibly alleged (bearing in
mind the findings of the Prior Tribunal) that Grenada “acted” in any way
improperly in connection with RSM’s loss of its contractual rights. Indeed,
the Prior Tribunal has definitively determined that RSM lost its ability to
explore because of its own failings, none of which can be laid at Grenada’s
doorstep, the alleged corruption notwithstanding. Given the Prior Tribunal’s
binding factual determination that Grenada acted properly in terminating the
Agreement, its allegedly-bad motive for standing firm and asserting its
contractual rights simply cannot support Claimants’ invitation to ignore that

settled determination.

If proven, Claimants corruption allegations, would certainly show that certain
Grenadian government officials had acted unlawfully under Grenadian and
international law (the acceptance of a bribe being unlawful under both), but

such unlawful behaviour, by itself, does not amount to a Treaty violation.

For Claimants to succeed on a claim for the violation of Treaty Articles II or
Ill, they must allege that Grenada took active steps to do as it was improperly
bidden (something more than simply relying on its contractual rights), which
steps could amount to a breach of the Treaty. However, no such allegations

are made.

Arbitrary, Discriminatory and Illegal Behaviour

Grenada’s allegation of breach of Treaty Article II (2), based on arbitrary,
discriminatory and illegal behaviour, is set out in paragraph 16 of the Request.

oS

There Claimants rely on: (a) Grenada’s “contrived counting procedure which
defies fact, logic and the law”; (b) its “failure to respond to Claimants’ letter

of 27 February for two (2) months, until the potential deadline had past [...]”;

39

and (c) ““Grenada’s action [...] enriched the Russian Global Petroleum for its
own ends and thereby discriminated against the significant investments of

American Claimants.”

7.2.9 The difficulty with this claim, as with the claim for expropriation, is that it too
relies entirely on this Tribunal’s ability to retry RSM’s contractual case, which

it may not do.

7.2.10 The Prior Tribunal’s findings that Grenada’s calculations were not contrived
or illogical, but were correct, are binding, as are its findings that Grenada
could not possibly have responded to RSM’s 27 February letter before the
deadlines had passed.

7.2.11 As to the claim that Grenada discriminated against RSM and in favour of
Global Petroleum, there is simply no credible allegation of fact to support it.
Claimants, though Ms Orr, accepted that their investment is the Agreement.”
And, as found by the Prior Tribunal, the Agreement was lawfully terminated
on 5 July 2005 (leaving Grenada with no further substantive contractual
obligation to RSM). Claimants admit that it was some three years before
Global Petroleum was issued with an offshore exploration license by Grenada
in June 2008 and by this time, Claimants’ investment had long been lawfully
terminated as a result of RSM’s own non compliance with the condition
precedent to its right to acquire an exploration license.*' Thus, when Grenada
eventually, as alleged, awarded Global petroleum a license, Claimants no
longer had an investment against which Grenada could be said to have

discriminated.
Breach of International Law Standard of Treatment

7.2.12 Claimants’ case based on treatment allegedly not in accordance with the
standard required by applicable international law (in breach of Article 11 (2))

is dealt with in paragraphs 17-20 of the Request. Like their other claims, here

” Arguably, this latter allegation may refer to a claim for a breach of Treaty Article II (1)’s most favoured nation
standard and we will also consider it as such.

* Transcript, 157/12-15.
*! Opposition, {{ 40.

40

7.213

7.2.14

7.215

7.2.16

7217

7.218

Claimants also rely exclusively on breach of, or inappropriate behaviour by

Grenada in connection with the Agreement.

Claimants say that Grenada’s position, that their application was untimely, “is
contrary to the terms of the Agreement, international law and Grenadian law,
and is in breach [...] of the Treaty.” But as discussed above, the Prior
Tribunal has held otherwise as regards breach of the Agreement under

Grenadian law.

Claimants next allegations, of Grenada’s “‘confabulated system of counting,”
and that “time is of the essence only if it is explicitly so stated in the contract,
which is clearly not the case here,” fall foul of the Prior Tribunal’s explicit
finding that Grenada counted the 90-day period correctly and that time was
indeed of the essence - compliance with the 90-day application period being a

condition of the Agreement.

Based, as they are, only on Grenada’s breach of the Agreement, for them to
succeed would again require a re-litigation of facts and issue that have already
been definitively determined in favour of Grenada. Accordingly, they cannot

possibly succeed in the present proceeding.
Claimants’ Non-receipt of Full Protection and Security

Claimants full protection and security claim relies on one assertion - that
Respondent “failed to timely respond to Claimants’ letter [Second Letter] to
refute its logical and factual calculation of the relevant time period, it failed to
provide Claimant any leeway with respect to its calculation of the filing
deadline [...], and it arbitrarily rejected the application which it was bound to

accept under the terms of the Agreement.”

This claim, like those before it, cannot survive the Prior Tribunal’s findings
that Grenada received the Second Letter only after the 90-day deadline had
expired and thus could not have responded in sufficient time to enable a timely

filing.

Moreover, Claimants’ loss of their contractual rights was entirely of RSM’s

own doing. The Prior Tribunal specifically rejected any suggestion that

4l

Grenada decided “not to respond as a means of luring RSM into a trap” when
it found that “there could be no bad faith or other unconscionable conduct by
Grenada in not responding to such letter before 28 March 2004 [the

deadline].”>”

7.2.19 In these circumstances, it would be impossible for this Tribunal to conclude in
the present proceedings that Grenada arbitrarily rejected Claimants’ late
application, or that, by relying on its own contractual rights (without abusing
those rights, e.g., by luring Claimants into a trap), its “failure to provide
Claimant any leeway” on RSM’s filing deadline could constitute a Treaty

breach.
Claimants Were Not Treated Fairly and Equitably

7.2.20 This claim is given the shortest treatment of any in the Request. Grenada’s
failure to meet the Treaty’s fair and equitable standard is again based on its
denial of Claimants’ license application. Grenada and its agents are said to
have placed personal gain over their obligations under the Treaty. The
problem with this is that, in the absence of credible alleged abuse by Grenada
of RSM’s rights under the Agreement, Grenada’s reliance on RSM’s failure to
fulfill a required pre-condition for the award of a license cannot reasonably be

said to breach the Treaty’s fair and equitable standard.

7.2.21 This is because Claimants lost their investment as a result of RSM’s own
actions (or inactions). As the Prior Tribunal has found, RSM was the sole
master of its own application’s timing and Grenada did absolutely nothing to
influence RSM’s timing. Put another way, assuming it to be true that a senior
official or senior officials were bribe takers from Global Petroleum, this/these

corrupt acts were not causative of the loss of Claimants’ investment.

7.2.22 The taking of any such bribe was unlawful, but Grenada’s decision to rely on
its contractual rights cannot be said to contravene the unfair and inequitable

standard as it has so far been understood by multiple ICSID Tribunals.

» Prior Award, {] 189, Exhibit R-1.

42

7.2.23 Grenada’s decision to rely on RSM’s failure to file timeously was in no way
arbitrary, it involved no absence of due process, there was no absence of
transparency and it did not discriminate by treating another party in a similar
position to RSM more favourably (i.e., by forgiving a failure of such a party to

meet a condition precedent to the exercise of its rights) than RSM.

7.2.24 As was recognised by the CMS Tribunal, the fair and equitable treatment
standard is an objective, not subjective one. Breach of the standard is
“unrelated to whether the Respondent has had any deliberate intention or bad

faith in adopting the measures in question.

7.2.25 In these circumstances, even if Grenada was motivated, by bribes, to offer its
off-shore exploration rights to Global Petroleum, its reliance on its contractual
rights to terminate the Agreement cannot be said to infringe the fair and
equitable standard when Grenada had done nothing to induce RSM’s failure to

file its application within the time limits the parties had agreed.
73 Fork in the Road Clause / Abuse of Process

7.3.1 Having concluded that Claimants’ claims cannot succeed in the face of the
findings by the Prior Tribunal concerning RSM’s and Grenada’s contractual
rights and the facts underpinning those findings, it is not necessary for the
Tribunal to decide whether the Treaty’s fork-in-the-road clause constitutes a
legal impediment to the assertion of their claims, such that Respondent’s

Objection should prevail, and we do not do so.

7.3.2 Nevertheless, even if it could be said that the parties to the present dispute
“had not been submitted by the national or company for resolution in
accordance with any applicable previously agreed dispute settlement
procedures” (Treaty Article VI(3)), the Tribunal considers the initiation of the
present proceedings, in which Claimants admittedly seek redetermination of
the Prior Tribunal’s contractual findings, to be impermissible in the face of the

ICSID Convention’s self-contained and exclusive system of review.

° CMS Gas Transportation Company v Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award, 12 May 2005, 4208.

43

7.3.3

7.3.4

7.3.5

7.3.6

7.3.7

As noted in Section 6 above, RSM was aware of virtually all of the facts upon
which they now allege corruption before the completion of pleadings in the
Prior Arbitration, and it clearly sought to rely on allegations of bribery to
impugn the testimony of Senator Bowen regarding the date on which Grenada

received RSM’s Second Letter.

Claimants also received Mr Leyton’s declaration (confirming Mr Melnicke’s
statements to Mr Grynberg) within six months of the June 2007 oral hearings,
and subsequently sought, unsuccessfully, to introduce new evidence into the

prior proceedings.

Following receipt of the Prior Award, which dealt adversely with its case, and
rather than attempting to seek its revision and rectification pursuant to
Convention Article 51, RSM initiated annulment proceedings under
Convention Article 52. It later abandoned those proceedings after the denial
of its application for an investigation by the annulment committee of whether
Grenada had denied RSM’s license application based on bribes received from

Global Petroleum.

It is true that Claimants style the present arbitration as Treaty claim based.
But the difficulty with this is that, as pleaded and argued, the present case is
no more than an attempt to re-litigate and overturn the findings of another
ICSID tribunal, based on allegations of corruption that were either known at
the time or which ought to have been raised by way of a revision application

and over which the Prior Tribunal had jurisdiction.

Claimants’ present case is thus no more than a contractual claim (previously
decided by an ICSID tribunal which had the jurisdiction to deal with Treaty
and contractual issues), dressed up as a Treaty case. Having regard to all that
has gone before, the Tribunal finds that the initiation of the present arbitration
is thus an improper attempt to circumvent the basic principles set out in
Convention Article 53 and the procedures available for revision and

rectification of awards provided for in Article 51.

44

8. COSTS

8.1 Parties’ Requests for Costs

8.1.1 In its Objection, Grenada seeks, inter alia, an award ordering Claimants to pay
all costs and fees of this arbitration, including the administrative fees and costs
of ICSID, the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and Grenada’s legal and other

costs.

8.1.2 During the course of the first meeting, when dealing with agenda item 3 -
“Apportionment of Costs and Advance Payments to the Centre (Convention
Article 61; Administrative and Financial Regulation 14; Arbitration Rule 28),”
the parties were each asked, if they were to prevail, whether the Tribunal
should award legal and other costs to date of this arbitration in their favour.

Each confirmed that such an award of, or order for costs was sought.™

8.1.3. The parties having both sought an award of costs in relation to the Objection
and, because of its potentially determinative effect on the arbitration, the
Tribunal, on 27 October 2010, requested the parties to submit their respective
statements of costs by 3 November 2010 (providing sufficient details as to
time spent, work and personnel involved, and charge out rates, to enable
assessment), and to submit their comments, if advised, on each other’s costs’
statements by 8 November 2010. This request was made without prejudice to

the Tribunal’s decision on the outcome of the Objection.
8.2 Parties’ Claims for Costs

8.2.1 In response to the Tribunal’s request, each of the parties submitted statements

of costs, as requested, on 3 November 2010.

8.2.2 Claimants sought an award of cost in the amount of US$ 31,092.50, of which
US$ 27,292.50 was attributed to the objection and US$ 3,800.00 was

attributable to the Security Application.

8.2.3 Respondent sought an award of costs in the amount of US$ 330,126.83, less

any portion of the advance refunded to it by ICSID, plus interest at a rate of

* Transcript, 14/11, 15/10.

45

8.3

8.3.1

8.3.2

8.3.3

8.3.4

3.25%, compounded semi-annually from the date of any Award in its favour
until the date of full payment. Its claim for costs was limited to costs incurred
for the Objection. The sum sought included US$ 201,210.00 for legal fees,
US$ 3,916.83 for disbursements and US$ 125,000.00 for its share of the
advance payment to ICSID.

Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

Convention Article 61(2) requires a tribunal, except as the parties otherwise
agree, to assess the expenses incurred by the parties in conjunction with the
proceedings, and to decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and
expenses of the members of the tribunal and the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision is required to form part of

any award.

Rule 28(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which governs the costs of

proceedings, provides that:

“Promptly after the closure of the proceeding, each
party shall submit to the Tribunal a statement of costs
reasonably incurred or borne by it in the proceeding
and the Secretary-General shall submit to the Tribunal
an account of all amounts paid by each party to the
Centre and of all costs incurred by the Centre for the
proceeding. The Tribunal may, before the award has
been rendered, request the Parties and the Secretary-
General to provide additional information concerning

the costs of the proceeding.’

The Secretary-General has advised the Tribunal that the costs of the
arbitration, which include inter alia, the arbitrators’ fees, the expenses of the
Tribunal, and the Secretariat’s administration fees and expenses, at the time of

the Award, amount to US$ 187,315.94.

In this case, each of the parties has asked the Tribunal to exercise its discretion

under Article 61, based on the principle that such costs should follow the

46

event. Having regard to its’ conclusions that Claimants present claims are
manifestly without legal merit, and that, it was impermissible for Claimants to
advance them in new ICSID proceedings, the Tribunal considers it appropriate
that Respondent should be fully indemnified for all of its costs, reasonably

incurred or borne, in this proceeding.

8.3.5 The Tribunal has reviewed with care Respondent’s statement of costs, and
determines that its legal costs in the amount of US$ 205,126.83 are reasonable
and should be reimbursed by Claimants.

8.3.6 In addition, Claimants shall be liable for 100% of the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal, and 100% of the administrative fees and expenses of
the Centre, in the amount of US$ 187,315.94.

OPERATIVE PART

9.1 Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, the Tribunal DECLARES,

CONFIRMS, ORDERS and AWARDS that:

(a) each of Claimants’ claims set out in its Request for Arbitration of 15
January 2010, and as further described in Claimants’ Opposition of 30
August 2010, and in Claimants’ oral submissions made on 25 October
2010, is manifestly without legal merit within the meaning of Rule

41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and is hereby dismissed;

(b) Claimants shall pay to Respondent its legal and other costs of these
proceedings in the amount of US$ 205,126.83.

(c) Claimants shall pay to Respondents US$ 93,605.62, being its
unrefunded share of the advance against costs paid to the Centre to

cover the costs of the first phase of these proceedings.

(d) Each of the sums awarded in (b) and (c) above shall bear interest at a
rate of 3.25%, compounded semi-annually from the date of this Award

until the date of full payment.

47

[Signed] [Signed]
“Professor Pierre Tercier Edward W. Nottingham
Date: [3 December 2010] Date: [December 7, 2010]
[Signed]

J. William Rowley QC
(President)

Date: [30 November 2010]

48

