INTERNATIONAL CENTRE
FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6

RACHEL S. GRYNBERG, STEPHEN M. GRYNBERG, MIRIAM Z. GRYNBERG, AND
RSM PRODUCTION CORPORATION

Claimants

GOVERNMENT OF GRENADA

Respondent

 

TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR
SECURITY FOR COSTS

[ 4 October 2010

 

Tribunal
Edward W. Nottingham
Prof. Pierre Tercier
J. William Rowley QC (President)

ICSID Secretary: Ms Milanka Kostadinova

Representing Claimants Representing Respondent
Roger A, Jatko Jan Paulsson
Janice C.Orr D. Brian King
JJ. Gass
RSM Production Corporation Elliot Friedman

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP

1. INTRODUCTION

Li

On 15 January 2010, Claimants filed a Request for Arbitration (“Request”)
against Respondent (sometimes also referred to as “Grenada”) alleging breach of
the 1986 Treaty Between the United States and Grenada Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment (“Treaty”). The Request

was registered by the Secretary-General on 16 March 2010.

On 5 August 2010, the Tribunal was constituted, compromising Prof. Pierre
Tercier (Switzerland), Edward W. Nottingham (USA) and J. William Rowley QC

(Canada), with the latter as its President.

On the same date, Respondent filed: (a) a Request for Security for Costs
(“Security Application”) to protect its rights during the first phase of the
proceeding; and (b) an Objection Under Arbitration Rules 41(5) (“Objection”).
The Security Application seeks an order from the Tribunal that Claimants post
US$ 500,000 within 14 calendar days of the Tribunal’s decision, failing which
this proceeding should be suspended until such payment is made. This Decision
deals only with Respondent’s Security Application. In reaching our Decision, the
Tribunal expresses no view as to the merits of either Respondent's Objection or

the merits of underlying dispute.

By letter dated 13 August 2010, the Tribunal directed Claimants to provide their
written response to the Security Application (“Response”), if advised, by 31
August 2010. The parties were also advised that the Tribunal envisaged being
able to reach a decision on the Security Application on the basis of one round of

written submissions and without the need for oral argument.

On 30 August 2010, Claimants filed their Response to Grenada’s Security
Application.

BACKGROUND TO PRESENT ARBITRATION

2.1

2.3

2.4

Claimants’ Request asserts claims under Treaty. The essence of those claims is
that Grenada breached a number of its Treaty obligations to Claimants by reason
of its dealings with Claimants in relation to a petroleum exploration agreement
between one of the Claimants, RSM Production Corporation (“RSM”), and
Grenada, dated 4 July 1996 (“Agreement”).

The Agreement, in summary, provided for RSM to apply for, and Grenada to
grant, a petroleum exploration licence within 90 days of the Agreement’s

effective date. In 2004, RSM applied for an exploration licence. Grenada denied

 

the application as untimely and inated the A . This gave

rise to a contractual dispute between the parties to the Agreement.

The Agreement’s dispute resolution clause calls for disputes arising thereunder to
be referred to Arbitration under the ICSID Convention, and on 31 August 2004,
RSM submitted a request for arbitration. RSM’s request was thereafter registered
by ICSID and captioned as RSM Production Corporation v Grenada, \CS|D Case
NO ARB/05/14 (“Prior Arbitration”). Following the exchange of pleadings and a
five-day hearing (in London in June 2007) on the merits, a three-member ICSID
tribunal (“Prior Tribunal”) rendered an award (“Prior Award”) on 13 March 2009.

Amongst other things, the Prior Award dealt with RSM’s contractual rights in

relation to the Agreement, and declared:

“The Tribunal declares that the Respondent [Grenada] did not
breach any of its obligations towards the Claimant [RSM] under
their Agreement of 4 July 1996 in failing to issue an Exploration
Licence to the Claimant, such obligation having lapsed on 28

March 2004 and the Agreement having been lawfully terminated

on 5 July 2005 so that the Respondent had thereafter no further

substantive contractual obligations to RSM."

2.5. RSM applied for annulment of the Prior Award pursuant to Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention. The annulment application remains outstanding. Although it
has been fully briefed, RSM has declined to pay the advance on costs requested
by the Centre on 13 January 2010, and those proceedings are currently suspended.
If RSM does not cure its default by 29 September 2010, the ad hoc Annulment
Committee may discontinue the proceedings.

GRENADA’S SECURITY APPLICATION

3.1 Grenada contends that the present arbitration, which it says seeks to relitigate the
factual and legal questions that have been resolved by the Prior Award,

epitomises vexatious litigation.

3.2 It argues that RSM’s refusal to pay the requested advance on costs in the
annulment proceedings may have deprived it of any remedy for the costs imposed
on it by those proceedings. Grenada also asserts that there is reason to believe that
Claimants would not voluntarily comply with a costs award in its favour in this

arbitration.

3.3. Grenada says that the question for this Tribunal is not whether Claimants can

satisfy a possible costs award; it is whether they will do so.

3.4 Claimants are also said to have ample means to post the “modest security”
Grenada requests. Requiring them to do so will prevent Claimants from using
ICSID improperly as a tool to put pressure on Grenada. Respondent further argues
that: (a) Claimants will have no incentive to comply with any award (as to costs)
that the Tribunal may make, and every incentive to frustrate it; or, (b) they may
tactically default before an award is rendered as, it is alleged, they did in the

annulment proceedings.

Exhibit R-1, Prior Award, at $503.

3.5 The Tribunal’s power to recommend security for costs pursuant to Article 47 of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules is asserted to be
unquestioned.

CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE

4.1 Claimants contend that there is: (a) no legal authority that supports the Security
Application and, (b) no factual basis for the requested amount.

4.2 With respect to their first point, Claimants say that the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the President of the Tribunal, has determined that the costs for
the first three to six months of the proceedings would be US$ 250,000, which
amount has been apportioned equally between the parties. They say that this
precludes Respondent’s Security Application because, although Article 61(2) of
the Convention authorises the Tribunal, in an award, to apportion costs after the
proceeding has been concluded, neither the Convention nor the Rules provide the
Tribunal with the power to change the apportionment of costs prior to a final
award or to provide for a party to post security for a potential costs award.

4.3. As to their second point, Claimants assert that the Security Application has only
been made so as to allow Respondent to express its view in relation to earlier and
unrelated litigation (litigation having no bearing on the present proceeding) in
order to “poison” the views of the Tribunal regarding this arbitration.

4.4 Claimants note that, at the time of their Response, they had promptly paid their
share of the requested advance against costs, but Respondent had not.

4.5 Finally, Claimants note the fact that, during the Prior Arbitration, Grenada’s then

Minister of Energy and Deputy Prime Minister confirmed that Global Petroleum
Group Ltd (*

state that if it turns out that Grenada is not paying its own expenses in this

 

jlobal”) was paying Respondent's legal fees and expense. They

arbitration, then the request in its Security Application is dishonest, and security

for costs is not required.

5. TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

5.

5.2

5.5

Grenada’s Security Application gives rise to three principal questions (set out

below), some or all of which the Tribunal may be required to answer.

{a) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to recommend security for costs as a

provisional measure?
(b) If so, do the circumstances justify the making of such a recommendation?

(c) In the event it is appropriate to recommend the lodging of security for

costs, is the amount sought appropriate
Jurisdiction
Article 47 of the [CSID Convention provides, in pertinent part:

“Except as the parties agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that
the circumstances so require, request any provisional measures
which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either

party.”
Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules provides, in pertinent part:

“(1) At any time after the institution of the proceedings a party may
request that provisional measures for the preservation of its rights
be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the
rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which

is requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.”

Grenada identifies its right to request that Claimants be required to reimburse it
for some or all of the costs it will incur in the proceedings as its right which is in

need of immediate protection.

Neither Article 47, nor Rule 39 specify the type of provisional measure a Tribunal

may recommend. This being the case, and subject to one caveat, a measure

5.6

5.7

5.8

5.9

5.10

requiring the lodging of security for costs (by no means an uncommon provisional
measure) would not, as a matter of jurisdiction, appear to fall outside a tribunal's
power. That is, unless such a measure cannot be said to relate to the preservation
of the applying party’s rights — the preservation of which is the only limiting

factor on the nature of a permissible provisional measure.

As to what rights of a party may be preserved, it seems obvious that, in the
context of a dispute, the parties’ contested substantive rights have yet to be
determined. For example, a party seeking damages for contractual or a treaty
breach has no “established” or “determined” right to damages. Similarly, a party

who seeks an ultimate award for costs has only a potential right to costs.

We are thus drawn to, and believe to be correct, the Plama Tribunal’s conclusion

that:

“The rights to be preserved [under Article 47 and Rule 39] must
relate to the requesting party’s ability to have its claims
considered and decided by the Arbitral Tribunal and for any
arbitral decision which grants to the Claimant the relief it seeks to

be effective and able to he carried out.” (Emphasis added)

To construe the rights that are to be protected or preserved under Article 47 and
Rule 39 as being limited to “established” rights makes no sense whatever in the
context of a provisional measure for their protection. Any such measure must, by

definition, precede a determination of their substantive validity.

The learning to be drawn from previous published ICSID tribunal decisions also
supports the conclusion that ICSID tribunals have the power (i.e. jurisdiction) in

appropriate circumstances to recommend the lodging of security for costs.

In Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain’, Spain filed an application for a provisional

measure, requesting the Tribunal to require the claimant to post a guarantee, bond

ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7..

or similar instrument in the amount of the costs expected to be incurred by Spain

in the arbitration.

5.11 Although the application was ultimately denied, the Tribunal did not appear to
fee] that the security for costs posed any particular jurisdictional problem

pared with other provisional measures. However, it luded that:

“Any preliminary measure to be ordered by an ICSID arbitral
tribunal must relate to the subject matter of the case before the
tribunal and not to separate, unrelated issues or extraneous

matters.

In this case, the subject matter in dispute relates to an investment
in Spain by an Argentinean investor while the request for
provisional measures relates to a guarantee or bond to ensure
payment of additional costs and expenses should the Claimant not

prevail in the case.

It is clear that these are two separate issues. The issue of
provisional measure is unrelated to the facts of the dispute before

the Tribunal.”°

5.12 Obviously, a requested provisional measure must concern rights (in the sense as
described in 5.6 - 5.8 above) which are at issues in the dispute. However, we do
not believe that there is any requirement for a provisional measure to relate to the
subject matter of the dispute in the same way that the Maffezini Tribunal seemed

to see such a relationship, or lack thereof *.

Maffezini, Procedural Order No. 2, 28 October 1999, paras 23-25.

‘The Maffezini, Tribunal’s emphasis on a measure’s necessary relationship to the subject matter of the case is
somewhat surprising, given that such a requirement is not specified in either the wording of Article 47 of the
Convention or Rule 39. Indeed, it is possible that the Tribunal may have mistakenly been thinking of the
provision for interim measures found in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Article 26(1) of those rules provides
that: “At the request of either party, the arbitral tribunal may take any interim measures it deems necessary in
respect of the subject-matter of the dispute, including measures for the conservation of the goods forming the

 

 

5.15

In the Casado’ case, although the Tribunal denied the security application before
it, it saw no jurisdictional limitation on its powers to make such a

recommendation in the right circumstances. It reasoned that:

“Taking account of the preceding general observations on
provisional measures and of the absence of a clear answer in the
text, there is no justification from excluding the tribunal from
being able to recommend in certain circumstances, the deposition
of a guarantee aimed at protecting the respondent against the

eventual non-payment of costs...”°

The Tribunal in Adlantic Triton v. Guinea reached the same conclusion with
respect to a request for pre-judgment security by Guinea for its counterclaim in a
contract-based ICSID arbitration. The Tribunal ultimately declined to recommend

the furnishing of the requested financial guarantees, but it held that:

“Recommendation of such measures would clearly be within its

mandate under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention.””

Finally, in the most recent reported ICSID decision on security for costs, the
Libananco Tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction to order such interim

measures, but that it would:

“Only be in the most extreme cases ... that the possibility of

granting security for costs should be entertained at all*

 

subject-matter in dispute, such as ordering their deposit with a third person or the sale of perishable goods.”
(Emphasis added)

Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile \CSID Case No.ARB/98/2
Casado, 16 \CSLD Review — FILJ 567 (2001). p.3.

P.D. Friedland, “Provisional measures and ICSID arbitration”, Arbitration International, Vol. 2 No. 4 (1986),
pp. 355-357

Libananco Holdings Co Limited v Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/8 Decision on Preliminary Issues, 23 June
2008.

5.16

5.18

5.19

In these circumstances, the Tribunal, by majority, considers that the wording of
Article 47 and Rule 39(1), properly construed, is of sufficient reach to enable an
ICSID tribunal, in an appropriate case, to grant provisional measures in the nature

of security for costs.”
Do the Circumstances Justify such a Recommendation?

It is beyond doubt that a recommendation of provisional measures is an
extraordinary remedy which ought not to be granted lightly. Each of the
Maffezini, Casado and Libananco Tribunals reached this conclusion. This is in
line with widespread municipal precedent and jurisprudence. It is also beyond
doubt that the burden to demonstrate why a tribunal should grant such an

application is on the applicant.

In cases of security for costs, Arbitrators (and courts in jurisdictions which are
prepared to make such an order) will rarely think it right to grant such an
application if the party from whom security is sought appears to have sufficient
assets to meet such an order, and if those assets would seem to be available for its

satisfaction.

In an ICSID arbitration, it is also doubtful that a showing of an absence of assets
alone would provide a sufficient basis for such an order. First, as was pointed out
in Libananco, it is far from unusual in ICSID proceedings to be faced with a
Claimant that is a corporate investment vehicle, with few assets, that was created
or adapted specially for the purpose of the investment. Second, as was noted by
the Casado Tribunal, it is simply not part of the [CSID dispute resolution system
that an investor’s claim should be heard only upon the establishment of a

sufficient financial standing of the investor to meet a possible costs award.

Asbitrator Nottingham feels that the Tribunal lacks the jurisdiction to order the posting of security for costs, for
two reasons, First, there is no express provision allowing a Tribunal to order such a posting in the CSID
Convention or Arbitration Rules, in contrast to other bodies of law such as Section 38(3) of the English
Arbitration Act of 1996 or Article 25.2 of the London Court of International Arbitration Rules, Second, the use
ofthe words "preserve" and "preserved" in Article 47 and Rule 39 presupposes that the right to be preserved
exists, Because Respondent has no existing right to an ultimate award of costs, the Tribunal is thus without
jurisdiction.

5.20 It is difficult, in the abstract, to formulate a rule of general application against
which to measure whether the making of an order for security for costs might be
reasonable, but it seems clear to us that more should be required than a simple
showing of the likely inability of a claimant to pay a possible costs award.
However, on the record before us, it is unnecessary to offer a view as to the nature

of what evidence might suffice.

5.21 In this case, Grenada has made no showing of Claimants’ impecuniosity, nor of
any unwillingness on their part to pay a costs award. There is also no evidence to
suggest that the United States’ courts would not fully enforce any costs award that
might be made against Claimants by this Tribunal. The fact that there are four
Claimants who would be jointly and severally liable to pay any such award also

minimizes the risk of non-payment.

5.22 All that Grenada has said about Claimants’ financial standing is that “Claimants
have ample means to post the modest security Grenada requests”. This is the

opposite to evidence of impecuniosity that is required.

5.23 As to Claimants’ unwillingness to satisfy a possible award of costs, reliance is
principally placed on: (a) RSM’s decision not to post the advance on costs called
for in its annulment application; and (b) Mr Jack Grynberg’s attempt to place

personal assets beyond the reach of his creditors some 10 years ago.'°

5.24 The Tribunal does not agree that the evidence relied on by Respondent is
sufficient to support such a conclusion. First, RSM had every right not to continue
with its annulment application. And while Mr Grynberg may be CEO of RSM,
there is no evidence to suggest that either it or any of the three individual
Claimants have sought to avoid previous cost awards or similar obligations. The
behaviour of Mr Grynberg, more than a decade ago, in unrelated proceedings,

simply cannot support the conclusion that Claimants will use every available

Grenada asserts that the conduct of RSM, its principals and Mr Grynberg strongly suggests “that they (Claimants]
will use any and every available means to frustrate Grenada’s attempts to enforce a costs award.”

means to avoid the enforcement of any potential costs award the Tribunal might

in the future be minded to make against them in this proceeding.

5.25 Because Grenada has failed to meet its burden to show insufficient or unavailable
assets, that is the end of the matter and it is not necessary to address the

appropriateness of the amount sought for security by Respondent.
6. DISPOSITION OF SECURITY APPLICATION

6.1 For the reasons recorded above, the Tribunal denies Respondent’s Security

Application, the costs of which are reserved to a later stage of this proceeding.

Washington DC, USA

[14] October 2010
[Signed] [Signed]
Edward W. Nottingham Prof. Pierre Tercier

[Signed]

J. William Rowley QC (President)

