INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

RSM PRODUCTION CORPORATION

Claimant

and

SAINT LUCIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10

 

DECISION ON CLAIMANT’S PROPOSAL FOR THE DISQUALIFICATION OF
DR. GAVAN GRIFFITH QC

 

Rendered by:

Prof. Dr. Siegfried H. Elsing, President of the Tribunal
Judge Edward W. Nottingham, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Date: October 23, 2014

PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

Representing Claimant:

RSM Production Corporation
c/o Mr. Jack J. Grynberg
Mr. Roger Jatko
Ms. Janice Orr
3600 S. Yosemite St., Suite 900
Denver, CO 80237
United States of America
and
c/o Mr. Daniel L. Abrams
Law Office of Daniel L. Abrams, PLLC
31 Penn Plaza, 132 W. 31st Street
15th Floor
New York, NY 10001
US.A
and
c/o Mr. Karel Daele
Ms. Heidrun Walsh
Mishcon de Reya
Summit House
12 Red Lion Square
London WCIR 4QD
United Kingdom

Representing Respondent:

Saint Lucia
c/o Mr. Brian King
Mr. Elliot Friedman
Ms. Lexi Menish
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st floor
New York, NY 10022
United States of America
and
c/o Mr. Jonathan J. Gass
Mr. Patrick McGahan
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
65 Fleet Street
London EC4Y 1HS
United Kingdom
and
c/o Ms. Kate Parlett
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2 rue Paul Cézanne
75008 Paris
France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 6
Claimant’s Position 6
Respondent’s Position 11
ANALYSIS 12
Applicable Legal Standard 12
Timeliness 15

 

Merits of the Disqualification Proposal .............cccccescesesesees cscs eeeseeeeseeseeeeeeeetetesseeneeeeees
1. General Remarks
2. The Assenting Opinion in Substance ...
a. The Wording of the Assenting Reasons
b. Bias in Favor of or Against one of the Parties ......0.0.c cece eeeeneneseeeeeeeeeeeeeeenes 19

DECISION 21

 

  

PARTIES

RSM Production Corporation (hereinafter referred to as “Claimant”) is a company
constituted under the laws of Texas, U.S.A. It is legally represented by Messrs. Jack J.
Grynberg and Roger Jatko and Ms. Janice Orr. Claimant is represented in this arbitration
by its counsel Mr. Daniel L. Abrams of Law Office of Daniel L. Abrams, PLLC, and
Mr. Karel Daele and Ms. Heidrun Walsh of Mishcon de Reya.

Saint Lucia (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent”) is represented in this arbitration by
its counsel Messrs. Brian King and Elliot Friedman and Ms. Lexi Menish of the New York
office of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP, Messrs. Jonathan J. Gass and Patrick
McGahan of the London office of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP, as well as
Ms. Kate Parlett of the Paris office of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to individually as a “Party” and

collectively as the “Parties.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On April 2, 2012, Claimant filed with ICSID a request for arbitration dated March 29,
2012 against Respondent (the “Request”).

On April 23, 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID (the “Secretary-General’) registered
the Request, as supplemented by letters of April 8 and 20, 2011, in accordance with Article
36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “ICSID

Convention’) and notified the Parties thereof.

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 26.3(b) of the
“Agreement between the Government of Saint Lucia and RSM Production Corporation,”

entered into on March 29, 2000, which provides:

“Each party shall appoint one arbitrator, and these two shall designate a
third arbitrator, who shall chair the Arbitration Board. If the arbitrators
named by the parties fail to agree upon a third arbitrator within thirty (30)
days after the latter of the two arbitrators has been appointed, or if any party

does not appoint an arbitrator within thirty (30) days following appointment
of an arbitrator by the other party, such arbitrator shall, at the request of
either party, be designated by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of
ICSID.”
The Tribunal is composed of Professor Dr. Siegfried H. Elsing, a national of the Federal
Republic of Germany, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Judge Edward
Nottingham, a national of the United States of America, appointed by Claimant; and

Dr. Gavan Griffith QC, a national of Australia, appointed by Respondent.

On August 6, 2013, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”) notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Aurélia Antonietti, ICSID

Team Leader/Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.
On September 6, 2013, Respondent filed a request for provisional measures.

On September 20, 2013, Claimant filed its opposition to Respondent’s request for

provisional measures.
On September 26, 2013, Respondent filed its reply on provisional measures.
On October 2, 2013, Claimant filed its rejoinder on provisional measures.

The Tribunal held its first session and a hearing on provisional measures with the Parties

on October 4, 2013, in New York City.

On December 12, 2013, the Tribunal issued its “Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for
Provisional Measures” in which it ordered Claimant to bear all further advances and to
refund to Respondent the portion it had already paid. The decision on Respondent’s

request for security for costs was suspended.
On January 24, 2014, Claimant filed its memorial on the merits.

On June 6, 2014, Respondent filed its counter-memorial on the merits.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

By letter of the same date, Respondent reiterated its request for security for costs.

On August 13, 2014, the Tribunal issued its “Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for
Security for Costs,” together with Dr. Griffith’s assenting reasons (“Assenting Reasons”)

and Judge Nottingham’s dissenting opinion. In its Decision, the Tribunal ruled as follows:

“(i) Claimant is ordered to post security for costs in the form of an
irrevocable bank guarantee for USD 750,000 within 30 days of this
decision.

(ii) Failing provision of such guarantee within 30 days, Respondent is
granted leave to request that the Tribunal cancel the hearing date as
set forth in the Procedural Timetable.

(iii) The decision regarding the costs of Respondent’s application remains
reserved until a later stage in these proceedings.”
On August 14, 2014, the Tribunal issued its decisions on the Parties’ respective requests

for production of documents which were filed on July 18, 2014.

On August 20, 2014, the Tribunal supplemented its Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for

Security for Costs.

By letter dated August 20, 2014, Claimant requested the Tribunal to extend the deadline for

filing of its reply by six weeks, i.e. from September 12, 2014 to October 24, 2014.

By email of the same date, the Secretariat informed the Parties that Respondent was invited

to comment on Claimant’s request of August 20, 2014 by August 27, 2014.

By email dated August 27, 2014, Claimant indicated that the Parties had conferred and
jointly agreed to extend the deadline for filing of Claimant’s reply by two weeks, i.e. by
September 26, 2014, with the deadline for filing of Respondent’s rejoinder remaining

unchanged, i.e. December 19, 2014, and the reserved hearing dates being maintained.

By email of the same date, Respondent confirmed its agreement to Claimant’s proposed

dates.

By email dated August 28, 2014, the Secretariat informed the Parties that the Tribunal

agreed to the extension of the deadline for filing of Claimant’s reply.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

By email dated September 8, 2014, Claimant informed the Secretariat that the Parties had
conferred and jointly agreed to extend the deadline for posting of the security for costs by
one week from the date set forth by the Tribunal in its Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for

Security for Costs, i.e. by September 19, 2014.

By email dated September 9, 2014, the Secretariat informed the Parties that the Tribunal
was agreeable to the Parties’ jointly agreed extension of the deadline for posting of the

security for costs.

On September 10, 2014, Claimant submitted its Proposal for the Disqualification of
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC (“Disqualification Proposal”).

By letter of the same date, the Secretariat notified the Parties that the proceedings were
suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6) and that it would revert shortly

regarding the next steps in the proceedings.

By letter dated September 11, 2014, the Secretariat conveyed to the Parties the schedule of

written submissions on the Disqualification Proposal as follows:

“I. Respondent is invited to submit its observations on the disqualification
proposal by Friday, September 19, 2014;

2. Dr. Griffith is invited to furnish any explanations that he may wish to
provide, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), within one (1) week
from receipt of the Respondent’s submission;

3. Both Parties are invited to simultaneously file, within one (1) week
from the date of any explanations furnished by Dr. Griffith, any further
observations they wish to make in connection with the disqualification
proposal. The Parties are requested to submit their observations only
to the Secretary of the Tribunal on the due date. The Secretary of the
Tribunal will circulate the submissions upon receipt of both Parties’
filings.”

By email dated September 18, 2014, Claimant informed the Secretariat that the Parties had
conferred and would work towards having the arrangements for the posting of the security

for costs in place by September 26, 2014.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

On September 19, 2014, Respondent filed its observations on the Disqualification Proposal

(“Respondent’s Observations”).

By letter dated September 23, 2014, the Secretariat informed the Parties that Dr. Griffith
did not intend to submit observations on the Disqualification Proposal, and that Professor

Elsing and Judge Nottingham decided that:

“[...] should the Parties wish to submit further observations on the
disqualification proposal, Claimant shall file its submission within one (1)
week of today’s date, and Respondent shall file its reply if it so wishes, within
one (1) week from the date of receipt of Claimant’s submission.”
On September 30, 2014, Claimant filed its further observations on the Disqualification

Proposal (“Claimant’s Further Observations”).

By letter of the same date, Respondent submitted comments concerning the schedule of

submission on the merits and the hearing dates.

By letter dated October 1, 2014, Respondent indicated that it had no further observations

on the Disqualification Proposal and commented on Claimant’s Further Observations.

By letter dated October 2, 2014, Claimant commented on Respondent’s letter of October 1,
2014.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

The Parties’ positions with respect to the Disqualification Proposal are summarized below.

I. Claimant’s Position

Claimant’s proposal for the disqualification of Dr. Griffith is based solely upon
Dr. Griffith’s Assenting Reasons to the Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for Security for

Costs of August 13, 2014.

Claimant asserts that the determinations made by Dr. Griffith in his Assenting Reasons
raise the concern that he lacks the qualities required of an arbitrator. ! According to
Claimant the finding of a lack of impartiality or independence within the meaning of
Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention merely requires the establishment of the

- - 2
appearance of dependence or bias.~

In Claimant’s opinion, Dr. Griffith’s comments reveal bias against both third-party funders
and funded claimants, such as Claimant in this arbitration.> In this respect, Claimant’s

concerns are based on the following excerpt from the Assenting Reasons:

“Tt is increasingly common for BIT claims to be financed by an identified, or
(as here) unidentified third party funder, either related to the nominal
claimant or one that engages in the business venture of advancing money to
fund the Claimant’s claim, essentially as a joint-venture to share the rewards
of success but, if security for costs orders are not made, to risk no more than
its spent costs in the event of failure.

Such a business plan for a related or professional funder is to embrace the
gambler’s Nirvana: Heads I win, and Tails I do not lose.

The founders of the Convention could not have foreseen in any way the
emergence of a new industry of mercantile adventurers as professional BIT
claims funders. It is no reach to find that, as strangers to the BIT entitlement,
such funders also should remain at the same real risk level for costs as the
nominal claimant. In this regard, the integrity of the BIT regimes is apt to be
recalibrated in the case of a third party funder, related or un-related, to

' Disqualification Proposal, para. 1.

squalification Proposal, para. 15; Claimant’s Further Observations, paras. 73 et seq.

$ Disqualification Proposal, p. 4.

42.

43.

* Assenting Reaso
> Disqualification Propos:

mandate that its real exposure to costs orders which may go one way to it on
success Should flow the other direction on failure.

For these brief reasons, my position is that, unless there are particular
reasons militating to the contrary, exceptional circumstances may be found to
justify security of costs orders arising under BIT claims as against a third
party funder, related or unrelated, which does not proffer adequate security
for adverse cost orders. An example of contrary circumstances might be to
establish that the funded claimant has independent capacity to meet costs
orders.

L.-J

My determinative proposition is that once it appears that there is third party
funding of an investor’s claims, the onus is cast on the claimant to disclose
all relevant factors and to make a case why security for costs orders should
not be made.”

The description of third-party funders as “mercantile adventurers” and the association
with “gambling” and the “gambler’s Nirvana: Heads I win and Tails I do not lose” are, in
Claimant’s view, radical in tone and negative and prejudge the question whether a funded
claimant will comply with a costs award.” Additionally, Claimant derives from Dr.
Griffith’s determinations that his alleged bias against the funders extends to Claimant as
the funded party as well.° Claimant contends that the language used by Dr. Griffith cannot

be qualified as a neutral discussion of the issues or a mere rhetorical emphasis.”

Claimant goes on to assert that Dr. Griffith’s determinations are not based on any particular
circumstances regarding the contractual arrangements between Claimant and its funder nor
on its history in connection with the compliance with costs awards; his opinion derives
from his preconceived, radical and general apprehension against third-party funding and

funded claimants in BIT arbitrations.* Dr. Griffith did not distinguish between the various

   

, paras. 23, 24.

© Disqualification Proposal, para. 25.
Claimant’s Further Observations, para. 100.
§ Disqualification Proposal, para. 33.

44.

4S.

46.

existing and possible types of third-party funding but reached his decision by a

consideration of funding in general.”

Claimant also bases its Disqualification Proposal on the fact that Dr. Griffith issued an
assenting opinion with different reasons at all, whereas he agreed with the result of the
Majority Decision. This, according to Claimant, shows that Dr. Griffith felt the need to
express his radical views on third-party funding to the “arbitration community” instead of
concurring with the President’s view, thereby stepping outside his role of an impartial and
open-minded arbitrator.'° In Claimant’s view, it is important to note that Dr. Griffith

articulated his opinion in his capacity as arbitrator and not in an academic context.!!

Claimant further contends that Dr. Griffith’s disqualification is justified by the fact that his
argumentation is, in parts, based on references to the situation in arbitrations under bilateral
investment treaties (BIT arbitration). Since the current arbitration concerns contract
between the Parties (and cannot be qualified as a BIT arbitration), Claimant concludes that

Dr. Griffith is being led by factors other than the facts of the case at hand.”

Claimant also refers to the questions whether a party requesting an order of security for
costs has to establish prima facie jurisdiction of the tribunal and whether any showing on
the merits of the case is required, on which Dr. Griffith likewise disagreed with the
President’s approach. Dr. Griffith expressed his view on the establishment of prima facie

jurisdiction as follows:

“Whilst under a BIT treaty claim an investor claimant may be required to
establish prima facie jurisdiction to obtain an order for provisional
measures, conceptually it is inadmissible to apply any such requirement upon
a respondent State party’s application for security for costs orders.

First, it is no function of the respondent State to establish jurisdiction: indeed
the application may be based upon the contention that there is none. Second,
a respondent party has no obligation to advance any case in defence on
jurisdiction or on merits before the claimant has made its case. Third, to
require a respondent State to establish the negative against its own interests,

° Claimant’s Further Observations, para. 95.

!° Disqualification Proposal, paras. 34 et seq.; Claimant's Further Observations, paras. 66 et seq.
'' Claimant’s Further Observations, para. 115.

"? Disqualification Proposal, para. 30.

namely, as a pre-condition for the making of such orders in defence, would
be a plain breach of Article 52 of the Convention as a serious departure from
a fundamental rule of procedure.

For these reasons, I would recast the possibility hinted at paras 59 and 60 to
the level of an absolute proposition that there is no requirement for a
respondent party applying for provisional measures to establish any, let
alone prima facie, position on jurisdiction. vis

With respect to the requirement of setting out the position on the merits, Dr. Griffith

reasoned:

“Applications for security are inherently to be made at inception before any

filings or proofs either way in response to the bare claim itself. The
Respondent’s application for security is grounded merely upon on [sic] the
alleged incapacity in the claiming party to meet adverse costs orders made at
a time when the claimant may not have put even a summary of its case to
establish jurisdiction and merits.

Hence, for essentially the same reasons stated in paras 4 to 6 above, it is
conceptually impermissible to cast any burden on a respondent applicant for
costs security to have any obligation to proffer any case in refutation in
advance of the claimant pleading its case. Hence, there is no possibility that
the respondent applicant could ever be required to establish ‘any showing as
to its position on the merits’, by which I understand the President to mean as
to its defence.”

 

47. From these remarks, Claimant derives that Dr. Griffith favors respondent state parties
irrespective of the facts of the particular case.° In particular, Claimant points out that
Dr. Griffith’s opinion does not contain any aspect in favor of the investor but merely in

favor of the respondent state. 6

 

zed and

  

48. In Claimant’s opinion, also the fact that both commentators and funders have criti
disagreed with Dr. Griffith’s approach shows that this approach is perceived as

inappropriate and thus further supports his disqualification. u

'S Assenting Reasons, paras. 4-6.

'4 Assenting Reasons, paras. 7-8.

'S Disqualification Proposal, paras. 42. et seq.
'© Disqualification Proposal, para. 44.

" Disqualification Proposal, paras. 54 and 62.

49. That Dr. Griffith elected not to furnish any explanations in reaction to Claimant’s
Disqualification Proposal, in Claimant’s opinion, adds further weight to the doubts

concerning his impartial and independent judgment. 1s

50. Claimant contends that by expressing his views on third-party funding, Dr. Griffith showed
a clear preference in favor of Respondent and thus a preference with regard to the outcome

of the dispute. 8

51. Claimant opines that, in any case, the cumulation of two grounds for a challenge, i.e. the
bias in favor of respondent states and the bias against funded claimants, justifies the

disqualification of Dr. Griffith.”°

52. Claimant contests that the Disqualification Proposal is in any way related to the prior
modification of the timetable. Rather, Claimant asserts that it had negotiated the possible
extension of time limits with Respondent in good faith and with the intention to maintain

the planned hearing date in order to not disrupt the proceeding.”!
53. Claimant requests that

“a. Dr. Griffith be disqualified as a member of the Tribunal”

b. It is not required to advance the costs St. Lucia has incurred in responding to
RSM’s Disqualification Proposal”?

c. St. Lucia be ordered to reimburse the costs RSM has incurred in making its
Disqualification Proposal”™*

Further Observations, para. 9.

Further Observations, para. 115.
Further Observations, paras. 118 ef seq.
s Further Observations, paras. 27 et seq.
® Disqualification Proposal, para. 2.

°3 Claimant's Further Observations, para. 127.

* Ibid.

 

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

II. Respondent’s Position

Respondent asserts that Claimant’s Disqualification Proposal is a mere attempt to disrupt
the proceeding, especially given that Claimant had, immediately prior to the
Disqualification Proposal, already delayed the proceeding by requesting that time limits be

extended leading to the modification of the procedural calendar.”*

Respondent believes that it was not necessary for Dr. Griffith to furnish further
observations on the Disqualification Proposal since the remarks in his Assenting Reasons

sufficiently speak for themselves.”°

Moreover, Respondent asserts that, against the background of the delay of the proceeding
caused by the Disqualification Proposal, the latter is to be, contrary to the requirements of

ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1), regarded as untimely and therefore to be rejected.””

Additionally, in Respondent’s view, the Disqualification Proposal fundamentally lacks
merit.° Respondent contends that the only reason for Claimant’s Disqualification
Proposal is its disagreement with the Decision on Security for Costs rendered in
Respondent’s favor. Such disagreement cannot constitute a ground for challenging an
arbitrator.” Consequently, the disqualification cannot be based upon the merits of the

decision, but only on the manner.*?

According to Respondent, the Disqualification Proposal does not meet the standard
required for a disqualification, which requires Claimant to furnish evidence that
Dr. Griffith manifestly lacks the ability to exercise independent judgment. Respondent

Fhe “« ae tee te 3
regards establishing a mere “appearance” as insufficient. '

Respondent further argues that the arguments put forth by Dr. Griffith do not raise any

doubts as to his impartiality. There is no basis to infer that Dr. Griffith would not act fairly

* Respondent's Letter of September 30, 2014, p. 1.
°° Respondent's Observations, para.6.

*7 Respondent's letter of September 30, 2014, p. 2.
*8 Respondent's Observations, para. 4.

?° Respondent’ s Observations, para. 15.

* Thid.

+! Respondent's Observations, paras. 10 et seq.

vis-a-vis Claimant in this proceeding.” Rather, his assenting reasons merely state his
opinion with regard to a widely discussed topic. The expressions used by Dr. Griffith are,
in Respondent’s view, merely a means to emphasize his opinion and not a sign of his bias

against Claimant or in favor of Respondent.**
60. Respondent requests that
“a. the Disqualification Proposal be denied. 4

b. RSM be ordered to reimburse the costs St. Lucia has incurred in responding to

RSM’s Disqualification Proposal. 3

D. ANALYSIS

I. Applicable Legal Standard
61. The legal framework governing a proposed disqualification of a member of an ICSID
tribunal is set out in Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Article 57 of the

ICSID Convention provides:

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of
any of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the
qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration
proceedings may, in addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on
the ground that he was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under
Section 2 of Chapter IV.”

62. Since Claimant raises no question concerning eligibility for appointment to the Tribunal,
our focus must be on whether Claimant has sufficiently demonstrated “a manifest lack of

the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14,” to which we now turn.

* Respondent’ s Observations, para. 17.

  
 

* Respondent's Observatior

*5 Respondent’ s Observations, para. 25.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention reads:

“Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral
character and recognized competence in the field of law, commerce, industry
or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.
Competence in the field of law shall be of particular importance in the case
of persons on the Panel of Arbitrators.”

Focusing again on the language which Claimant has placed in issue, the only question
before us is whether Claimant has sufficiently demonstrated a “manifest lack” of the

ability “to exercise independent judgment.”

As previously noted (paragraphs 40 and 58, supra), the Parties disagree about what the
pertinent language in Articles 57 and 14(1) requires. According to Claimant, all that is
required is “the appearance of dependence or bias,” (quoting Blue Bank International &
Trust (Barbados) Ltd v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/ 12/20),
Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of November
12, 2013, para. 58). Respondent insists that mere “appearance” of bias is insufficient and
that partiality must “be clearly and objectively established” (quoting OPIC Karimum
Corp. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14), Decision on the
Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator, of May 5, 2011, para. 45). In
our view, the Parties are conflating distinct concepts. The authorities on which they rely

are consistent with one another and can be reconciled, a task which we now undertake.

The first conflated concept is simply this: proof of bias or dependence must almost always
rest on “appearances,” that is, on circumstantial evidence. Proving a person’s actual bias,
dependence, or prejudice is practically impossible, absent an admission or declaration from
the person himself. There is simply no way for ordinary people to scrutinize or fathom the
operations of a human mind. Hence, we find ourselves in full agreement with those

authorities which declare

“Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of
actual dependence or bias; rather it is sufficient to establish the appearance
of dependence or bias.”

67. The second conflated concept is this: what is the standard by which the circumstantial
evidence of dependence or bias is to be evaluated? The standard has two aspects. First, it
is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third

party. 37 Second, giving meaning to the word “manifest,” the circumstantial evidence of

dependence or bias must be “obvious. 238

68. According to Schreuer, the term “manifest” does not refer to the gravity, but rather to the

“ease with which it is perceived. 739

69. To summarize our view of the authorities: we believe the circumstantial evidence
demonstrating the appearance of dependence or bias must be plain or obvious to an
independent third party based on an objective and reasonable evaluation of the evidence.

We thus find ourselves in agreement with the Unchallenged Arbitrators in Caratube:

°° Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/20), Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of November 12, 2013,
para. 59. See also Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del
Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Professor
Francisco Orrego Vicufia of December 13, 2013, para. 65; Repsol SA. and Repsol Butano SA. v. Republic of
Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Arbitrators Francisco
Orrego Vicufia and Claus von Wobeser of December 13, 2013, para. 70; Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of February 4, 2014, para. 74.

7 Blue Bank & Trust (Barbados) Ltd v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/
12/20), Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of November 12, 2013, para. 60;
Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Francisco
Orrego Vicuiia of December 13, 2013, para. 67; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. and others v. Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of
May 5, 2014, paras. 53; Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision to
Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of February 4, 2014, para. 77.

*8 Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd y. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/20), Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of November 12, 2013,
para. 61; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case Nos.
ARB/3/17 and ARB/03/19, Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral
Tribunal of May 12, 2008, para. 29.

° Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed. 2009, Article 52 para. 135. See also EDF
International S.A., SAUR International S.A. and Le6n Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/23), Challenge Decision Regarding Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler of June 25, 2008, para.
68; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Committee of October 3, 2001, para. 25.

 

 

 

 

14

70.

71.

72.

723.

“Claimants must show that a third party would find that there is an evident or
obvious appearance of lack of impartiality or independence based on a
reasonable evaluation of the facts in the present case.”

II. Timeliness

Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1), a disqualification proposal has to be made

“promptly.” ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:

“A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article
57 of the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding
is declared closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its
reasons therefor.”

The term “promptly” is not further defined in the ICSID Arbitration Rules, so that, in

accordance with prior decisions, the issue of timeliness is to be assessed in each individual

case.*!

In Abaclat, a disqualification proposal filed after 21 days was considered timely.” In
contrast, in Suez, a period of 53 days was considered as untimely.“ Whereas such prior
determinations cannot have an immediately binding effect on us, since the assessment is
subject to the specific circumstances of the case, the scale revealed by these two exemplary

decisions appears, depending on the individual constellation, to be reasonable.

In the present case, Claimant filed its Proposal on September 10, 2014, i.e. 28 days after
the issuance of the Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs of August 13,
2014. Every submission requires preparation and coordination between lawyers and

clients. Absent circumstances indicating the contrary, we consider the Disqualification

*° Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case
No. ARB/13/13), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Arbitrator Bruno Boesch of March 20, 2014, para.

57.
+! Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/5), Decision to Disqualify a Majority of the
Tribunal of February 4, 2014, para. 68; Burlington Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa
Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Decision on the Proposal for
Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia of December 13, 2013, para. 60.

® Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision to Disqualify a Majority of the
Tribunal of February 4, 2014, para. 69.

* Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17), Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the
Arbitral Tribunal of October 22, 2007, para. 26.

74.

75.

76.

77.

Proposal filed after 28 days to be timely and thus filed “promptly” within the meaning of
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1).

Also, we do not see any hint to the effect that the Disqualification Proposal was made in
bad faith or was in any way related to the prior modification of the procedural timetable.
As the negotiations reveal, Claimant’s counsel had already contacted Respondent’s counsel
on August 11, 2014, with a request to alter the timetable and extend the deadline for filing
its reply memorial on the merits (until October 10, 2014). The negotiations continued until
the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement on September 8, 2014. At the
beginning of these ongoing negotiations, the Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for Security
for Costs had yet not been issued. Hence, as Claimant could not have known when the
decision would be issued and what its reasoning would be, we see no reason to conclude
that Claimant followed a plan comprising both the alteration of the timetable and the

Disqualification Proposal.

The challenge of arbitrators is a procedural right of the Parties, granted under the ICSID
regime by Article 57 of the ICSID Convention in conjunction with ICSID Arbitration Rule
9. As there are no concrete circumstances indicating the contrary, the exercise of this

procedural right cannot be characterized as abusive.

III. Merits of the Disqualification Proposal

1. General Remarks

According to the standard established above, it is required that the statements by
Dr. Griffith in his Assenting Reasons manifestly, i.e. obviously, reveal bias regarding the

conduct of the proceeding from an objective point of view.

First and foremost, however, it is worth noting that the Assenting Reasons were issued in
connection with the Tribunal’s Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs and
thus on a procedural issue. This decision did not deal in any respect with the merits of this
arbitration, i.e. the contractual relationship between the Parties. Nor were Dr. Griffith’s

statements related to the substance of the dispute. Hence, it is difficult to see how the views

78.

79.

80.

expressed in the Assenting Reasons could allow any inference as to Dr. Griffith’s position

with regard to the disposition of the merits of this arbitration.

Additionally, the mere fact that Dr. Griffith did not furnish any additional explanation
cannot be considered to support his disqualification. Under ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), a
challenged arbitrator has the option to give an explanation (or not), but for the decision on
the challenge it is irrelevant whether or not the arbitrator made use of that option. To hold
that an adverse inference may be drawn from the arbitrator’s election not to furnish an

explanation would fly in the face of Rule 9(3)’s plainly permissive language.

Nor can the fact that Dr. Griffith issued the Assenting Reasons as such add any weight to
the Disqualification Proposal. Whereas, admittedly, the issuance of an assenting opinion is
rare in international arbitration, it is not excluded by the procedural rules. On the contrary,
it is an option granted by ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(3) which a co-arbitrator may decide to
exercise or not. Hence, we see no basis for questioning Dr. Griffith’s motives for issuing

his Assenting Reasons.

Furthermore, the Disqualification Proposal cannot be successful to the extent that it deals
with the merits of the Decision on St. Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs, in particular
the Assenting Reasons. An adverse ruling itself is no permissible ground for a
disqualification.“ Accordingly, Dr. Griffith’s views as to the qualification of third-party
funding as such, its impact on the assessment of a request for security for costs, as well as
his views on the burden of pleading of the requesting party should not be reviewed in
substance in the context of a decision on a disqualification proposal. Such review is not
the purpose and function of the procedural right to challenge an arbitrator pursuant to
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, the Disqualification Proposal has to be
considered merely concerning the manner in which Dr. Griffith expressed his views in the

Assenting Reasons.

* See Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5), Decision to Disqualify a Majority of
the Tribunal of February 4, 2014, para. 81; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. and others v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal of May
5, 2014, paras, 54 et seq.

81.

82.

83.

84.

Likewise, the perception of the Assenting Reasons by scholars and other commentators and
the views expressed in their comments and articles are irrelevant for our decision. First,
the articles published in response to the Assenting Reasons and in particular regarding the
issue of third-party funding, also deal with the merits of the Decision on St. Lucia’s
Request for Security for Costs. These, as pointed out above, do not provide a permissible
ground for a challenge. In any case, any criticism by commentators and funders against the
Assenting Reasons or even Dr. Griffith in person should not be taken into account when
assessing Dr. Griffith’s qualification as an arbitrator within the meaning of Article 14(1) of
the ICSID Convention. It is not part of an arbitrator’s duties to ensure that his views are
well-received or well-perceived among scholars and members of professions possibly
affected by the substance of the decision. Such duty would impair the capacity of an
arbitrator to render an independent decision exclusively guided by the facts of the case as

submitted by the parties.

Regarding the group of affected professionals, i.e. professional funders in the present case,
we also note that some of the authors cited by Claimant in support of his Disqualification
Proposal appear to have a genuine interest in the matter themselves and can hardly be

considered as neutral observers of the Assenting Opinion.**

2. The Assenting Opinion in Substance

We now turn in detail to the objections and the specific issues raised by Claimant in the

Disqualification Proposal.

a. The Wording of the Assenting Reasons

The expressions used by Dr. Griffith in his Assenting Reasons, such as “gambling,”
“adventurers” and the reference to the “gambler’s Nirvana” are strong and figurative
metaphors. However, in our view, these expressions primarily serve the purpose of
clarifying and emphasizing the point Dr. Griffith purports to make, namely the paramount
importance, in his opinion, of third-party funding of a party in connection with a request

for security for costs. We do not regard it to be established that these terms reveal any

5 In particular, this applies to Messrs. Mick Smith, Iain McKenny and Christopher Bogart, cited in Disqualification
Proposal, para. 62 and Claimant's Further Observations, paras. 84 et seq.

18

85.

86.

87.

underlying bias against third-party funders in general or Claimant in particular. The means
of expressing a point of view or articulating an argument may vary from one arbitrator to
another, and different arbitrators possess varied characteristics, including their habits of
drafting decisions and the wording used. As long as such wording does not clearly reveal

any preference for either party, it cannot serve as a ground for a challenge.

Whether the use of “absolute propositions” in the Assenting Reasons is preferable from an
academic point of view, might be arguable. However, since the impartiality and
independence of Dr. Griffith as an arbitrator are at issue here, this is, in our opinion, not a
ground for a challenge. Rather, any objection regarding these propositions concerns the
underlying reasons for the position taken by Dr. Griffith on the procedural issue of whether
or not security for costs should be ordered and is not subject of the requirements under
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Thus, Dr. Griffith’s deviating views as to the
requirement of establishing a prima facie case on jurisdiction or on the merits are not

contestable by means of a challenge.

In summary, we regard the language in the Assenting Reasons as radical and perhaps
extreme in tone, but not to a degree as to justify a disqualification. Dr. Griffith may well,
with the expressions used, have stepped close to the edge of what can be considered as an
objective reasoning. However, we believe that he has not actually stepped over the
demarcation line between radical and extreme language on the one hand and clearly
inappropriate and hence inacceptable expressions in the context of an arbitration on the

other hand.

b. Bias in Favor of or Against one of the Parties

Claimant asserts that Dr. Griffith’s Assenting Reasons reveal a “general apprehension”
against funded claimants such as Claimant itself. For Claimant, one of the reasons is the
repeated use of references to BIT arbitration proceedings. This however, in our opinion, is
not to be understood to the effect that Dr. Griffith was guided by facts or principles other
than the facts underlying the case at hand. Whereas perhaps his argumentation appears to
be somewhat beside the point in certain respects since the present arbitration does not

derive from a BIT but from a commercial contract between the Parties, we do not see that

88.

89.

90.

Dr. Griffith disregarded the facts of the case to Claimant’s detriment. The consistent
reference to BIT arbitrations, which could also be understood as an analogy to a group of
arbitrations in which state parties are typically respondents, might perhaps impair the
persuasiveness of the argumentation in substance but cannot affect Dr. Griffith’s ability to

issue an independent judgment.
Additionally, Dr. Griffith starts his argumentation with the observation that

“[iJn a real sense, the risk to a State of a self-identifying investor claimant
under a BIT having no funds to meet costs orders is inherent in BIT regimes.
As a general proposition it may be said that a State party to a BIT has
prospectively agreed to take claimant foreign investors as it finds them. That
the claimant does not have funds to meet costs orders if unsuccessful is no
reason to make orders for security. Commonly, this situation is contended to
arise from the matters of complaint, and it would be inconsistent with the BIT
entitlements for such financial issues arising from its lacks of funds to
derogate from the investor’s treaty entitlements.

It follows, that save in truly exceptional circumstances there is little scope for
security for costs orders being made against a claimant simpliciter under a
BIT claim.”*”

We believe that this passage shows that Dr. Griffith considered both sides of the coin, i.e.
interests of the investor and of the respondent state alike. Hence, Claimant’s argument that
Dr. Griffith did not take into account any consideration in favor of the investor, is not

persuasive.

We note, in accordance with the standard established above, that Claimant’s
Disqualification Proposal relies on Dr. Griffith’s Assenting Reasons and hence on his
expressed opinion which is subject to interpretation. As we require an objective standard
to be met, Claimant needs to establish facts indicating Dr. Griffith’s lack of impartiality.
However, in this case, the facts presented are that Dr. Griffith issued his Assenting Reasons
with the contents as described by Claimant. These facts, however, are as such not

sufficient to constitute a lack of impartiality. The underlying arguments, as presented by

46 Assenting Reasons, paras. 2 and 3.

20

Dr. Griffith and the wording, in our view, do not cast reasonable doubt upon Dr. Griffith’s

capacity to issue an independent and impartial judgment in the present arbitration.

E. DECISION

91. Based on the above grounds, we decide as follows:

(i) Claimant’s Proposal for the Disqualification of Dr. Griffith dated September 10,
2014 is dismissed.

(ii) The determination and allocation of the costs incurred in connection with the

proposal remain reserved until a later stage in this proceeding.

(iii) The suspension of this proceeding is terminated as of the date of this Decision.

21

Hin, erect.

 

Prof. Dr. Siegfried H. Elsing Judge Edward W. Nottingham
President of the Tribunal Arbitrator

22

