ICSID Case No ARB/05/16

REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
Applicant

and
RUMELI TELEKOM A.S. AND TELSIM MOBIL TELEKOMUNIKASYON HIZMETLERI
Respondents

(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

 

Members of the Committee
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel (President)
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC
Dr. Eduardo Silva Romero
Secretary to the Committee

Ms. Martina Polasek

Representing the Applicant: Representing the Respondents:
Mr. Ali Malek QC Mr. Hamid Gharavi

Mr. Christopher Harris Mr. Julien Fouret

3 Verulam Buildings, Gray's Inn Ms. Nada Sader

and Derains Gharavi & Lazareff

Mr. David Warne 25 rue Balzac

Mr. Gautam Bhattacharyya 75008

Ms. Chloe Carswell Paris, France

Reed Smith

Beaufort House
15 St Botolph Street
London EC3A 7EE, United Kingdom

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: March 25, 2010

CONTENTS

1. SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGG..............sscsssssssssssesssesscssseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseanssenes 3
2. APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT ..............ccscssssssssscsssesesesesesssesesesesesesesessenssanssses 9

2.1 LEGAL GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT
2.1.1 Applicant's position
2.1.2 Respondents’ position....
2.1.3 The Position of the Co

2.2 JURISDICTION
2.2.1 Applicant's position
2.2.2 Respondents’ position
2.2.3 The Conclusion of the COMMUTE .........cccccccccccseeeseesesesesesesesesessseseseseseee

2.3 COLLUSION
2.3.1 Applicant’s position
2.3.2 Respondents’ position
2.3.3 The Conclusion of the Co

2.4 CAUSATION
2.4.1 Applicant's position
2.4.2 Respondents’ position
2.4.3 The Conclusion of the Co

25 D,
2.5.1 The Parties’ Submission:
2.5.2 The Analysis of the Co:
2.5.3 The Evidence on Damages before the Tribunal
2.5.4 The Tribunal’s Approach
2.5.5 The Conclusion of the Committe

3. COSTS
DECISION 58

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS

On 31 October 2008, the Republic of Kazakhstan (“RoK” or “Applicant on
Annulment” or “Applicant”) submitted a timely application for annulment
(“Application”) of the Award which was rendered on 29 July 2008 in favour of
Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S.
(‘Rumeli and Telsim” or “Respondents to the Application” or
“Respondents”) by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of Professor Bernard
Hanotiau (President), Marc Lalonde O.C. P.C. Q.C. and Stewart Boyd C.M.G.
Q.C in ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16.

The Award determined a dispute arising under the Bilateral Investment Treaty
dated 1 May 1992 between Kazakhstan and Turkey (“the BIT”). The dispute
concerned the alleged expropriation of Rumeli and Telsim’s 60% shareholding
in KaR-Tel, a Kazakh company which, on 31 July 1998, had won the bid to hold
the Licence (“the Licence”) for the second mobile telephone network in
Kazakhstan. The investment contract granted by the Kazakh Investment
Committee for the Licence on 20 May 1999 (“the Investment Contract”) had a
ten-year duration and was due to expire on 31 July 2009. The Licence itself
was granted for 15 years and expired in 2013. The Tribunal decided
unanimously in its Award that it had jurisdiction over the dispute; that the Rok
had breached its obligation to accord Rumeli and Telsim fair and equitable
treatment under the BIT; and that the RoK had expropriated Rumeli and
Telsim’s investment. It ordered the RoK to pay Rumeli and Telsim US$125
million by way of compensation, together with interest and costs.

The Application was based on the grounds that the Tribunal had manifestly
exceeded its powers, that there had been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure and that the Award failed to state the reasons on
which it was based in violation of Articles 52(1)(b), 52(1)(d) and 52(1)(e) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID Convention”). The Rok challenged four
aspects of the Award as meriting annulment:

(a) Jurisdiction: The Tribunal found that Rumeli and Telsim’s investment was in
accordance with Kazakh law (Award paragraphs 320 — 322). The Applicant on
Annulment submits that the investment was part of a large-scale fraud and was
therefore illegal. The Applicant submits that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers by finding that it had jurisdiction when it had none due to the illegality
of the investment;

(b) Collusion: The Tribunal found collusion between the Investment Committee
and Telecom Invest (a Kazakh shareholder in Kar-Tel) (Award paragraphs 707
— 708). The Applicant on Annulment submits that this finding was contrary to all
of the evidence before the Tribunal and therefore either amounted to a failure to
give reasons or departed from a fundamental rule of procedure;

(c) Causation: The Applicant on Annulment submits that the Tribunal failed to
make any finding as to causation, and that this failure amounted to an

annullable failure to provide reasons and/or a manifest excess of powers;

(d) Damages: The Tribunal awarded Rumeli and Telsim US$125 million
damages to compensate them for the expropriation of their shares and to
provide full reparation for the breaches of treaty committed by the RoK (Award
paragraph 814). The Applicant on Annulment submitted that the Tribunal failed
to give reasons for its decision as to quantum and that the Award must be
annulled on this basis.

In its Application, the Applicant requested a stay of the enforcement of the
Award pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention.’

On 3 November 2008, the ICSID Secretariat acknowledged receipt of the
Application.

On 7 November 2008, the ICSID Secretariat notified the Parties of the
registration of the Application and informed the Parties that the enforcement of

Rok’s Application for Annulment dated 31 October 2008, paras 119-123.

4

the Award was provisionally stayed in accordance with Rule 54(2) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“the Arbitration Rules”).

On 12 December 2008, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that the ad
hoc Committee was constituted and was comprised of Judge Stephen M.
Schwebel, Professor Campbell McLachlan and Dr Eduardo Silva Romero (“the

Committee”).

On 17 December 2008, copies of the declaration signed by each member of the
Committee were sent to the Parties in accordance with Rule 6 of the Arbitration
Rules.

By letter dated 19 December 2008, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties
that Judge Schwebel had been appointed as President of the Committee and
invited the Parties to confer on the request for the stay of the enforcement of
the Award.

By letter dated 23 December 2008, the Parties were informed that the first
session of the Committee would be held on 9 February 2009 at the World Bank
offices in Washington D.C. By letter of the same day, the Applicant on
Annulment informed the Committee that it did not agree to the request made by
Counsel for the Respondents that the stay of the enforcement of the Award be
lifted or that the Applicant on Annulment should give a bank guarantee. The
Applicant argued that it was entitled to a stay of the enforcement of the Award
and that there was no necessity or justification for security to be given.

By letter dated 14 January 2009, the Applicant on Annulment informed the
Committee of the Parties’ agreement regarding the procedural timetable for the
filing of submissions in relation to the issue of the stay. In addition, the
Applicant informed the Committee that the Respondents were of the view that
oral submissions on the issue of the stay were unnecessary but that the
Applicant wished to present oral submissions on the issue of the stay at the
initial Committee session to take place on 9 February 2009.

On 16 January 2009, the Committee noted the Parties’ agreement regarding
the procedural timetable for the filing of submissions in relation to the issue of

the stay and sent a draft agenda to the Parties for the session to be held on 9
February 2009. Both Parties agreed to the draft agenda presented.

On 22 January 2009, the Respondents to the Application filed their application
for the termination of the stay or for the posting of a security together with 28
exhibits.

On 30 January 2009, the Applicant on Annulment filed its response to the
Application for the termination of the stay or for the posting of a security.

On 4 February 2009, the Respondents to the Application informed the
Committee that they would not be submitting a reply to the response submitted
by the Applicant on Annulment.

On 8 February 2009, the Respondents to the Application filed an additional
Exhibit 29 to their application for the termination of the stay or for the posting of
security dated 22 January 2009.

On 9 February 2009, a hearing was held at the World Bank offices in
Washington D.C. The Parties confirmed, inter alia, that they had no objection to
the constitution of the Committee or to any of its members* and respectively
presented their views on the issue of the stay. At the close of the hearing, the
Committee decided to maintain the stay pending further analysis of the Parties’
positions and the rendering of the resultant decision.

On 19 March 2009, the Committee rendered its decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award. The Committee decided that the continuation of the
stay was conditioned on the provision by the Applicant on Annulment of a
written assurance specifying that full payment of the Award would be made
within a fixed period of time. It was further decided that if the Applicant on
Annulment declined to produce such assurance and it wished that the stay be
maintained, then it should deposit the sum of 50% of the principal amount of the
Award — USD 62.5 million — into an escrow account.

Minutes of the First Session, 9 February 2009, Section | Procedural Matters, Point 1.

6

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

On 7 April 2009, the Applicant on Annulment requested an extension of one
month for its declaration concerning the stay of enforcement. By letter of the
same day, the President of the Committee requested the Respondents to the
Application to submit their comments on the Applicant's request by 14 April
2009.

On 8 April 2009, the Respondents to the Application objected to the extension
requested by the Applicant on Annulment and requested the Committee to
reject the extension or alternatively “grant a partial extension subject to an
undertaking by the Republic of Kazakhstan that it will use this additional time to
comply with the Decision.”

On 8 April 2009, the Committee accorded the Applicant on Annulment an
extension until 11 May 2009 for the provision of the written assurance set out in
paragraph 88 of the Decision on the Stay of the Enforcement of the Award and
confirmed that, in the event that such assurance was not forthcoming by that
date, the provisions of paragraph 89 of the Decision would take effect.

On 9 April 2009, the Applicant on Annulment filed its Memorial on Annulment.

By letter dated 28 April 2009, the Applicant on Annulment provided a written
assurance in accordance with paragraph 88 of the Decision on the Stay of the
Enforcement of the Award.

On 6 May 2009, the Committee took note of the written assurance received
from the Applicant on Annulment and confirmed that it was satisfactory for the
purposes set out in paragraph 88 of the Decision on the Stay of the
Enforcement of the Award. The stay of the enforcement of the Award therefore
continued.

On 9 June 2009, Rumeli and Telsim filed their Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

By letter dated 27 July 2007, the Committee confirmed that it approved the time
extension agreed by the Parties for the Applicant on Annulment to file its Reply
Memorial by 28 July 2009.

On 28 July 2009, the Applicant on Annulment filed its Reply Memorial.

28.

29.

30.

32.

33.

34.

By letter dated 8 September 2009, the Committee confirmed that it approved
the time extension agreed by the Parties for the Respondents to the Application
to file their Rejoinder on Annulment by 11 September 2009.

On 11 September 2009, the Respondents to the Application filed their Rejoinder
on Annulment.

On 12 October 2009, in view of the Applicant on Annulment’s submissions
concerning the Turkish Savings Deposit Insurance Fund relating to paragraphs
324-328 of the Award of 29 July 2008, the President of the Committee informed
the Parties that he was among the counsel for the Republic of Turkey in the
case of PSEG Global Inc. and Konya llgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited
Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5). The President
confirmed that this fact had not and would not have any influence on the
discharge of his functions in the Committee.

On 14 October 2009, the Committee took note of the Parties’ respective
communications of 12 and 13 October 2009 concerning the length of the
hearing on the Application and reserved its position as to the number of days
necessary for an oral hearing, subject to a definite decision after having
received the pleadings filed by the Parties. The Committee further concluded
that in view of the amplitude of the pleadings, the conflicting positions of the
Parties on a number of questions and the need to afford both Parties the
opportunity to fully argue their case, counsel could use two of the reserved days
for the hearing and would be able, if necessary, to continue into a third day.

On 15 October 2009, the Applicant on Annulment, in response to the letter of
the ICSID Secretariat dated 12 October 2009, confirmed that it had “no
concerns about Judge Schwebel’s position on the ad hoc Committee in relation
to the Respondent's application for Annulment of the Award.”

On 23 and 24 October 2009, a hearing on annulment was held at The Hague.

On 25 October 2009, the Applicant on Annulment provided the Committee with
the transcript from day 6 of the hearing on the merits which took place in
October 2007, at which the evidence of the experts on quantum was heard as

35.

36.

37.

38.

21
2.1.1

2.1.1.1

39.

40.

well as the Analysys PowerPoint presentation given on behalf of Rumeli and
Telsim and the Navigant PowerPoint presentation given on behalf of the RoK.

On 26 October 2009, the Respondents to the Application, pursuant to the
Committee’s request at the hearing, provided Analysys' valuation of Rumeli and
Telsim’s damages based on the assumption that no terminal value should be
accounted for, which was communicated to the Tribunal on 30 October 2007 as
per its instructions at the hearing on the merits held on 26 October 2007.

On 13 November 2009, the Respondents to the Application submitted their
request for arbitration costs which they quantified at US$504,552.97.

On 18 November 2009, the Applicant on Annulment submitted costs of
US$1,187,409.36 for pursuing its Application.

On 22 January 2010, the proceeding was declared closed in accordance with
Arbitration Rules 38(1) and 53.

APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT
Legal grounds for annulment

Applicant’s position®
Legal Framework

The Applicant on Annulment contends that Article 52 of the ICSID Convention
should be construed in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties.

The Applicant on Annulment accepts that annulment “is not a routine step to be
taken by a party that has lost a case” and that the annulment mechanism does
not permit an appeal but contends that, given that it is the only possibility open
to parties and was a crucial feature of the States’ agreement to the ICSID

system, the review must be thorough and as wide-ranging as is legitimately

The transcript of the hearing held on 22 and 23 October 2009 will be referred to as follows:
Transcript [page number]:[line number]. See Transcript 24:14-35:16; paras 62-103 of the Memorial
on Annulment and paras 12-40 of the Reply Memorial.

9

41.

42.

2.1.1.2

43.

44.

45.

2.1.1.3

46.

requested by the parties and that its central importance should not be watered
down or excluded by a fixation with finality.

In this regard, the Applicant on Annulment emphasizes that an ad hoc
committee should resist the temptation to be regarded as the guardian of the
award and to uphold it at all costs.

The Applicant on Annulment accepts that, as held in the Vivendi case,‘ an ad
hoc committee must consider “the significance of the error relative to the legal
rights of the parties.” However, it contends that an ad hoc committee only has
discretion whether to annul or not in a case where a violation is trivial and that it
is not necessary to show in addition to a breach of a requirement by the tribunal
that such breach was determinative of the claim.

Manifest excess of powers

According to the Applicant on Annulment, there are three widely recognized
principal aspects of the “manifest excess of powers” ground for annulment: lack
of jurisdiction, non-exercise of jurisdiction and failure to apply the proper law.

The Applicant submits that a deficiency in any of the requirements for
jurisdiction constitutes a manifest excess of power.

The Applicant further submits that a failure to apply any law or the application of
the wrong law can be sanctioned as a manifest excess of power and, in either
case, the violation must be manifest, in the sense of being self evident.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

According to the Applicant on Annulment, there are four key aspects of this
ground for annulment: lack of impartiality, breach of the right to be heard,
absence of deliberation and treatment of evidence and burden of proof.

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Compagnie Générale des Eaux/ Vivendi Universal
(‘Vivendi’) v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002,
6 ICSID Rep 327, para 66.

10

47.

48.

2.1.1.4

49.

50.

51.

52.

The Applicant asserts that in order for there to be a serious departure, the
violation of such a rule must have caused the Tribunal to reach a substantially
different result and that a finding of a serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure does not permit the Committee any discretion as to whether to
annul or not.

The Applicant on Annulment further alleges that the inappropriate allocation of
the burden of proof is a well settled ground for annulment as well as the rule
that ICSID tribunals must deal with all issues put before them.

Failure to state reasons

According to the Applicant on Annulment, there are four generally accepted
aspects to this ground: absence of reasons on an issue, insufficient and
inadequate reasons, contradictory reasons and failure to deal with all material
issues.

The Applicant emphasizes the importance of giving reasons both on the
grounds of legitimacy and the policy considerations of public interest, integrity
and quality of the process.

The Applicant cites the Mitchell annulment decision’ for the submission that a
failure to state reasons exists whenever the reasons are purely and simply not
given or are so inadequate that the coherence of the reasoning is seriously
affected.

The Applicant further cites the Kléckner | and MINE annulment decisions® for
the submission that the reasons must allow “the reader to follow the arbitral
tribunal’s reasoning, on facts and on law’ and enable “one to follow how the
tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion...”

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on
Annulment, 1 November 2006, available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca.

Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. Republic of Cameroon (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 2 ICSID Rep 95, para 119; and Maritime
International Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea (\CSID
Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, 22 December 1989, 4 ICSID Rep 79, para 5.09.

11

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

2.1.2

2.1.2.1

58.

Although agreeing that the correctness of the reasoning is not the subject of
review, the Applicant on Annulment asserts that the tribunal's reasoning must
be both coherent and displayed.

In this regard, the Applicant on Annulment contends that if it is necessary for an
ad hoc committee to draw inferences in order to explain a decision or say that
such reasons were implicit, then the reasons given by the tribunal were
inadequate. The Applicant on Annulment further contends that it is not
acceptable for the ad hoc committee to provide or reconstruct reasons where
the tribunal has not done so as this would allow the ad hoc committee to modify
the award and to assume the responsibility of an appeal court.

In addition, the Applicant on Annulment argues that the giving of contradictory
reasons by a tribunal amounts to a failure to state reasons.

The Applicant further argues that a failure to deal with a question which would
have altered an important finding of the tribunal amounts to a failure to state
reasons and that it is unacceptable for an ad hoc committee to address a failure
to deal with an issue by speculating that the tribunal concerned must have
considered and dismissed the argument.

Finally, the Applicant on Annulment disputes the proposition that there needs to
be a ‘real impact’ on the tribunal's final decision arising from the failure to state
reasons in order for the error to be annullable.

Respondents’ position’
Legal Framework

The Respondents to the Application contend that Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention should be construed in accordance with the Vienna Convention and
that in pursuance of the principle of the finality of awards, the annulment
proceeding should not be used as a means of re-litigating the dispute.

See paras 5-81 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment, paras 4-81 of the Rejoinder on Annulment
and Transcript 295:11-301:9.

12

59.

60.

2.1.2.2

62.

2.1.2.3

63.

64.

They further contend that annulment is an exceptional recourse intended to
sanction only the most egregious violations of basic principles and not to re-
litigate the substantive correctness of the Award; the mandate of an ad hoc
committee is to determine whether the underlying process was fundamentally
fair. In this regard, the Respondents emphasize that it is the tribunal which is
the judge of the probative value of the evidence produced and not the ad hoc
committee.

The Respondents to the Application argue that ad hoc committees have
discretion whether to annul an award upon finding one of the grounds of
annulment and that only those errors which have a material impact on the
applicant on annulment’s case in the underlying arbitration justify the annulment
of the award.

Manifest excess of powers

The Respondents contend that the alleged excess of powers should be
manifest and that this requirement applies equally if the question is one of
jurisdiction. According to the Respondents, an excess of powers is manifest if it
can be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis.

The Respondents also contend that the misapplication of the proper law is not a
ground for annulment and that a failure to apply the proper law will only lead to
an annulment if it is manifest.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

The Respondents assert that the departure must not only be serious and be
such as to deprive the party of the benefit or protection which the rule was
intended to provide but also relate to a rule which is fundamental, such as
principles of natural justice and due process.

In addition, the Respondents contend that there must be a causal link, namely
the serious departure from the fundamental rule of procedure must have had a
material impact on the applicant on annulment’s case in the underlying
arbitration.

65.

2.1.2.4

66.

67.

68.

69.

The Respondents accept that if an ad hoc committee finds a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure, it is obliged to annul the award since the
material impact of the tribunal’s decision is embodied in the definition of this
ground.

Failure to state reasons

The Respondents contend that, as held in the MINE annulment decision, the
adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review and that the
requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to
follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B, and eventually to its
conclusion, even if in the process it made an error of fact or of law.

The Respondents further contend that this ground for annulment concerns a
failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award and not a
failure to state correct or convincing reasons and that as long as the reasoning
is coherent, the award may not be annulled. In addition, the Respondents
argue that not only must the express rationale on a central point be lacking but
this central point must be necessary for the tribunal’s reasoning.

It is the contention of the Respondents that, as long as the reasons set out in
the award can be explained by the ad hoc committee or if the committee can
supply the reasons from the context of the award and the record, then the
award should not be annulled.

They further argue that there is no basis for considering that contradictory
reasons constitute a ground for annulment and that a failure to answer all
questions does not warrant automatic annulment unless it rendered the award
unintelligible.

Supra n 6.

2.1.3

2.1.3.1

70.

71.

72.

73.

The Position of the Committee
Legal Framework

In respect to the legal framework of the ICSID annulment proceedings, both
Parties agree that an annulment proceeding is not an appeal process and that
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention should be construed in accordance with the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

As noted, the Applicant on Annulment argues that, given that an annulment
proceeding is the only possibility open to parties to challenge an award and that
its institution was a crucial feature of the States’ agreement to the ICSID system,
the review must be thorough and as wide-ranging as is legitimately requested
by the parties. The Respondents to the Application, for their part, contend that
in implementation of the principle of the finality of awards, the annulment
proceeding should not be used as a means of re-litigating the dispute and that
annulment is an exceptional recourse intended to sanction only the most

egregious violations of basic principles.

The Parties are therefore in disagreement over the scope of the review to be
carried out by the Committee. The mission of the Committee, however, is
defined in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention. An ad hoc committee has the
power to annul an award on one or more of five grounds, namely, that the
tribunal was not properly constituted, that the tribunal has manifestly exceeded
its powers, that there was corruption on the part of a member of the tribunal,
that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
or that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

An ad hoc committee should not be concerned with upholding the finality of an
award or ensuring that the review of the award is as extensive as possible given
that the annulment proceeding is the only possibility open to the parties, but
should simply act within the confines of the task devolved upon it by the ICSID
Convention. It may annul the award if, but only if it deems that one or more of
the grounds for annulment set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention
obtain.

74.

75.

76.

77.

2.1.3.2

78.

The Applicant on Annulment asserts that an ad hoc committee, upon finding an
annullable error, only has discretion not to annul the award if the error is trivial.
The Respondents to the Application argue, to the contrary, that an ad hoc
committee always has discretion to annul, or not to annul, the award, regardless
of whether the error is trivial or not.

In the view of this Committee, an ad hoc committee has discretion to annul an
award upon finding one or more of the grounds of annulment. That discretion is
not fettered by the requirement that the error must not be trivial. The ad hoc
Committee in the Vivendi Annulment Decision, upon which the Applicant on
Annulment relies, does not support the proposition that an ad hoc committee
only has discretion not to annul in the case where such breaches are trivial, and
merely points out that an ad hoc committee should “guard against the

»9

annulment of awards for trivial cause.” That conclusion is sound.

The Parties are further in disagreement in relation to the issue whether it is
necessary to show, in addition to a breach of a requirement by the tribunal, that
such breach was determinative of the claim.

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention does not condition annulment of an award
on a showing that the breach of a requirement by the tribunal was determinative
of the claim. It follows, therefore, that if a ground for annulment obtains the ad
hoc committee may, at its discretion, annul the award.

Manifest excess of powers

In relation to the ground of annulment for manifest excess of powers, both
Parties agree that a failure to apply any law or the application of the wrong law
constitutes a manifest excess of powers. The misapplication of law, however,
does not constitute a manifest excess of powers. Both Parties also agree that
the violation must be manifest, in the sense of being “self evident’ and “capable
of discernment with little effort and without deeper analysis.” The Committee

Supra n 4, para 63.

2.1.3.3

79.

2.1.3.4

80.

82.

"
12

will elaborate further upon the meaning of manifest excess of powers when it
considers the question of jurisdiction.’

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

In relation to the ground of annulment for serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure, both Parties agree that the departure must be serious and
also relate to a rule which is fundamental. Both Parties further agree that an ad
hoc committee is obliged to annul the award if a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure is found.

Failure to state reasons

In relation to the ground of annulment for failure to state reasons, both Parties
agree that this ground obtains if there is a total absence of reasons. Both
Parties further agree that the reasons must be coherent and allow “the reader to
follow the arbitral tribunal’s reasoning, on facts and on law’ and enable “one to
follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its
conclusion.”"'

In addition, both Parties agree that a failure to deal with a question which would
have altered an important finding of the tribunal or would have rendered the
award unintelligible amounts to a failure to state reasons.

The Parties however do not agree on whether contradictory reasons amount to
a failure to state reasons. As the Respondents to the Application point out,
there is no basis why contradictory reasons are more objectionable than wrong
reasons which do not amount to a failure to state reasons. Accordingly, it is
not clear that contradictory reasons constitute a failure to state reasons unless
they completely cancel each other out and therefore amount to a total absence
of reasons. It is believed that such cases would be extremely rare and, as held
in the Vivendi Annulment Decision, “tribunals must often struggle to balance
conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to

Infra para 96.
Citing Kléckner and MINE, supra n 6.
Para 71 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

17

83.

84.

2.2
2.2.1

85.

18

discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons
could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such conflicting

considerations.”'*

The Parties further disagree over the power of the Committee to draw
inferences in order to explain a decision, to state that certain reasons were
implicit and to reconstruct reasons where the tribunal has not done so. In this
Committee’s view, if reasons are not stated but are evident and a logical
consequence of what is stated in an award, an ad hoc committee should be
able to so hold. Conversely, if such reasons do not necessarily follow or flow
from the award’s reasoning, an ad hoc committee should not construct reasons
in order to justify the decision of the tribunal. The Committee will elaborate
further upon its views on the failure to state reasons ground as it applies to
decisions on damages at paragraphs 136 — 151 below.

In relation to the arguments raised by the Applicant on Annulment concerning
the Tribunal’s failure to address certain of its arguments, it is the position of this
Committee that it is not necessary for a tribunal explicitly to deal with all the
arguments raised by the parties. It is important for a tribunal to summarize the
parties’ positions accurately and comprehensively and thereby take into
account and consider all of the arguments raised by the parties. If the
arguments of the parties have been correctly summarized and all the claims
have been addressed, there is no need explicitly to address each and every
one of the arguments raised in support of the particular claims, and it is in the
discretion of the tribunal not to do so.

Jurisdiction
Applicant’s position’

The Applicant on Annulment argues that Rumeli and Telsim’s investment in

KaR-Tel was aimed at furthering their worldwide fraud and, as such, was not in

Supra n 4, para 65.
Paras 104-123 of the Memorial on Annulment and paras 42-62 of the Reply Memorial, Transcript
100: 25-131:13.

18

86.

87.

88.

conformity with the laws of Kazakhstan as required by both the Turkey-
Kazakhstan BIT and the Foreign Investment Law.

Accordingly, the Applicant argues, first, that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers by finding that it had jurisdiction when it had none.

Second, the Applicant on Annulment alleges that there was a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure. The Applicant contends that it is a
fundamental principle of justice that the parties should not face different
standard of proof when putting their case before any tribunal and that, as a
result, the Tribunal’s decision to apply a different standard of proof to the RoK
than to Rumeli and Telsim was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. More specifically, the Applicant on Annulment argues that it was
obliged to prove conclusively that Rumeli and Telsim’s investments in KaR-Tel
were fraudulent whereas Rumeli and Telsim were subject to a less rigorous
standard of proof most notably in relation to the finding of collusion.

Third, the Applicant on Annulment argues that there was a failure to state
reasons. In this regard, the Applicant contends that the Tribunal did not provide
any reasons which would enable the reader to understand the basis upon which
it disregarded the clear and unrebutted evidence of fraud and found that the
investment was made in accordance with the laws of Kazakhstan or
international law. In this regard, the Applicant on Annulment asserts that it is
difficult to see what better evidence one could adduce of the illegality of Rumeli
and Telsim’s investment than the judgment of Federal District Court for
Southern District of New York in Motorola Credit Corp. v. Uzan (ex. A10), which
made specific findings that their investment in KaR-Tel for the purposes of
acquiring the License was in fact the proceeds of their fraud on Motorola. In
addition, the Applicant contends that the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory
as it rejected the evidence of the Almaty City Court’s judgment as to the
transactions by which Telsim supplied equipment to KaR-Tel and subsequently
went on to rely on the same findings as part of its approach to damages.
Indeed, the Tribunal found that one of the factors which would influence any
prospective purchaser in 2003 was the “doubts about the quality of the
equipment’ which the Applicant asserts can only be a reference to the finding of

19

2.2.2

89.

90.

91.

the expert inquiry ordered by the Almaty City Court that the equipment which
Telsim had supplied to KaR-Tel was previously used and outdated equipment.

Respondents’ position"

The Respondents contend that the Application in relation to jurisdiction should
be dismissed for the reason that the Tribunal is the judge of the probative value
of the evidence produced and that it is not the Committee’s role to control the
Tribunal’s assessment of evidence.

In addition, the Respondents contend that there was no manifest excess of
power for the following reasons :

e The Tribunal acknowledged that the condition contained in the BIT
concerning the legality of the investment was material, analyzed the
facts presented by Respondent before determining whether the
provision was violated and subsequently reached the conclusion, based
on its assessment of the probative value of the evidence presented, that
there was no such violation; and

e Even if an excess of power had occurred, it could not possibly qualify as
being manifest as there is no excess that is plain on the face of the
Award.

The Respondents also argue that there was not a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure for the following reasons:

e One cannot compare the standard of proof on the question of the
legality of the investment for purposes of jurisdiction to the standard of
proof for collusion, the latter of which can, in practice, often only be
proved by circumstantial evidence;

Paras 91-117 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment; paras 41-75 of the Rejoinder on Annulment
and Transcript 316:9-329:1.

20

92.

93.

2.2.3

94.

¢ The Applicant does not demonstrate that the Tribunal applied different
standards of proof to the Parties, nor that such a departure from the
principle of equality was substantial and could justify annulment;

e The Tribunal found collusion on the basis of extensive additional
evidence, both direct and circumstantial as set forth in paragraphs 707-
715 of the Award, and held that it was left in no doubt concerning the
finding of collusion; and

e The Tribunal’s decision would have been the same even if it had
applied a lower standard of proof as the Tribunal ultimately found that
the New York Judgment did not contain any evidence showing that the
two Motorola loans made in relation to KaR-Tel were used improperly or
for illegal purposes.

In relation to the Applicant on Annulment’s assertion that the Tribunal failed to
provide reasons, the Respondents assert that the Tribunal took into
consideration the Parties’ respective positions and supporting evidence and
provided sufficient reasons explaining why it dismissed the Rok’s allegation of
fraud and why it held that Rumeli and Telsim’s investment did not violate the
laws of Kazakhstan or international law, as shown in paragraphs 318-323 of the
Award.

The Respondents further assert in this regard that there is no contradiction in
the Tribunal’s reasoning and that the fact that a third party purchaser may
question the quality of the equipment does not constitute a finding by the
Tribunal that such equipment was purchased fraudulently or in any irregular
manner, let alone that any irregularity relating to mere equipment would be such
as to qualify the entire investment as having been made in violation of Kazakh
or international law.

The Conclusion of the Committee

At paragraphs 318-323 of the Award, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that
the evidence did not demonstrate that Rumeli and Telsim’s investment was
illegal as a matter of Kazakh law or international law.

21

95.

96.

97.

According to Rule 34 of the Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal is the judge of the
admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value.

An ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal and cannot therefore enter, within
the bounds of its limited mission, into an analysis of the probative value of the
evidence produced by the parties. An in-depth analysis of the evidence
produced by the Applicant on Annulment in relation to the allegation that Rumeli
and Telsim’s investment in KaR-Tel was aimed at furthering their worldwide
fraud lies outside the scope of the Committee’s powers. Indeed, this is why the
Award can only be annulled for a manifest excess of powers. Such lack of
jurisdiction should have been evident on the face of the award and should not
require the Committee to reconsider the evidence put before the Tribunal. An
ad hoc committee will not annul an award if the tribunal's approach is
reasonable or tenable, even if the committee might have taken a different view

on a debatable point of law."®

Where, as here, the question of jurisdiction
depends not on a question of law but rather on an appreciation of the evidence,
it would not be proper for an ad hoc committee to overturn a tribunal's treatment
of the evidence to which it was referred. The judgment of the U.S. District Court
in Motorola v. Uzan found that Motorola was fraudulently induced to make loans
to KaR-Tel and Telsim, but it does not contain a finding that Rumeli’s
investment in KaR-Tel was itself a fraud or in perpetration of a fraud or
otherwise illegal under Kazakh law. The judgment of the Almaty City Court in
Telecom Invest LLP v. Rumeli found that the prices paid by KaR-Tel for cellular
equipment and handsets were excessive, but the Court made no finding that
Telsim had defrauded KaR-Tel, merely overcharged it. Moreover, the judgment
concerned the supply of goods after the investment had been made, a matter
which could not affect the legality of the investment itself.

The Arbitral Tribunal did not create a different standard of proof when it
concluded that there was “no conclusive evidence that Claimants defrauded
KaR-Tel by causing it to enter into transactions with Telsim at excessive prices.”

Kléckner supra n 6, 115; Case concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v.
Senegal) |CJ Rep 1991, 53, 92 ILR 30 para 47; Government of Sudan v. Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (the “Abyei Arbiration”), PCA, 22 July 2009, paras 508, 510.

22

98.

99.

Rather, the Tribunal was merely expressing its failure to be convinced by the
evidence put before it. On a fair reading of paragraphs 320-322 of the Award,
the Tribunal is simply rejecting Kazakhstan’s case of fraud on the evidence
adduced by it. Thus, at paragraph 320, it rejects the general allegation of fraud,
explaining:

After careful examination of Respondent's submissions, the Arbitral
Tribunal has reached the conclusion that Respondent did not prove that
Claimants’ investment would have been fraudulent or would have violated
any laws or regulations of Kazakhstan.

It is clear, as shown in paragraphs 167-176 and 228-235 of the Award, that the
Tribunal took into account and considered the Parties’ positions concerning the
alleged illegality of Rumeli and Telsim’s investment in KaR-Tel. The Tribunal
recorded in its Award the detailed submissions of Kazakhstan on this issue,
including its reliance on the judgment of the Federal District Court in New York
and the allegation about the purchase of equipment at inflated prices. It then
proceeded in paragraphs 318-323 to note that it had carefully examined the
Rok’s position in this regard before considering the evidence before it (most
notably the District Court’s judgment) and arriving at the conclusions that “the
New York judgment does not bring any evidence that the two Motorola loans
made in relation to KaR-Tel were used improperly or for illegal purposes” and
that the “record does not contain conclusive evidence that Claimants defrauded
KaR-Tel by causing it to enter into transactions with Telsim at excessive prices.”
Thus, there was no failure to provide reasons in this regard, and the Applicant's
arguments to the contrary amount to an attempt to appeal on questions of
evidence which the Tribunal was entitled to, and did, determine. This does not
amount to a ground for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.

Applying the holding in the MINE Annulment decision, the Award enables the
reader to follow how the Tribunal proceeded from the standard that
“investments in the host State will only be excluded from the protection of the
treaty if they have been made in breach of the fundamental legal principles of
the host country’ (point A) to consider the Rok’s position and evidence
produced in relation to the alleged illegality of Rumeli and Telsim’s investment

23

2.3
2.3.1

100.

101.

2.3.2

102.

(point B) to its conclusion that “Respondent’s allegation that Claimants
investment was fraudulent does not find any foundation in the record.”
Accordingly, the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its decision that Rumeli
and Telsim’s investment did not violate international law or the laws of
Kazakhstan.

Collusion

Applicant’s position””

The Applicant argues that the Tribunal did not state the reasons why it rejected
crucial pieces of documentary and oral evidence (notably the letter of 21
February 2002 and the testimony of Mr. Podporin and Mr. Agilonu) and made a
finding in relation to collusion which was unsupported and contrary to such
evidence. In this regard, the Applicant on Annulment emphasizes that the
finding of collusion had a significant effect on the amount of damages awarded
as it formed the sole link between the cancellation of the Investment Contract
and the subsequent proceedings and the finding of an expropriation.

The Applicant further argues that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule
of procedure when it failed to determine the case based upon the evidence
before it.

Respondents’ position”®

The Respondents argue that the Application in relation to the Tribunal’s finding
of collusion should be rejected for the following reasons:

. The Applicant on Annulment is trying to appeal the factual determination
of the Tribunal and its assessment of the evidence in relation to its
finding of collusion;

See paras 124-137 of the Memorial on Annulment; paras 63-84 of the Reply Memorial and
Transcript 131:14-145:21.

See paras 118-130 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment, paras 77-99 of the Rejoinder on
Annulment and Transcript 329:7-344:5.

24

2.3.3

103.

. The Tribunal fulfilled its obligation to inform the Parties of the factual
and legal basis that led it to its decision in relation to collusion as shown
in paragraphs 707-708 of the Award;

. The finding of collusion was established by further direct and
circumstantial evidence as set forth in paragraphs 709-715;

. Even though the Award does not make explicit reference in this finding
to specific exhibits, such references can be found elsewhere in the
Award and in any event, the absence of references is not a ground for
annulment as the Tribunal had already reviewed the evidence before it
and already summarized it in an earlier section of the Award; and

. The finding of collusion did not have a material impact on the decision
of the Tribunal. Even if the Tribunal had found that there was no
collusion, the Tribunal would still have found that there was an
expropriation as the findings were decided independently of each other.
In addition, the Tribunal also held Respondent liable for breach of its
obligation of fair and equitable treatment which prompted full
compensation irrespective of the holding of expropriation. Accordingly,
the same compensation would have been awarded to Rumeli and
Telsim irrespective of the finding of collusion and therefore it did not
have a material impact on the Tribunal’s decision.

The Conclusion of the Committee

The Tribunal found that the decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Court of
29 July 2003 affirming compulsory redemption of Rumeli and Telsim’s shares in
KaR-Tel amounted to a taking of those shares, not for the benefit of the State
but for the benefit of a private Kazakh investor, Telecom Invest. The Tribunal
held that it was relevant that the taking had been instigated by the decision of
the State, acting through its Investment Committee, to terminate the Investment
Contract. It further held that “the court process which resulted in the
expropriation of Claimants’ shares was brought about through improper
collusion between the State, acting through the Investment Committee and
Telecom Invest” (Award, paragraph 707). At the same time, the Tribunal found

25

104.

itself unable to conclude on the basis of the evidence that, as Rumeli and
Telsim claimed, “... there was a wider conspiracy involving the President [of
Kazakhstan], or for his direct or indirect benefit’ (at paragraph 715).

As previously pointed out, and pursuant to Rule 34 of the Arbitration Rules, the
arbitral tribunal is the judge of the probative evidence put before it. The
Committee is neither empowered nor competent to conduct a re-evaluation of
the significance of the factual evidence weighed by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
gave detailed consideration to the significance of the sequence of events
surrounding the Investment Committee’s decision to terminate the Investment
Contract (Award, paragraphs 113-120). The purpose of the reasons
requirement under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is not to require the
tribunal to explain its consideration and treatment of each piece of evidence
adduced by either party, surely an excessive burden for any court or tribunal.
Rather, it is to enable the reader (and specifically the parties) to see the
reasons upon which the award itself is based. In the case of the finding of
collusion, the Tribunal filled this duty. The Tribunal did not therefore seriously
depart from a fundamental rule of procedure when it decided, based on its
assessment of the evidence before it, that there was collusion between the
Investment Committee on the one hand and Telecom Invest and _ its
shareholders on the other.

Furthermore, there was no failure to state reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal’s
conclusion that there was collusion between the Investment Committee on the
one hand and Telecom Invest and its shareholders on the other. Applying the
holding in the MINE Annulment Decision, the Tribunal noted at paragraph 707
of the Award that the decision to terminate the Investment Contract was taken
by the State on 25 March 2002 and that the following day Telecom Invest sent
its notice to KaR-Tel and to Rumeli and Telsim calling for an Extraordinary
General Meeting of shareholders of KaR-Tel to consider the harm to KaR-Tel
and the compulsory redemption of Rumeli and Telsim’s shares (point A). The
Tribunal subsequently noted that, as a result, the notice was sent without the
decision of the Investment Committee having been communicated to KaR-Tel
(point B) before concluding that, in its judgment, Telecom Invest and its
shareholders were privy to the decision and that KaR-Tel and Rumeli and

26

106.

2.4
2.4.1

107.

108.

109.

Telsim were not, and that this was the result of collusion between the
Investment Committee on the one hand and Telecom Invest and _ its
shareholders on the other.

In any event, the issue of collusion did not determine the outcome of the case.
As discussed below, the Tribunal found treaty breaches including a finding of
expropriation which gave rise to Rumeli and Telsim’s right to be awarded
damages. The Tribunal made a finding of collusion based on its appreciation of
the evidence before it, an appreciation that the Committee cannot challenge.

Causation

Applicant’s position’?

The Applicant, first, contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
by failing to address the issue of causation and by failing to apply international
law in the form of the concept of causation to its findings of fact and that this
was highly material to the outcome of the arbitration since if there was no
causation, no compensation could have been awarded.

The Applicant contends, second, that the Tribunal departed seriously from the
fundamental principle that it was required to determine all questions before it by
failing to determine the issues in relation to causation raised by the RoK.

The Applicant contends, third, that the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for
rejecting its arguments on causation, most notably its argument that there was
no causal link between the cancellation of the Investment Contract and the
court decision because the court proceedings resulted from the independent
intervening act of Telecom Invest and its argument that the cancellation of the
Investment Contract caused Rumeli and Telsim no loss because it was
substantively justified. In this regard, the Applicant asserts that if its arguments
were implicitly rejected, there was a total absence of reasons for such a
rejection and, if they were not implicitly rejected, there was a serious failure to
address a crucial question before the Tribunal.

Paras 138-210 of the Memorial on Annulment, paras 85-105 of the Reply and Transcript 145:21-
191:17.

27

110.

2.4.2

111.

The Applicant further argues that the Tribunal failed to explain, and there is no
way to follow how it arrived at, the conclusion that either the procedurally wrong
termination of the Investment Contract or the lack of transparency of the Task
Force was the proximate cause of Rumeli and Telsim’s loss of their
shareholding in KaR-Tel. The Applicant’s essential point on causation is that
the Tribunal failed to make a finding that Kazakhstan’s breaches of treaty
caused Rumeli and Telsim’s loss and that this omission constitutes a failure to
provide reasons. The Applicant focuses its attention on paragraphs 745-751 of
the Award, under the heading “Causation.” It points out that this section merely
records the Parties’ arguments on causation, but fails to state any conclusion of
the Tribunal on those arguments.

Respondents’ position”

The Respondents argue that the application for annulment in relation to the
Tribunal’s finding on causation should be rejected for the following reasons:

. There was no excess of power let alone a manifest excess of power
since the Tribunal applied international law and heavily relied on
international law to determine the damages, and particularly to attribute
these damages to the State as shown at paragraphs 785-793 of the
Award;

. The Tribunal did determine the issue of causation raised by
Respondents. In relation to the causal link between the wrongful
termination of the Investment Contract and the damages, the Tribunal,
after finding that the RoK had breached the BIT and summarizing the
Parties’ arguments on causation (paragraphs 745-751), found that there
was a causal link between the BIT breach and the damages as it was
the BIT breach, namely the wrongful termination of the Investment
Contract, which ultimately led to the expropriation of Rumeli and
Telsim’s investment (paragraphs 707-708 and 790-797 of the Award).

Paras 131-158 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment, paras 101-114 of the Rejoinder and
Transcript 344:6-357:23.

28

2.4.3

112.

113.

In relation to the causal link between the lack of transparency of the
Task Force and damages, the Tribunal found that had the Working
Group’s procedure been fair, it would not have confirmed the validity of
the termination of the Investment Contract and it was the cancellation of
the Investment Contract that led to the expropriation of the investment
(paragraphs 707-708 of Award);

. The Applicant on Annulment challenges the Tribunal’s application of the
law and/or the correctness of its decision when it asserts that the
Investment Contract would have in any event been terminated following
a suspension. Moreover, it was not shown that Rumeli and Telsim were
ultimately able to cure any default under the Investment Contract; and

. Even if the challenge on this ground was well founded, it would not
justify annulment for failure to meet the material impact test. The
Tribunal found that the RoK committed multiple breaches (wrongful
termination of the Investment Contract, finding of an expropriation and
inadequate compensation and breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard by virtue of the lack of transparency and due
process of the Working Group) and that the damages sustained by
Rumeli and Telsim were compensable pursuant to any of these
breaches.

The Conclusion of the Committee

If the Tribunal had failed to consider in its Award the legal and factual question
of whether the breaches of treaty committed by the RoK had caused the loss of
Rumeli and Telsim’s shares, that might well constitute a failure to give reasons
within the meaning of the Convention. But a fair reading of the Award as a
whole demonstrates that this is not so. On the contrary, the Tribunal
adequately considered both the legal and factual issues related to causation.

The Tribunal summarized the Parties’ positions in relation to causation in
paragraphs 745-75 of the Award. The Tribunal therefore took into account and
considered the arguments raised by both Parties including the Rok’s arguments
that the cancellation of the Investment Contract caused no loss to Rumeli and

29

114.

115.

24

Telsim because it was substantively justified and its argument that there was no
causal link between the cancellation of the Investment Contract and the Kazakh
court decision because the court proceedings resulted from the independent
intervening act of Telecom Invest.

When turning to its own decision on causation in Section IV of the Award, the
Tribunal records that the obligation of a State for the commission of an act
engaging its international responsibility includes, under Article 31°' of the
International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility, “full reparation
for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act’ (Award, paragraph 790,
emphasis supplied). It is clear from the ILC Commentary to this article that,
while a sufficient causal link is a necessary condition for reparation, this is not to
be reduced to any particular verbal formula, as the particular requirements of
causation may differ, depending on the type of obligation breached and the
circumstances of the case.”

The Tribunal then proceeds to find that Rumeli and Telsim’s loss is the
expropriation of their shares in KaR-Tel (Award, paragraph 793). The factual
finding that Rok’s actions caused the expropriation of Rumeli and Telsim’s
shares is contained in earlier sections of the Award dealing with respective
breaches of treaty. The Tribunal found breach of the treaty standard of fair and
equitable treatment by reason of the decision of the Investment Committee to
terminate, rather than to suspend, the Investment Contract, and because of the
subsequent decision of the Working Group to ratify the Investment Committee's
decision (Award, paragraphs 613-618). Then, when addressing the claim of
expropriation, the Tribunal found that “the court process which culminated in the
expropriation was instigated by the decision of the State, acting through the
Investment Committee, to terminate the Investment Contract’ (paragraph 707).
What is “instigated” by the decision of the State is caused by the decision of the
State. In this way, the Tribunal traced the sequence of causal events from the

Mis-cited in the Award as Article 32.

i Law Ci ission ‘l ibilities of States for i Wrongful Acts: Text of
the Draft Articles with Commentaries thereto’ (Crawford, Special Rapporteur) in Report of the
International Law Commission of its Fifty-third Session (2001), Official Records of the General
Assembly Fifty-sixth Session, Supp No 10, UN Doc A/56/10, 59, 92-3.

30

 

116.

117.

23

original decision of the Investment Committee to the final decision of the
Supreme Court, which resulted in the expropriation of the shares.

Moreover, the decision of the Supreme Court was held by the Tribunal to
constitute a breach of the treaty’s protection against expropriation, because the
compensation awarded by the Court did not meet the treaty requirement of
adequate compensation. It is irrelevant for this purpose that the Tribunal found
(as it did at paragraph 619) that there had been no denial of justice in the
Court's procedure such as to amount to a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard by the Court. The treaty protection from expropriation
supplies an independent standard which must also be met, whether or not the
decision was the result of a fair procedure or was in compliance with national
law. Indeed, the authorities relied upon by the Applicant in these annulment
proceedings expressly support the proposition that the taking of property by a
court may amount to expropriation by the State and that this may in itself
amount to an international wrong.”

The Tribunal furthermore relied in its Award (paragraph 615) upon the
admission of breach of the Investment Contract made by Kazakhstan in two
letters sent to the Ministry of Industry and Trade by the Ministry of Finance and
the Ministry of the Economy and Budget on 14 May 2003. These letters
support the Tribunal’s view (at paragraph 615) and show Kazakhstan's
awareness that its wrongful termination would result in pursuit of an arbitral
claim. They thus underscore the Tribunal's finding that the ultimate loss of the
shares resulted from a chain of causation, commencing with the wrongful
decision of the Investment Committee to terminate the Investment Contract.

Oil Field of Texas Inc v Iran (1986) 12 lran-USCTR 308, para 42; Decision No 136 of Franco-ltalian
Claims Commission (1952) XIII UNRIAA 389, 438.

31

2.5

2.5.1

118.

119.

120.

Damages

The Parties’ Submissions

(1) Applicant’s submissions

The Applicant's principal submission in its Application to annul the Award by
reason of its treatment of damages was that the Tribunal’s decision to award
damages of $125 million was inexplicable, being based on inconsistent, illogical
or nonexistent reasons. The Applicant contended that it was impossible to
follow the progression of the Tribunal’s reasoning “from Point A to Point B and
eventually’ to its figure of $125 million.* Although the Applicant submitted in its
Memorial that a number of the other grounds of annulment in Article 52(1) of the
ICSID Convention were satisfied, its submissions centered on the allegation
that the Tribunal failed to adequately state the reasons for its decision on the
quantum of damages (Article 52(1)(e)).

The Applicant contended that the Tribunal’s reasons had to be coherent”® and
that it was inappropriate for the Committee to infer or construe the Tribunal’s

reasons, let alone reconstruct them.

The Applicant stressed the fragile financial position of KaR-Tel in April 2002.76
Navigant’s opinion was that KaR-Tel was insolvent by that stage. The Applicant
then argued that the improvement in KaR-Tel’s fortunes that followed the
installation of Mr. Yerimbetov as general manager would not have occurred if
Rumeli and Telsim had remained involved in the company and_ that
consequently, Rumeli and Telsim were not entitled to seek the benefit of that
improvement in the company’s fortunes. The Applicant submitted that on these
two preliminary factual issues — whether the company was insolvent at April
2002 and the relevance of the change in fortunes between then and 2004 — the

Memorial on Annulment, para 261, citing M/NE supra n 6, para 5.09.

Reply Memorial, para 30, citing Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (UAE) (ICSID
Case No ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para 23, available at
http://ita.law.uvic.ca.

Transcript 192-195.

32

121.

122.

123.

124.

Tribunal had expressly preferred the evidence of the Applicant's expert,
Navigant, referring to paragraphs 806 and 808 of the Award respectively.

The Applicant submitted that there had been a nine-step reasoning process by
which the Tribunal reached its decision.” On the basis of this analysis, the
Applicant sought to demonstrate that the Tribunal’s reasoning was inconsistent
with the evidential findings referred to above. Then it sought to show that the
reasons given by the Tribunal were so erroneous, illogical, inconsistent and
insufficient that it was actually impossible to reconstruct a logical reasoning
process by which the Tribunal reached the figure of $125 million.

Step One was to identify the overall approach to the calculation of damages,
which is to give Rumeli and Telsim back the value of their shares at the time
that the expropriation took place.” The Applicant submitted that this required
the application of a method of valuation, not merely the choice of a figure.”

Step Two was to identify the date of the valuation. The Tribunal chose 30
October 2003 (Award, paragraph 796). The Applicant submitted that it should
not have mattered because the Tribunal had accepted that Rumeli and Telsim
were not entitled to the benefits accruing after April 2002.°°

Steps Three and Four were to determine the method of valuation. The
Applicant argued that the discounted cashflow (“DCF”) method should not have
been adopted.*’ The Applicant recalled the fact that the Tribunal preferred
Navigant’s evidence on the matters in dispute, and criticised the Tribunal’s
decision to adopt the DCF approach. The Applicant suggested that, on
Navigant’s evidence and pursuant to the World Bank Guidelines, % the
liquidation value approach had to be adopted; the DCF approach, it submitted,
was inappropriate for a financially-distressed company such as KaR-Tel.** The

Transcript 206.

Memorial on Annulment, para 244.

Transcript 207: 7-10.

Memorial on Annulment, para 246; Transcript 207:24 — 208:2.

Transcript 209:10-11.

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ‘Report to the Development Committee
and Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment’ (1992) 31 ILM 1366.

Memorial on Annulment, para 248; Transcript 214-216.

33

125.

126.

127.

Applicant also emphasised that the DCF approach required an actual
calculation, not a “shot in the dark.”°4

The Applicant submitted that Step Five should have been to follow Navigant's
evidence and adopt the liquidation value approach. Instead, the Tribunal
adopted the DCF approach, despite describing its shortcomings. The Applicant
submitted that this approach was “wholly unreasoned,” and “contradictory with
the earlier findings which indicate that liquidation value is appropriate.”*> The
Applicant criticised the Tribunal’s reference in paragraph 810 of the Award to
the value of the Licence, stressing that the Tribunal’s task was to assign a value
to the shares, not the Licence.

The Applicant submitted that the Tribunal never asked the Applicant or its
expert to undertake a DCF analysis, and the Tribunal did not do so itself.
Instead, at Step Six, the Applicant criticised the Tribunal’s decision to start with
the Analysys figure, despite its flaws, and “reduce it to come up with a damages
award.”*® The Applicant suggested that when a tribunal adopted a DCF
analysis, it was required to provide full reasons for its decision to reject or adopt
certain factors. The Applicant submitted that the Tribunal’s analysis was
arbitrary and inconsistent with its earlier reasoning. It alleged that the Tribunal’s
analysis was wrong, and that it failed to explain why it rejected the approach
advocated by Navigant.

The Applicant contended that the Award at this point is
“unreasoned...incoherent and...wholly arbitrary” and that the Tribunal was not
entitled to adopt a “bad and flawed valuation” before “knocking off some of the
figures."*” The Applicant argued that the burden of proof on Rumeli and Telsim
required them to establish both the right to, and the quantum of, the damages,
and that a discretionary analysis by the Tribunal was inconsistent with this
obligation notwithstanding the latitude it admitted the Tribunal enjoyed. It

Transcript 218/19.

Transcript 232:15-17.

Memorial on Annulment, para 251; Transcript 237:15.
Transcript 248:1-2; 249:8-10.

Memorial on Annulment paras 219 — 220.

34

128.

129.

130.

4
42

contended that Rumeli and Telsim had a duty to calculate an accurate damages
figure, and that because Analysys’ calculation was obviously flawed, the
Tribunal was obliged to award zero damages.*°

At Step Seven, the Tribunal compared its figure with the price paid by
VimpelCom in August 2004 (paragraph 813 of the Award). The Applicant
submitted that this figure was irrelevant, given the changes that had occurred
since Rumeli and Telsim sold their shares in KaR-Tel, and that the Tribunal
failed to explain why it was taken into consideration. It submitted that the true
relevance of the price was to illustrate the flaws in Analysys’ valuation.

Step Eight was the calculation of the figure of $125 million. The Applicant
contended that if that figure was reached as the product of a DCF analysis, it
was not possible to see how the figure was reached. No inputs were given by
the Tribunal, and the methodology was not described. Rather than being
“extremely succinct,” the Applicant contended that the reasons were
nonexistent® and that tribunals are obliged to properly reason their awards to
avoid deciding ex aequo et bono. The Applicant suggested that, in fact, the
Tribunal may have reached this figure by analysing the value of the licence
instead of the shares, noting that the licence could not be assigned, although
the shares could be sold. The Applicant contended that the Tribunal’s finding
that the value of the licence was “far in excess of its book value” was
“unreasoned.”"'

Step Nine was to consider the relevance of the negotiations with Telecom
Invest and the valuations before the Presidium. The Applicant contended that
the Tribunal’s finding that Telecom Invest was inexperienced in the mobile
communications market was contradictory and that the Tribunal failed to take
proper account of these factors.

Memorial on Annulment para 235; Reply Memorial para 112.

Citing MTD Equity Sdn Bhd and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/7),
Decision on Annulment, 21 March 2007, 13 ICSID Rep 500, para 106.

Transcript 268:4.

Memorial on Annulment paras 253 — 259.

35

131.

132.

134.

43
44

46
47

Finally, the Applicant disagreed that the failure to state reasons must have
caused the Tribunal to reach a substantially different result to justify annulment.

(2) Respondents’ submissions

The Respondents contended that the Award was perfectly easy to follow and
was not lacking in reasons, and that the Applicant's complaints related
exclusively to the correctness of the Award. They contended that reasons did
not need to be “correct or convincing.”*® All this required in the context of a
damages calculation, in the Respondents’ submission, was “reference to the

Tribunal’s estimation.”“*

The Respondents agreed that the Tribunal began by identifying the task, which
was to determine the value of the expropriated investment. It then decided to
adopt the DCF approach as a starting point, because this would have been
used as a starting point in discussions between a willing buyer and a willing
seller, and because it reflected the significance of the licence asset.*®

In the Respondents’ submission, the Tribunal then identified the limitations of
the DCF method in the circumstances: the lack of historical data; KaR-Tel’s
balance sheet insolvency; the prospect that the company’s fortunes would not
improve unless new management was introduced, and so on.*® It then chose
Analysys’ figure as a starting point and exercised its discretion to approximate a
figure based on the evidence, which the Respondents contended is inherent in
such an exercise.” A tribunal is not obliged, in the Respondents’ submission,
to choose a figure that corresponds exactly with the amount requested by a
claimant.

Citing Vivendi supra n 4, para 64.

Counter-Memorial para 189, citing Wena Hotels Ltd v. Arab Republic of Egypt (\CSID Case No.
ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, 6 ICSID Rep 129, para 91.
Counter-Memorial para 179, citing Award paras 811 -813; Transcript 363-365, 370-371.
Counter-Memorial para 180; Transcript 373-375.

Transcript 375:17-21.

36

2.5.2

136.

137.

48
49

The Respondents referred to paragraph 813 of the Award, where the Tribunal
identified a starting point of $210 million. At paragraph 814, the Tribunal
adopted a figure of $125 million. The Respondents submitted that the Tribunal
moved from the first to the second figure after taking into account all the
circumstances referred to above.“® This was a similar approach to that
approved on annulment in REPSOL v. Ecuador’®. In this light, the Respondents
submitted, it was easy for a reader to follow the progression of the Tribunal’s
reasoning.

The Analysis of the Committee

(1) The Review of Reasons on Annulment

The proper approach which an ad hoc committee ought to take when
considering an application to annul an award on the ground that it “has failed to
state the reasons on which it is based” (Art 52(1)(e) ICSID Convention) requires
special consideration in the context of the quantification of damages.

The general approach which should guide the review of an award on this
ground was well stated by the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi:

. it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article
52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all of part
of an award, not the failure to state correct or convincing
reasons...Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal can be followed
and relate to the issues that were before the tribunal, their correctness is
beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be
stated succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions differ in their
modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a degree of
discretion as to the way in which they express their reasoning....

Counter-Memorial para 183; Transcript 384:17-18.

Repsol YPF Ecuador v. Empresa Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/10), Decision on Annulment, 8 January 2007, para 84, available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca.
Supra n 4, paras 64 — 65.

37

138.

It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and
indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might. However,
tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and an
ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when
what is actually expressed in a tribunal's reasons could more truly be said
to be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.

Moreover, an ad hoc committee is entitled itself to seek to understand the
reasons for the award from the record before the tribunal. Indeed, in
appropriate cases, it should do so. As the ad hoc Committee held in Soufraki:*'

It is also possible that a tribunal may give reasons for its award without
elaborating the factual or legal bases of such reasons, so long as those
reasons in fact make it possible reasonably to connect the facts or law of
the case to the conclusions reached in the award, annulment may
appropriately be avoided.

Such an approach echoes the suggestion made by Professor Reisman in his
influential monograph, Systems of Control in International Adjudication and
Arbitration: Breakdown and Repair,®” that ad hoc committees should:

. actively seek to get inside the skin of the tribunal whose award is
under review and to track its explicit and implicit ratiocination before
concluding that its reasoning is insufficient.

In MINE v Guinea, the ad hoc Committee did annul the portion of the Award
relating to damages.®* It found that the Tribunal had contradicted itself by
rejecting both of the damages calculations put forward by the claimants, and
adopting, without explanation, one of its own which was contrary to the reality of
the situation. This portion of the Decision on Annulment in MINE has not

Supra n 25, para 128.
(Duke UP, Durham, 1992), 95.
Supra n 6, paras 6.105 — 6.108.

38

140.

56
57

escaped critical comment. As Professor Schreuer observes in_ his
Commentary:*

The ad hoc Committee’s arguments on this point are not convincing and
have been criticized by several commentators. The calculation of lost
profits always has a speculative element. What the Tribunal had done
was to dismiss two theories that had appeared to it as too speculative and
to adopt another method that seemed more realistic. The speculative
character of damages theories in the calculation of lost profits is a matter
of degree. To adopt a theory that is speculative but less so than other
ones is not inherently contradictory. That a method for the calculation of
damages is “contrary to what really happened” is inherent in a situation of
lost profits.

In the more recent Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Azurix,® the applicant
had sought annulment of the award inter alia on the basis that it failed to state
the reasons upon which the Tribunal had arrived at its damages figure. The
Committee rejected this ground of annulment. The Tribunal had stated that it
was applying a fair market value test. It then accepted the claimant’s proposed
method of valuation. But it proceeded to discount the figures submitted by the
claimant so as to arrive at its final figure. In so doing, it took into account its
estimation of what an independent and well-informed third party would have
been prepared to pay for the concession at the relevant date, and also the
possibility that such a third party might well have developed the business
significantly. The ad hoc Committee found that the Tribunal balanced these
competing considerations.®* Its resulting figure “was an approximation that the
Tribunal considered to be fair in all the circumstances.’ The ad hoc
Committee held that there was no insufficiency in the Tribunal’s reasoning in
this regard.

Schreuer et al The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2 ed, 2009) 1012-3 (citations omitted).
Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Annulment, 1
September 2009, paras 341 — 366, available at http://icsid.worldbank.org.

Ibid, para 350.

Ibid, para 351.

39

141.

142.

58

(2) The Quantification of Damages

It is necessary at this stage to make some general observations about the
nature of the adjudicatory task confronting an arbitral tribunal when it is
determining the quantum of damages to award a claimant which has succeeded
on liability. The general test of “full reparation,” found in Article 31 of the ILC
Draft Articles, can be simply stated. It is that classically formulated by the

Permanent Court of International Justice in the Chorzéw Factory Case, namely:
58

...feparation must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of
the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability,
have existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if
this is not possible, payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a
restitution in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for loss
sustained which would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in
place of it - such are the principles which should serve to determine the
amount of compensation due for an act contrary to international law.

It is quite another thing, however, to translate that test into actuality in the
circumstances of a particular case. That is because the valuation of
expropriated shares in a company necessarily involves a consideration of the
future profitability of the business, a matter which is inherently uncertain. As
Whiteman observed:

However, the absolute certainty of prospective profits can scarcely ever
be established in as much as in all cases they are to be realized in futuro.
It is the worth of the expectation of future profits, appropriately discounted,
that is to be considered in cases where an award for the loss of
prospective profits is proper.

Chorzow Factory Case (Germany v Poland) (Merits) (1928) PClJ Rep Ser A No 17, 47.
Whiteman, Damages in International Law (1943) Vol Ill, 1872.

40

143.

144,

145.

146.

60

The problem of arriving at an appropriate valuation faced by an arbitral tribunal
determining the amount of damages to be awarded for the expropriation of
shares in a business is, in this respect, substantially similar to that faced by any
court or tribunal, national or international.

The fact that the exercise is inherently uncertain is not a reason for the tribunal
to decline to award damages. This point was made by Sole Arbitrator Cavin in
the Sapphire arbitration, when determining the amount of damages to be
awarded to the plaintiff for loss of profits following the expropriation of an oil
concession. He stated:®°

It is not necessary to prove the exact damage suffered in order to award
damages. On the contrary, when such proof is impossible, particularly as
a result of the behaviour of the author of the damage, it is enough for the
judge to be able to admit with sufficient probability the existence and
extent of the damage.

So, too in the Pyramids ICSID arbitration,®' the Tribunal, in assessing the
damages attributable to the loss of the claimants’ opportunity to make a
commercial success of the project, held that:

. it is well settled that the fact that damages cannot be assessed with
certainty is no reason not to award damages when a loss has been
incurred.

A similar approach is also frequently adopted by national courts.

For this reason, tribunals are generally allowed a considerable measure of
discretion in determining issues of quantum. Thus, in Wena Hotels, the ad hoc
Committee held:®

Sapphire International Petroleums Ltd v National Iranian Oil Co (Award) (1963) 35 ILR 136, 187-8.
Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt (\CSID Case No. ARB/84/3),
Award, 20 May 1992, 3 ICSID Rep 189, para 215.

See, e.g. Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd (1991) 174 CLR 64, 83 (HCA).

Supra n 42, para 91.

4

147.

148.

65
66
67

With respect to determination of the quantum of damages awarded, it
may be recalled that the notion of “prompt, adequate and effective
compensation” confers to the Tribunal a certain margin of discretion,
within which, by its nature, few reasons more than a reference to the
Tribunal’s estimation can be given, together with statements on the
relevance and the evaluation of the supporting evidence.

This is not a matter to be resolved simply on the basis of the burden of proof.
To be sure, the tribunal must be satisfied that the claimant has suffered some
damage under the relevant head as a result of the respondent's breach.™ But
once it is satisfied of this, the determination of the precise amount of this
damage is a matter for the tribunal's informed estimation in the light of all the
evidence available to it. This is widely accepted in municipal law.® The point
was well put by Brennan J:

Although the issue of a loss caused by the defendant’s conduct must be
established on the balance of probabilities, hypotheses and possibilities
the fulfilment of which cannot be proved must be evaluated to determine
the amount or value of the loss suffered. Proof on the balance of
probabilities has no part to play in the evaluation of such hypotheses or
possibilities: evaluation is a matter of informed estimation.

A similar distinction between the fact of loss (which it is for the claimant to prove)
and the amount of loss (which it is for the tribunal to determine) has been
accepted in the practice of international courts and tribunals. Thus, in Chorzow
Factory itself, the Permanent Court found that the two German companies had
suffered some damage as a result of the illegal act of the Polish Government in
dispossessing them of the Factory at Chorzow.®” It then took up itself the task
of determining the quantum of that damage, by appointing its own experts to

Thus, for example, the PClJ rejected a claim for damages resulting from third party competition
with the Bayersiche factories as insufficiently proved in Chorzéw Factory supra n 58,

Gotanda ‘Recovering Lost Profits in International Disputes’ (2004-5) 36 Georgetown JIL 61, 101.
Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1992-4) 179 CLR 332, 368 (HCA).

Supra n 58, 46.

42

149.

150.

conduct an enquiry.®° In Vivendi v Argentina the Tribunal drew the distinction
between fact of loss and its amount when it observed: ?

[C]ompensation for lost profits is generally awarded only where future
profitability can be established (the fact of profitability as opposed to the
amount) with some level of certainty.

In arriving at its own estimation of the extent of the claimant's loss, an arbitral
tribunal has available to it a number of different bases of valuation. But it is
worth emphasising that valuation methodologies are not mutually exclusive.
They may well be complementary tools. As the United States Supreme Court
recently observed:””

Valuation is not a matter of mathematics....Rather, the calculation of true
market value is an applied science, even a craft. Most appraisers
estimate market value by employing not one methodology but a
combination. These various methods generate a range of possible market
values which the appraiser uses to derive what he considers to be an
accurate estimate of market value, based on careful scrutiny of all the
data available.

In the case of expropriation, adequate compensation will normally be
determined by reference to the fair market value of the taken asset immediately
before the time at which the taking occurred.”’ Although there are a number of
more specific techniques which a tribunal may employ to determine such value,
the World Bank Guidelines themselves provide that they do not imply the
exclusive validity of a single standard for the fairness by which compensation is
to be determined.” The overriding criterion is simply:”°

Ibid, 51 and Order (Expert Enquiry) (1928) PClJ Ser A No 17, 99-103.

Companhia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Compagnie Générale des Eaux/ Vivendi Universal
(‘Vivendi’) v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No ARB/97/3), Second Award, 20 August 2007, para
8.3.3 (emphasis in original). See also Ripinsky and Williams Damages in International Investment
Law (BIICL, 2008) 165-6.

CSX Transport Inc v Georgia State Board of Education 552 US 9, 128 S Ct 467 (2007), 472.

World Bank Guidelines supra n 32, IV 3.

Ibid IV 6.

Ibid IV 5.

43

..-an amount that a willing buyer would normally pay to a willing seller
after taking into account the nature of the investment, the circumstances
in which it would operate in the future and its specific characteristics,
including the period in which it has been in existence, the proportion of
tangible assets in the total investment and other relevant factors pertinent
to the specific circumstances of each case.

151. Nor is a court or tribunal required to shut its eyes to events subsequent to the
date of injury, if these shed light in more concrete terms on the value applicable
at the date of injury or validate the reasonableness of a valuation made at that
date.”

2.5.3 The Evidence on Damages before the Tribunal

(1) Introduction

152. With these considerations in mind, it is necessary for the Committee to assess
carefully the approach and reasoning of the Tribunal in determining the
quantum of damages, in the light of all of the evidence available to the Tribunal
relevant to the issue.

153. For this reason, the Committee requested at the oral hearing that the Parties
provide it with a complete record of all evidence before the Tribunal in the
arbitral proceedings relating to the quantum.” To the extent that this material
had not already been exhibited in the annulment record, this was provided by
the Parties under cover of their communications dated 25 and 26 October 2009.

154. The material before the Tribunal consisted of the following:

Kantor Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standards, Valuation Methods and Expert Evidence
(2008) 68-9; Sinclair Refining Co v Jenkins Petroleum Process Co 289 US 689, 698; 53 S Ct 736
(1933); Golden Strait Corp v Nippon Yusen Kubishika Kaisha (The Golden Victory) [2007] UKHL 12,
[2007] 2 WLR 691, para 36.

Transcript 368:24 — 369:9.

44

155.

156.

157.

(a) Report of A Wright (Analysys) for Rumeli and Telsim, 26 February 2007,
(Analysys Report) (Ex PB 7);

(b) Report of B Kaczmarek (Navigant) for RoK, 23 May 2007 (Navigant Report)
(Ex PB 6);

(c) Transcript of Day 6 of the arbitration hearing, 26 October 2007 at which the
experts gave oral evidence;”°

(d) PowerPoint presentation slides used by each expert at the oral hearing;

(e) Analysys’ further valuation produced at the request of the Tribunal dated 30
October 2007.

(2) The question as to quantum before the Tribunal

Before assessing the evidence as to quantum, it was necessary for the Tribunal
to characterise and refine the damages question it had before it.

The Tribunal had concluded (at paragraphs 612 — 615 of the Award) that the
decision of the Investment Committee to terminate the Investment Contract on
25 March 2002 constituted a failure to provide fair and equitable treatment, and
that this was compounded by the decision of the Working Group on 9 August
2003 (paragraphs 616 — 618). The final act of taking that made the
expropriation irreversible was the decision of the Supreme Court on 30 October
2003 (paragraph 705).

The Tribunal had decided that Kazakhstan's acts had caused the loss of Rumeli
and Telsim’s investment (paragraphs 613 — 617 as to the facts; paragraphs 705
-707 as to the law). Furthermore, the compensation awarded by the Supreme
Court was inadequate to meet the standard imposed by the Treaty (paragraph
706). The Tribunal was required, therefore, to determine either the “rea/ value”

Here referred to as TH6.

45

158.

159.

160.

161.

7
78

or the “fair market value” of the investment at the time of the expropriatory
action or when the action became known (paragraph 785).

The Tribunal concluded that the same test applied whether real value or fair
market value was being assessed (paragraph 786), and that the date at which
the assessment was made was the same for both (paragraph 787). The task,
following Chorzéw Factory, was to determine the value to Rumeli and Telsim of
their shares (paragraph 794). The Tribunal then approved the formulation in
the World Bank Guidelines, noting that the “fair market value” approach
assumes a transaction between a willing buyer and a willing seller, and that the
task in assessing “real value” was not materially different (paragraph 802).

The Tribunal’s task was then to resolve this issue of quantum, having
considered the expert evidence presented by Mr. Andrew Wright, of Analysys
(submitted on behalf of Rumeli and Telsim), and Mr. Brent Kaczmarek, of
Navigant (submitted on behalf of the Rok).

(3) Analysys’ evidence

In Analysys’ opinion, three methodologies were potentially available by which
the value of the investment could be assessed: DCF; “net book value” (NBV);
and a comparison with other companies.” Analysys’ opinion was that NBV
gave an inaccurate picture of a mobile telecommunications company’s value,
and that there were major practical difficulties in determining an accurate
valuation by the comparative method.

Analysys accepted that KaR-Tel was balance-sheet insolvent, but stressed that
it was not bankrupt and that it was still capable of trading.” In those
circumstances, a liquidation value approach was not appropriate and it was
correct to value the company as a going concern. Analysys also disputed
Navigant’s approach to calculating fair market value, because it involved a

Analysys Report, 7-9.
H6, 54-58.

46

162.

163.

164.

80
81

hypothetical transaction when in fact there was not a willing buyer and willing
seller. Analysys was of the opinion that the DCF approach should be used to
determine fair market value anyway. In other words, Analysys believed that fair
market value and real value should be determined by the same methodology.
Analysys therefore concluded that DCF was the most appropriate means of
valuing Rumeli and Telsim’s investment.

The DCF approach required Analysys to model KaR-Tel’s cash flows from 2002
to 2013, when the Licence expired, and then calculate the terminal value of the
business at that point. The Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) was
then calculated. Analysys’ modelling of future cash flows was based on an
estimation of the number of future subscribers and an estimated Average
Revenue per User (ARPU). Non-subscriber revenues were added, and costs
were estimated. The WACC was then subtracted.

Prior to the hearing, Analysys revised its figures after determining that the
definition of revenue in the VimpelCom 2005 Annual Report had been
misleading. The Report had defined revenue as excluding interconnect fees,
but had included those fees in the actual calculations of revenue.” Analysys
had thus added interconnect revenue to the total in the original calculations of
ARPU, meaning it was counted twice. Analysys’ revised valuations were:

(a) At 23 April 2002: $162 million;
(b) At 30 October 2003: $227 million.®°

Mr. Wright opined that these figures were consistent with the price paid by
VimpelCom*®' suggesting that VimpelCom paid less than Analysys’ projected
value due to wariness caused by the very events that were the subject of the
arbitration. He also took the view that Analysys’ projections were consistent
with VimpelCom’s actual declared revenue. He explained why the “Enterprise
Value per Subscriber’ calculated by Analysys was much higher than for

TH6, 33:1-5.
Analysys Presentation, Slide19.
TH6, 106-107.

47

165.

166.

82
83

comparable companies, and why, in his view, cash flow would have jumped
from being negative before 2002 to $10.8 million in 2002.

Analysys’ figures were calculated using actual data (for example, figures for
actual mobile penetration in Kazakhstan in 2002 to 2007). Analysys also
prepared calculations based only on forecasts representative of those available
in 2002/2003 (described as the “average underestimate forecasts,” because at
that time it analysts had underestimated the future growth of mobile telephony
in Kazakhstan). These figures were (at 23 April 2002):

(a) $91 million (with 3G technology investment);
(b) $185 million (without 3G technology investment).®*

On the last day of the hearing, Mr. Lalonde had queried the possibility that KaR-
Tel’s mobile telecommunications licence would not have been renewed in 2013.
Analysys thus recalculated the value of Rumeli’s investment to exclude the
terminal value of the business in 2013. Analysys also provided alternative
calculations that excluded the cost of investing in 3G technology, on the
assumption that KaR-Tel would only do so if its licence was to be renewed.
The resulting valuations, provided in a letter to the Tribunal of 30 October 2007,
were:

(a) At 23 April 2002: $87.6 million, or $97.2 million without 3G

investments;

(b) At 30 October 2003: $130.8 million, or $143.4 million without 3G
investments;

(c) On “average underestimate forecasts:” $44.4 million (without 3G
investments).

TH6, 132:8.
Analysys Presentation, Slide 20.

48

167.

168.

84
85

87
88.
89

On the last day of the hearing, Mr. Boyd had questioned whether the
management forecasts prepared by KaR-Tel in 1999 and 2002 were relevant,
and asked why DCF calculations had not been done on the basis of them. In
response, Analysys ran a fourth set of calculations that were included in Rumeli
and Telsim’s Post-Hearing Memorial at paragraph 208. The resulting
valuations were:

(a) $54.6 million (with 3G investments)
(b) $111 million (without 3G investments)

(4) Navigant’s evidence

From the outset, Navigant’s approach stressed KaR-Tel’s fragile financial
position. It noted that the company had been mismanaged in the years 1999 to
2002 and had failed to meet business goals.®° It had also pointed out in its
written report that its market share had dropped from 50% to 25%,®° but on
cross-examination Mr. Kaczmarek accepted that the 50% figure in KaR-Tel’s
business plan was only nominal (indicating that KaR-Tel began with one of the
two licences in Kazakhstan before any users were subscribed).*”

Navigant concluded that at 23 April 2002, KaR-Tel was financially insolvent and
not a going concern.® It noted that MCC had called in its loan, and that KaR-
Tel showed no signs of being able to raise the necessary funds to pay it. On
cross-examination, Mr. Kaczmarek accepted that Telsim, a large company, had
guaranteed the loan® and that it was possible that someone other than Mr.

TH6 150.

Navigant Report paras 9, 28-64.
Ibid paras 9, 59.

TH6 165:8-166:9.

Navigant Report paras10, 69-74.
TH6 157:19-158:14.

49

170.

171.

172.

Yerimbetov could have rectified the company’s position. He also accepted
that KaR-Tel had continued to trade throughout the period.*'

Following its conclusion that KaR-Tel was insolvent, Navigant did not accept
that a DCF analysis was appropriate, and instead determined that the
liquidation value of the company was the appropriate measure.® It concluded
that KaR-Tel’s debt to MCC was greater than the value of its assets, and
therefore that the value of Rumeli’s shares in the company was, at best, zero.
Mr. Kaczmarek accepted, however, that while the shares may have been
worthless, principally because of the size of the debt, the business was not
worthless.* .On the contrary, he accepted that the business could have had a
value, even in April 2002, of between US$81.9 million and US$113 million.“

Navigant concluded that the price paid by VimpelCom in 2004 was fair or
slightly high.°° It therefore concluded that $350 million represented the absolute
limit of KaR-Tel’s value at that point. Navigant went on to opine that the
increase in KaR-Tel’s value could be ascribed to the new management team,
and therefore would not have occurred had Rumeli and Telsim remained
shareholders.

Navigant considered that Analysys had failed to take account of the fact that
KaR-Tel’s revenue would not have been sufficient to pay its debts and failed to
take account of significant factors that would have weighed on a potential
purchaser in 2002. Navigant argued that the EV per subscriber was so high
that there must have been serious errors in Analysys’ calculations. It further
argued that the nearly three-fold discrepancy between Analysys’ valuation of
KaR-Tel’s shares at 2004 and the price paid by VimpelCom indicated that

 

8:
Navigant Report paras11 & 125; TH6 76:14—18; 81:13-14.
TH6 173:20-23.
Navigant Presentation 32; TH6 173:12-14.
Navigant Report paras176 — 179.

50

Analysys’ calculations were flawed. Navigant submitted that Analysys’ revised
calculations remained significantly overinflated.°°

2.5.4 The Tribunal’s Approach

173. The Tribunal thus had three possible starting-points on the evidence submitted
to it:

(a) First, it could accept that KaR-Tel was actually insolvent, as
opposed to merely balance-sheet insolvent; accept that KaR-Tel was not
a going concern; and conclude that the company’s shares had zero net
value.

(b) Second, it could adopt a DCF approach, starting from those
projections presented by Analysys which proceeded from the
assumptions that the Tribunal chose to adopt, and then discounting those
projections in the light of any further considerations which the Tribunal
decided were relevant.

(c) Third, in order to test the reasonableness of any figure arrived at
under (b), the Tribunal could consider the relevance of the sale to
VimpelCom for $350 million, on the basis that the sale reflected the value
of the License, KaR-Tel’s major asset, at that time, appropriately
discounted to take account of changes in circumstances in the ten
months between the date of expropriation (30 October 2003) and the date
of the Vimpelcom sale (August 2004).

174. The Tribunal began at paragraph 752 by reciting Rumeli and Telsim’s argument
that the sale to VimpelCom constituted “relevant background” to the Tribunal’s
task of assessing the compensation due. It was accepted by the RoK that the

86 TH6 97:5-6; 98:10-12.

51

175.

176.

177.

price was, at most, only a slight overvaluation. RoK maintained, however, that
the price was wholly attributable to the changes that had occurred since the
expropriation.

Having considered the World Bank Guidelines, the Tribunal noted at paragraph
809 that the Tribunal’s “overriding objective’ remained to assess the market
value of the investment to a willing buyer. A DCF valuation would have formed
one of the methods used by a buyer to determine how much to pay. The
Tribunal noted, however, at paragraph 811 that it remained an approximation
dependent on the validity of its underlying assumptions, not a mechanical
calculation.

The Tribunal held that, although Kar-Tel lacked the track record which would
normally be required for it to be treated as a going concern for the purpose of
applying a DCF analysis, nevertheless, value had to be ascribed to its major
asset, the Licence. The Licence was plainly worth far in excess of its book
value, and this value was determined by the potential for whoever owned it to
generate income from it. A purchaser of the company’s shares would have
been guided in deciding what to pay by the Licence’s potential to generate
income, because by purchasing the shares they would obtain the Licence. The
Tribunal thus concluded at paragraph 811 that there was “no realistic
alternative’ to using the DCF method. The date of the expropriation was part-
way through the period from Rumeli and Telsim’s eviction, in April 2002, and
the sale to VimpelCom in September 2004. By the time of the expropriation
subscriber numbers in Kazakhstan had begun to increase rapidly, and the value
of the Licence, and therefore KaR-Tel’s shares, would have already begun to
increase.

The Tribunal then adopted Rumeli's “base case DCF valuation” of $227 million
in the absence of any more reliable starting point. After taking into account
countervailing factors, such as the possibility that the management initiatives
adopted by Mr. Yerimbetov would not have been adopted had Rumeli and
Telsim remained shareholders, the Tribunal referred at paragraph 813 to the
VimpelCom sale price. In paragraph 814 it concluded that $125 million
constituted adequate compensation for the loss of Rumeli and Telsim’s 60%

52

178.

179.

a7

shareholding. That sum values the total shares at $208 million, which is
approximately 60% of the price actually paid for the company some 11 months
later.

The Conclusion of the Committee

The figure of US$125 million is baldly stated in the Award, without an
explanation of a mathematical calculation undertaken by the Tribunal in arriving
at it. The Committee well understands the grounds for the Applicant on
Annulment’s objection in this regard. It is highly desirable that tribunals should
minimise to the greatest extent possible the element of estimation in their
quantification of damages and maximise the specifics of the ratiocination
explaining how the ultimate figure was arrived at. But, nevertheless, the
Committee does not consider that the award of damages is one which it ought
to annul, since the Tribunal did not fail to give reasons for its award of damages.
On the contrary, the Tribunal examined the position as to damages with
considerable care and set out the reasons for its award in terms appropriate to
the circumstances of the case and the evidence available to it.

In the light of the foregoing analysis, the reasons why this conclusion is
warranted may be summarised in the following ten points:

(1) The Committee is not limited in its review of the Award under Article 52(1)(e)
of the ICSID Convention to the text of the Award alone, but rather should seek
to understand the motivation of the Award in the light of the record before the
Tribunal.°”

(2) The Tribunal plainly rejected the view that the shares were worthless at the
time of expropriation. The fact that the Tribunal accepted at paragraph 806 that
the company was balance-sheet insolvent does not contradict its subsequent

Supra paras 138 and 140, citing Soufraki & Azurix.
53

100
101

finding in this respect. On the contrary, it took the view that Kar-Tel had at that
stage a major asset of considerable value, which would have far exceeded its
book value (i.e. the value ascribed to it in the balance-sheet). That asset was
the Licence (for which Rumeli and Telsim had already paid US$67.5 million on
31 July 1998, over four years previously).*® The Tribunal held that this asset of
the company would undoubtedly have been taken into account by a buyer in
any valuation. Since that asset was income-generating, the Tribunal decided at
paragraph 811 that it had no alternative but to use the DCF method to ascribe a
value to it.

(3) The shares in Kar-Tel were freely transferrable. The Licence being an asset
of Kar-Tel, the owner for the time being of shares in Kar-Tel would obtain the
benefit of the value of that Licence to the extent of its shareholding and subject
to the other assets and liabilities of the company.” Thus, to that extent, the
value of this income-generating asset of the company would be relevant to the
value to be ascribed to the expropriated shares.

(4) Once the Tribunal had determined that Rumeli and Telsim had established
that they had lost something of real value, the determination of what value was
to be ascribed to that loss became one for the Tribunal’s own informed
estimation. It was not limited in that exercise to the evidence or figures put
forward by the Parties.'°

(5) The estimation of damages in such circumstances is not an exact science.
It is of the essence of such an exercise that the tribunal has a measure of
discretion, since the final figure must of its nature be an approximation of the
claimant’s loss. There may in that context be real limitations on the extent of
reasoning which can reasonably be expected.’

Award para 6.

This was accepted by Counsel for the RoK in response to questions from the President of the
Committee: Transcript 288:21 — 292:5.

Supra paras 147 and 148 and the authorities there cited.

Supra paras 144 — 146 and the authorities there cited.

54

102

(6) In the instant case, the Tribunal expressly decided, for the reason given in
(2), that it would apply a DCF analysis. But, at the same time, it explained,
correctly, that “the method must be understood as an approximation which is
dependent on the validity of the assumptions, and not as a mechanical
calculation which will yield a value whose validity is not open to question”
(paragraph 810). The overarching test for fair market value was that which a
willing buyer would have paid to a willing seller, and a DCF analysis was simply
one tool which would have been used in such a negotiation.

(7) Once the Tribunal had reached this point in its analysis, the only evidence
available to it (i.e. evidence that would enable it to undertake a DCF analysis)
was that put forward by Analysys on behalf of Rumeli and Telsim. That was
because Navigant for Kazakhstan had maintained its position that the shares
were worthless. Thus, its evidence was of no real use to the Tribunal for the
exercise which it had decided it had to undertake. The Tribunal could only be
guided by the DCF calculations undertaken by Analysys on the basis of the
various different assumptions applied. It expressly adopted, at paragraph 813,
Analysys’ base case valuation of US$227 million for Rumeli and Telsim’s 60%
stake, after repaying the Motorola loan.

(8) In arriving at its final figure, the Tribunal was entitled to balance a number of
countervailing considerations." These considerations included those stated by
the Tribunal in its Award at paragraphs 806 to 808 and 812. The factors do not
contradict the other elements of the Tribunal’s reasoning. Rather, they serve to
explain the reason for the reduction from US$227 million to arrive at the final
damages figure of US$125 million.

(9) The Tribunal was entitled to, and did, test the reasonableness of the DCF
valuation against the price achieved in the sale to Vimpelcom some 10 months
later (Award paragraph 813).

Supra para 137, citing Vivendi supra n 4 paras 64-65.
55

180.

181.

182.

183.

103
104

(10) In the result, therefore, the Tribunal did undertake the task of producing a
reasoned Award as to damages as mandated by the ICSID Convention, and its
Award is not to be annulled on this ground.

COSTS

The Respondents to the Application request the Committee to issue a decision
ordering the Applicant on Annulment to pay to the Respondents all costs and
expenses incurred by them flowing from the preparation and conduct of the
annulment proceedings, including the fees and expenses of counsel, the
arbitrators and the charges of ICSID.'°°

On 13 November 2009, the Respondents to the Application submitted their
request for arbitration costs quantified at US$504,552.97. The Applicant on
Annulment, in its letter of 18 November 2009, submitted its request of
US$1,187,409.36 for pursuing its Application.

The Committee has discretion to determine how, and by whom, the expenses
incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings and the ICSID costs
should be paid (Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule
47(1)(j), read in conjunction with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rule 53).

The Azurix annulment decision held that, “the normal course should be for a
wholly unsuccessful applicant for annulment [to] carry the burden of the whole
costs of the Centre advanced by it associated with the proceedings, including
the fees and expenses of the members of the ad hoc committee. 04 However,
the practice of virtually all ICSID annulment committees has been to divide
ICSID costs — including the fees of committee members -- equally between the

Para 196 of the Counter-Memorial on Annulment and para 153 of the Rejoinder on Annulment.
Supra n 55 para 278.

56

184.

105
106

107

parties and to order each party to bear their own counsel fees.'® In one of the
few annulment decisions in which the unsuccessful applicant was ordered to
pay both counsel fees and ICSID costs, the ad hoc Committee found that the
annulment application was “fundamentally lacking in merit’ and that the
applicant's case was “to any reasonable and impartial observer, most unlikely to
succeed’.'°°

In the instant case, although the Committee has denied the Rok’s application
for annulment in its entirety, the Application was not fundamentally lacking in
merit; particularly on the question of damages, it raised a claim that required
extended consideration. Accordingly, the Parties shall each bear their own
counsel fees and shall contribute equally to meeting the costs of the annulment
proceeding (Rok’s advances to ICSID). As the Applicant has been solely
responsible for making the advance payments to cover the costs of the
proceeding in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation
14(3)(e), the Respondents to the Application shall reimburse the Applicant half
of such costs.'””

Schreuer supra n 54, 1234.

CDC Group PLC v. Republic of the Seychelles (I\CSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on
Annulment, 29 June 2005, 11 ICSID Rep 237, 266.

The ICSID Secretariat will in due course provide the Parties with a financial statement showing the
costs of the proceeding.

57

DECISION

For the reasons given above, the ad hoc Committee decides:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The Application for Annulment of the Republic of Kazakhstan is dismissed
in its entirety.

The Parties shall bear in equal shares all expenses incurred by the Centre
in connection with this proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the
members of the Committee.

Each Party shall bear its own litigation costs and expenses incurred with
respect to this annulment proceeding, including its cost of legal

representation.
Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration

Rule 54(3), the stay of enforcement of the Award ordered by the ad hoc
Committee in its decision of 19 March 2009 is terminated.

58

THE AD HOC COMMITTEE:

C-a Mahon)

Campbell McLachlan

Date: 72 February 2010

 
    

Edyafdo Silva RomréTo
Date: 7 Fe brvieg 2040

    

hs

Steph#n M. Schwebel

Date: ‘y}) Fhbawt, PUL)

59

