tg

Ad hoc Arbitration
Binder
¥.

The Czech Republic

 

 

FINAL AWARD

 

Members of the Arbitral Tribunal:
Justice Hans Danelius, Chairman,
Professor Jtirgen Creutzig
Professor Emmanuel Gaillard

Counsel for - Binder: Counsel for The Czech Republic:

Place of Aybitration: Prague
Date of the Final Award: 15 July 2011

 


TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. General background

IL The Treaty

Ii. The Customs Act and other relevant provisions

IV. The proceedings
V. The Parties’ claims
VI. The Parties’ arguments

A. The Claimant:

(a) Relevant background

(b) The tax fraud and the involvement of the customs
authorities

(¢) The alleged forgery and the implication of customs
officials .

(d) The consequences for CARGO

(¢) No tax liability in 1994-1995 when importing goods
from Slovakia

@ The customs offices not authorised to assess and
collect taxes

(3) Void administrative acts

(h) Guarantee for the customs debt in the guarantee
certificate

() Liability of the drivers for the customs debt

@) Absence of CARGO in the customs proceedings
with the drivers

(k) Time bar

()) Application of the principles of interpretation in
favour of the Claimant

(m) The obligation not to expropriate

(n) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment

(0) The obligation not to impair the enjoyment of
investments by arbitrary or discriminatory measures

(p) The obligation to provide investments with full
protection and security

(W) The obligation of treatment in accordance with
standards of international law

(t) Breaches of the BIT

B. The Respondent:
(a) Relevant background
(b) Transit customs procedures
(c) The security
(@) The tax fraud
(¢) Claiming the guarantee

Page

15
15

20

25
27

28

30
32

32
33

34
35

37

38

@ CARGO's liability in respect of the 1,245 transit
shipments

(g) The use of the forged stamps

(h) CARGO’s lack of vigilance

(i) CARGO’s liability for excise taxes and VAT

@) The competence of the customs offices

(k) Time bar

() No refunds to CARGO

(m) No harassment

(1) No right to review domestic court decisions

(0) The BIT claims

(p) No expropriation

(@) No unfair treatment

(r) No arbitrary or discriminatory measures

(s) No violation of the full protection and security
standard

() No violation of Article 7(1) of the BIT

(u) Final remarks

VIL. The Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning

. General considerations
. Taxation of imports from Slovakia
. The surety bonds
. The fraudulent acts
(a) Customs clearance at C'W'A's premises
th) The use of forged documents
(¢} involvement af customs officers
5. Time bar
6. Legal protection
7. Evaluation under the Czech-German BIT
(a) Fair and equitable treatment
(b) Arbitrary or discriminatory measures
(c) Full protection and security
(a) Deprivation of property
(e) Obligations under international law
8 Conclusion
9, Costs

AwWHN

THE AWARD

FINAL AWARD
rendered on’ 15 July 2011 in an ad hoc arbitration between the following Parties:

‘Claimant::  _ . Binder,
Counsel: * Vyroubal Krajhanzl Skolout Law Firm, Na Piikopé 22,

Slovansky dim, 110 00 PRAGUE 1, Czech Republic

Respondent: The Czech Republic, represented by the Ministry of Finance,
Letenské 15, 118 10 PRAGUE 1, Czech Republic

Counsel:
', Weinhold Legal, Charles Square Center, Karlovo néméstf 10,

Ls.
120 00 PRAGUE 2, Czech Republic
2. , Teynier, Pic et Associés, 56, rue de Londres, F-75008 PARIS, France

Arbitral Tribunal: Justice Hans Danelius, Chairman, Professor Jtirgen Creutzig and
Professor Emmanuel] Gaillard

Place of Arbitration: Prague

I. General background

1, On 16 November 1990, Mr. Binder (hereinafter referred to as “the
Claimant”) formed a limited company in Czechoslovakia registered as CARGO Transport-
Internationale Spedition, spol. s.r.o, (hereinafter called “CARGO”) with its seat in Liberec
and its principal business in Prague. The purpose of CARGO was to provide forwarding
services and associated operations on behalf of international haulier and cargo owners.

2. On 1 January 1993, the Federation between the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic
was dissolved, and CARGO became a limited company of the Czech Republic.

3, In the period from June 1994 until April 1995, large quantities of oil products refined in the
Slovnaft refinery in Slovakia were imported into the Czech Republic via the border station
Bieclay-dalnice. In accordance with Czech law, they were admitted for transit by the customs
authority at the border station, subject to subsequent presentation and clearance at an inland
customs office. In order to ensure such presentation, an authorised customs agent was
requested to issue a guarantee accepting responsibility in case the procedure was not finalised
at the inland customs office. In its capacity of customs agent, CARGO issued such guarantees

for a large number of shipments.

4, As from May 1995, the Czech customs authorities adopted 1,245 decisions in which they
found that shipments had not been presented at an inland customs office for determination of
excise tax and value added tax (“VAT”) and ordered CARGO to make payments of altogether
CZK 370 million on the basis of the guarantees it had issued for these shipments. CARGO
considered these claims unjustified and lodged a large number of appeals. However,
enforcement took place against CARGO in regard to a total amount of approximately CZK

45 million (about EUR 1.5 million).

5, On 19 March 2003, CARGO was declared bankrupt,

Ul. The Treaty

6. The present arbitration is based on the bilateral Treaty of 2 October 1990 between the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic regarding the
Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments (“the Czech-German BIT” or “the BIT”)
which, in translation into English, provides, inter alia, as follows:

Atticle J

For the purpose of this Treaty,

(1) the term “investments” comprises every kind of assets that are acquired in conformity with the
domestic laws, in particular:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such as mortgages, liens and
pledges;

b) sharos of companies and other kinds of interest in companies;

c) claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or claims to any performance having
an economic value and that relate to an investment;

Artiole 2
(1) Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible investments of investors of the

other Contracting Party and admit such investments in accordance with its legislation. { shall in any case
accord such investments fair and equitable treatment.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the
management, maintenance, use or enjoyment of investments in its territory of investors of the other

Contracting Party.

(3) Investments and revenue arising hereof and in the event of their re-investmen( such revenue shal!
enjoy full protection under this Treaty.

 

Article 5,

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investments in its territory owned or controlled by investors of
the other Contracting Party to treatment jess favourable than it accords to investments of its own investors
or to investments of investors of any third state,

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall subject investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards their
activity in connection with investments in its territory, to treatment less favourable than it accords to its
own investors or to investors of any third state.

Article 4
(1) Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall enjoy full protection and security in the
territory of the other Contracting Party.

(2) Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall not be expropriated, nationalised or
subjected to any other measure the effects of which would be tantamount to expropriation or
nationalisation in the territory of the other Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against
compensation, Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the date on which the actual or threatened expropriation, nationalisation or
comparable measure has become publicly known, The compensation shall be paid without detay and shall
carry the usual bank interest until the time of payment; it shall be effectively realisable and freely
transferable, Provision shall have been made in an appropriate manner at or prior to the time of
expropriation, nationalisation or comparable measure for the determination and payment of such
compensation. The legality of any such expropriation, nationalisation or comparable measure and the
amount of compensation shall be subject to review by due process of law.

Article 7
(1) If the legislation of either C ing Party or under.i ional law’existing at. present
or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in addition to this Treaty contain a regulation,
whether general or specific, entitling investments of investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment

more favourable than is provided for by this Treaty, such regulation shall to the extent thal it is more
favourable prevail) over this Treaty.

Anticle 9
(1) Disputes between the Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Treaty
should as far as possible be settled by the governments of the two Contracting Parties..

(2) Ifa dispute cannot thus be settled, it shall upon the request of either Contracting Party be submitted to
an arbitration tribunal.

(3) Such arbitration tribunal shall be constituted ad hoc as follows: each Contracting Party shall appoint
one member, and these two members shall agree upon a national of a third State as their chairman to be
appointed by the governments of the two Contracting Parties. Such members shal] be appointed within
two months, and such chairman within three months from the date on which either Contracting Party has
informed in writing the other Contracting Party that it intends to submit the dispute to an arbitration

tribunal.
(4) If the periods specified in paragraph 3 above have not been observed, either Contracting Party may, in
the absence of any other arrangement, invite the President of the International Court of Justice to make the

necessary appointments.

(5) The arbitration tribunal shall reach its decisions by a majority of votes, Such decisions shall be
binding. Each Contracting Party shal] bear the cost of its own member and of its representatives in the
arbitration proceedings; the cost of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be borne in equal parts by
the Contracting Parties. The arbitration tribunal may decide on other allocation of costs. The arbitration

tribunal shal].determine its.own procedure,

Article 10
(1) Disputes relating to investments between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor of the other
Contracting Party should as far as possible be amicably settled between the parties in dispute,

(2) If a dispute cannot be settled within a time period of six months from the point in time when it was
raised, it will be submitted to arbitration at the request of the investor of the other Contracting Party,
‘Unless the parties in dispute have agreed otherwise, the provisions of Article 9(3) to (5) shall be applied
mutatis mutandis on condition that the appointment of the members of the arbitration tribunal in
accordance with Article 9(3) is effected by the parties in dispute and that, in so far as the periods specified
in Article 9(3) are not observed, either party in dispute may, in the absence of other arrangements, invite
the Chairman of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, if not otherwise
agreed, to make the required appointments. The Arbitral Award shal) be recognised and enforced
according to the rules of the Agreement of 10 June 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign

Arbitral Awards.

Article 13
(i) This Treaty shall be ratified; the instruments of ratification shall be exchanged as soon as possible in

Bonn.

(2) This Treaty shal) enter into force 30 days after the date of exchange of the instruments of ratification,
It shall remain in force for a period of ten years and shall be extended thereafter for an unlimited period
unless denounced’ in writing by either Contracting Party twelve months before its expiration. After the
expiry of the period of ten years this Treaty may be denounced at any time giving twelve months’ notice,

(3) In respect of investments made prior to the date of termination of this Treaty, the provisions of
Articles 1 to 12 shall continue to be effective for a further period of fifteen years from the date of

termination of this Treaty.

IM. The Customs Act and other relevant provisions

7. At the relevant time in 1994 and 1995, the customs clearance procedure for imports was
regulated by the Customs Act No. 13/1993. The Customs Act contained at that time the

following general provisions:

CHAPTER ONE — DEFINITION OF BASIC TERMS
Section 2
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply:
(i) “customs debt" means the obligation of a person to pay the amount of the import duties (customs deb!
on importation) or export duties (customs debt on exportation),
(j) “oustoms supervision” means the complex of nots and mensures for seouring observance of laws and
other generally binding legal regulations the implementation of whioh is within the competence of the
customs authorities,
(1) “oustoms approved treatment” means:

L, the placing of goods under a customs procedure,

(m) “customs procedure” (hereinafter “procedure”) only means:

2. transit (Sections 139 ef seq.),
(n) “declarant” means the person making the customs declaration in his own name, or the person in whose
name a customs declaration is made,
(0) “customs declaration” means the act made in the form prescribed by the customs rules, whereby the
declarant indicates the wish to place goods under a given procedure or to terminate such procedure. and
provides the data required by the customs authorities for the application of the given procedure in
accordance with the customs rules,
(p) ‘release of goods” means the act whereby the customs authorities make goods available 10 an
individually defined person for purposes stipulated by the procedure under which they are placed.

CHAPTER TWO — CUSTOMS AUTHORITIES AND THEIR ORGANISATION, CONTROL. AND
TASKS

Section 3

(1) The customs authorities are authorities of state administration having jurisdiction in the arca of
customs, customs policy, customs tariff and customs statistios,

(2) The customs authorities shall also administer

(a) the value added tax and excise taxes collected on importation,

(b) charges relating to importation and exportation,

(c) the road tax in the case of foreign persons.

Customs offices

Section 10

(1) Customs offices shall be established and their territorial jurisdiction shall be defined by Ordinance
issued by the Ministry [of Finance].

Section 11

The customs office shall

(a) make decisions on the release of goods under the proposed customs procedure,
(b) assess and collect duty, taxes and charges on importation, exportation or transit,

(e) determine the customs value,

 

(8 grant deferral of payment of duty and payment of duty in instalments,

(h) enforce the payment of outstanding amounts of duty, taxes and charges Jevied on importation,
exportation or transit,

(i) carry out direct supervision of the movement of persons, goods and means of transportation in the
customs border zone as part of customs supervision,

(n) carry out contro] after the release of the goods,

8. The goods subject to customs duty were defined as follows:
CHAPTER SIX - CUSTOMS DUTY AND CUSTOMS TARIFF

Part One
CUSTOMS DUTY

Section 55

Goods subject to customs duty
(1) All imported goods shall be subjected to import duty excépt goods explicitly designated as duty-free

+ in the customs tariff.
(2) Exported goods shal] be subject to export duty only if the customs tariff explicitly establishes such a

duty.
(3) Goods explicitly designated as duty-free in international treaties shall not be subject to duty.

9. The following rules applied fo the customs proceedings:

CHAPTER EIGHT -ENTRY OF GOODS TO THIS COUNTRY

 

 

Part One °
ENTRY OF GOODS ACROSS THE STATE BORDER

Section 80
(1) Persons who carry goods across the state border shall declare the goods at the border customs office
and present therewith the documents relating to the goo

(4) Transport of goods along a customs route shall be realised without delay, without a change in the

cargo and without departure from the customs route,
(5) Customs checkpoint means a place designated for the movement of persons and transport of goods

across the state border,

Part Two
PRESENTATION OF goops FOR CUSTOMS SUPERVISION

Section 81
(1) Goods brought into this country shall be conveyed by the person bringing them into this country

without delay with an intact customs seal and in accordance with instructions issued by the customs
authorities:
(a) to the competent customs office or to a different place designated or approved by the customs
authorities,

Section 82
(1) Any person who assumes responsibility for the carriage of goods after they have been brought to this

country shall become responsible for the compliance laid down in Section 81.

(2) If so provided by an international treaty, goods shall be subject to customs supervision although still
outside the customs territory of this country and shall be cleared in the same manner as goods already
brought into the country.

 

Part Three
PRESENTATION OF GOODS TO CUSTOMS

Section 83

(1) The person who brought goods to this country or the person who assumed responsibility for carriage
of the goods in this country following their entry and who delivered them to the locations specified in
Section 81 shall present the goods to customs.

CHAPTER NINE — CUSTOMS-APPROVED TREATMENT OR USE

Part Two
CUSTOMS PROCEDURES

Section 99
The purpose of customs proceedings which are being held within the framework of customs supervision
shall be to decide on placing the goods in question under the proposed customs procedure.

Section 100

Initiating customs proceedings

Customs proceedings shall be initiated by lodging 4 customs declaration proposing that the goods in
question should be placed under a specified customs procedure.

Section 102

(1) Customs proceedings shall be held at a customs office or in customs zones.

(2) Customs zones are marked sections or railway depots, porls. vt airports and other areas specitied pv
tive Customs authorities in agreement with the owners or authorised users of such areas,

(3) At the request and at the expense of the declarant, customs proceedings may also be conducted outside
a customs zone.

(4) [he Mmuistry shall lay down in an Ordinance the conditions under which proceedings are conducted
outside a customs zone and set the amount of expenses to be charged for conducting such proceedings.

(6) Customs proceedings shall be conducted in the presence of the declarant,

 

Section 104

Decisions in customs proceedings

(1) The basic requisites of decisions issued in customs proceedings shall be:

(a) designation of the customs office which issued the decision,

(b) the serial number of the decision, the date of receipt of the customs declaration, the date of issue of the
decision,

(c) the exact designation of the declarant,

(d) the designation of the goods in question,

(e) the subheading of the customs tariff and the rate of duty levied on the goods,

(£) the amount of the duty, tax and charge, and the number of the bank account to which this amount is to
be paid,

(athe signature of the authorised officer of the customs office which issued the decision, with his name,
surname and official rank added, and the official seal.

Part Three
CUSTOMS DECLARATION

Division One
Form and requisites of a customs declaration

‘Section 105

(1) The customs declaration shal] be made:

(a) in writing or

(b) using a data processing and transmission technique where permitted by the competent customs

authority, or
(c) by means of an oral declaration or any other aot whereby the holder of the goods expresses his wish to

place them under the customs procedure in question.
(2) A customs declaration made in written form shal] be always signed by the authorised person.

Section 107

‘The declarant

(1) A customs declaration may be made by any person who is able to present the goods in question, or to
have them presented, to the competent customs office together with all the documents which are required
to-be produced -for-th f th g g-the-oustoms-p spect-of which the
goods were declared,

Section 108

(1) The declarant may be only a Czech person.

(2) The provision of paragraph J shall not apply to cases where a person:

(a) makes a declaration to place goods under a transit or temporary use procedure, ©

(b) declares goods on an occasional basis, provided that the customs office considers this to be justified,

Part Five
DISPOSAL OF GOODS

Section 123
At the declarant’s request, the customs office may permit that the goods be disposed of prior to their

release. The oustoms office shal] grant the request in every case when the grounds for not releasing the
goods are merely the necessity of determining the origin of the goods, the place of their dispatch, their
tariff classification or their customs value. Security shall be provided for any customs debt which does or

could arise.

Part Six
SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES

Section 124

a) Where the implementation of the procedures in question is properly ensured, he customs office may,
in order to simplify completion of formalities and procedures, grant permission

(a) the written customs declaration made on the prescribed form (Section 105, — 5) to omit al] the
prescribed particulars, or some of the prescribed documents not to be attached thereto or presented, or

(b) the goods to be entered at the declarant’s request for the procedure in question on the basis of a

commercial or administrative document replacing the customs declaration,

CHAPTER TEN - CUSTOMS PROCEDURES
Part One
RELEASE FOR FREE CIRCULATION

Section 128

Release for free circulation shall confer on foreign goods the status of Czech goods. Release for free
circulation shall entail application of the pertinent commercial policy measures and other formalities laid
down in respect of the importation of goods and the charging of any duties due.

Part Two

SUSPENSIVE ARRANGEMENTS AND CUSTOMS PROCEDURES WITH BCONOMIC IMPACT
Division One

Provisions common to several procedures

Section 133
(1) The term “suspensive arrangement” is understood as applying to the following procedures:

(a) transit,

(3) “imported goods" means goods placed under a suspensive arrangement and goods which, under the
inward processing procedure in the form of the drawback system, have met the conditions laid down for
release for free circulation and the conditions set in Section 175.

Section 137

(1) A suspensive arrangement with economic impact shall be discharged when a new customs-approved
treatment or use is assigned to the goods.

(2) The customs office shall take ali the measures necessary to place the status of the goods in harmony
with the conditions laid down for the procedure in question.

Division Two
I ransut

Section 139

(1) Transit means a procedure covering goods transported under customs supervision from one customs
office to another customs office,

(2) Transit operation means the movement of goods in transit from the customs office of dispatch to the
customs office of destination.

(4) The customs office of dispatch means any customs office where the transit operation begins,

(5) The customs office of destination means any customs office where the transi{ operation ends,

(9) Internal transit means transit from the customs office of entry to an inland customs office.

Section 140

(1) Any person who is entitled to dispose of the goods may propose that the goods be released under the
transit procedure. The customs office may require the declarant to prove that he is entitled to dispose of
the goods,

(2) The deciarant shall bear responsibility towards the customs office for fulfilment of the obligation
arising from the transit procedure; he shall, in particular, ensure that the goods are produced under
conditions laid down by the customs office of dispatch to the customs office of destination in an unaltered
state, with an intact customs seal and with the accompanying documents.

Section 141
(1) Save where an international treaty or this Act provides differently, the proposal to releasing the goods

under transit procedure shall be filed with the customs office of dispatch on a form issued or approved by
the General Customs Directorate.

 

(4) The customs office of dispatch shall decide whether and under what conditions it will release the
goods and how their identity is to be-secured, When the declarant fails to. present a proposal for securing a
customs debt, the manner of securing the customs debt shall be determined by the customs office.

Section 144
(1) Before goods are released for transit procedure, the declarant shal) provide security for any customs
debt which may arise in respect of such goods.

10. Other relevant provisions in the Customs Act were the following:

CHAPTER THIRTEEN — CUSTOMS DEBT
Part One

Section 240
(1) A customs debt on importation shall be incurred through the unlawful removal from customs

supervision of goods liable to import duty.

(2) The customs debt shall be incurred at the moment when the goods are ; Temaved from customs
* ‘supervision: ”

(3) The debtor shall be:

(a) the person who removed the goods from customs supervision,

(b) any person who participated in such removal and who was or should have been aware that the goods

-were being removed from customs supervision,
(c) any person who acquired or held goods removed from customs supervision and who was-or should

have been aware at the time of acquiring or receiving the goods that they had been removed from customs
supervision,

(d) the person required to fulfil the obligations arising from temporary storage of the goods or from the
use of the customs procedure under which those goods were placed.

Section'250
Where several persons are liable for payment of one customs debt, they shal] be liable for such debt
jointly and severally.

Part Two
SECURITY TO COVER CUSTOMS DEBT

Section 254
(1) Where, in accordance with customs rules, the customs authorities may require security to be provided

for ensuring payment of a customs debt, such security shall be provided by the debtor or by the person
who may become liable for the debt.

(3) The customs authorities may permit the security to be provided by a person other than the person from

whom it is required,

Section 259
The following shall be deemed equivalent to a cash deposit as security covering a customs debt:

(a) submission of a cheque the payment of which is guaranteed by a bank,
(b) submission of any other instrument recognised by the customs office as a means of payment.

Section 260
(1) The guarantor shall undertake in his letter of guarantee in writing to pay jointly and severally with the

debtor the secured amount of a customs debt.
(2) The guarantor may be only:

(a) a bank,
(b) any person approved by the customs-authorities.

10

(3) The customs authorities may reject or refuse to approve the proposed guarantor when they have
warranted doubt that the customs debt will be paid within the prescribed term.

Part Four
TIME-BARRING AND EXTINCTION OF CUSTOMS DEBT

Section 282

Time-barring of the right to claim outstanding duty

(1) The right to recover and enforce the payment of outstanding duty shall be time-barred after six years
following the year when such duty became due.

Part Five
REPAYMENT AND REMISSION OF DUTY

Section 289

(1) Where no deception or obvious negligence can be attributed to the person concerned, the customs
office may repay or remit import or export duty also for other reasons than those referred to in Sections
286 to 288, in particular if payment of the duty would seriously impair the livellhood of the debtor or of
persons depending on him for their livelihood, or if enforcing the payment of the outstanding amount of
duty would result in the economic ruin of the debtor,

(2) The customs office shall repay or remit the duty for the reasons stated in paragraph |, if an application
is submitted to it within twelve months of the day on which the amount of duty was communicated to the
debtor,

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN ~ JOINT, INTERIM AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 318
Where an imernational weaty conains provisions differing irom tins Act or irom regulations issued
thereunder, the provisions of the international treaty shall apply.

Section 320

Save where this Act provides differently, proceedings before customs authorities shall be governed:
(a) in matters of customs gressions by the general ions governing i

(b) in other matters by the general regulations governing administrative procedure. !

Section 323

Securing and determining the customs debt and time-barring of the right to enforce payment of
outstanding duty (Sections 254 to 282) shall also cover securing and determining the obligation to pay
taxes and fees on importation and time-barring of the right to enforce payment of taxes and fees on
importation.

11, Decree No. 92/1993 of the Ministry of Finance, dated 17 February 1993, contained the
following provisions:

Section 16

Customs proceedings outside the customs area

(in relation to Section 102, subsection 4 of the [Customs] Act)

(1) Ifa declarant requests the realisation of customs proceedings outside the customs area, the declarant
must make the request sufficiently in advance, inform the customs authority of the approximate amount
of goods and the type of goods using the nomenclature which is common in commerce and propose the

 

' Act 71/1967 on Administrative Proceedings.

il

time for the realisation of the customs proceedings; the declarant is obliged to inform the customs
authority of any subsequent changes to this information.and to do so without any undue delay.

(2) Customs proceedings may take place outside a customs area, if this is justified by reasons of economy,
especially if it simplifies the transportation of-the goods, or if it is otherwise imperative and does not

breach the regular.activities of the customs authority.
(3) Customs proceedings do not take place outside the customs area, if the customs authority designates

that the customs supervision will only be realised by means of an inspection of the documents and written
materials,

(4) the customs authority will realise the customs proceedings outside a customs area, provided that all of
the necessary documents pertaining to the product and the means of transport, in which the goods are
transported, are prepared in the period proposed by the declarant, so that the customs proceedings can be
commenced immediately and concluded without delay,

(5) If the customs authority undertakes the customs proceedings outside a customs area, the declarant will
defray the customs authority the costs of the proceedings as follows.

Section 43
Upon application of the declarant, who proposes the release of goods into free circulation, the customs

authorities may, subject to the conditions stated in Sections 44 to 46, permit the imported goods to be
presented at the premises used for business by the declarant, or in other places outside the customs area as

authorised by the customs authorities,

Section 44
(1) The customs authorities may issue an authorisation under Section 43, if

(a) the applicant’s records enable efficient contro] by the customs authorities, in particular contro] after

the release of the goods,
(b) the adherence to prohibitions and restraints and other provisions, which govern the release of goods.

into free circulation, can be assured.

(2) The customs authorities do not grant a permit under Section 43, if the person, who applies for the
permit,

(a) repeatedly has violated customs regulations,

(b):only occasionally proposes-the-release of goods inte-free circulation.

Section 45
(1) If the customs authorities discover that the applicant has repeatedly violated customs regulations, they

will withdraw the permit granted,
(2) The customs authorities may withdraw the granted permit, if they discover that the applicant only

occasionally proposes the release of goods into free circulation.

Section 46
(1) A person, who is granted a permit, is obliged, after presentation of the goods at the location specified

in Section 43,

(a) to inform the customs authorities immediately about delivery of goods, in the form and under
conditions set by the customs authorities,

(b) to enter the delivered goods into its records which must, in particular, include data making it possible
to determine the character of the goods and the date when it was entered into the register,

(c) to prepare such documents as are necessary for the release of goods into free circulation.

(2) If the proper execution of customs supervision is not effected, the customs authorities may authorise a

person who is granted a permit pursuant to Section 43,
(a) to submit a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) already at the time of imminent delivery of the

goods,

(b) in special cases, depending on the kind of goods and the frequency of imports, not to inform the
customs authorities about each delivery of goods, if all data, which the customs authorities consider
necessary for the performance of any possible customs control, are presented to the customs authorities.
The entry of the goods into the declarant’s records in these cases is considered as an authorisation to
dispose of the goods,

Section 47
An application for the permission listed in Section 43 has to contain the following information:

a) the exact denomination of the goods which it concerns,

b) a proposal form of notification that the goods were clelivered outside the customs area,

c) a proposal for the mode of record of the goods delivered outside the customs area,

d) a commitment to prepare documents that are necessary for the release of the goods into free circulation
or into the regime of storing goods in the oustoms storage area,

e) a proposal for the time-limit, within which the customs declaration will be submitted to the customs

office,
f) a proposal for the designation of the day from which it will be possible to consider the goods as

released.

Section 48
A permission mentioned in Section 43 has to contain the information given in the application that was

handed in according to Section 47.

12. Both Section 5(1)(b) of the Excise Taxes Act and Section 43(2) of the VAT Act, as in
force in 1994 and 1995, stipulated that, when importing goods to the Czech Republic, a tax
liability arises on the day the customs debt occurs. According to Section 2(e) of the Excise
Taxes Act and Section 2(2)(i) of the VAT Act, the customs authorities were entrusted with the
function of tax administrator in respect of imports, while in other cases the tax administrator
was the regional revenue authority.

IV. The proceedings

13, On 29 March 2005, the Claimant, with reference to Article 10 of the Czech-German BIT,
informed the Czech Republic (hereinafter called “the Respondent”) that he requested the
opening of proceedings against the Respondent, provided that no conciliation was reached
within a six-month period in respect of his claim for compensation for damage he had
suffered to his investment in the Czech Republic. As no settlement of the dispute was reached,
the Claimant subsequently instituted arbitration proceedings against the Respondent. In these
proceedings he alleges that the Respondent breached his rights as an investor under Articles
2(1},(2) and(3). 3(!) and (2). 4(1) and (2) and 7(1) of the BIT,

AKt 2) ands). A(t} and (2). 4(7) (2} (1)

14, In accordance with Article 10 of the BIT, an Arbitral Tribunal was set up which is at
present composed of Professor Jurgen Creutzig (appointed by the Claimant), Professor
Emmanuel Gaillard (appointed by the Respondent) and Justice Hans Danelius, Chairman
(appointed by the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce). The Arbitral
Tribunal, after hearing the Parties, decided that the place of arbitration should be Prague.

15. The Arbitral Tribunal decided, on 29 October 2006, to deal separately with the
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction in a first phase of the proceedings. On 15 December
2006, the Tribunal also decided, if it should find that it had jurisdiction in the case, to deal
separately with the issues of liability and quantum.

16. In an Award of 6 June 2007, the Tribunal rejected the Respondent’s objections to the
Arbitra] Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

17. The Claimant, who had submitted a partial Statement of Claim on 2 October 2006,
supplemented it with a full Statement of Claim in respect of liability on 3 September 2007, to
which the Respondent replied in a Statement of Defence of 3 December 2007.

18. A Second Memorial was submitted by the Claimant on 10 July 2008 and by the
Respondent on 3] January 2009.

13

19. The fina] hearing on the liability issue was scheduled to be held on 13-17 July 1999 but
was postponed. Instead, it was decided, in May 2009, that the fina] hearing on liability should

be held between 2 and 10 November 2009.
20. On 20 August 2009, the Respondent ‘informed the Arbitral Tribunal that the Tribunal’s
Award of 6 June 2007 has been set aside on 22 June 2009 by a District Court in Prague which

had found that the Claimant was a Czech permanent resident and therefore not entitled to
initiate arbitration proceedings based on the Czech-German BIT, The Respondent requested

the Tribunal] to discontinue any steps in the arbitration proceedings.

21, On 28 August 2009, the Claimant informed the Arbitra] Tribunal-that he had appealed
against the judgment of the Prague District Court. Nevertheless, the Claimant requested that
the November hearing be cancelled and that re-scheduling of the hearing be made in
consultation with the Parties.

22. On 1 September 2009, the Tribunal, having regard to the wishes of both Parties, decided
to cance] the November hearing and not to determine for the time being any new date for a
hearing. The Tribunal stated, however, that it remained open for any suggestions from the
Parties regarding the further proceedings, including new dates for a hearing on liability.

23. On 20 November 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal proposed to hold a telephone conference
with the Parties in order to be informed of any developments in the Czech court proceedings
and to have the Parties’ views on their expected further duration, including the possibilities of

any further appeals to a higher court.

24. On 24 November 2009, the Respondent replied that it did not deem it necessary to
organise a conference call to further elaborate on the issues addressed in the Arbitral
Tribunal’s letter. .

25. On 4 December 2009, the Claimant’s counsel informed the Arbitral Tribunal that the
Claimant had fallen ill and could not, for the time being, discuss matters in connection with
. the arbitration. The Claimant’s counsel therefore suggested that a conference call be
scheduled at a later point in time and added that he would convey to-the Tribunal] and the

Respondent whatever information on any development he would receive.

26. On 3 February 2010, the Arbitral Tribunal decided to declare the proceedings suspended,
while indicating its readiness at any time to consider a request by either Party for the
proceedings to be resumed. .

27. In a letter of 11 October 2010 to the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal, referring to a decision
of 2 July 2010 by the City Court of Prague to annul the District Court’s judgment of 22 June
2009, asked the Parties whether, in view of this development, it might be appropriate to
resume the arbitration proceedings.

28, In letters of 19 October and 9 November 2010, the Claimant requested the Arbitral
Tribunal to continue the proceedings. In a letter of 25 October 2010, the Respondent
expressed the view that the proceedings should be further discontinued.

14

29, On 23 November 2010, the Arbitral Tribunal, noting that a request for resumption of the
proceedings had been made by one of the Parties, found it appropriate, in conformity with its
declaration in the decision of 3 February 2010, to grant this request.

30, Supplementary written briefs were submitted by the Claimant on 15 February 2011 and by
the Respondent on 15 April 2011. Cost claims were submitted by the Parties on 10 June 2011.

31, The final hearing in the case was held in Prague on 23-27 May 2011. The Claimant, who

was present in person, was also represented at the hearing by Mr Mr.
. and Mr, as counsel. The Respondent was represented by Mr.
‘, Mr. » Mr. and Mr. as counsel. In

addition to the Claimant, Mr. Binder, who was questioned at the hearing, the following
persons were heard as witnesses or experts:

(a) at the Claimant ‘s request:
Mr,

Mr.

Mr. <

Mr...

Mr.*

Mr,

(b) at the Respondent 's request:
Mr.

Mr.

Mr..

Mr.

Mr.

Mr.

Mr. °

Ms

Mr.

V. The Parties’ claims
32, The Claimant requests that the Arbitral Tribunal should issue:

(a) a declaration that the Czech Republic has acted in breach of the following provisions of the
Czech-German BIT:

Ci) the obligation of fair and equitable treatment [Article 2(1)],

(ii) the obligation not to impair investments by arbitrary or discriminatory measures
[Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3 (2)],

(iii) the obligation of full protection and security [Articles 2(3) and 4(1)],

Civ) the obligation not to deprive the Claimant of his investment [Article 4 (2)], and

(v) the obligation to treat investments at least as well as required by international law
[Article 7(1)],

(b) a declaration that the Tribunal retains jurisdiction and that the Tribunal, in a third phase of this
arbitration, will address the appropriate redress for the Treaty breaches, including questions of

quantum, and

(©) an order that the Czech Republic pay the costs accrued in this arbitration, including the costs of
the Tribunal and the legal and other costs incurred by the Claimant.

33. The Respondent requests that the Tribunal should:

(a) dismiss all the Claimant’s claims pursuant to the Czech-German BIT,

(b) order the Claimant to pay all the costs and expenses of this arbitration, including the fees
and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and the fees and expenses of the Respondent’s legal

representation, on a full indemmity basis, and

(c) award such other relief as the Arbitral Tribunal considers appropriate.

VI. The Parties’ arguments

34, The Parties’ arguments in regard to the liability’issues are mairily as follows: ”

A. The Claimant:

(a) Relevant background

35. In connection with the separation of the Czech and Slovak Republics in 1993, a customs
union was established between the two states. Consequently, export and import of goods
between the Czech and Slovak Republics should be exempt-from customs and similar levies,
Nevertheless, all iniport'and export of goods ‘betweeri the Slovak Reptiblic anid-the Czech
Republic were still to undergo customs -proceedings-in. order to monitor flows.of goods across
the border for balance-of-trade and statistical purposes. There was no statutory basis at the
relevant time for the assessment and collection of excise taxes within the framework of the
customs proceedings, but these taxes had to be settled within the system of the internal tax

administration.

36. According to the Czech Customs Act, the highest supervisory customs authority was the
Genera] Customs Directorate which, in its turn, constituted a division of the Finance Ministry.
The General Customs Directorate was entrusted with general supervisory and regulatory

functions.

37. Directly under the General Customs Directorate sorted Regional Customs Offices which
were entrusted with a monitoring role in relation to lower customs offices, and with a variety
of decision-making functions, such as granting authorisations for deferral of tax payments in

the context of transit of goods.

38. Under the Regional Customs Offices sorted 18 lower-echelon customs offices (ah
example of such an office is Zlfn). These customs offices were entrusted with the actual
processing of the individual customs operations, such as decisions to release goods “under the
proposed customs procedure” (Sections 10, 11(1)(a) of the Customs Act), to assess and collect
customs due and to determine “customs value”, to grant deferral of customs payments and
enforce payment of outstanding amounts. They were also authorised to grant declarants the

right to use a “simplified customs procedure”.

39. Further, it was a duty of the customs offices to “carry out direct supervision of the
movement of persons, goods and means of transportation in the customs border zone” as part
of customs supervision and to carry out “control after the release of goods”, pursuant to
Section 11(1)(i) and(n), respectively.

40, Customs supervision begins when customs proceedings are initiated, for instance — as of
relevance in this case — when a transit customs declaration (“TCP”) is issued in respect of a
specific shipment. Customs supervision terminates upon fulfilment of final customs clearance
at an inland customs office. Upon that event, the goods “are released into free circulation”,
which brings into operation Section 240(2) of the Customs Act. This Article stipulates that
“[t]he customs debt shall be incurred at the moment when the goods are removed from

customs supervision”.

41, There was no final customs clearance at the Slovak-Czech border crossings in respect of
the import operations which are relevant in this case. Final customs clearance took place at
inland customs offices (“customs offices of final destination”, in the terminology of the
Customs Act) or — subject to specific authorisation by the customs authorities ~ at the location
of the importer. A “customs debt” according to the Customs Act would arise if goods were
unlawfully removed from customs supervision,

42, In practical terms, hauliers passing the borders of the Czech Republic were directed to a
specified inland customs office for purposes of presenting the goods at that location (ar, if
authorised by the customs authorities, at the location of the importer in a “simplified customs
procedure”). This arrangement, in its turn, prompted the necessity for the haulier to obtain a
TCP for purposes of authorising movement of the goods from the customs office at the
national Czech border (“customs office of dispatch”) to the inland customs office (“customs
office of destination”). The TCP is issued by’ the customs agent, Part 5 of the TCP contains a
larger portion which after final presentation of the goods is returned to the customs office of
dispatch by internal routing within the customs administration and a smaller bottom part
which is returned via the driver of the relevant tank truck to the customs agent.

43. As regards the shipments of oi! products from the Slovnafi refinery, which are the subject
matter of the present case, the following procedure was applied in practice:

(a) When arriving at the Czech border point Bieclav-ddlnice, the driver of the tank truck, as a
first step, reported to the local CARGO office, CARGO being a duly licensed customs agent.
The driver handed in the bottom part of the Part 5 slip from any previous TCP, duly signed,
numbered and stamped by the inland customs office. This document constituted proof that the
haulier had complied with the procedure of presenting any previous shipment for final
customs clearance at an inland customs office. The haulier then requested that CARGO
prepare and deliver a TCP for the new customs transit procedure.

(b) The CARGO office of Bieclav-dalnice verified that the previous transport under the TCP
regime, issued to that particular haulier, had been finally presented at the relevant inland
customs office. This was done by inspection of the Part 5 slip and the customs stamp and
signature affixed to it. The Part 5 slip was then retained by CARGO and filed for verification
purposes. The CARGO office further verified that the requisite shipping documents were
complete and in good order, ie. the CMR way-bill together with a commercial invoice,
packing lists/specification and an export customs declaration, including the necessary data

 

and seals. CARGO would also check the driver’s identity on the basis of his passport and
check his signature on the TCP under the text containing the haulier’s guarantee undertaking:

(c) Provided that these shipping documents were found to be in order, the CARGO office
would prepare the requisite TCP. The particulars of the TCP were also entered into CARGO’s
computer data base, and, additionally, transferred to the customs authorities’ central data base
(SLIGOS), which was accessible for all Czech border and inland customs offices. CARGO.
had its own intranet system, which was also linked to the customs authorities’ database by
way of a third party provider (Transoft), CARGO could — and did — enter data into SLIGOS
but could not get access to information from that-facility.

(d) The TCP was printed in hard copy and handed over to the truck driver for presentation at
the adjacent customs office at the border crossing Breclav-ddlnice. At the same time, the TCP
‘was communicated to that border customs office by intranet in electronic mode. As soon as
the TCP had been received and accepted by the customs office, the specific customs transit
operation would be accounted for as “open” in the customs administration’s data base. At the
same time, a hard copy of the TCP, duly signed and stamped, was issued by the customs
-office..Jt.would.remain “open”.as.long as presentation of the goods at the inland customs

office had not talcen place.

(e) Additionally, CARGO would print out and issue the so-called “‘zdruéuf Listina” — a surety
bond — for the particular transit operation. The surety bond was printed out togetherwith the
TCP and the TCP number (at the bottom) was also printed out in full by the CARGO
computer. The name of the particular “declarant” was added, as well as the date. The surety

bond was additionally signed and stamped by CARGO,

Cf) The struck driver, provided swithan admission slip; would go’to the’customs desk.of ‘the
Bieclay-ddlnice -Customs Office and:hand.over the TCP and the surety bond issued.by the
CARGO office, together with the shipping documents. The customs officer at the customs
office would undertake an inspection of the documents to ensure their consistency and
compliance with the pertinent requirements. As for the surety bond, the customs officer would
add by hand the provisional assessment and sign and stamp the document. In addition, an
optical inspection of the physica] condition of the customs seal on the cargo would be made.

(g) Further, a time-limit for presentation of the goods at the inland customs office (two or a
maximum of three days) would be noted, after which the customs officer would register the
TCP in a binder, “Expedited deliveries”, and, additionally, record the opening of the TCP
prepared by CARGO electronically in the customs software data base.

(n) The driver would proceed to the passport control and then return to his tank truck with the
TCP and associated shipping documents, He would continue to the physical checkpoint,
present the documents and hand over his admission slip to the customs officer, who would
authorise the onward transport in the customs transit regime. The driver would then leave the
border crossing with the shipment, the TCP and the shipping documents.

(i) The customs officer at the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office would then make a copy of the
surety bond and return this copy to CARGO with the provisionally determined amount of
customs charges (or, in this case, the amount of excise taxes) filled in, This would enable
CARGO — as well as the customs authorities themselves — to continuously monitor the

18

aggregate amount of CARGO’s potential guarantee exposure (and that of the hauliers/drivers)
by reason of outstanding “open” shipments in the customs transit regime.

(j) The Bfeclay-dalnice Customs Office sorted, after receipt of its mail, the Part 5 slips (upper
part) in a specific file and also verified the computer-stored update of pending (“open”)
customs operations and their due finalisation.

(k) The truck driver would forward the shipment “under the customs transit regime” to the
inland customs office (or to another place, if a “simplified customs procedure” had been
authorised). There, he would present the goods indicated in the TCP transit document within
the prescribed time-limit and in an unmodified condition to a customs official.

(I) The customs officer a{ the inland customs office would review the documents and inspect
the condition of the customs seal affixed to the cargo. Having ascertained that the docurnents
were in order and that the seal had not been tampered with, the customs official would
confirm that the shipment had been duly presented at the “customs office of destination”. This
he would do by applying a customs stamp to the Part 5 slip of the TCP, together with his
signature, and noting the serial number of the TCP concerned. Additionally, he would enter
the arrival of the transit goods in an “incoming transit book” and in electronic mode,

(m) Moreover, the customs officer of the inland customs office would return the upper part of
the Part 5 slip (return note) — by internal routing within the customs authorities’
administration — and the driver would receive the bottom part of the Part 5 slip. This stamp
constituted proof that the shipment had been presented at the customs office of destination,
and that the liability of the haulier/driver and CARGO had come to an end.

(n) After having made the necessary verification of the accuracy and completeness of the
shipping documents and an inspection of the cargo seals, the customs office would calculate
and determine the amount of excise taxes payable, The Final Customs Declaration ("JCD")
and the shipping documents would be handed out to the importer against payment of the

i io af saninite)
determined am: ine of security),

 

44, All the steps in the customs transit proceedings from the Czech border crossing to final
customs clearance at the inland customs office were entered into and monitored in the
computer network of the Czech customs authorities. The closing of the customs procedure
was registered in the computer data base by the customs office.

45, Neither the haulier/driver nor CARGO had any responsibility for any “customs debt”
which might arise after the goods had been presented to the customs office of destination in
an unaltered state with an intact customs seal and with the accompanying documents. All! the
1,839 shipments of oil products which were the subject of tax fraud had been presented for
customs clearance at the relevant inland customs office, which means that the responsibility
of CARGO (and the hauliers/drivers) in all cases had terminated.

46. In order to ensure that goods in transit were presented at the customs office of destination
for purposes of ensuring final customs clearance, a system of guarantees was in place. The
driver of the tank truck — on behalf of the haulier — signed a guarantee for the amount of
customs duties which had been determined on a preliminary basis by the customs officer at
the border crossing. By making the haulier’s liability immediately enforceable on the basis of
a guarantee undertaking, there was an effective disincentive in place for the haulier to dispose

19

of the goods — e.g, in collusion with the consignee of the goods — without ensuring that the
shipment was properly forwarded and presented to the customs office of destination.

47. In order to provide security for any payment obligation that CARGO might incur, a bank
guarantee was required. It was up to the customs agent to procure a bank guarantee for an
agreed reference amount of potential indebtedness incurred by hauliers/drivers who retained
the services of CARGO. In the case of CARGO, this bank guarantee was established at CZK
15 million (approximately EUR 0.5 million). The particulars of the guarantee were regulated
by Section 259 of the Customs Act. This :was also the reason why CARGO continuously
verified — before issuing new TCPs — that the hauliers/drivers had properly terminated prior

shipments under the transit regime.

48. The Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s., at the request of CARGO, initially issued a
guarantee in the amount of CZK 5 million (approximately EUR 180,000) with a term of
validity until 31 May 1993. In its confirmation letter of 2 July 1993, the Czech Ministry of
Finance accepted the undertaking as a global security. In a letter of 27 October 1993, the
guarantee was extended unti] 31 December 1994 on identical terms. After suggesting that the
amoutit of:the global guarantee should ‘be increased ‘to CZK 30'million (approximately EUR
1 million), the Ministry of Finance, on 31 March 1995, finally accepted that the security
amount could be increased to CZK 15 million, as proposed by CARGO.

49. CARGO issued a surety bond for each transit operation, which accompanied the TCP and
was handed over to the driver of the tank truck. By doing so, CARGO undertook joint and
several liability together with the hauliers/drivers for any customs debt that might arise
because of unlawful removal of goods under the transit regime from customs supervision.

-50; When the amount of the-surety ‘bondwas ‘filled ‘in; the*bond ‘already ‘contained particulars
regarding the relevant hhaulier/driver, the particular TCP number and the date of issuance,
which had all been generated and printed on the form by CARGO’s computer.

51. The TCP number is made up of 13 digits. The first digit (3) designates that it is a customs
transit matter, the digits two to five indicate the relevant border customs office (Breclay-
ddlnice = 0223), the digits six and seven identify the customs agent (CARGO = 51) and the
last six digits designate in sequential order the number of issuance of the individual TCPs.
The entire sequence of digits was generated by the CARGO computer system. The number
was communicated to the customs authorities’ intranet computer system and printed
automatically on all relevant customs documents. It was also used by the intranet facility of
the customs authorities and reiterated in the context of “customs operations” pertaining to the

relevant shipment.

52. There is no way the customs authorities would have failed to notice the accumulation of
_ surety bonds, if there had been one, exactly in the interest of ensuring that they did not exceed
what the guarantor reasonably could be expected to discharge. It is, likewise, inconceivable
that CARGO would issue surety bonds without ascertaining that prior transit operations had
been duly finalised. The situation which finally presented itself was that the customs
authorities advanced guarantee claims against CARGO not only in the amount of the bank
guarantee — CZK 15 million — but one of CZK. 370 million, i.e. an amount twenty-five times

higher than the guaranteed limit.

20

53, The liability of the haulier arises only where there is a failure to present the goods at the
inland customs office. If this requirement is complied with, the duty to pay the “customs debt”
evolves upon the importer. This is why a security is also provided by the importer, i.e. in the
event where the goods have been delivered ex works (as in the present case),

54, It was possible only for a customs officer of a “customs office of dispatch” at a border
crossing — ¢.g, Bteclay-dalnice — to initiate a customs transit authorisation based on a TCP.
However, it was also the duty of the customs official at the inland customs office, for instance
Olomouc or Zlin, to ensure that the TCPs, which had been issued at the border crossing, were
timely and properly finalised at the customs office of destination.

55, It is the Claimant's position that transit shipments have been duly presented and that goods
(1,681 loads of oi! products during a ten months period) were not illegally removed from customs
supervision, at least not by CARGO. The transit shipments were properly performed,
releasing CARGO from liability under its guarantee,

56, Even after the competent Czech court had set aside the guarantee claims, the customs
authorities still did not release funds of CARGO that had been impounded, As a consequence,
CARGO was forced into bankruptcy, and the Claimant's investment was lost.

57. If presentation of the goods has taken place, the liability of the hauliers/drivers provided in
Section 140(2) of the Customs Act will have ceased and the sole responsible party for the
payment of customs taxes and VAT will be the importer. in this case the company CWA spol.
s.t.o (“CWA"). The customs authorities are in a position to ensure — and will ensure — that
payment of customs duties, consumption taxes and VAT will be effected by requiring a guarantee
or equivalent arrangement from the importer. It is evident that the Czech customs authorities never
asked CWA to settle any customs debt, let alone post any guarantee in connection with being
granted the simplified customs procedure. by the Geské Budéiovice Regional Customs Authority

58. If illegal removal of the goods from customs supervision has occurred, all those persons who
are shown to have cartied out the removal, or those who took part in such measure and were aware
or should have been aware of the removal, will become jointly and severally liable for the ensuing
damage according to Section 240(3) of the Customs Act, Obviously, if the importer does not take
part in the illegal removal, he will not incur liability in such a context, It rarely happens that the
importer is involved in the illegal removal from customs supervision. The importer will be easily
identified and therefore will not be able to avoid liability. In the present case all of the 1,839
shipments were actually delivered to CWA.

(b) The tax fraud and the involvement of the customs authorities

59, By the use of a number of sham companies and the involvement of a number of
impecunious front men operating in cahoots with customs officials, it was possible for an
individual by the name of to import refined oil products (gasoline and diesel
oil) into the Czech Republic from the Slovnaft refinery in Slovalcia, acting in the guise of the
patently insolvent company CWA, without paying the relevant excise taxes. The fraudulent
scheme enabled the concerned individual to avoid excise taxes representing, according to
certain media reports, a figure in the area of CZK 0.5 billion (approximately EUR 17.5
million).

   

21

60. What happened in the.case of CWA and the other sham companies was that the inland
customs office simply stamped and returned to the haulier the Part 5 slip, but without securing
the payment of the relevant tax impositions (normally oscillating around CZK 300,000 or
approximately EUR 10;000 per tank -truck).“It can also be established thatthe inland customs
office entered into the computer records the fact that the relevant customs transit operation

had been duly terminated,

61. Three of the impecunious front men taking part in the tax fraud ("the Diesel case”) —
| — were indicted by the public prosecutor

was given a 10 year prison sentence, The promoter of the entire tax

already in 1996,
who was subsequently also prosecuted and sentenced to a term of

fraud was *
imprisonment.

62. From a writ of prosecution of 13 April 1999 and the judgment of 18 January 2002 against
+, the following details appear:

 

(a). . succeeded in a two-months period (13 June - 14 September 1994) to import and
spirit off no less than’643 tank trucks fully loaded with oi] products, thereby avoiding to pay a
customs debt of almost CZK 200 million (approximately EUR 6 million). In the next few
months (6 September - 29 December 1994), he also, through the entirely insolvent company
HOREX Zlin s.r.o., managed to avoid payment of excise taxes by its failure to honour tax
assessments relating to the import of 764 truck loads of oi] products in the amount of
approximately CZK 230 million (approximately EUR 8 million). He would not-have'been
able to do this without the active involvement of the customs authorities.

(b)* s participation in the tax fraud involved CZK 55
‘million(approximately EUR 2-million); and-CZI¢ 25" mitthion fapproximately BURT “million),

respectively, rightfully due to the Czech treasury. : acted under the trading
which carried out 207 shipments of oil products in the period

name
ran up a tax

16November - 5 December 1994. During the same period
debt of CZK 54.6 million (approximately EUR 2 million), more than fifteen times the amount

of the required security, This bears witness of the inadequacy of the requested security and the
complicity of the customs authorities in the tax fraud.

(c): , who in all likelihood was also involved in the tax fraud, was sentenced to a
10 year prison sentence by a judgment of the Brno District Court in the year 2000.

63. The oi] purchases were carried out as follows. CWA placed orders with the Slovnaft
refinery in Slovakia for diesel and gasoline consignments, usually by telephone or fax. The
purchase orders were given by either " or his hired hand » The
customs invoices issued by Slovnaft identified Slovnaft as seller and CWA as purchaser. As
final consignees of the shipments were indicated CWA itself or one or the other of a number

of sham companies (Unitip, Kredit, ; Horex, and others).

64, The “importers” who were granted the simplified procedure were manifestly insolvent
companies, represented by impecunious front men with no professional record whatsoever, let
alone in the oil trade (however, in the cases of Messrs and with a criminal
record), There was never more than one importer, i.e. : . The other figure-heads
were never observed by persons involved in the import operations. In flagrant breach of the
statutory requirements, only nominal — if any — security for the customs debt was requested,

22

let alone provided. The various sham companies applied a rotating application scheme for
window dressing purposes.

65, Already the fact that the Czech customs authorities extended open unsecured credits to a
number of manifestly indigent companies in an aggregate amount of at least EUR 17.5 million
during some nine months proves that the customs authorities were implicated in the illegal

scheme,

66. What the Claimant needs to establish in this case is that the transit shipments have been duly
presented and that the windfall gained by CWA by avoiding payment of taxes and VAT
(according to the prosecutor amounting to the counter-value of approximately EUR 20 million)
has been made possible by assistance or negligence from inside the customs organisation to
provide a simplified procedure without proper safeguards and to cover up the consequences of the
tax fraud or dysfunctionality of the supervision and control functions of the Czech customs
administration at the time. In this case, the Claimant needs to show such involvement or, as a
minimum, dysfunctionality in the Czech customs administration as having caused the loss of the
Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic in order to establish a breach under international
law,

67. There are circumstances of a general nature that conclusively support the Claimant's case.

68. During the period July 1994 - April 1995 almost two thousand tank trucks crossed one and the
same border crossing and had TCPs issued by one and the same customs office of dispatch. the
Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office. All the trucks went to one and the same place "en masse". i.¢
to the "clispatching" of CWA, Although an average of almost ten trucks a day passed the Slovak-
Czech border, week after week, no "missing" truck was suspected until at the very end of April
1995. One should add that even larger volumes of oil products that were imported by CWA
came in hy rail.

69. There would have been no incentive for CWA to carry on any unauthorised simplified
procedure creating a situation where the goods would have been considered as unlawtully
removed from customs supervision, as this would expose it to the adverse economic consequences
of such removal.

70. CWA occupied a work force of some fifty people in order to deal with dispatching of a
volume of, as an average, 200 tons of oi! products each day. Lipovd and Slugovice were located in
the immediate vicinity of Zlfn. There is no way that the customs offices in the region could
remain ignorant of the occurrences at this major place of activities and they would have reacted if
something sinister happened.

71, An important element of the tax fraud consisted in the indication in the customs invoices, the
TCPs and the CMR waybills of a number of consignees based on an alleged "Consignments
Agreement" of 24 March 1994 with supplements of 25 August 1994 and 12 September 1994. This
setup was evidently driven by an intention to off-load the tax debt on insolvent front men. It is
likely that the authorisations issued — legitimately or illegitimately — by the Zlfn customs office
for. ~ +, Horex and Unitip were also intended to promote this intent. Whatever the purpose
was, it is beyond any doubt that the documents were fabricated by one or more customs officials
at the Zlin customs office.

72. The tax fraud concerned exclusively the import of oil products into the Czech Republic

 

23

from the Slovnaft refinery in Bratislava in Slovakia. These oil imports were in al] cases and at
all times based on sales contracts concluded by Slovnaft as seller and CWA as buyer..The
contracts were of.a call nature within the limits of certain forecast preliminary quantities
based ion quarterly delivery periods, All:deliveries of oi] products were*invoiced to: CWA’ and
CWA was the sole debtor in relation to Slovnaft in respect of deliveries of oi] products.

73. The Slovnaft customs invoices in all cases also included particulars regarding a "consignee"
( — , Horex, Unitip, » 5 etc.). These "consignees" were irrelevant from a customs
point of view. Orders for.deliveries. of oil:products and their specific category were forwarded -by
fax from CWA. Slovnaft produced and prepared the deliveries thus ordered, issued a notice of
readiness for delivery and issued an invoice to CWA. For each ready shipment, CWA issued a
transport order to one of a large number of road hauliers, according to which the haulier was
directed to Slovnatt to load.the particular shipment. These transport orders were invariably issued

by CWA, irrespective of whether the consignee wasCWA,? —_, Horex, Unitip or
or anyone else, The transport order also included particulars concerning the place of delivery and

the customs formalities to observe (i.e. forwarding in transit-regime and presentation in-Lipova or
SluSovice according to the simplified procedure granted to CWA). Payments for transports were
-in-all-cases executed by.CWA -(to.the-extent.they followed).

74, Practically all transit shipments of oil products — irrespective of who the consignee was —
proceeded to the CWA "dispatching" in Lipova or Slugovice. At these locations, authorised by the
simplified procedure granted to CWA, the goods were presented by the hauliers -and the
documents, i.e. the TCP, the commercial invoice and the CMR waybill, were presented. CWA
acknowledged receipt of the shipments in all cases on the CMR waybills and the Zlin customs
office confirmed.Part 5 of the TCP. The Part 5 slip was provided to the driver and Part 5 .(upper
part) of the TCP was returned by internal routing from the customs office of destination’to the
~customs’office of dispatch: Fhe-shipments-with CWA-as-consignee and-the ones -with-other:fronts,
were all customs cleared under-the permit for a simplified procedure granted to CWA by the Ceské

Budéjovice Regional Customs Authority.

75. The only exception from this procedure were deliveries where ~ acted as
consignee and front man. ' * had, with the oi] import business, managed to secure a
simplified procedure at the customs office of Stran{ against the deposition of CZK 5 million
(which funds had been put at disposal by CWA). However, irrespective of this
different regime, transit shipments indicating as a consignee were also transported
to the "dispatching" of CWA, where receipt of the shipments was confirmed by CWA.

76. Documents, i.e, the TCP, the CMR waybill, the customs invoice and specifications, were
prepared and collected by CWA employees and brought over to the Zlin customs office on a
regular basis, Consistent with relevant instructions, the Zlin customs office, iver alia, returned
Part 5 (upper part) of the TCP to the Bieclay-ddlnice Customs Office. The customs office checked
Part 5 with the original page 1 of the TCP, which had been retained, and, having satisfied itself
that these documents were duly completed, closed ("discharged") the transit operation in the hard

copy and the electronic files of the customs office.

77. After the TCP and the goods under the simplified procedure allowed to CWA were presented
at Lipovd or SluSovice, the drivers were given onward delivery instructions to the final
buyers/consignees of the oi! products. The seller of the oi] products to the final buyers was at all
times CWA, and it was CWA which invoiced and collected payment from the final buyers for

deliveries at all times,

78. The simplified procedure allowed CWA was granted by the Ceské Budéjovice Regional
Customs Authority, which is situated some 300 km from Zlin. The authorisation must have been
granted in contravention of the most basic requirements for such a step. Essentially, there had
been no requirement imposed by the customs authorities that CWA should pose a guarantee for
satisfying payments of accruing excise taxes and VAT.

79. There is no way that any customs office of any national customs administration in any
reasonably developed country in the world could fail to notice that 90% of truck loads of oil
products disappeared between its national border crossing along a motorway to a place of
destination 80 lm into the country within a period of 10 months, Neither did any such thing
happen, One reason why it succeeded in this particular case is that "open" TCPs were
successively presented to the Zl{n customs office and so reported to the customs office of
dispatch, i.e, the Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office, which discharged the TCPs,

80, Already this basic factual state creates a compelling prima facie case that customs offices
have taken active part in shielding from customs control the circumstances by which CWA er
consortes managed to steer through the Czech customs contro! more than two thousand truck
loads of oil products, voiding to pay approximately EUR 20 million, It was up to the customs
office of dispatch to monitor transit shipments and assure that these were properly finalised.
In the cases relevant for this case, this task fell to the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office. The
way in which the contro! was ensured was by having the inland customs office forward all the
Part 5 copies of the TCP (the upper, larger part) duly numbered, signed and stamped by an
officer of that office and sent on a daily basis by mail to the originating customs office of
dispatch, During the relevant period, the Bteclav-dalnice Customs Office received on a daily
basis an average of around 50 such Part 5 forms, relating to incoming traffic, witnessing the
termination of the relevant shipments. Among these Part 5 forms, 1,778 confirmations were
received in respect of TCPs relating to the fraudulent CWA imports.

 

81. In order to monitor these incoming, "closed" TCPs against "opened" TCPs, the Breclav-
délnice Customs Office had delegated four customs orficcis iv work witit cviiaiing and

registering the status of TCPs,

82. The fact that all these copies arrived by mail, in envelopes originating from the Zlin
Custorns Office (and occasionally from other customs offices) and that, therefore, the Part 5
forms with the "forged stamps" originated from the Zl{n Customs Office establishes either
that customs officers at that customs office of destination were involved in the tax fraud or
that, as the Claimant believes, all the shipments have been duly presented.

83. Of course, if the customs office of destination had not mailed to the dispatch office any
Part 5 forms, confirming presentation of the goods at the inland customs office, that border
customs office — as the office responsible for discharging TCP operations ~ would have
intervened at an early stage and noted the traffic which was unaccounted for.

84. A computer printout of 27 May 1995 lists six open TCPs which shows that all the other
TCPs had been registered as discharged at the time by the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office on
the basis of Part 5 forms returned from the Zlfn Customs Office (and occasionally other inland
customs offices). Indeed, the printout provides proof that the Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office
had received all of the Part 5 confirmations from essentially the Zlin Customs Office (with the
exception of four shipments). It is fully consistent with the fact that all TCPs have been

25

discharged (but six) and with the fact that the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office at no relevant
time initiated the statutorily required inquiry procedure.

~85.Fhe continuous:surveillance and-sontro] of customs-operations'that-take place on-national
territory is at all times a fundamental ‘function ofthe customs administration of any country.
On the occasion when a TCP is issued by the border:customs. office, in this case the Breclay-
ddlnice Customs Office, a last date for presentation of the goods at the customs office of
destination is stipulated. The closure of TCPs is monitored by the discharging office, ie. the
customs office of dispatch, on a daily basis. According to the internal directives applicable at
the time, it was the duty of the customs office of dispatch to initiate a so-called inquiry
procedure no later than 15 days after the last date of presentation had passed for the particular
transit shipment ifno Part 5 (upper part) copy had ‘been received. This inquiry procedure was

initiated by way of an inquiry letter.
(c) The alleged forgery andthe implication of customs officials

86. The customs officials use specific stamps to confirm the authenticity of confirmations and
tovissue other statements made by the customs authorities.-Of particular relevance in this case
are the stamps affixed on the Part 5 slips'in order to provide the haulier/driver with proof that
goods have.been duly presented at the inland customs office and that, as a-consequence, the
liability of the hauliers/drivers for due performance of the forwarding of the shipment i in the

customs transit regime has ended,

87. According to the rules in effect, each customs officer was assigned a specific stamp’with
the individual sequential number for which the concerned individual had to sign and carry

r esponsibi ity,

88. The customs: stamp with the personal number 12 was assigned to ‘to a customs 1s officer a at Zin
by the name of; . who, according to the Brno judgment in the Diesel case, stated
that he never used his stamp for stamping documents to confirm that certain goods imported
into the Czech Republic from abroad were cleared at customs. The question therefore arises as
to who used this stamp and for what purpose. and how and in what circumstances the theory
arose that the stamp was forged. It should also be explained why the stamps, whether

authentic or forged, were destroyed (if that is the case).

89. The other stamp with the persona] number 21 was assigned to another customs officer at
the inland customs office in Zlin by the name of : who, according to the Brno
judgment, stated that his superior provided him with documents that were stamped with a
forged stamp with the same number as the one assigned to him. One may ask oneself why the
law enforcement agencies were satisfied with this astounding allegation and who was the
superior engaging in such pursuits. it is also remarkable that : himself did not
have any objection to someone using a forged stamp with the same number as the one

assigned to him.

90. Forensic examinations carried out by the Czech police authorities as to the authenticity of
the stamps used to confirm the prescribed presentation of goods at the customs office of
destination on the Part 5 slips concluded that the stamps, which were subject to examination,
having the identification number “Olomouc C 1366, persona] number 21”, when compared
with an imprint of a purportedly authentic stamp (Olomouc C 1373, personal number. 12),
revealed differences “in the external dimensions of the impressions of the stamps”. From this

26

observation, the forensic experts concluded that the first stamps were “forgeries”. However,
this conclusion is, in the Claimant's view, wrong. Firstly, the observation has not been made
on the basis of the original stamps which, according to information from the customs
authorities, had been destroyed. Instead, the conclusion was based on imprints from the
stamps. It must be noted here that the stamps consist of natural rubber or an artificial resin,
which will vary in its dimensions depending on the ambient temperature, the pressure with
which the stamp is applied and the physical characteristics of the surface on which they are
applied.

91, But, more importantly, it is not clear what would have been the point of using “forged”
stamps. Final customs clearance did, after all, take place, excise taxes were calculated and
determined, and the entire case against each and all of the importers CWA ef consortes was
based on the fundamental premise that they managed to bring the shipments of oil products
through final customs clearance without providing security for payment of excise taxes, let
alone making the requisite payments, None of the hauliers/drivers are accused of having
failed to present the transit goods at the inland customs offices in the materials belonging to
the prosecutions of ef consories.

92, What is problematic with the hypothesis concerning “forged stamps” is that these
allegations were formulated in 1995, while the associated forensic examinations (not of the
stamps, for some reason, but of the stamp imprints) clid not take place until 1996 and 1998,
What is even more problematic is that a very large number of Part 5 slips relate to transit
operations which, also in the view of the Czech customs authorities, have been duly
terminated. These were provided with the same “forged” stamps.

93. The decision by the customs offices to raise guarantee claims against CARGO and some
of the hauliers/drivers was dictated by an effort on the part of the customs authorities to cover
up for the fraud in which they had participated, a fraud by which the Czech treasury has
incurred damages in an amount in excess of CZK 0.5 billion. If the customs authorities,
hypothetically, had not taken part in the sham, it would not have been necessary for them to

to cover up th
to cover up th:

 
   

sused by the tnx fraud.

   

 

94, Czech customs officials must have been implicated in the tax fraud. In any event, the
contention of the customs authorities that the shipments had not been presented at the inland
customs office cannot be correct. In all the 1,839 cases (irrespective of whether the importer
occasionally may have paid the excise taxes or not), the inland customs office assessed the
amount of excise taxes on the basis of JCDs, payable by the various sham companies that
figure in the tax fraud and these figures have subsequently formed the basis for the public
prosecutor's charges against the collaborators in the tax fraud.

95. From this follows that the hauliers/drivers must have presented the goods at the inland
customs office and, by so doing, caused the expiry of their (and CARGO’s) guarantee
undertakings, because, if they had failed to do so, the customs authorities would not have
been able to calculate and determine the amounts of excise taxes payable on each shipment. It
is also a fact that the sham companies are accused of having removed the goods from customs
supervision, In fact, this was the entire case of the public prosecutor in the prosecutions of

et consortes. This would not have been possible, if the hauliers/drivers had
already illegally removed the goods from customs supervision.

27

96. But even if the customs authorities were innocent of any wrongdoing and simply the
victims of a major fraud, the Respondent would still carry responsibility under the Czech-
German BIT for what transpired. If these had been the facts of the case, it would imply that
the‘ customs ‘authorities ‘had opted -for-a course«of: conduct .which ‘consisted in- the illegal
enforcement of at least. 1,245 guarantee claims against CARGO and a number of
hauliers/drivers for purposes of indemmnifying themselves for damage caused to them by a

third, unrelated party.

(d) The consequences for CARGO

97, The transiting of oi] shipments from the Slovnaft refinery in Slovakia to the Czech
Republic were carried out on ‘a routine basis essentially during the time period June 1994 -
April 1995 in compliance with the customs regulations. The CARGO office at the Breclay-
ddinice border-crossing routinely and regularly prepared TCPs on behalf of hauliers/drivers of
oi] products, and it was routinely and regularly provided with the Part 5 slips from the
hauliers/drivers, returning from the customs office of destination (or the place authorised by
the customs authorities under the simplified customs procedure). There was, obviously, no
~weason for CARGO (or the individual hauliers/drivers) to doubt that their obligation to present
the shipments at the “customs office of destination” had béen duly Somplied with arid “that
their potential liability under their guarantee undertakings had expired.

98. In respect of the 1,839 shipments of oil products, imported by CWA ef consories, there
was, strictly speaking, no question of “unlawful remoyal] from customs supervision”. There
was simply a situation-where certain customs officials allowed the shipments, after properly
conducted customs clearance proceedings, to be “released into free circulation”, although
excise taxes had not-been paid nor security been posted. In all cases — except three ofa total
-number ‘of 1;839 —-the-Part-5~slip -was-retumed-to -GARGO -(as -well-as-to -the- originating
customs office of dispatch, ie. in these cases the Bieclav-délnice Customs Office) as a
confirmation of presentation of the shipments at the inland customs office. For more than a
year the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office also continuously received the larger portion of the
Part 5 slips, finally amounting to around 7,700 copies in total for 1994-1995 (not limited to
CWA-telated shipments), without pretending that the stamps affixed on these confirmations
were “forgeries”. It was also notified of the closure of TCPs by way of the customs

authorities’ computer intranet facility.

 

99. Not until] much later— the first indications came from the Bieclay-dalnice Customs Office
at the end of April 1995 - was there any indication that something irregular was happening.
At that time CARGO was told by an officer at that “customs office of dispatch”, that
shipments had not been presented at the inland customs offices (or any alternative, duly
approved location). In response, CARGO presented copies of the Part 5 slips, showing the
relevant customs stamps. When comparing the copies of the Part 5 slips filed with the
Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office, it was possible to establish that those stamps were identical
with the ones provided to CARGO, and that also the Breclay-dalnice Customs Office had
accepted these as authentic confirmations and closed all the relevant TCPs. In response to this
observation, the customs authorities declared that the stamps were “forgeries”, however,
without proffering any explanation or supporting evidence for such an astounding proposition.

100. In the context of the first oral allegations that shipments forwarded in the customs transit
regime — even those having taken place as early as 8-9 months earlier ~ had not been duly

28

presented at the inland customs offices (or alternative locations), the customs authorities also
initiated a practice of methodical harassment of hauliers/drivers being serviced by CARGO.

101, Apart from false guarantee claims which were sent to CARGO, there was a systematic
stoppage of hauliers not only at the Bteclav-dalnice border crossing but also at other border
crossings (not only bordering on Slovakia) such as Mosty u Jablunkova, Hodonin,
Sudoméfice, Mikulov, Cinovec, Folmava, Pomez{ nad Oht!, Rozvadov, Dub{, Brno, Praha-
Nupaky, Praha-Ruzyné, Ostrava and Cesky TéSin, These stoppages created in each instance
delays of three or four days, during which CARGO had to undertake extraordinary measures
to clear the shipments with the General Directorate of Customs by making direct solicitations
to , who was the head of its legal department. The stoppages of shipments
at the border crossings were linked to the trumped-up guarantee claims and would not have
occurred but for the fact that the customs authorities elected to pursue such illegal guarantee
claims,

102, Information about the singling out of CARGO for this discriminatory treatment of
shipments immediately spread among the hauliers involved in the international haulage
business into the Czech Republic. As a consequence, the principal business of CARGO, the
international forwarding and freight operations, went into steep decline. Business plummeted
from CZK 105 million (approximately EUR 3.7 million) in 1994 to a middling CZK 3 million
(approximately EUR 100,000) in 1995.

103. Up to the year 2000, there seemed to be prospects to rehabilitate CARGO to ensure its
survival, However, beginning in 1999 and picking up momentum in the year 2000, the
customs authorities embarked on the route of enforcement of customs decisions, impounding
CARGO's bank accounts and other assets. By impounding, during the period 1999-2001, a
total amount somewhat in excess of CZK 45 million (approximately EUR 1.5 million), the
customs authorities totally paralysed CARGO’s entire operations in the year 2000. A ficr that
time, hopes were entertained by the Claimant io resoive the existing deadiock by negotiations
with representatives of the Czech Ministry of Finance and other officials. However, this was
unsuccessful, and CARGO’s bankruptey could not be avoided

104. The customs authorities were fully aware that the false guarantee claims agains CARGO.
and certain hauliers/drivers lacked foundation. They were issued solely with the intent to
cover up the deficit, which had accumulated as a result of the endemic failure of the customs
authorities to collect excise taxes from CWA ef consortes, the illegal scheme which the
customs authorities had knowingly aided and abetted, In all these cases the customs
authorities falsely declared that the Czech state treasury had incurred losses because
shipments forwarded in the transit regime had not been presented at the customs offices of
final destination. However, the true cause of losses was that the customs authorities had
implicated themselves in the tax evasion scheme.

105. CARGO ultimately, after many years, obtained the setting aside of all those impositions
in the Regional Court of Brno. However, no release of previously impounded property or
reimbursement of attached funds was effected by the customs authorities.

(ce) No tax liability in 1994-1995 when importing goods from Slovakia

106. The term “customs debt” specified in Section 2(i) of the Customs Act, in its version
effective in 1994-1995, represented a duty to pay import customs duties only and no

29

obligation to pay the corresponding excise taxes and VAT collected upon import.
Accordirigly, the Customs Act did not provide for the obligation to pay excise taxes and VAT.
This tax Mability was directly g governed by the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT Act.

107, ‘h accordance with Seotion 55(3) of the Customs “Act, goods that ‘were “explicitly

designated as duty-free goods in international treaties (which applies to importing of goods
from Slovakia, with which the Czech Republic had a customs union) were not subject to
import duties. As a result, a customs debt could not arise‘on importing goods from Slovakia to

“the Czech Republic.

1:08. Both Section 5(1)(b) of the Excise Taxes Act and Section 43(2) of the VAT Act, which
were ‘in effect at the relevant time, stipulated that, when importing goods to the Czech
Republic, a tax liability arose on-the day the customs debt occurred, These provisions should
be interpreted as stipulating that the occurrence of a tax liability was materially conditional on

the occurrence of a customs debt (i.¢. a tax liability could only arise where there was a

customs debt) as well as specifying the time on which a potential tax liability would arise. The
interpretation that a tax liability represented an integral part of the customs debt, ie. that a tax
liability arose even where goods .were_not liable to customs duties, cannot be accepted, as
such a conclusion cannot be inferred from the relevant tax legislation. Only later on
(specifically in 1997) the relevant amendments to the legislation were approved, explicitly
determining the occurrence of a tax liability on importation of duty-free goods. This
amendment confirms the correctness of the interpretation, according to which a tax Hability i in
1994-1995 under the given circumstances did not arise.

109. In addition, it should also be noted that both the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT Act
covered the import of goods as a taxable event in provisions preceding the provisions on the
occurrence-of a tax liability-(such-as Section-4(1).of-the Excise Taxes Act.or Section.J-of the
VAT Act). It should be inferred from these provisions that a tax liability was conditional on
the occurrence of a customs debt. Neither the Excise Taxes Act nor the VAT Act provided for
the occurrence of a tax liability when importing goods that were duty-free in accordance with
international treaties (such as the treaty on the establishment of the customs union-between
the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic). When interpreting Section 5(1)(b) of the
Excise Taxes Act and Section 43(2) of the VAT Act, it must be concluded that neither excise
duty nor VAT could have been assessed on importing goods from Slovakia in 1994-1995 and,
as a result, tax liability could not have arisen under the legislation effective at that time.
Consequently, as the tax liability did not arise, the Claimant’s guarantee relating to this

liability could not have been claimed.

110. Another important fact to consider is that the Customs Act at that time clearly
determined the method by which a procedure with conditional exemption from customs duties
(in this particular case a transit procedure under Section 133(1)(a) of the Customs Act) could
be terminated, The Customs Act provided that this procedure was deemed terminated on the
moment the goods concerned were assigned another customs-approved procedure. If, in the
present case, the goods that were released for a transit procedure by the Bfeclav-ddlnice
Customs Office. were not assigned another customs-approved procedure, these goods were not

released for any other customs procedure,
111. In connection with this, it seems crucial] that, under the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT

Act effective in 1994-1995, goods liable to tax were only the goods liable to customs duties
and that importation of goods was understood to be, only and exclusively, the release of goods

 

30

for procedures specified in the law, in particular the release of goods for free circulation, the
release of goods for inward processing and the release of goods for temporary use. Moreover,
these acts did not include any provisions which would consider the removal of goods from
customs supervision as an import of goods. Nor did they refer to the relevant provisions of
Section 240 of the Customs Act.

112. This means that, in accordance with the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT Act as well as
general constitutional principles, a tax liability occurred only where goods were released for
specific procedures and could not have occurred in other instances. This interpretation is also
supported by the fact that only by Act No. 208/1997 with effect from 1 January 1998 Section
43(2) of the VAT Act was amended to stipulate that import VAT liability also arises upon the
breach of conditions stipulated for the customs procedure under which the goods are placed
under customs supervision, Before this date the occurrence of VAT liability on the import of
goods was exclusively bound, from both material and time perspective, upon the occurrence
of a customs debt. If this legislative amendment was aimed at extending the tax liability (the
fact that the amendment was aimed at extending the tax liability was explicitly confirmed by
the wording of the explanatory report of the Act amending the VAT Act), it is obvious that,
before the amendment became effective, VAT liability could not arise where no import as
defined by the VAT Act took place.

113, Consequently, when the goods under the transit procedure were removed from customs
supervision, they were not released for free circulation (as the customs declaration for the
release of goods for free circulation was not accepted) nor were they imported as defined in
the Excise ‘axes Act and the VAT Act. In such a case, a tax liability could not have occurred
as the liability was exclusively connected with importation of goods, and only imported goods
were liable to customs duties.

114. The fact that, despite the said facts, customs authorities assessed tax on imports from
Slovakia implies that they fundamentaily breached the Constitution of the Czech Republic
and the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. Section 2(3) of the Constitution states
that state authority may only he exercised in the cases extent and by procedures sot out
by the law. Section 4(1) of the Charter provides that duties can be imposed only under the law
and within its limits and only in compliance with fundamental rights and freedoms. Section
11(5) of the Charter states that taxes and charges can only be imposed under the law.

  

() The customs offices not authorised to assess and collect taxes

115. A further fundamental problem for the resolution of the whole case is whether the customs
office was entitled at all in 1994-1995 to assess and collect excise tax and VAT on the relevant
imports, i.e. whether it was within their substantive authority to take such decisions.

116. Section 3(2)(a) of the Customs Act provided that customs authorities also perform
administration of excise tax and value added tax collected “upon import” and this provision
was specified in Section 11(1)(b) in such a manner that this administration, ie. the assessment
and collection of such taxes upon import, is performed by customs authorities. The Customs
Act did not define the term “import” in more detail.

117. Section 2(e) of the Act on Excise Taxes stated that customs authorities were entrusted
with the function of tax administrator in respect of “imports”. In other cases the tax
administrator was the relevant regional revenue authority. The VAT Act contained a similar

3]

provision and in Section 2(2)(i) stated that customs authorities were the tax administrator only
in connection with “imports” and ‘that in other cases the tax administrator was the relevant

regional revenue authority.

118, The Act.on Excise Taxes defined.the term “import”. At the.decisive time, i¢, in 1994, the
term “import” was defined in Section 2(d) of this Act in such a manner that import was
understood to be only the release of selected products into free circulation, with reference to
Section 128 e7 seg. of the Customs Act, or into the regime of active treatment contact in the
return ‘system, with reference to Section 163. et seg. of the Customs Act. The Act on Excise

Taxes did not consider anything else to be imports.

119. The VAT Act defined the term import slightly differently, but according to this definition
it was not possible to regard any entry of goods into the Czech Republic as an import.
According to Section 43(1) only imported goods were subject to tax, whereas import was
understood to only concern goods released into the following regimes:

(a) free circulation regime — reference to Sections 128 to 132 of the-Customs Act,

(b) active treatment.contact regime .in return. system (BU terminology: inward processing relief)
~reference'to Sections 163 to 178 of the Customs Act,

(c) imported back into free circulation from the passive treatment contact regime u
terminology: outward processing ‘relief) — reference to Sections 197 to 213 of the Customs
Act, “ao

(d) temporary use (EU terminology: temporary import) — reference to Sections 238 to-253 of
the Customs Act,

120. This indicates that, in addition to what was specified in the Act on Excise Taxes, the VAT

Act regarded as imports .only .releases into free.circulation during re-import .from-passive

treatment contact regime and release into temporary use regime.

 

121. According to the payment assessments issued by the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office, the
customs debt arose in accordance with Section 240, and did not arise upon release into ‘the free
circulation regime, or the active treatment contact regime in the return system, or the temporary
use regime, or release into the free circulation regime upon re-import of goods upon the
termination of the passive treatment contact regime, so, according to both tax acts, it was not
an import but a transit. As customs authorities were the administrators of such taxes only in
connection with imports, the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office was not the administrator of such
taxes, i.e, it was not materially competent to assess and collect such taxes. The assessment and
collection of such taxes in these cases was within the power of the relevant revenue authority,
The payment orders, which are individual administrative acts, suffer from a fundamental and
inherent defect, since they were issued by a customs office that was not materially entitled to

issue them.

122, The Customs Act, the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT Act, in their versions effective in
1994-1995, stipulated that at import of goods the customs authority shall be responsible for the
administration of the excise taxes and import VAT. As a result, the answer to the question
whether the Customs Office was authorised to assess the excise tax and VAT depends on
whether in the relevant case import of goods was realised or not. There was no specific
definition of the term “import” in the Customs Act. The term was defined for the purpose of
the Excise Taxes Act and the VAT Act in Section 2(e) of the Excise Taxes Act and Section

43(1) of the VAT Act.

123. Consequently, the given case did not concern import as defined in the respective tax
regulations since the goods were not released for free circulation. It follows that the customs
authorities did not have subject-matter jurisdiction for assessment and enforcement of tax
liabilities under the valid legal regulations, i.e. they were not the “tax administrator”,

124. As in the relevant cases the taxes were assessed by a customs office, without the law
giving it the authority to do so, this procedure fundamentally breached the Constitution of the
Czech Republic and the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, which provide that
state power can be applied in the cases, within the limits and in the manners stipulated by the
Jaw. In contrast to this, individuals and legal entities can do what is not prohibited by the law,
and nobody can be forced to do what is not imposed by law.

(@) Void administrative acts

125. Legal theory distinguishes between defective administrative acts that are unlawful or
materially incorrect, formally defective acts and void administrative acts. There is a
presumption of correctness for unlawful or materially incorrect administrative acts and
formally defective administrative acts. These acts are regarded as free of error, unless the
opposite is found officially (by an administrative body or a court), ie, until they are changed
or cancelled by the relevant administrative body or court, These defective administrative acts
should be distinguished from cases of nullity (voidness, non-existence), Nullity occurs when
defects reach such a level that it is no longer possible to regard them as administrative acts,
and where such activity is not regarded as authoritative administrative activity, such acts do
not bind anybody and nobody is under an obligation to comply with them. Nullity is usually
caused by an absolute lack of material jurisdiction of the administrative body that issued the
relevant act.

126, Since it is not possible in this case, in view of the definition of “import” in the Act on
Excise Taxes and the VAT Act, to speak about the import of goods and the customs office
was therefur laa adindiusivaivi, Ge, it did not have muictial jutisdiction to assess and
collect the taxes, it is necessary to regard all payment assessments, and also related decisions
of the customs directorate, as bad acts (void, null acts), and therefore as acts which do not
produce the effects intended by them. Such acts cannot be regarded as administrative acts and
are not binding, All legal acts by the customs office which were based on such bad acts are
therefore unlawful.

  

(h) Guarantee for the customs debt in the guarantee certificate

127. According to the guarantee certificates, CARGO provided a guarantee for the securing of
the customs debt and undertook to settle the guaranteed amount of the debt jointly and
severally with the debtor.

128. Since the definition of the term “customs debt” in Section 2(i) of the Customs Act, in its
version effective in 1994-1995, included only an obligation to pay import customs duty and
not an obligation to pay excise tax and VAT, it is necessary to infer that CARGO only
provided a guarantee for the payment of the customs duty and not for the payment of excise
tax and VAT by the debtor in the guarantee certificate.

33

129. Subject to evaluation from a legal perspective should also be the issue what was the
actual will of the parties in respect of the extent of the guarantee, whether it was intended only
to include the customs duty payment or whether it also related to payment of tax liabilities. In
~ this.respect it ismecessary to infer that if.it was.not-the will. of-the parties.also-to securetthe.tax
liabilities of the. primary debtor by the rélevant guarantee certificate, then the customs
authority ‘was not entitled-to assert the guarantee in this relation. The Claimant submits that
CARGO’s will in respect of the extent of the guarantee covered only securing of the customs

duty payment, if any.
(@@ Liability of-the drivers for the:customs debt

130. The customs authorities evaluated the facts of the case in question as illegal removal of
goods from customs supervision and, in accordance with Section 240(3) of the-Customs Act,
they declared CWA and the customs declarants as debtors in relation to the customs debt.

131. No guarantee for a customs debt could have been claimed from CARGO as no customs
debt-in connection with removal of goods from customs supervision arose for:the drivers who
acted as customs declarants in the relevant customs proceedings and for whom CARGO

provided a guarantee.

132. From decisions of the Constitutional Court it appears as follows:
(a) In cases where the driver is formally stated in a customs declaration as the :customs
declarant it cannot be automatically inferred that this person really is the customs declarant,.as
in some cases the driver acts on behalf of his employer on the basis of a power of attorney.
When investigating whether the driver actually is the customs declarant, al! relevant means of

-evidence.must be considered.

(b) The obligation of the driver to pay the customs debt.cannot be imposed automatically and
based only on a formal application of the appropriate provisions of the’ Customs Act to the
data and information included in the customs declaration, if the circumstances indicate that
someone else might have committed an unlawful action resulting in failure to deliver the

goods to the customs office of destination.

133, As the criminal proceedings in the case of who was found guilty of tax
evasion in connection with the respective diese] oi] imports from Slovakia was not closed
until] many years after the final and conclusive decisions on the liability of the drivers for the
customs debt had been issued, it is obvious that the customs authorities based their decisions
in all cases on insufficiently investigated facts as they had not reflected the findings resulting
from the conclusions of the investigating, prosecuting and adjudicating bodies, This was
especially so in a situation where (or CWA, the company controlled by him)
was subsequently declared by the criminal court as the sole debtor in connection with the
relevant taxes. The decisions on the liability of the drivers for the customs debt must thus be

considered unlawful.

134. If the customs authorities of the Czech Republic asserted the claims against CARGO
based on unlawful decisions to impose the obligation to settle the customs debt on persons to
whom the guarantee of CARGO related, then asserting the claims against CARGO to meet
this guarantee must also be considered unlawful.

34

@ Absence of CARGO in the customs proceedings with the drivers

135, In the period between | January 1993 and 30 June 1997, in compliance with Section 320
of the Customs Act (in the version then effective), the Act No. 71/1967 on Administrative
Procedure (in the version then effective) was to be applied to proceedings before customs
authorities in so far as the Customs Act did not contain special rules. The relevant issues
included the specification of the basic rules of the proceedings, the definition of the
participants to the proceedings and their procedural rights and obligations.

136. The basic rules of the proceedings included the duty of the administrative body to
proceed in close cooperation with citizens and organisations (i.e. with natural persons and
legal entities) and to give them the opportunity to defend their rights and interests in an
effective manner (Section 3(2) of the Administrative Procedure Act).

137, Section 14(1) of the Administrative Procedure Act defined “participant in the
proceedings” as a person whose rights, interests protected by the law and obligations shall be
subject to hearing in the proceedings or whose rights, interests protected by the law and
obligations may be directly affected in the proceedings. Further a participant was also a
person/entity who/which claimed that he or it could be directly affected in his or its rights,
legal interests or obligations by the decision.

138. The procedural rights of the participants in the proceedings were reflected in the
obligation of the administrative body to give the participants an opportunity to provide their
opinion on the underlying facts of the decision as well as the manner in which they have been
identified or, if appropriate, to propose other facts to be added to the existing underlying facts
(Section 33(2) of the Administrative Procedure Act).

139. The Supreme Administrative Court has stated (case no. 7A 1/2/2002. ruling of 14
November 2003) that the purpose of Section 33(2) of ihe Administrative Procedure Act iy ww
enable a party to proceedings to be able, “before a decision is issued”, to make objections or
proceclural requests so as to ensure. inter alia. that the decision is genuinely hased on 2
reliably ascertained state of affairs.

140. The Constitutional Court has stated (ruling II. US 329/04 of 3 March 2005) that “[i}t is a
breach of the principle of the rule of law, which is anchored in Section | of the Constitution of
the Czech Republic and the right to court protection and judicial review, protected by Section
36(1) and (2) of the Charter [of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms], if an administrative body
does not give a complainant the option of expressing its opinion on the source documents for
the ruling and the method in which they were ascertained in accordance with Section 33(2) of
the Administrative Procedure Act, and the court, as a part of its review of administrative
decisions, did not have regard to such circumstance”. The procedure of the Respondent and
the Czech Customs Directorate is in direct conflict with this case-law. It was only from the
second instance decision of the Customs Directorate Brno (and before that from the District
Customs Office in Bieclav) that CARGO learned that a customs debt was to arise under
Section 240(1) of the Customs Act, ie. because the goods were unlawfully removed from
customs supervision, and the declarant was designated the debtor under Section 240(3)(d),
because it did not meet its obligation under the transit regime.

141, Based on the guarantee certificates concerned, issued for the purpose of securing the
customs debt of the customs declarants, CARGO took over the guarantee for any customs

35

debt that arose for the customs declarants from the transactions concerned. The decision in
which the-customs debt was assessed to the individual customs declarants had a direct impact
on the.substantive position of CARGO as its obligation as guarantor was activated by this
decision*CARGO was therefore, according to ‘Section-14(1).of:the Administrative Procedure
Act, a participant in the customs proceedings in which :the customs debt of the customs
declarants was assessed and was entitled to use the procedural rights provided by the

Administrative Procedure Act.

142. Since the customs .authorities did not-deal with CARGO as a participant in -the
proceedings regarding the assessment of the customs debt of the declarants, they did not
provide CARGO with an opportunity to express its opinion on the facts underlying: these
decisions and on the manner they ‘had -been established and, in general,-did not proceed in
close cooperation with CARGO during ‘the proceedings. Consequently, the .decisions on
assessment of the customs debt-to the customs declarants were-based on material procedural

errors.

143. CARGO did not get the opportunity to defend its rights .and interests ‘in an effective
manner, which ‘resulted: not: only -in--a -breach .of the..Administrative Procedure Act but
primarily also in 2 breach of the fundamental constitutional right of CARGO to a due process
according to Section 38 (2) of the-Charter of Fundamental] Rights and Freedoms.

144. When CARGO was not invited to participate in the administrative proceedingsiandwas
not informed about any auditing acts of the customs authorities, including examinations on
site, examinations of witnesses, etc., and when it was not given the opportunity to give its
Opinion on this procedure and to propose supplementary means of evidence, this was.a-very
serious breach of its procedural rights, and the manner in which the customs authorities

fe the . liabilities .must..be

‘proveedied*towards-CARGO

considered urilawful‘and unconstitutional.

(k) Time bar
145. At the time when the alleged customs debt arose, i.e, in 1994-1995, no time-limits for
customs debt assessment were set out in the Customs Act.

146, Since at the relevant time no time-limit was defined in the Jaw, it could be argued that no
time-limit at all applied to the assessment of the guarantor’s customs debts. However, such
interpretation, taking into account the elementary principles of a democratic state respecting
the rule of Jaw, is not permissible.

147. It is therefore necessary to find an interpretation that would be in conformity with the
Constitution. The only solution consistent with the Constitution is to apply the provisions of
other regulations that govern time-limits for assessment, despite the fact that the Customs Act
did not explicitly refer to them. Such regulations include Section 47 of the Act’ on the
Administration of Taxes and Fees and Section 4 of the Act on the Tax System, which provide
for the same three year time-limit. If within this three year time-limit, an act is made to assess
tax, the three year time-limit starts running again from the end of the calendar year in which
the taxpayer was informed accordingly. Each of the said provisions has a rather different
wording, but the basic facts such as the rules for the running and the Jength of the time-limit

for tax assessment are consistent.

|
|

 

36

148. It should be noted that Czech courts have fully resolved the issue concerning the nature
of the decision on the obligation to settle the guaranteed customs debt and the determination
of legal regulations under which, in this particular case, the running and the length of the
time-limit for asserting claims towards the guarantor in connection with the guarantee for the
customs debt should be considered.

149. The act under which the guarantor is invited to settle the customs debt for the debtor
represents, in terms of the relevant case-law, a decision under the substantive law,
determining the amount of the customs debt to be settled by the guarantor.

150, In the period from | July 1997 to 30 June 2002 customs authorities issued a notice to the
guarantor requiring payment of outstanding amounts pursuant to Section 73(1) of the Act on
Administration of Taxes, while in the period from |! July 2002, pursuant to a new provision in
the Customs Act, customs authorities issued payment assessments, i.2, decisions determining
customs and taxes to the guarantor, As the approach to notifying the guarantor about the
payment duty changed over time, the court decisions contain inconsistent terminology for the
tax administrator's act through which the guarantor is invited to settle a customs debt on
behalf of the debtor and references to different provisions of tax or customs legislation.
However, this does not affect the substance and the nature of the customs authorities’ act
through which claims from the customs guarantee have consistently been raised against the
guarantor. Taking this into consideration, the principles contained in the court decisions
should be fully applicable to the present case,

I51, ‘I'he proceedings are regarded as assessment proceedings in relation to the guarantor and
during such proceedings the guarantor’s payment obligation, including reasons and amount, is
assessed for the first time. Accordingly, the decision must be delivered to the guarantor within
the time-limits determined for assessing the duty, i.e. within the three year lapse period, not
within the time-limit for recovering outstanding customs duties. If no decision is issued by the
customs authority within this time-limit, the right to demand the guaranteed amount ceases to
exist,

152. The six year time-limit laid down in Section 282 (1) of the Customs Act should not be
applied. This has been rejected repeatedly and explicitly by the Supreme Administrative Court
and the Constitutional Court, In accordance with the relevant case-law, such application
would infringe the rights of a guarantor in an unacceptable and unconstitutional manner.

153. In order to preserve the time-limit for tax assessment, it is necessary that tax is assessed
finally and conclusively. After the end of the lapse period, the right to assess tax ceases Lo
exist. If a decision on tax assessment is made after the end of the lapse period, such decision
shall be regarded as unlawful and it is the official obligation of each public authority (i.¢
administrative authorities and courts) to consider this unlawfulness ex officio.

154, A decision of the Supreme Administrative Court (No. 1 Afs 15/2009-105 of 19 February
2009) points out that the stated elements can be inferred from Czech legislation and should
also be considered as legal standards and principles valid in an international context. The
Supreme Administrative Court’s decision contains the following legal conclusions:

(a) The interventions of a public authority in the private sector are significantly restricted by
the running of time. If the law tends to create a special group of state receivables that are not

37

subject to any time limitation, the legal certainty of those addressed by the legislation is
threatened (Section 1(]) of the Constitution).

(b) -The -purpose -of. applying the time bar is.1to -enhance. the. legal :certainty..of those
participating in legal relations, stimulating creditors (regardless of whether it concerns a
private or a public entity) to-assert their rights within the -required time period. Fora public
authority’s claims, the time bar reduces the possibility of wilfully intervening in the legal

rights of individuals and legal entities.

(c) Since the Customs Act did not determine the lapse period for customs assessment and with
respect to Section 320(b) of the Customs Act, it'is necessary to follow Section 4(2).of Act No.
‘212/1992 on ‘the Tax System, according -to which tax can neither be assessed, nor be
recovered, after a period of three years from the end of the calendar year in’ which the
taxpayer or a’person responsible for the tax must file a tax return or in which the debtor is

liable to withhold tax or make a relevant tax prepayment.

155. Consequently, the time-limit within which customs authorities were entitled to issue a
final .and-conclusive decision on the obligation to settle the guaranteed customs debt incurred
in 1994-1995, expired after three years as from the end of the year in which the.customs.debt
arose, As during this time-limit customs authorities took no measures to assess the guaranteed
customs ‘debt, the time-limit expired on 31 ‘December 1997. As final and conclusive decisions
on the duty to settle the guaranteed amount of-the customs debt were issued after thesend of
the time-limit, such decisions are unlawful and public authorities were obliged to consider this
unlawfulness automatically as part of their-official duties. Even if a tax liability-had arisen in
this case, together with the guarantor’s liability, the customs authorities would not have:been
entitled to claim the guarantees considering the expiry of the lapse period. <

@ ‘Application of ‘the; principles of interpretation in 1 favour of the Claimant

156. The legislative situation regarding the excise taxes and the VAT was thus inconsistent in
the years ‘in question and no clear cohesion existed -among the individual public Jaw
provisions in this area. The terms establishing the tax liability were not laid down
unambiguously and there were numerous loopholes in the legislation which allowed an
arbitrary interpretation of the relevant provisions by the Czech authorities.

157. In this connection, it is necessary to concentrate on two fundamental principles, which
are a permanent part of the constitutional order of the Czech Republic and are aimed at
protecting those persons or entities towards which state power is exercised. First, the in dubio
mitius principle creates an obligation for the public authorities, when the legislation is
ambiguous, to opt for an interpretation of the Jaw favourable to the individual. Secondly, the
legality principle indicates that state power may be exercised only in cases, within the limits
and in the manner stipulated by the Jaw. As the Constitutional Court has stated on many
occasions, these principles and the fundamental rights of the participants to the proceedings
derived from these principles apply especially in relation to the administration of taxes and

customs duties.

158. It follows from these principles that, where there are two possible interpretations of tax
law leading to different results, it is necessary to apply the interpretation which is more
favourable to the taxpayer, i¢. the interpretation which affects the taxpayer’s property to a

 

38

lesser degree. Moreover, in the present case the problem was not two conflicting
interpretations of tax law but the absence of legislation providing for tax liabitity.

159, Based on these principles it is evident that, if the tax legislation did not explicitly and
unambiguously provide for the occurrence of tax liability, the governmental authorities were
not entitled to raise any claims against the taxpayer or its guarantor,

(m) The obligation not to expropriate

160, Article 4(2) of the BIT includes a broad provision on expropriation, It does not require
that actual expropriation occur, merely measures “tantamount - - - to expropriation", which
sometimes are referred to as “indirect” or “de facto" expropriation. Such expropriations may
be deemed to have occurred regardless of whether the state “takes” or transfers legal title to
the investment. It is also immaterial whether the state itself economically benefits from its
actions,

16], It is also generally recognised that expropriation cloes not necessarily result from a single
act of the state. It could result from a series of acts, eventually resulting in expropriation. This
situation is known as “creeping” expropriation or “constructive” expropriation.

162, It is a well established principle that state interference with an investor’s use of property
should be deemed actionable regardless of the form that the interference takes,

163. The conduct pursued by the Respondent does not constitute an expropriation, but it is “a
measure the effects of which [are] tantamount to expropriation or nationalisation”. The
conduct amounting to such a breach consists in the failure of the Czech prosecution to
conduct any examination into the role of the customs authorities in the tax fraud — which
could easily have been established at the time by means of even a summary investigation —
and thei pursuance, without legal justification, of CARGO and other persons with a view to
collecting the resultant shortfall of excise tax and VAT to the Czech treasury. Specifically, the
prosecution could easily have established that transit shipments had heen culy accounted for
at the Bieclav-ddlnice Customs Office and discharged on the basis of internally routed
customs documents, The Respondent's manifest failure to take any such action but instead, on
a massive scale, pursue collection measures against CARGO and a large number of
hauliers/drivers constitutes acts having the effect of expropriation.

(n) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment

164, Article 2(1) of the BIT further provides that investments are to be ensured “fair and
equitable treatment”.

165. The broad concept of fair and equitable treatment imposes obligations beyond customary
international requirements of good faith treatment. The BIT makes this plain by separating the
requirement of fair and equitable treatment in Article 3(1) from the obligation to adhere to
“obligations under international law” in Article 7. The obligation of fair and equitable
treatment is a specific provision that may prohibit actions that would otherwise be legal under
both domestic and international law.

166. In the present case, the BIT standard is not in any way qualified, It should therefore be
interpreted broadly enough to translate into real and effective protection of the type that

39

would encourage investors to participate in the economy of the host state. In this regard the
BIT preamble makes it clear that the parties are “intending to create favourable conditions for:
reciprocal] investments”. Moreover, Artiole 2 of the BIT provides that “[eJach Contracting
Party shall in its.territory :promote -as far.as possible investments of-investors of the other
Contracting Party”. Therefore, fair and equitable treatment should be understood to -be
‘treatment ‘in an even-handed and-just:manner, conducive to fostering the promotion-of forei gn

investment.

167. This requires, as a most basic requirement, that the investor will not suffer the
consequences of corrupt practices in-any branch of government administration northe adverse
effects ‘of governance dysfunctionality. It:falls:squarely within the legitimate expectations of
the investor that, for instance, a-customs administration exercises reasonably efficient contro]
of movement of goods over national boundaries in order to ensure that investors are not
exposed to entirely uncontrollable and incalculable business risks in any administrative

environment.

168, CARGO did not benefit from a fair:and equitable.treatment, since the guarantees ‘issued
by CARGO were enforced without a legal basis, and the legal remedies at CARGO’s disposal
were inadequate, it should be pointed out that until-1 January 2003 the ‘Czech Republic lacked
a Supreme Administrative Court which meant that the judicial protection in administrative

mattets, including customs matters, ‘was clearly insufficient.
(0) The obligation not to impair. the enjoyment of investments by arbitrary or discriminatory

nieasures

169. Article 2(2) of the BIT similarly provides that a state shall not “in any way impair by
arbitrary .or discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use or .enjoyment .of

investments”.

170. The arbitrary or discriminatory measures are listed as altematives in the BIT and,
therefore, it is sufficient that a measure is either arbitrary or discriminatory to constitute a

breach of the treaty.
171. As to discriminatory measures it is submitted that the definition of this notion is to be
found in the BIT itself, where it is stated in Article 3(1) and (2) that neither Contracting Party
shall subject investments or investors to less favourable treatment than it accords to
investments of its own investors or to investments of investors of any third state”.

172. The obligation not to impair the enjoyment of investments by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures is intimately related to the fair and equitable standard of protection, In the present
case, the Czech prosecution authorities behaved in an arbitrary manner by failing to
investigate the circumstances that Jed to the failure of the customs authorities to ensure
payment of at Jeast 1,861 transit shipments of a total of 2,054 involved in tax fraud. The
conduct was also discriminatory in that the Respondent failed to pursue claims against the
primarily responsible party for carrying out the tax frand- CWA and its owner — and instead
targeted its efforts on innocent bystanders,

40

@ The obligation to provide investments with full protection and security

173. Article 2(3) of the BIT further requires that “[iJnvestments and revenue arising hereof
and in the event of their re-investment such revenue shall enjoy full protection”, and Article
4(1) of the BIT provides that “[iJnvestments by investors of either Contracting Party shall
enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party”. Under these
provisions each state is required to take all steps necessary to protect investments, regardless
of whether its domestic law requires or provides a mechanism for it to do so, and regardless of
whether the threat to the investment arises from the state’s own actions or from the actions of
private individuals or others. The obligation extends beyond an obligation to protect physical
property and includes the obligation to protect the legal security of investments. It means that
the state must exercise reasonable due diligence to protect foreign investments,

174, The Respondent’s conduct also breaches the standard of full protection, While this
standard has been used predominantly in the context of physical protection, it has also been
extended to the duty to protect an investor from claims pursued by state organs which have
not been properly vetted for their legal justification.

(q) The obligation of treatment in accordance with standards of international law

175. Article 7(1) of the BIT contains a broad provision requiring the contracting parties to
treat investments at least as well as required by “obligations under international law existing
at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties - - - whether genera! or
specific’. ‘Thus, in addition to all obligations under treaties or otherwise, general principles of
international law require host states to provide a certain minimum protection to international
investments.

176. It is universally accepted that the minimum protection afforded investors under
international law generally includes, hut is not limited to, requirements of duc piucess,
transparency, obligations of natural justice, exercise of good faith, due diligence and fair
dealing, and the protection of economic rights. The Respondent has failed in
i tion io the Ciaimant’s investment.

   

 

 

(r) Breaches of the BIT

177. The Czech Republic's breach of its international obligations under the Czech-German
BIT consists of the following elements:

(a) the imposition of illegal guarantee claims leading to the destruction of the Claimant's
investment in the Czech Republic caused by a tax fraud made possible by the complicity of
public officials or by failure to provide a functional customs administration as regards
supervision and control,

(b) imposition of illegal guarantee claims on hauliers/drivers ~ and, hence, on CARGO ~

without providing the primarily indebted persons with protection of their fundamental rights
of due process in respect of matters relevant to Section 240(3) (a) and (b) of the Customs Act,

(c) failure to heed domestic court decisions by enforcing guarantee claims in cases not yet set
aside by a Czech court in the presence of analogous cases which have been set aside, and

4]

(d) enforcing guarantee claims for unpaid excise taxes and VAT on the basis of CARGO’s
guarantee undertaking, covering “customs debt” only. ~

178. The Respondent’s breach of international law consists of the prosecution of illegal
claims, which ultimately destroyed the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic. In all
the relevant.1,245 cases, the.shipments forwarded under the customs transit regime had been
duly terminated pursuant to. Section 140(2) of the Customs Act. Additionally, the
hauliers/drivers had“been provided. with proof to such .effect. Finalisation of the transit
operations had.also-been reported to the relevant customs office: of dispatch, . ‘Bieclav-délnice,
and had been duly entered into the computer records of the customs authorities.

179. A ‘guarantee undertaking under the Customs Act atthe time constituted liability in
respect of.a ‘icustoms debt” only, while excise taxes and VAT did not qualify as “customs

debt”.in the meaning of the law.

180. Irrespective of the fact that shipments in the transit regime were actually presented. atthe
relevant inland customs locations, all the guarantee claims. directed:against- CARGO ‘(and :the
~hauliers/drivers). -were.illegal. in all. circumstances. A person can -be..declared -liable for .a
“customs debt” as defined in the Customs Act only if he is found guilty of “the unlawful
removal from customs supervision of goods subject to import duty”. However, ‘the excise
taxes which are of relevance in the present case, i.e. consumption tax and VAT, do not
constitute a “customs debt” in the meaning-of the Customs Actas then in effect,

 

181. The guarantee claims were therefore lacking a legal basis, and their enforcement
amounts in its own right to a breach of international law.

-182. It-should -be noted -that -the-Customs -Act -was amended in this respeot-by.-Act-No.
113/1997, which entered into effect on 1 July 1997. At that time a new provision was added in
the form of Section 323 of the Customs Act, which provided that “customs duty” should
include taxes and fees collected during import and export. This is confirmed by the Czech
Ombudsman who pointed out that on this matter “it is necessary to proceed from what the
legislator stated in the Act and not from what-the legislator did not embody in the Act”.

183. There can be no doubt that the treatment to which the Claimant’s investment in the
‘Czech Republic has been exposed constitutes the most egregious breach under international
law and that it represents, in particular, an unbridled violation of the Respondent’s obligations

under the Czech-German BIT,

184. In consideration of the excessive and blatant nature of the breach and the obviousness of
its departure from even minimum standards of treatment required under international law, it
would seem that a discourse on its implications for the Respondent’s responsibility under

international law would not be called for.

B. The Respondent:

(a) Relevant background

185. Acting as a customs agent, the company CARGO, incorporated by the Claimant in 1990
under Czech law, guaranteed proper performance of shipments transiting in or through the
Czech Republic. During the years 1994-1995, CARGO accepted to guarantee the proper .

42

performance of 2,054 transit shipments of oil products imported from the Slovnaft refinery in
Slovakia by several companies, ie, CWA, HOREX, and
UNITIP.

186. In April 1995, the Czech Customs Administration found out that, among these 2,054
transit operations guaranteed by CARGO, 1,245 transit shipments for which

HOREX and UNITIP were the consignees' had been fraudulently completed through the use
of forged customs stamps. Accordingly, the Customs Administration raised and enforced
CARGO’s guarantees in respect of these 1,245 transit shipments in an amount representing
approximately EUR 13 million.

187. According to the Claimant, the 1,245 guarantee claims raised against CARGO were
“false” as any and all of the 2,054 transit shipments would have been properly performed,
therefore releasing CARGO from any liability under its guarantee undertakings. The
Respondent submits that this position is based on an intentional confusion of the facts that
gave rise to CARGO’s guarantee claims as wel! as on a false interpretation of the legal
background to these claims. Indeed, all these relevant 1,245 shipments were performed under
an identical fraudulent scheme. The goods and the transit documents were handed over in the
absence of any customs officer at the premises of CWA, where the transit documents were
affixed with a stamp of the customs authority which later appeared as being forged.

188. The Respondent therefore argues that, since these 1,245 transit procedures were
fraudulently completed, they gave rise, as a matter of Czech law, to a customs debt for which
CARGO, as the guarantor for the proper completion of the transit procedures, was jointly and
severally liable together with the drivers/hauliers. Czech courts have unanimously confirmed
that, on the merits, the enforcement of CARGO’s guarantees was in full accordance with the
Czech legal order.

(b) Transit customs procedures

sv, i goods enivr w country, the iocai customs authority typically demands payment of
import duties and other charges and, where appropriate, applies commercial policy measures
such as, for instance, anti-dumping duties. If the goods are only meant to pass through that
country on their way to another country, these payments are due, even if taxes and charges
paid may be reimbursed when the goods leave that country. If the goods have to be released
into the market of their country of destination, these payments are typically made at the
customs office located on the border crossing. In both cases, this solution implies that the
goods may have to undergo a series of administrative procedures at border crossings before
reaching their final destination.

 

190, Transit is a customs facility available to operators who move goods across borders
(international transit) or territories (internal transit) without paying the charges due in
principle when the goods enter the territory, thus requiring only one fina! customs formality
when the goods arrive at their final destination. It offers an administratively simple and cost
advantageous procedure to carry goods across borders and territories.

191. Instead of clearing the products at the border crossing directly, with all the administrative
and practical difficulties that this solution would imply, goods moved under a transit
procedure are declared at the customs office located at the border crossing and finally cleared
at another customs office located inside the customs territory. This situation is extremely

43

widespread in international commerce and was in force in the Czech Republic in the period
1994-1995 when the Diesel case occurred and well before.

192...Under ithe «internal. transit :procedure.as applicable during the period: 1994-1995 in the
Czech Republic, customs duties, excise taxes, VAT and other charges on imported goods

+ were ‘suspended .during their movement-from one customs office (the customs office of
dispatch) ‘to another customs office (the inland.customs office of destination).

193, Under Czech law.as. applicable from 1993 onwards, i.e. at the-time of the Diese] case,
transit procedures: were governed by Sections 139 to 144 of the Customs.Avct. Section 139(9)
of the Customs Act defined internal transit as follows: “internal transit is transit from a

customs office of entry to an inland customs office”.

194, During.the transit period, the goods are placed “under customs supervision”, the.payment
of all dues that.may accrue on’such-goods being guaranteed either by the declarant himself by
way of a deposit in cash or, more generally, by a third party approved by the..customs
authorities. In the Diese] case, the declarants were mostly the drivers of the tank trucks
shipping oil from the refinery of Slovnaft in Slovakia to CWA in the Czech Republic.
Security for payment in casé goods were removed from: customs supervision was-offered-by

195. Internal transit procedure is one of several customs procedures existing under Czech, law.
.All customs.proceedings have in common that.they are “initiated by submitting a customs
declaration proposing that the goods in question should be placed under a-specified customs
procedure”, Accordingly, when a declarant wishes goods to be placed under the internal
transit procedure, he has to propose that the goods be released into the transit procedure by

ubmitting.a.customs. to.this.end,-a-TCP. 7 met Nae ee ett ance eames enttemtnene

196, Another important feature common to al) customs procedures is the declarant’s duty to
be present during the customs proceedings. Indeed, according to Section 102(6) of the
Customs Act, “customs proceedings shall-be conducted in the presence of the declarant”. The
attendance of the declarant in person to all steps of the customs procedure aims at limiting the
tisk of fraud and corruption.

197, Internal transit started when the goods were declared-at the customs office of dispatch —
in the present case, the Bfeclay-ddinice Customs Office. It ended when the goods and transit
declaration were presented to a customs officer at the customs office of final destination or,
under certain circumstances and subject to a proper authorisation being granted by the
relevant customs authority, at the premises of the importer. Then, an officially stamped and
signed copy of the TCP was returned by the customs office of destination to the customs
office of dispatch which would discharge the transit procedure and the declarant’s liability in
the transit, unless an irregularity had occurred,

198. The transit procedure implied the completion of three mandatory successive steps, to
which an additional possible one may be added, i.¢.:

(a) formalities at customs office of dispatch and beginning of transit procedure (step 1),

(b) end of transit and customs clearance at customs office of destination (step 2) or at
importer’s Jocation (step 2 bis),

 

44

(c) discharge of transit procedure by customs office of dispatch (step 3), and
(d) inquiry procedure (step 4) in case of suspected breach of conditions of transit regime.

199. The whole transit procedure was paper based in 1994-1995, in the Czech Republic like in
all countries of the European Union. The basic document for transit was the TCP, which the
declarants (in the present case the drivers, which was rather unusual) had to present to the
customs office of dispatch together with a guarantee offered by a customs agent, such as
CARGO. The purpose of this guarantee was to make sure that the goods would not escape
customs supervision.

200. Copy | of the TCP was kept by the customs office of dispatch, Copies 4 and 5 were
accompanying the goods in transit. Copy 4 was kept at the customs office of destination at the
end of the transit procedure, The upper part of copy 5 was returned by the customs office of
destination to the customs office of dispatch.

201. At each of the stages, the TCP was affixed with a stamp of a customs office, In the
present case, it is proven that the stamps were forgeries.

202. The procedure of transit was discharged by the customs office of dispatch comparing
copies | and 5 of the TCPs for each given transit procedure. Unless irregularities were
discovered a posteriori, the discharge of the transit procedure amounted to the release of the
liability of the declarant/guarantor.

203. Inquiry procedures were to be initiated, either when there was no proof that the goods
reached their customs office of destination, or when the relevant documents happened to be
falsified or invalid.

204. In the period 1994-1995, no system of electronic exchange of data was in force in the
Czech Republic, The Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office therefore had to deal with a total of 500
TCPs om paper in average per day in 1994-1995, No computer network existed at that time
between customs offices in the Czech Republic and information was exchanged through the
use of floppy disks. Therefore, neither CARGO nor the Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office
would have been able to exchange information via an intranet network with the customs
office of destination of the goods, as alleged by the Claimant.

205, Inherent in any transit shipment is the risk that the transported goods are diverted out of
their way and dumped into the local market without customs dues, taxes and all other
measures accruing on the import of such goods being paid by the importer, hence the need for
specific safeguard techniques. In the past, transporters were obliged to have a customs officer
accompanying any shipment in transit. The modern safeguard technique is the putting into
place of a guarantee mechanism: the guarantor is liable to pay any customs debt due to the
customs authorities as a result of the removal of a transit shipment from the supervision of the
customs authorities.

206. The customs authorities’ financial interest to be safeguarded during the transit procedure
is the proper payment of dues accruing on imported goods, If the goods happen to “disappear”
while the internal transit procedure is not closed and then are dumped on to the black market,
these dues will not be paid and the customs administration will have suffered damage to an

45

equivalent amount. This notion is traditionally defined as the “customs debt”. Under Czech
law, it was defined under Section 240(1).and (2) of the-Customs.Act,
it dure.ismot.closed : ‘according

-20%..Rhe declarant i is-liable.f b-andievery.time:a.tr:
‘tothe law and a security has tobe provided for the payment of this. customs: debt.

 

 

208. The declarant’s liability is defined i in Section 1 40(2) of* the ‘Customs Act. The declarant
shall bear responsibility towards the customs office for fulfilment of the obligations arising
..from:the.transit procedure: He-shall;in particular, ensure :that-the goods are produced under
conditions-laid down.by the customs office of :dispatch:(i.¢, any oustoms office where a. transit
operation begins) to the-customstoffice of destination (i.e. any customs-office where a transit
operation -ends) -in an unaltered -state, with intact .customs seal and with ‘secompanying

documents,

209. There is no doubt that the declarant’s liability may be engaged each and every time a
transit procedure is not closed in-accordance with the law..In the present-case, the procedure
was not closed with respect to any of the 1,245 transit shipments:that gave rise to. CARGO’s
guarantee.claims.and-the goods -were “removed :from .customs.supervision”. for.each .oftthese

shipments.

210. Two other provisions of the Customs Act are of relevance, even if they did not allow the
transit procedures to be terminated at-the importer’s premises. The first-is Section 124 which
was entitled “simplified customs procedure” and was aimed at facilitating the customs
procedures through-the use-of “simplified” customs documentation. The second is Section 123
of-the Customs Act (“Disposal of the goods”) which played.an important role in the Diese]
case. Section 123 did not allow the goods to be driven-to the importer’s location but only
aH d.the.goods.to:be.disp d.oforior-to.theirrel into.tree.circulati onzbs:the.;
This procedure, which was granted on a case by case basis, was not applicable to transit-as-it
took place after the end of the transit procedure at the inland customs office, if any. This is the
teason-why this approval had to be granted by the inland.customs office and not by the border
customs office which fully-dealt with and granted all-relevant transit procedures andirelevant
approvals. Yet, the documents relied on by the Claimant in support of his contention pursuant
to which so-called simplified procedures were used in the Diese] case were “authorisations”

granted under Section 123 ofthe Customs Act, which appeared to be falsified.

211. Therefore, only an authorisation granted in accordance with Section 102(3) of the
Customs Act would allow the goods to be driven directly to the importer’s location where
final customs clearance could be conducted by a customs officer.

212. One of the fundamental allegations raised by the Claimant is that the 1,245. transit
procedures had been discharged since the oil shipments at issue had been presented to the
customs office of destination or to an authorised alternative place. Indeed, according to the
Claimant, the TCP is “opened” by the relevant customs office of dispatch and is “closed” at
the customs office of destination, This contention is incorrect. Indeed, it is a well established
principle that the termination of the transit procedure at the customs office of destination does

not amount to the discharge of the transit procedure.
213. Under Czech law applicable at that time, it was the customs office of dispatch that

decided whether the transit procedure could be discharged. Indeed, the transit procedure is
discharged by the customs office of dispatch (in the present case the Bieclav-dalnice Customs

46

Office) based on the comparison of the data relating to the transit operation, as established at
the customs office of dispatch and as recorded and certified by the customs office of
destination, Discharge of the transit procedure is generally implicit and does not involve any
formal decision by the competent authorities at the customs office of dispatch. Therefore,
assuming that information appearing in the upper part of the TCP copy 5 matched with the
copy | retained by the customs office of dispatch, the transit procedure could be considered as
discharged by the customs office of dispatch.

214, The Claimant further contends that there is definitive evidence of such discharge, since
the drivers were provided with a bottom part of TCP, copy 5, allegedly affixed with an
official stamp of the Czech customs authorities. The Respondent submits, however, that the
bottom part of the TCP, copy 5, is no evidence that the transit procedure was terminated under
Czech law. The reason for this rule is that the bottom part of the TCP, copy 5, may be forged
and such forged document cannot be opposed to the customs office of dispatch.

215, In the present case, the only documents which the Claimant relies on in order to
“demonstrate” that the transit procedures were closed! are the bottom part of the TCPs, copy 5,
with forged stamps affixed on them, This is obviously no evidence that the transit procedure
was terminated. In the absence of any evidence that the procedure has ended, none of the
1,245 transil operations that gave rise to CARGO’s guarantee was ever discharged.

216, National customs authorities typically launch inquiry procedures in the event of absence
of proof of the end of the transit procedure after a specified time period or as soon as the
relevant authorities are informed of or suspect that the procedure has not come to an end. This
is what the Czech customs authorities have accomplished when they discovered that a number
of oil transit shipments were irregular, in April 1995, when bottom parts of TCP copy 5.
instead of upper parts, were erroneously returned to the customs office of dispatch by the
fraudsters.

217, tt was fully normal for the customs administration to start a an an inquiry procedure when
oa K . The procedure of
inquiry is engaged as soon as the competent authority discovers a posterior’ that the proof
presented to it has been falsified and that the procedure has not been ended. The competent
authority of the customs office of dispatch will then determine whether or not the procedure
has ended and whether it can be discharged. It will also determine whether or not a customs
debt has been incurred, as well as the person(s) responsible for the debt. The practice in the
Czech Republic in 1994-1995 was first to approach the inland customs office which was
stated on the TCP as the customs office of destination. If this customs office did not provide
any satisfactory response, the customs office of dispatch would then approach all customs
offices, in case the driver/declarant made the clearance at a different customs office than the
one mentioned on the TCP. In the absence of a satisfactory answer, it would ask the declarant
to show evidence that the transit was terminated. The Czech Customs Administration was
clearly entitled to launch an investigation in April 1995, when it first suspected the transit
shipments to be unlawfully performed through the use of forged stamps on the TCPs.

 

(c) The security

218. The Customs Act obliged the declarant to secure any potential customs debt, either by
way of a deposit in cash or through a security offered by a third party. The declarant was not
allowed to release the goods into the procedure of transit absent such a security. This appears

47

from Section 144(1) of the Customs Act.

219. The Customs Act contained a particular chapter devoted to the “security to cover
’ voustomssdebt? ‘Its basic-provisions were-as'follows:. Tes .

“@) The security for‘the customs debt’ thad-to be provided by:the declarant, ‘in. the present case
the drivers, by way-of a deposit in-cash. The customs authorities.could also:permit a customs
debt-to ‘be secured by a.person other than the declarant, Z,¢, a customs agent like-CARGO,

(b). The-amounit of the security should ‘be either‘the precise amount of the customs-debt in
question or the maximum amount:estimated ‘by the customs authorities. In the present case,
the amount of the customs debt. was calculated -by reference tothe quantity of-oil imports
declared by the drivers with respect‘to each of their transit shipments.

(c) When the customs debt was secured by a guarantor, the latter should undertake in his
surety bond to pay jointly and severally with the debtor the secured amount of a customs debt.

-220.~According to-Section.260(2)-and.(3).ofthe-Gustoms Act,.the guarantor must.be a-bank.or
a person duly approved by ‘the customs authorities, it ‘being specified that the customs
authorities could reject or refuse to approve the proposed guarantor provided they “had
warranted doubt whether the.customs debt-would-be paid within'the prescribed.term.

221. The guarantee relationship between the customs.agent and a declarant originates from a

surety bond issued by the customs agent in order to-secure jointly and severally the customs

debt with the declarant. Given the peculiarity of the situation of the professionals of the
freight forwarding and of guarantors ‘for the customs debt potentially arising out of a transit
third. rts st agents--had-a. mitral. le-ste play th

pees
intemal transit procedure.

222. Indeed, beyond their duty to pay the customs debt, customs agents are in charge .of
“assisting clients such as importers and exporters in complying with customs formalities and
other applicable procedures and requiremerits. They perform a double function. On the one
hand, they assist importers and ‘exporters in complying with customs formalities and
procedures, On the other hand, they guarantee that goods will be moved from a customs office
of dispatch to an inland customs office of destination and that applicable taxes will be duly
paid, This latter function, namely the guarantee, applies to any and al] events of non-payment,
including, without limitation, in the event of diversion of use or non-delivery of the relevant
goods to the corresponding inland customs office and irrespective of who is ultimately liable.

223. In addition, customs agents have an obligation to report irregularities and deviations
from established customs procedures, Common examples of these deviations or irregularities
include, but are not limited to, false or inconsistent documentation and any suspicious
activities of non-compliance. Customs authorities rely, and the whole system is based, on the

customs agents having the highest professional and ethical standards,

224. Jn light of their particular role in the transit procedure, customs agents should be
particularly vigilant before participating in any transit procedure, and accepting to secure such

operations.

48

(d) The tax fraud

225, The Diesel case was a customs fraud that took place in the Czech Republic i in the years
1994-1995 and involved a number of individuals —

and .— who were all prosecuted, and those viho were found guilty
were later sentenced. More particularly, these individuals, directly or through CWA, Horex,
UNITIP and ; were involved in the fraudulent importation to the Czech

Republic of shipments of oil products ftom the refinery Slovnaft in Slovakia. The customs
administration raised CARGO’s guarantee claims in respect of the 1,245 transit procedures
that were fraudulently completed through the use of two customs stamps that were later on
established as being forgeries, The 1,245 transit procedures in respect of which the customs
administration raised CARGO’s guarantee claims involved CWA as importer and
Horex and UNITIP as consignees (none of the 1,245 transit procedures involved °

as consignee).

226. The Respondent points out that the fraudulent scheme in the Diesel case, namely the use
of a forged stamp on the TCP, copy 5, is a typical example of a fraudulent completion of the
transit procedure. CARGO must have been aware that such mechanisms were classical for
fraudsters in transit procedures, Given the peculiar circumstances - new border, new customs
office, large quantities of refined oi! migrating at the Breclav-dilnice border crossing -
CARGO should have been very cautious before accepting to guarantee such transit shipments.
Yet, the Claimant feigns to be surprisecl by such a fraudulent mechanism. It is the Claimant's
position, firstly, that the seals were not, in fact, forged, and, secondly, that such circumstance
would not be opposable against a guarantor.

227. The Respondent submits that the following facts are established with respect to the |,245
transit shipments for which CARGO’s guarantee has been claimed:

(a) Fraudsters involved in the Diesel case started importing oil from the Slovnaft refinery in
the month of F ebruary 1994, first in smal! quantities (16 shipments between February and
May 1994), Starting in June 1994, relatively large quantities were ! :
June 1994, 173 in July, 283 in August, 406 September),

   
 

(b) Among the 259 transit shipments performed between February and 7 July 1994, only six
were fraudulent and led the customs administration to raise CARGO's guarantee. This
technique is classically implemented by fraudsters so as to initiate a climate of confidence
with the customs agent before starting their unlawful activities.

(c) Between 7 July 1994 and 2 May 1995, a total of 1,805 oil shipments imported by
fraudsters in the Diesel case were accepted for internal transit procedure from the Bieclay-
dalnice Customs Office, the vast majority of these shipments taking place before 31
December 1994,

(d) A large number of these transit procedures were fraudulently closed by two stamps on the
TCPs, copy 5, i.e. one stamp of the inland customs office of Olomouc 1366, with the
sequential number 21, and one stamp of the inland customs office of Olomouc 1373 with the

sequential number 12,

(e) A report from the Institute of Criminology Prague dated 20 March 1996 has established
that these stamps were forged. This conclusion was confirmed in a police report of the Section

49

of Technical Expertise in the Area of Documents and Communications in Writing dated
22 July 1996. A total of 1,245 transit shipments were concerned by such fraud and remained
open.
@ Despite extensive. eriinal investigation: including she: examination ofa. lan ‘ge number of
-Witnessés such as: represeritatives - anid employees. .of CWA, ~~ y.Horex,--UNITIP,
, CARGO and the customs authorities, no-evidence was-ever found that
the customs administration was implicated i in the fraud.

(CZ) Claiming: the guarantee

Fak te te Bee at TG oe .
228. Confronted with a total of 1,245 transit procedures that were fraudulently.completed, the
Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office rightly decided to claim the guarantees issued by CARGO
with respect:to these shipments, decisions that CARG@-in almost-all cases challenged before

the competent courts and-administrative bodies, ‘without achieving a final success,

229. The Claimant contends that the guarantee claims issued by the customs authorities “were
false”, In :support of this contention, the: Claimant»relies: on (i) a computer printout dated
27 May 1995 and (ii) a guarantee claim case, which is alleged to be illustrative ofall the

1,245 guarantee cases against CARGO.

 

230. While denying any evidentiary force to the computer printout, the Respondent considers
that the guarantee claims case referred to by the Claimant is a perfect example of the 'Bieclav-
dalnice Customs Office’s right decision to claim CARGO’s guarantee.

 

231. In essence, the Claimant contends that the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office could not

-validly-claim. CAR GO’s guarantee: because i in possession of the TCPs, copy 5.:issued
with Tespect to all the transit shipments at issue. The Respondent considers ‘this ‘contention to

be false, since CARGO’s TCPs, copy 5, were forgeries based on false customs stamps.

   

232. The case which the-Respondent-wil] address is one of the-1,245 claims :that were-raised
against CARGO by the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office, The sequence of facts is as follows:

(a) On 4 November 1994, a shipment of diesel oi] exported by Slovnaft and imported through
Horex was presented at the Breclav-ddlnice Customs Office. The declarant was a driver
. This shipment was released into the internal transit procedure under cover of

CARGO” s guarantee.

(b) On the same day, the bottom part 5 of the TCP was stamped with the false stamp Olomouc
1373, serial number 12. This stamp is one of the two stamps that-were later established to be
forged. In other words, the transit procedure was fraudulently completed. The goods in
question were never submitted to the customs office of destination and were instead dumped

on the market without excise taxes being paid.
(c) On 7 March 2000, the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office issued a payment order against
CARGO to fulfil the guarantee claim in the amount of CZK 341,721.

233. Confronted with the fraudulent completion of a customs debt, the Bfeclav-ddlnice
Customs Office was perfectly right to consider that the transit procedure was not closed and to
claim CARGO’s guarantee that was precisely aimed .at protecting the .Czech. treasury’s

 

50

interests in such cases.

234. CARGO had the possibility to appeal decisions of the Bireclav-dalnice Customs Office
within 15 days from their notification before the Regional Customs Office Breclav, which
CARGO did in many cases. Yet, the Regional Customs Office Bieclav, as well as all other
administrative and judicial bodies seized by CARGO, constantly held that, on the merits, the
guarantee claims were well-founded.

235. In the case of the shipment of 4 November 1994, CARGO appealed the decision on the
guarantee claim before the Customs Directorate Brno and the decision was set aside but
merely for procedural reasons. The matter was returned to the Bieclav-dalnice Customs
Office for issuance of a valid decision.

236, On 4 April 2002, the Breclav-ddlnice Customs Office re-issued a valid decision against
CARGO, On 16 April 2002, CARGO appealed this decision before the Customs Directorate
Brno which, on 8 August 2002, confirmed the decision.

237, On 30 April 2004, the Regional Court of Brno rejected the claim for annulment of the
administrative decision (at this time CARGO was already represented by the bankruptey
trustee).

238. On 28 June 2006, the Supreme Administrative Court confirmed the challenged decision
of the Regional Court of Brno,

239, The Claimant contends that the customs administration simply refused to comply with
final court decisions that allegedly ordered the Czech state to reimburse sums that were
unduly withheld. The Respondent points out that this statement is completely false for the
following reasons:

(a) Firstly, the true meaning of the decision of the Regional Court of Brno was that the
guarantee claims were reasoned on the Customs Aci as amended in 1907, whereas
text was not in force when the facts complained of took place in 1994-1995, Never io the
Regional Court of Brno rule that the guarantee claims lacked merit.

 

(b) Secondly, the Regional Court of Brno never ordered the customs administration to
reimburse any sums to CARGO. Far from that, the Regional Court of Brno returned the
matter to the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office “for further procedure”, i.¢, It invited the
customs office to issue a new decision based on the Customs Act as applicable in 1994-1995,

(c) Thirdly, the customs administration was perfectly right in refusing to reimburse any sums
to CARGO between the day of the judgment returning the matter to the customs office and
the day a new decision was issued by this customs office. The reason is that the state was
entitled under Czech law to set off any amounts due by the state to a private party against any
amounts due to the state by this private party. These explanations were made clear to CARGO
on numerous occasions, for instance in a decision dated 22 February 2003 by the Bfeclav-
dalnice Customs Office that was confirmed by the Customs Directorate Brno on 16 April
2003.

(d) Finally, on the merits, the Regional Court of Brno has ruled that “the issue of the existence
of a customs debt had been solved by another decision of the customs organs that entered into

 

31

force”. In other words, the Czech court ruled that, on the merits, the existence of a customs
debt may no Jonger be challenged. :

-240. The.Claimant contends that CARGO’s bankruptcy was-the result of the Respondent’s
‘intentionally. illicit action through the ‘prosecution of illegal claims. However, CARGO’s
‘bankruptcy was not the result of.an internationally illicit action of the Respondent which also
acted in full compliance with Czech.law When it enforced CARGO’s guarantee claims.

a CARGO's abt in repeat of’ the d,, 245 transit Shipments:

‘241, The: Respondent does not agree to the‘Claimant’s contention“that 1,245 transit shipments
-which::gave rise to CARGO’s guarantee; were -properly -performed. -On.the coritrary, the
Respondent maintains that the 1,245 transit shipments at stake:were not properly performed as
they were unlawfully removed from customs supervision, therefore justifying the enforcement
of CARGO’s guarantees,
242. The Respondent notes that it is-not disputed.between the Parties that the 1,245. transit
shipments at stake were driven directly to -CWA’s. warebouses in Lipové or. SluSovice.
However, what remains-disputed -is -whether the drivers..were. effectively entitled to: do-so. °
While the Claimant is of the view that there was an authorisation allowing them to deliver the
goods directly to CWA’s premises, the Respondent maintains that this was not the case and
that, as-a consequence, the goods were illegally delivered to these locations. As a-resultsof:the
delivery of the 1,245 transit shipments to CWA’s warehouses in Lipové or Slu8ovice-without
any.authorisation to do so, it was impossible for the customs office of destination specified on
the TCPs to confirm their due presentation. What occurred is that, after the artival.of the
goods at CWA’s warehouses, the TCPs were illegally collected by CWA’s employees and
never brought to the customs office of destination specified on the TCPs. The Respondent
submits that this is why, finally, no customs clearance had ever been performed in relation to
~the°l;245 transit shipments'whichgave riseto:CAR GO's:guarantee.

243, The Respondent cannot accept the Claimant’s assertion that the drivers were entitled to
deliver the goods directly to CWA’s premises on the ground of:

(a) the permits allegedly granted to © . Horex and UNITIP by the Zlin Customs
Office on ] May 1994, 1 June 1994 and 7 April 1995 respectively, and

(b) the permit granted to CWA by the Customs Office Ceské Budéjovice on 27 June 1994.

244, Indeed, the Respondent maintains that the documents which, in the Claimant’s opinion,
attest that the drivers were effectively entitled to deliver the goods directly at CWA’s
‘warehouses when performing transit shipments for the consignees . Horex and
UNITIP were falsified. In any event, even if they had been genuine, they could not have
entitled the drivers to deliver the goods directly to the importer’s location.

, who was supposed to have issued

245. The Respondent points out that, while
these “authorisations”, was not in a hierarchical position which would have entitled him to

issue such kind of permits, it also appears that the signatures on these three documents are not
his, This results from a mere comparison between
initials on the documents,

“. specimen signature and the

 

52

246, In any event, the Respondent submits that these “authorisations” would never have
entitled the drivers to deliver the goods directly to CWA’s premises. Only an authorisation
granted in accordance with Section 102(3) of the Customs Act as applicable at the relevant
time would have allowed goods to be transported directly to the importer’s location in order
for the customs clearance to be performed at that place, However, the “authorisations” relied
on by the Claimant only allowed their “beneficiaries” to dispose of the goods prior to their
release into free circulation in accordance with Section 123 of the Customs Act. This
provision was of no relevance in case of transit procedures since it only allowed the goods to
be disposed of prior to their release into free circulation. As a consequence, the special
treatment of goods allowed under this provision could only apply after the end of the transit
procedure. In other words and irrespective of their authenticity, these “authorisations” could
not have entitled the drivers to deliver the goods directly to CWA's premises since they were
not “granted” on the ground of Section 102(3) of the Customs Act,

247, The question remains as to whether the drivers were entitled to deliver the goods at
CWA's premises by virtue of the simplified procedure granted to CWA by the Customs
Office Ceské Budéjovice, This authorisation was issued in accordance with Section 124(1)(b)
of the Customs Act. The Respondent finds it irrelevant for the present case for the following
reasons:

(a) Section 124(1)(b) of the Customs Act was aimed at simplifying the customs procedures
from an administrative point of view by allowing a declarant to release goods into a customs
regime on the basis of a commercial/administrative invoice only. Of critical importance here
is the fact that such simplification of customs declarations applied to any customs regimes
except transit. This is what the Regulation SPE 126 (OS-35) clearly states: “Under the
permitted simplified procedure a declarant may submit a customs declaration for the release
of goods into a relevant regime, except for the transit regime - - -”.

(b} Goods presented to a border customs office under the umbrella of the simplified procedure
al Section 124(1)(b) were released into free circulation on the basis of a commercial invoice
instead of a TCP. However, such simplified procedure allowed the tinporter to present such
goods accomna ist uiily tu thé customs office which granted such
procedure. In other words, a simplified procedure granted by the Customs Office Ceské
Budéjovice could never be used for deliveries of goods elsewhere (neither the
Ziin/Otrokovice Customs Office nor CWA’‘s premises), The authorisation granted to CWA
may therefore not apply to the present case where CARGO’s guarantee was enforced as a
result of the unlawful removal of transit shipments from customs supervision.

       

(c) A simplified procedure granted in accordance with Section 124(1)(b) of the Customs Act
also implied that no customs agent was involved in the procedures performed under the
umbrella of such permit. Indeed, in accordance with the terms of Section 124(1)(b), simplified
procedures implied that no TCP was issued since it did not apply to transit operations.
Furthermore, no specific surety bond had to be issued either, since the authorisation for the
simplified procedure under Section 124(1)(b) required another type of securing of the customs
debt. In the case of CWA, this was done by the Agreement on Securing Customs Debt
concluded between CWA and the Customs Office Ceské Budéjovice on 29 June 1994, which
is an inseparable part of the decision of the Customs Office Ceské Budgjovice allowing CWA
to use the simplified procedure,

248. The Respondent therefore contends that the reason why the Bfeclav-ddlnice Customs

53

Office requested the drivers. to. submit TCPs and surety bonds was that the 1,245 transit
shipments which gave rise'to CARGO’s guarantee were not - and.could not-be — performed
under the zimbrella of a 8 permit for the simplified. Procedure under Section 124)@) of "the

Customs Ati:

bene ARMM A A rae sotitey: 6

 

 

249, ti is thus clear, in the Respondent's opinion, that the simplified procedure under Section
124(€1)¢b). of the~Customs Act granted to CWA did nét-apply to transit. sitoperations and-did-not
: require the. services ‘of ony customs agent including | CARGO,

  
 
  

. 250. The Respondent: also fi nds cleat that the. ives ‘were:not onttled 4 sto 9 deliver: the: :goods
‘directly to -CWA’s warehouses ‘by“virtue-of Section :102(3) :of the Customs Act: The faot:that
ithe:drivers.delivered the goods directly -at CWA’s warehouses, which they::weremot:-entitled:to
do, is ‘by itself an-illegal removal of goods.from customs: supervisionwhich :gave rise to ‘an
obligation for which CARGO is liable and accepted the risk: However, other -occurrences
confirm that the 1,245 transit shipments at stake here were not’ properly. performed .and
therefore entitled the customs authorities to raise CARGO’s guarantees,

-251. The.Claimant-has-explained:that when arriving .at-.CW.A’s warehouses ithe .drivers..were
directed to‘hand over their TCPs to’an employee of the importer. Although this -behaviour-is a
clear infringement of ‘the drivers’ obligations as declarants of the goods, the..Cldimant
maintained that it was:normal for CWA's employees ‘to collect the TCPs :from -the «drivers
upon: their arrival at CWA’s premises: in Lipové or Slu8ovice. The Respondent finds ‘this

position unworkable, for the two following reasons:

 

* (a) First of all, even if there was -an authorisation-to deliver the goods. directly to -CW.A’s
premises in accordance with Section 102(3) of the Customs Act, a.customs officer would stil]
-have-had-to-be-present-at-CW.A-s«p firm-th jon.of-the:good
and to have the customs clearance performed at het place. The absence of any customs
officer at CWA’s premises is corroborated-by some drivers who testified that they never dealt

with any customs officer upon their arrival at. Lipova or SluSovice.

(b) Secondly, by handing over ‘the TCPs to CWA’s employees and 4 believing they would
attend the customs proceedings instead of them, the drivers clearly breached their duties -as
declarants of the transit shipments. Indeed, by virtue of Sections-140(2)-.and 102(6) of the
Customs Act, the drivers acting as declarants of the transit shipments were under a duty to
“ensure that the goods are produced under the conditions laid down by:the customs office of
dispatch to the customs office of destination ‘in-the unaltered state, with an intact customs seal
and with the accompanying.documents” and to attend the customs proceedings. As a result of
their non-compliance with their duties as declarants of the.goods, the drivers allowed the
unlawful removal of the goods from customs supervision by CWA’s employees, thus giving
rise to an obligation for which they were jointly and severally liable with CARGO acting as

the guarantor for these transit shipments.

252. The Respondent also contests the Claimant’s affirmation that CWA’s employees — after
illegally coljecting the TCPs from the drivers — brought them over to the Zlin Customs Office
on a regular basis, since it is not supported by any evidence and is mistaken for the two

following reasons:

(a) First of all, the documents issued for transit shipments where » Horex and
UNITIP were the “consignees” were systematically handed over to the head of the

54

dispatching of CWA, i.e. - and not to the customs office of destination specified
in the TCP as prescribed by the Customs Act, The fact that the transit declarations were kept
:and that no one, neither at CWA nor at the Zlfn Customs Office, ever saw
him attending the customs proceedings, necessarily leads to the conclusion that those
documents were never handed over to the customs office of destination specified in the TCP.

(b) Secondly, one may also note that the Claimant’s assertion that CWA’s employees brought
the customs documents to the customs office of destination cannot be reconciled with the
Claimant’s position in this arbitration. According to him, the goods were delivered and
cleared directly at CWA’s premises by virtue of a simplified procedure, However, since the
customs clearance had to be performed in the presence of a customs officer (even under the
simplified procedure), the Respondent does not understand why CWA's employees would
have to bring the customs documentation to the Zlfn Customs Office when these documents
could have been directly taken over by the customs officer who was supposed to attend! the
customs clearance at CWA's locations,

253. Both Parties concur in saying that final customs clearance, which as a rule must be
performed at the customs office of destination, is in the present case materialised by the
issuance of a JCD on which the amounts of customs duties ~ if any — and indirect taxes (/.¢.
excise taxes and VAT) due for a specific transit shipment are assessed, However, the Parties
are in disagreement concerning the question whether such customs clearance occurred in
respect of the 1,245 transit shipments for which CARGO’s guarantees have been issued,

254, It is the Respondent's case that the 1,245 transit procedures could not have been duly
discharged since it was discovered in late April 1995 that the upper parts of the TCPs, copies
5, received at Bieclav-dalnice were fraudulently filled in and were affixed with a forged
customs stamp, a falsified signature and a fictitious number.

255. ‘The Claimant tries to establish the complicity of the customs administration in the
perpetration of the fraud. According to him, the number of shipments that evaded the customs

clycmont of customs officers in tax

 

supervision is an overall indicator of the inv
Claimant’s opinion, no customs office in any reasonably developed country could fail to
notice that 90% of truck loads of oil products disappeared between the national border

crossing and a place of destination 80 km into the country within a period of six months.

 

256. The Respondent notes, however, that there are examples showing that this may be
possible. In 1994, transit procedures related to fifteen lorries of computer products were
fraudulently completed by the Russian mafia using a falsified stamp. Large quantities of
alcohol and cigarettes in transit from Portugal to Germany were removed from customs
supervision thanks to the use of a forged stamp in 1994, giving rise to the claim of a customs
agent’s guarantee in the amount of 37 million euro. Approximately 1,000 lorries of live
animals and 300 lorries of meat in transit were removed from customs supervision in 1995, to
such a level that the market price for meat inexplicably fell down at that time. Apart from
these examples available to the public domain, all practitioners active in the field of customs
during the period 1990-2000 have been confronted with similar cases of fraud, including
those dealing with petroleum products.

257. In any event, the Respondent considers that the customs officers dealing with the
discharge of the transit shipments at the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office could not have
known that the documents that were mailed to them were falsified. Several circumstances

55

made it impossible to detect the forgery on the sole basis of the control.performed on that
occasion. Firstly, the Claimant’has purportedly and significantly minimised the number of
copies 5 of the TCPs which were received on a daily basis at Bieclay-dalnice. Instead of 50,
sas affirmed by. the Claimant,-approximately.400 upper parts-of:the TCPRs coming from.-the 134
other customs offices in the Czech Republic had to be checked daily. .As a result, only the
absence of the copy 5 of the TCP within the prescribed time or its blatant falsification could
be detected through the monitoring performed by customs officers in charge of discharging
the transit shipments at Breclav-ddinice, However, copies 5 of the TCPs in question on their
face.complied with the required specifications. They had a.customs stamp which, at first sight,
was.similar to an.authentic stamp. They-bore a signature the authenticity of which the customs
officer could not have verified. They finally had a TCP registration number which complied _
with formal requirements and was generated so that no overlap with.authentic numbers was

possible,

258. A ‘professional involved in the transit sector, such as, for instance, CWA, may have
learned how the TCP numbers were structured. Jt was therefore possible for CWA, or any
other person involved in the Diesel case, to fabricate TCP numbers that presented. the
appearance of authenticity and -would not conflict with a genuine TCP number. If the customs
officers at Zlin had been inVélvéd in the tax ftaud, the Respondent submits that-they :would
have affixed an authentic TCP number on the copies 5 of the TCPs in order for the fraud-to be

entirely undetectable.

259. Finally, in the Respondent’s view, the fact that the transit shipments were considered by
the customs office of dispatch to be “discharged” does not at all prove that the customs
officers were involved in perpetrating tax fraud. It only confirms that the perpetrators
managed to maintain appearances that everything was normal and to thwart the vigilance of

the customs administration.

260. The Claimant is also of the opinion that the absence of any inquiry procedure is proof of
the complicity of customs officers. The Respondent points out, however, that the Bieclav-
dalnice’ Customs Office started inquiry procedures immediately after the fraud was suspected,
in late April 1995, by issuing inquiry letters to some of the customs offices of destination
possibly affected by the Diesel case in order to find out whether the shipments had been
presented to them or not. For instance, the Zlin Customs Office answered these inquiry letters
by ascertaining that the shipments had not ‘been presented, which later gave rise to guarantee
claims against CARGO. Further, such alleged delays in the inquiry procedures do not prove

any complicity.

261. The Respondent also made its best efforts to collect the customs debt from CWA and the
drivers/declarants prior to initiating proceedings against CARGO or in parallel with these
proceedings.

262. The Respondent considers that the Claimant has failed to demonstrate any involvement
of the customs officers in the perpetration of tax fraud and has even been unable to create a
mere presumption in this regard.

263. In the absence of any involvement or negligence on the part of the customs
administration in the tax fraud, the Respondent validly raised CARGO’s guarantee claims. By

acting as a customs agent, CARGO accepted to cover the proper performance of the transit
customs procedure, thereby undertaking the risk associated-with liability deriving from the

56

unlawful removal of the transit shipments from customs supervision.

264, The Respondent adds that CARGO’s bankruptcy is in no way associated with any
wrongdoing or negligence of the customs authorities, but a mere result of the business risk
taken by the customs agent’s business in the Czech Republic in the period 1994-1995,

(g) The use of the forged stamps

265. The Claimant contends that the use of customs stamps necessarily involved customs
officers at Zlin. According to him, the stamps — although authentic — have not been used in a
legitimate context but were used as a cover-up for the ongoing tax fraud. However, the
Respondent points out that the stamps used during the course of the transit shipments in
question were scientifically qualified as being forgeries.

266. Moreover, although the customs stamp number “1366.21” was cancelled on | September
1994, it was used in relation to transit shipments performed by Horex until 6 October 1994,
ie, one month and a half after its cancellation. If a customs officer had effectively been
involved in the tax fraud, the Respondent considers that he or she would have paid closer
attention in order to warn the perpetrators to stop using the stamps “1366.21” as of
| September 1994,

267. The Respondent submits that, if customs officers at the Zlin Customs Office had been
effectively involved in the fabrication of the authorisations, they would have been anxious to
make the signatures on them similar to the signature of the person who had
allegedly issued them. Furthermore, the similarity of these authorisations and an authorisation
the authenticity of which has not been questioned is not as striking as the Claimant argues.

(h) CARGO’s lack of vigilance

268, The Respondent argues that, in light of their particular role in the transit procedure,

 

and accepting to secure such operations, Commercial risks deliberately and knowingly
assumed by the investor cannot be compensated by the BIT.

269. In the Respondent's opinion, a customs agent acting as a guarantor, such as CARGO,
should particularly make efforts:

(a) to assess the financial situation of the declarants it accepts to guarantee,

(b) to have as large a number as possible of drivers ensuring transit shipments, in order to
avoid some drivers being accountable for a customs debt they could not support,

(c) to verify the notoriety of the importers, especially when large quantities of goods are
regularly imported,

(d) to be particularly cautious when transit shipments concern goods that are subject to high
excise rates (cigarettes, alcohol, oil), and that are known to be more fraud-sensitive than other

items,

(e) when large quantities of goods are imported, to verify that other customs agents also

57

guarantee their:transit, so as-to divide the possible customs debt with as large .a number of
customs agents as possible, and

when-‘a.driver.frequently.<carries.:the..same -goods,-.to. check. wits him. «that. hie é transit
Soettinte ‘wert well: and that-no imegularity was. noticed.

  

270. The ‘Respondent considers these conditions to be the quid ‘pro. quo ‘in > order to protect
CARGO’s own financial] interests, not mentioning those of the Czech treasury. CARGO did
not:perform any: isk management and this: antys of vigilance “was not Feomplied swith in the
‘Diesel rcase, -'
271. The standard practices applied by reputable customs .agentsiactive in the Czech Republic
in the relevant-time‘period allowed them to avoid:béing involved and harmed ‘in the Diese]
case. Among the measures which were ‘implemented in order:to prevent risk of providing
significant security for fraudulent transit it shipments of oi] -products, the following. should: be

highlighted:
- (a) Only haulier .ec swere acting.as acceptable.decl, in-the .transit-procedure. In
other words, customs agents didnot secure customs debts for individual drivers.

(b) Surety bonds were issued only on the basis of the guarantee contract between haulier,
company and the customs agent. ae
~(c) The drivers were required to sign a declaration obliging them to return the TCP Part-5 slip
:to the customs agent.

(@-Customs.-agents -were issuing. “black-lists” containing-names.of.haulierswhich.had-transits
that were not closed, and those which did not pay their customs debts.

(e) Customs agents issued a list of “sensitive goods”. Securing transit of such sensitive. goods
required signature of the customs agent’s director.-Oi] products were always considered as
“sensitive goods”.

(f) It was not usual practice during the relevant period to establish exclusivity between a
customs agent and a haulier or driver.

272, The Respondent considers that the Diesel case contains a great deal of evidence that
CARGO was manifestly negligent in the fulfilment of its professional duties.

273, Indeed, CARGO was the only customs agent implicated in the Diesel case, although
other customs agents providing the same kind of services were established at the Bieclay-
déinice border crossing in 1994-1995, Shipments of fraudulent imports of oil products
amounted to a significant portion of CARGO’s own activity at BYeclay-ddlnice in 1994,

274. In view of this situation, the Respondent argues that CARGO should have been all the
more cautious and alarmed by the following elements:
(a) Shipments of goods with special excise tax regime (oil, cigarettes, alcohol) are well known

to be more fraud-sensitive than others, especially in the peculiar circumstances of the present
case (new border, new customs office, enormous quantities of oi] migrating through the

 

58

Bfeclav-dalnice border crossing). Contrarily, CARGO guaranteed these shipments as if it was
“business as usual” on apples or pears.

(b) Shipments of enormous quantities of oil products were set up by entities which the
Claimant acknowledges were unknown, ruled by very young, inexperienced and insolvent
persons, Manifestly, CARGO has offered its guarantee to the transit on such shipments
without more investigation.

(c) Shipments of these oil products were declared by the drivers, ie, natural persons with
limited financial resources, mostly in their own name. Given the risk of such declarants’
insolvency, CARGO should obviously have been more vigilant towards them as opposed to
institutional clients. Additionally, these shipments were performed by a limited number of
drivers (approximately 60), some of them performing up to 75 shipments each. Yet, CARGO
accepted to guarantee these drivers in full knowledge that they would not be capable of
supporting the customs debts in case something went wrong.

(d) Parts 5 TCPs of all fraudulent shipments were actually stamped by only two stamps (the
stamp of 1 (No. 1366.21) and the stamp of . (No. 1373.12), This
very unusual situation did not attract CARGO's attention. It later happened that these stamps
were proved to be forgeries.

(e) CARGO often issued surety bonds to drivers/hauliers before it received the bottom part 5
of TCPs related to previous shipments performed by the same driver/haulier. For instance.
CARGO issued 69 surety bonds to Cetrans after 9 August 1994 although it never received the
bottom part 5 TCP of the transit procedure opened by Cetrans on 9 August 1994, The same
situation occurred with (29 shipments after 2 November 1994) and Transpolar Hope
(27 shipments after 23 November 1994),

(f) CARGO did not verify the notoriety of the consignees — especially and his
company Horex, although they all of a sudden started to impor a very large number of tank

   

(g) Transit always ended in the same surprising way, namely the drivers were asked to stay
outside the importers’ premises and never met any customs officer at the end of the transit, as
the drivers have repeatedly declared during the criminal proceedings. The Claimant has never
provided a piece of evidence nor any declaration that the drivers had informed CARGO of
this very astonishing situation. This means either that CARGO did not especially enquire with
the drivers about the way the transit terminated, or that CARGO knew that something unusual
was afoot. In both cases, it is not for the Czech Republic to suffer the consequences of such
behaviour.

(h) The bottom parts 5 of TCPs were not delivered to CARGO by the declarants but by two
CWA employees (Mr. ...... and Mr. J, even though the drivers were doing their
more or less regular shuttles. This should have been an indication for CARGO that the drivers
did not fulfil their obligations within the transit regime.

275. The Respondent considers all these elements as obvious evidence of CARGO's
negligence in the sequence of facts that ultimately gave rise to guarantee claims against it.

59

(i) CARGO’s liability for excise taxes and WAT

276. The Claimant contends that CARGO’s surety bonds did not provide that it was liable for
the payment of excise taxes and VAT.and that, as a consequence, CARGO was not liable to
pay-such taxes. However, the Respondent points out that CARGQ-had aovepted: -to-guarantee
payment of excise-taxes and VAT. wil we

277. In paragraph 2 of all surety bonds issued: by CARGO during the years 1994-1995, the
guarantor undertook, within the time-limit. of-ten.days-from the.notification of the.amount of
customs duty, tax and fees by the relevant customs authority, forthwith:to.pay the. requested

amount.

278, The Respondent.finds the.wording of CARGO’s surety bonds ‘fully consistent with -the
relevant provisions of the Customs Act.: Under Section 323 of this Act, as.applicable in the
years 1994-1995, excise taxes and VAT were part of the customs debt.

279. The Respondent.also considers.that the Claimant’s argument is contrary to any sense of
_Jogic..The _scope...of CARGO’s obligations was, consistent .with the. purpose .of such
engagement within the framework of goods imported within a customs union. If excise-taxes
and VAT were not covered within the notion of “customs debt”, this would.have amounted to
depriving the guarantees of the customs agents of any effect in the particular context of the
Czech-Slovak commercial relationships. If-the Claimant’s argumentation were accurate, the
Czech-customs administration would not have requested any guarantee at.al] in rcaseof transit

shipments coming from the Slovak Republic.
280. The Respondent argues that CARGO, when securing the proper -performance of the
£

hb -was .perfectly-aware-of-the.fact-thatzit could.bs

1,245 transit shipr
for the payment of excise taxes and VAT, such as those accruing on the import of oil

producis.

281. The Respondent points out that the drivers and CARGO were jointly and severally-liable
for the customs debt. This obligation is clearly stated in Section 260 of the Customs Act.

282. The Claimant also contends that CARGO, as guarantor of the custorns debt, was not
liable to pay excise taxes and VAT for the unlawful removal of goods from customs
supervision, According to the Claimant, the laws of the Czech Republic in force from 1994 to
1997 did not contain any provision under which excise taxes and VAT could be assessed on
goods imported from the Slovak Republic, in case such goods were illegally imported into the
Czech Republic. In the Respondent’s opinion, these contentions are erroneous.

283. The Respondent finds the question as to whether excise taxes and VAT are part of the
customs debt to be largely irrelevant for the present discussion. Indeed, what matters is not the
definition of customs debt but the extent of the surety bond provided by the customs agent. In
this respect, there is no doubt under Czech law as applicable in 1994 and 1995 that this
guarantee encompassed the obligation to pay excise taxes and VAT. The Respondent
considers that Section 323 of the Customs Act as applicable at that time made it absolutely
clear that excise taxes and VAT were secured by the customs agent.

284, Moreover, the Respondent argues that al] Czech laws and regulations also made it clear
that the notion of secured customs debt encompassed excise duties and VAT.

60

285. The Act on Excise Taxes and the Act on VAT set forth that tax liability arose “on the
day a customs debt arises”,

286. The Respondent argues that the Claimant is wrong when contending that goods imported
from Slovakia were exempt from customs duty. Under the Agreement on the Customs Union
between the Czech Republic and Slovakia no goods were exempt from customs duty, but the
goods were just subject to a customs preferential system. Under this preferential regime,
import duties were assessed but not collected. Therefore, when importing goods from
Slovakia, a customs debt clearly arose.

287. Moreover, Section 8 (1) of the Act on Excise Taxes made it clear that products imported
from the Slovak Republic, as goods freed from customs duty due to the general system of
customs preferences, were subject to excise tax, The same regime applied also to VAT.

288. Contrary to what the Claimant contends, the Respondent submits that the term “import”
included the unlawful removal of goods from customs supervision (Section 240 (I) of the
Customs Act). And again, sequentially, the Act on Excise Taxes and the Act on VAT
stipulated that tax liability arises upon import, i.e, the tax liability arose at the moment when
the goods were unlawfully removed from customs supervision in the regime of transit.

289, Moreover, the Treaty on the Customs Union between the Czech and Slovak Republics
provides that “[g]oods exported from one of the Parties to the other Party could not be in a
favourable position due to the return of the national tax duties over the indirect taxes cast
upon such goods”. The Respondent considers that the only logical interpretation of this
provision is that the imported goods must be subject to the same tax in the importing state as
they were in the exporting state.

290. In addition, the Claimant relies on the Supreme Administrative Court judgment No. 7
Afs 149/2004- 159 dated 23 March 2006 which i in his opinion shows that the term “customs
dabt” sh 5
Administrative Court judgment in reality supports and confirms the Respondent’s argument
that excise taxes and VAT were part of the customs debt secured by CARGO’s surety bonds
and that the customs administration had the authority to assess and collect excise taxes and
VAT at the relevant time. The judgment also makes it clear that the drivers could be debtors
of the customs debt notwithstanding that other people also participated in removing the goods
from customs supervision in the transit regime. Indeed, many Czech court decisions show that
excise taxes and VAT are part of the customs debt, and that the customs authority is entitled
to collect and assess excise taxes and VAT.

apart di

  

@ The competence of the customs offices

291. On a subsidiary basis, the Claimant argues that the Czech Customs Administration was
not entitled at all to assess and collect excise taxes and VAT on the relevant imports. The
arguments are as follows:

(a) Section 3(2)(a) of the Customs Act, Section, 2(e) of the Act on Excise Taxes and Section
2(2)Ci) of the Act on VAT entrusted the customs authorities with the function of tax
administrator in respect of excise taxes and VAT payable upon imports of goods.

61

(b) “Import” is defined in both the Act of Excise Taxes (where it only designates the release

of-goods. into free circulation or active treatment contact in return system) -and tbe Act on
WAT (where it.designates the release of goods into free circulation regime, active treatment
-contact.regime: ‘in-retumn.system;temporary.use and goods ‘imported baal into fies cincailation
from the passive treatment contact regime). :

   

(c) In the Pi ‘esent case, since the payment assessments ocurred i in b relation toa customs debt
“which thad:arisen.in accordance with Section 240 of the-Czech;Customs.Act, the cust6ms:debt
did not-arise upon the.release.into the free circulation regime or:any other.regime-constituting
“import” and, since customs bodies were the administrators of excise taxes and VAT orily in
connection with imports, the Bieclay-dalnice.Customs -Office-was not the administrator. of
such, taxes, i.e. it wasnotmaiterially.competentito assess and collect such taxes. Le

@ ‘Due to the lack of material competense of the. Bieclavedélnice Customs Office, .the
administrative acts issued in relation to, paxment 8 assessments in this-case are void and not

binding. . ‘

292, The Respondent considers that this argumentation cannot stand for ‘the following
teasons. The rélevant Jaw-is the Customs Act which defines ‘the notions of “import?iand
“imported goods”. According to Section 133(3), “‘[i]Jmported goods’ means goods, placed
under a suspensive arrangement”, and according to Section 133(1), “[tJhe term ‘ suspensive
arrangement’ is understood as applying to the following procedures: (a) transit [- - =
Section 2(e) of the Act on Excise Taxes stated that customs authorities are entrusted with the
function of tax administrator.in.respect of imports and the Act-on VAT .contained-a similar
provision and in.Section.2(2)(i) stated-that customs authorities serve as tax-administrator.only
in connection with import, this does not mean anything more. than the simple fact:thatsin the
case-of..imports (defined inthe.Customs.Act-as.Jex..specialis).the.customs .authorities_are
itled to assess and .collect.excise taxes and VAT. The legislation of the Czech Republic
‘formed a logically ‘iriterconmected nexus and complex. -corpus, Wheréby ctistoms officers were
undoubtedly empowered to-assess and collect excise:taxes and VAT in the situation.at‘issue.

  

   
 

293. The removal of goods from customs supervision was defined as import under Sections
133 and 240(1) of the Customs Act, and the customs offices ‘were entitled-to assess and collect
excise taxes and VAT also upon transit. This followed from Sections 3 and 11 of the Customs
Act, Section 2 of the Act on Excise Taxes and Section 2 of the VAT Act.

294. Accordingly, in the present case, excise taxes and VAT were assessed and collected in
the amounts and under the conditions stipulated in the Act on Excise Taxes and the Act on
VAT. CARGO was very well aware of this as it calculated the amounts of taxes in order to
complete surety bonds.

295. The Respondent concludes that goods placed under the regime of transit are imported
goods within the meaning of the Customs Act, for which the customs authorities are therefore

perfectly entitled to assess and collect excise taxes and VAT by virtue of Section 3(2)(a) of -

the Customs Act.

296. The Czech Customs Administration’s claims against CARGO were upheld and
confirmed by a number of decisions of courts of the Czech Republic, including the Regional
Court of Brno and the Supreme Administrative Court as well as in at least 18 cases decided by

the Constitutional Court,

62

297, The Respondent points out that in no such proceedings did CARGO or the Claimant
raise those arguments based on Czech customs law which the Claimant now requests the
Arbitral Tribunal to reassess. Nor did any courts apply this argumentation by themselves,
although they could have done so (based on the /ura novit curia principle), The simple reason
is that those arguments are completely groundless, fabricated just for this arbitration,

298. The Respondent also argues that the Claimant is estopped from sustaining arguments not
raised before Czech courts or contrary to what he or his witnesses have sustained before.

299, Based on his arguments, the Claimant alleges that the actions of the customs authority,
by which it assessed and collected the customs debt, were void. In the Respondent's view, this
conclusion is wrong as based on incorrect arguments. In any case, the acts of the customs
authority regarding the assessment and collection of the customs debt (including VAT and
excise taxes) could not be considered as void, inasmuch as there was no fundamental and
clear defect, and as they were indeed not issued by an administrative body that was lacking
material jurisdiction.

300. The Respondent argues that the administrative acts of the customs authority must be
presumed to be correct, unless the relevant administrative bodies and/or courts of the Czech
Republic change or cance] them. To the best knowledge of the Respondent, nothing like this
occurred.

301. The Claimant also brings argumentation which leads to the asserted conclusion that
CARGO was entitled to participate in the administrative proceedings against the individual
drivers. The Respondent contests this for the following reasons.

302. The Czech legislation did not embody a single provision stipulating the necessity to carry
one single proceeding in a situation where several persons were participating in the customs
debt evasion or where several persons are liable for a customs debt originating in non-delivery
of identical products to a customs office of destination. Corresnondingly, the Claimant dane
not refer to any Czech statutory provision stipulating such duty to conduct one proceeding
with all debtors, nor any case which would deduce such duty from principles of administrative
law.

303. It has to be noted that proceedings conducted against the individual drivers led to
individual decisions issued to and binding on the drivers only. These decisions were neither
enforceable against CARGO nor had they res judicata or any other impact on CARGO and its
rights. The decisions agains. CARGO were issued in separate proceedings in which it could
have freely proposed any evidence, including, for instance, interrogation of the drivers as
witnesses or reference to the files of the proceedings conducted with the drivers. CARGO had
standard opportunities to defend its rights in numerous proceedings carried out before Czech
administrative bodies and, later, Czech courts.

(k) Time bar

304, The respondent submits that the Claimant uses various means, e.g. citing unrelated court
decisions and misinterpretations of the Czech legislation in the given time period, in order to
persuade the Arbitral Tribunal that the assessed (and partially collected) customs debts have
been time-barred, The argumentation is incorrect and misleading for the following reasons,

63

305. The Customs Act did not contain any provision about a time-limit for assessing the
customs debt. CARGO’s debts were not time-barred when they.were assessed. and enforced,
because the relevant laws of the Czech:Republic.did.not-contain.any provision: which:would

stipulate such a time! ‘Limit,

306: The Claimant, well. aware that the Customs Act cannat provide any “basis for ‘his
argumentation, is irying to persuade the Arbitral Tribunal] about the applicability ‘of either
Section 47:ofthe Act: on Administration of Faxes:and Fees or:Section:4 of:the Act on the Tax

System.
307. However, ‘the Customs ‘Act applicable at that time limited. the applicability of the
administrative laws to those-specifically referred to in Section 320, and-neither the Act on
Administration of Taxes and Fees nor the Act on the Tax System was .listed there. Later,
effective as of 1997, the Customs Act stipulated in Section 320 the applicability of general
regulations on administration of-taxes:and -fees, while explicitly. excluding the:applicability of
Section 47 of the Act on Administration of Taxes and Fees. The Customs Act in Section 320
in the wording .applicable.before 1997 did. not even refer to the /general regulations on

administration of taxes and fees”,
308. Therefore, the applicability of both Acts upon which the Claimant has altenatively: based
his argumentation was exc’ tuded by the:Customs Act.

309. The Claimant -has not-indicated any relevant laws of the-Czech Republic, which were
effective at that time and which would demonstrably stipulate.a time-limit-for assessing the
customs debt i in customs proceedings. As a consequence, the Claimant has failed to prove the

sti debt..in..the-legislati: of-~the..Czech

+ #7) Jirnit<te
‘Republic.

310. Nor is it correct that any court decisions have formulated a new position on the issue of a
time-limit. First of all, it should-be pointed out'that the Czech legal system is not-based on
precedents. Court decisions pertain to particular cases and do not have any force as
precedents. Secondly, the court decisions referred to by the Claimant can easily be
distinguished from the Claimant’s case. They relate to customs debts which arose after 1 July
1997. In other words, all the presented judgments are based on the wording of the Customs
Act following an amendment to the Customs Act implemented by Act. No 113/1997. Only
after the said change, i.¢, after 1 July 1997, did the Customs Act allow for the subsidiary use
of the Jaws on tax administration. Based on the general reference to the laws on tax
administration, the Supreme Administrative Court held that the Customs Act allowed for the

applicability of Act No. 212/1992 on the Tax System.

31], It is not clear why the Claimant relies on Section 4 of Act No. 212/1992 on the System of
Taxes when the Customs Act contained specific provisions devoted to the time bar in respect
of the right to claim outstanding duties. Indeed, Section 282(1) provided in this regard that
“Ttlhe right to recover and enforce the payment of outstanding duty shall be time-barred after
six years following the year when such duty became due”. At the same time, the Customs Act
did not contain any time limitation for the imposition of customs debts. Therefore, the
payment orders issued in 1999 and 2000 were not time-barred since they were issued to
CARGO within the time-limit prescribed by Section 282(1) of the Customs Act, Moreover
pursuant to Section 282(3) of the Customs Act, the time bar shall be taken into account only if

64

an objection is raised by the debtor,

312. Therefore, the applicability of both Acts upon which the Claimant has alternatively based
his argumentation was excluded by the Customs Act.

313. It should be added that the Biteclav-ddinice Customs Office issued notifications on non-
delivery of goods and consequently decisions on the payment of the customs debt by
CARGO, ie. within the initial deadline prescribed by Section 4 of Act No. 212/1992. As a
result, a new deadline of three years started to run. Therefore, payment orders notified to
CARGO in 1999 and 2000 could not be time-barred under the said Section 4.

314, It should also be pointed out that the application of Section 282 of the Customs Act leads
to exactly the same result since its second paragraph provides for a mechanism similar to
Section 4 of Act No, 212/1992.

315, The Respondent concludes that the guarantee claims were not time-barred.

()) No refunds to CARGO

316. The Claimant also argues that the Czech customs administration abusively refused to
grant CARGO’s request to have its funds reimbursed as a consequence of the setting aside of
some of the guarantee claims. The Respondent strongly disagrees with this allegation. The
procedure before the Czech customs bodies was fully in compliance with the applicable law.
At the time when CARGO asked for a refund of the financial means based on the cancellation
of the payment order, other receivables existed due to the Czech customs authority by
CARGO, Based on this the Czech customs authority could, in full compliance with the
applicable law, set off such financial means against the oldest unpaid underpayment of
CARGO towards the Czech customs authority. In case of decisions sct aside by the relevani
courts on the basis of appeals of CARGIU, the Brectav-dainice Customs Office indeed decided
according to the Act on Administration of Taxes and Charges on the return of the
overpayment and, also according to the same Act, on the setting.off of such overpayiicni
against other unsettled obligations of the Claimant. This was challenged by CARGO but
upheld by the District Court of Brno and subsequently also by the Supreme Administrative
Court. None of the decisions listed by the Claimant resulted in an irrefutable seizure of
CARGO’s assets. However, CARGO did not meet the requirements for a refund under

Section 289 of the Customs Act.

(m) No harassment

317. The Respondent opposes the Claimant's contention according to which CARGO would
have been harassed. The Claimant’s description of the circumstances that allegedly
constituted a “harassment” against CARGO is simply inconsistent, and neither CARGO nor
the Claimant ever filed any complaint in this regard before the Czech customs administration.
The Claimant also failed to demonstrate any detrimental effect on CARGO’s activity resulting
from such alleged harassment.

318. Moreover, the Claimant has admitted that there is no causal link between the alleged
harassment and the loss of revenues related to CARGO’s lost opportunity to continue to
prepare TCPs. In the Respondent’s view, this must be interpreted as a renunciation by the
Claimant of his claim relating to an alleged harassment, since it is well known that, for a state

65

to incur international liability, a causal link .must be ‘demonstrated between the damage

suffered and the facts constituting.a violation .of the state’s obligations. Since.the Claimant

himself acknowledged that, even if demonstrated, the alleged harassment had no causal link

sawvith th mage: suffered bythe :Claimant.through. CARGO,. aitemay..not Jead ‘onthe Coech
bi

  

3 19. The Claimant has not reverted t to 9 the alleged harassment and. may indeed have dropped
this argument. In any event, i.e. if the Claimant had not abandoned this claim, the Respondent
-considers that he‘has:stillnot.provided the Arbitral Tribunal .with any.evidence: ‘supporting his
argumentation invthi regard must therefore be.

       

(on) No wight t to review domestic court decisions

:820.,The Respondenit hastdemonstrated-that'the fate of the:Claimant’s'investment:in:the Czech
‘Republic was not'the'resuit-ofthe Respondents illicit action.. This demonstration is:sufficient
to establish :that-the ‘Czech ‘Republic incurs :no:liability towards the Claimant under the BIT,
However, as the:Claimant'is ‘invoking that the’Respondentpursued the 1;245-guarantee:claims
illegally under interna] Czech law, the Respondent will‘answer-such:wrongful:contention‘on a __
subsidiary basis by ‘emphasising that the interpretation and application of Czech law is a
matter for the Czech courts whose: decisions cannotbe- roviewed't ina tle? present Proceedings.

   

  

321. The Claimant raises: several: ‘arguments based: on-Czech ‘law. ‘Al sin: cally ‘based upen “such
regulation, the Claimant requests the -Arbitral ‘Tribunal to sit~as the .Czech‘‘supreme
administrative -or constitutional court -and decitle «whether ithe 1,245 guarantee . claims -were

validly pursued.

B22.he. -Claimant.. omits.to.nefer.t0. the.fact that. the guarantee..claims. which..were<enforced
against CAIRGO -have in fact dlready been upheld ‘by @zéech cdurts. Consegiently; the
Giatinant *hasind standing under intemationdl law-to ask an Arbitral‘Tribunal ‘to rule“on the
validity of such claims, unless the Claimant was: denied justice which is not:the case-here.

323. For example, in the case of Mr. — one of the 1,245 claims that -were raised
against CARGO by the Bieclav-délnice Customs Office - CARGO had the-possibility to
appeal the decision made by the customs office-within 15 days from its notification ‘before the
Bieclay Regional Customs Office, which CARGO did. Yet, the -Biéclay Regional Customs
Office, as wel] as all other administrative and judicial bodies seized by CARGO, constantly
held that, on the merits, the guarantee claim was well-founded,

324. Since CARGO used its right to appeal the customs office decisions, the Czech courts
ruled on the legality of those claims. The respondent considers that the Czech court decisions

have res judicata effect,

325. CARGO even challenged the decisions before the Constitutional Court of the Czech
Republic. In all cases CARGO’s constitutiona] complaints were rejected as groundless.

326. The Respondent considers that, by challenging the validity of the 1,245 claims in this
arbitration, the Claimant seeks to create a new degree of jurisdiction before the Arbitral
Tribunal. However, the role of international] courts or arbitral’ tribunals is not to ‘be a substitute
for domestic courts in assuming the role of a domestic court of appeal or cassation. CARGO’s
claims, based on the alleged misinterpretation or misapplication of Czech customs law and

66

regulations by Czech courts, therefore logically fall outside the determination of an
international arbitral tribunal sitting under the auspices of a BIT,

327. The Respondent argues that the Czech customs authorities acted in a manner validated
by the domestic Czech courts when they pursued the 1,245 guarantee claims. There is
therefore no legal ground for a liability of the Respondent, on the basis of guarantee claims
confirmed by the Czech courts.

328. In the Respondent’s view, the only ground that could have justified for the Claimant to
have the courts’ decision reviewed was denial of justice. However, this argument was not
raised by the Claimant, the reason being that the Claimant was not denied justice by the
Respondent.

329, Denial of justice may arise out of either procedural or substantive deficiencies in judicial
processes. For example, a denial of justice argument could be raised if the courts refused to
entertain a suit, if they subjected it to undue delay, or if they administered justice in a
seriously inadequate way. The Respondent considers that no such procedural irregularity or
deficiency occurred! in this case for the following reasons.

330. First of all, cach of the intervening Czech courts and customs offices made CARGO
aware of its procedural rights, In each decision made by the intervening courts or authorities,
CARGO was reminded of its right to appeal the relevant decision and the conditions for filing
any such appeal. CARGO also enjoyed full freedom to appear before the courts for the
protection of its rights and to bring any action provided or authorised by Czech law. CARGO
had a right to be represented by counsel and, in fact, engaged a law firm. In addition, CARGO
was not subject to a refusal by the relevant courts to entertain the suit or to an inadequate
administration of justice. Indeed, every court or authority it referred to accepted to hear its
claim. The Customs Directorate Brno even set aside the decision of the Bfeclav-dalnice
Customs Office for procedural reasons, and the Bieclav-ddinice Cusioms Office re-issued a
valid decision against CARGO. Finally, CARGO’s claims were not subject to undue delay.

 

331. Consequentiy, CARGO has never been denied procedural justice before Czech courts
and was indeed treated on a footing of equality with Czech nationals. The fact that the
Supreme Administrative Court was not set up until 2003 does not mean that CARGO lacked
judicial protection before that time.

332. Nor was the Claimant substantively denied justice. The Claimant alleges that the
guarantee claims were made by the Respondent without legal basis under Czech law. In other
words, according to the Claimant, the Respondent allegedly did not comply with Czech law
when raising CARGO’s guarantee claims and thus breached international law. However, the
mere violation of internal law never justifies an international claim. Consequently, even if the
Czech customs offices and courts wrongly held that the 1,245 guarantee claims were valid,
that would not entail a violation of the Czech-German BIT. To prove such a violation, the
Claimant must show that he was substantially denied justice. Such a demonstration has not
been made.

333, The Czech courts did not act with bad faith, bias, fraud or partiality, nor were they
subject to external pressures or violated clear legal precepts. On the contrary, the courts took
into account CARGO’s arguments and based their decisions on a clear and comprehensive

67

legal reasoning. Thus, in the absence of denial of justice, the rights created under Czech

national Jaw are final.

 

~(Q) Phe BiTclaims:. Siamese ae ed
334, The Respondent argues’ that BMs: are not: tiaimed vat. pr otecting individuals or companies
against the occurrence of the inherent risk of their business profession, should they be foreign
investors. The-decisions of thé:Czech customs:authoritiés to claim the:guarantees of CARGO
were taken. in full compliance with -the:Customs Act:as-applicable in .1994-1995..Hence, the
Czech Republic cannot be held liable for the losses which CARGO has sustained as-a:result of
these guarantee claims since any private entity would have been exposed to exactly the same
guarantee ‘claims sin'similar citcumstances, As a-matter of sCzech law, the enforcement of
CARGO’s guarantee in cases ‘where: transit:procedures were fraudulently“completed through
the use of-a forged stamp -was spart:of thebusiness risk inherent in its activity as a customs
‘agent.'In no‘way may the Czech Republic:besheld liable i? CARGO's guarantee was-claimed
as the result of ‘its ‘bad business Judgments consisting in not having -an efficient risk

‘manager ent: system.

335. The ‘Respondent points out- thet, in- 5 the present case,’ in its: capacity :as customs :agent,
CARGO undertook a risk consisting in being liable for the customs debt due to=Czech
,customs ‘authorities in case the transit shipments it secured were not-properly performed and
-unlawfully ‘removed from customs supervision. ‘Therefore, it is the Respondent’s :case ‘that
since-the 1,245 transit shipments at -hand-were-fraudulently closed,:CARGO’s guaratitee was
validly invoked. On a subsidiary basis, the-Respondent maintains. that the tax fraud-did-not
involve any complicity or negligence of'the Czech customs administration. -
336..The:Respondent:has.demonstrated.that:the treatmentawhich:CAR GO. has:been.subject.to
- in:the Czech ‘Republic was fully consistent with Czech rules applicable to the guarantees
- provided"by customs agents in’ order'to secure'the.transportation of ‘goods under the-procedure
of transit from:a border customs: office of dispatch to-an inland customs office of destination.
This demonstration is sufficient to establish that the Czech Republic incurs no liability

towards the Claimant under the BIT at issue.
337, The Claimant contends that the Czech Republic would be in breach of the following
obligations stipulated in the BIT:

(a) not to deprive the investor of its investment [Article 4(2)],

(b) to treat investments fairly and equitably [Article 2(1)],

(c) not to impair the enjoyment of investments by arbitrary or discriminatory measures
[Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3 (2)],

(d) to provide investments with full protection and security [Articles 23) and 4(1)], and

(ce) to ensure treatment of investments that complies with the standard of international Jaw
[Article 7(1)].

338. The Respondnet points out that in this regard the Claimant’s argumentation has
significantly evolved during the course of these proceedings. Initially, the Claimant did not

68

invoke the duty not to expropriate, the obligation of fair and equitable treatment and the
treatment of investments in compliance with international law. Instead, the Claimant restricted
his claim to the allegation that his investment (i) suffered discriminatory measures and (#i) did
not enjoy full protection and security. In the Respondent's opinion, this conclusively shows
the importance which the Claimant himself devotes to all other alleged “breaches” which the
Claimant tries to substantiate at the final stage of the proceedings.

339. As a preliminary matter, the Respondent draws the Arbitral Tribunal’s attention to the
very particular context within which the Claimant made his “investment” in the Czech

Republic

340, First of all, the Claimant registered the company CARGO in November 1990, i.e, exactly
one year after the “Velvet Revolution” by which the former Czechoslovakia emancipated
from the former Eastern bloc, Shortly thereafter, in January 1993, the country split into two
independent states, namely the Czech Republic and Slovakia, Already at this time, both
countries had the ambition to undertake economic reforms with the intention of creating
capitalist economies and to join the European Union. After more than 40 years of a state-
oriented economy, the Czech Republic undertook huge administrative, political and economic
reforms which implied the setting up of new administrations and the implementation of new
regulations which were unknown in the country at that time, The Bieclav-ddlnice Customs
Office was established at a border that was created ex nihilo on | January 1993, Needless to
say, investing in the Czech Republic at the beginning of the 1990s was undoubtedly a more
risky business than investing in France, Germany, Great Britain or Switzerland in the same
period, ‘I'he Claimant was perfectly aware of these circumstances when he decided to invest in
the Czech Republic with the reasonable aim to benefit from the liberalisation of the economy.

341. Secondly, the Claimant did not only choose to invest in a renascent State. He also
decided to perform the highly risky business of securing the performance of transit procedures
as a customs agent. Especially in those years and in Central Europe, the ficld of iraisic
customs operations was particularly risky. The Claimant was also perfectly aware of that.

 

342, The Arbiirai Tribunai shouid have these factual elements in mind when assessing the
Claimant's contentions.

(p) No expropriation

343. Article 4(2) of the BIT provides that “[i]nvestments by investors of either Contracting
Party shall not be expropriated, nationalised or subjected to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalisation in the territory of the other
Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against compensation”. The Claimant
contends that measures “tantamount to expropriation” encompass not only measures whereby
the state takes or transfers title to the investor’s property, but also the state’s interference with
the use of such property or with the enjoyment of its benefits (“indirect expropriation”). The
Claimant further alleges that according to a well-established principle, the state’s interference
with an investor’s use of property should be deemed actionable regardless of the form that the
interference takes. In addition, the Claimant bases his claims on the contention that
expropriation (or any other measure that would be tantamount thereto) may either take the
form of a single state act or a series of state acts (known as “creeping” or “constructive”

expropriation).

69

344. The Claimant contends that the Respondent’s breach of international Jaw consists in the
pursuance of illegal claims, which ultimately have destroyed the Claimant’s investment and
that the guarantee claims were without legal basis and the enforcement thereof -amounts in its

“own: tight tora breach oF international: law.

345: The Respondent. ‘sonsidens ‘that the ‘Claimant's submissions have 5 failed to explain in
"reasonable detail how theCzech Republic may: have breached ‘the ‘BIT rules and (more
ww "the Claimant “may. ‘have been ‘deprived of his ‘investment cby: the

 

     

346, In any saseyithe Claimant cannot contend.that the Respondent undertook.an indireot.or
“wneeping-expropriation: Firstly,-the guarantee: claims:were*pursued:in compliance with Czech
customs regulations applicable at the’ relevant time, Secondly; ‘losses incurred :by an investor
may not qualify as expropriation if they are the result of bad business decisions and/or of the
commercialwisks deliberately:and-lmowingly .assumed:by the investor, especially in case the
latter is well experionced i inthe field in which he:has decided to invest.

 

347, The: Respondent points out: that the Glaimant had a long-standing. experience in.the. field

‘of customs:proceedings ‘all across-Europe. He was therefore:perfectly aware-of.the.zisks borne
by customs agents, especially when-undertaking-guarantees for transit shipments, a-business
which was reputed as particularly risky in former.:COMECON countries during.the years
1990-1995. It is also not surprising that the Claimant’s careless approach to his -busi
activities in the Czech Republic led to bankruptcy of multiple Czech toga entities:controlled

‘bythe: Claimant.
348. In.the Respondent’s opinion, CARGO’s. bankruptcy had nothing i in. common with the
di i R

.--Respondent.either.. Firstly,.the.bankruptey.
any ‘Czech government bodies, but*by an individual who was
‘Secondly, ‘the“total -value-of? CARGO ‘s debt: (other: than- obligations tothe state):sexceeded

CARGO’s assets determined by the bankruptcy trustee in the course of the bankruptcy
proceedings. Consequently, CARGO would have been over-indebted (i.e. legally and
factually bankrupt) even in case all receivables of any state entity were omitted. This appears
clearly from the summary of receivables registered-within CARGO’s bankruptcy proceeding.
In other words, the value of due receivables of third parties, other than the state, exceeded at
the relevant time the value of CARGO’s assets and led to CARGO’s bankruptcy.

  

 

 
 
 

349, Finally, the Respondent argues that that, contrary to the Claimant’s allegations, the
alleged failure of the Czech prosecution to conduct an examination into the role of the
customs authorities in the tax fraud does not constitute an expropriation. First of all, such
allegation is inaccurate since al] customs officers related to the Diesel case were heard by the
Czech police during the criminal investigations, and all parties involved in the Diesel case
gave evidence in the related criminal proceedings. Then, the alleged failure of the Respondent
to investigate on the role of the customs authorities in the tax fraud cannot in any way be

assimilated to expropriation.

: 350. Exercise of the Respondent’s rights arising out of the guarantees issued by CARGO or
any other act of the Respondent cannot therefore amount to a breach of Article 4(2) of the

BIT.

70

(@) No unfair treatment

351, In the Respondent’s opinion, the fair and equitable treatment standard under Article 2(1)
of the Czech-German BIT must be interpreted as an incorporation of the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment, and not as a new standard binding upon the
parties to the BIT. The BIT has to be interpreted very strictly. The idea of a stand-alone fair
and equitable treatment standard independent from customary international law is very
marginal and must be rejected. Therefore the Claimant's allegation according to which the
obligation of fair and equitable treatment is a “specific provision” cannot be accepted. In any
event, the question as to whether the fair and equitable standard is, or is not, the equivalent of
the minimum standard of protection under customary law is of limited relevance when
assessing whether the Respondent breached Article 2(1) of the BIT, since the Czech Republic
complied with all requirements resulting from this standard.

352, Contrary to the Claimant's argumentation, the Respondent acted in a consistent manner
as of the day the first guarantee claims were raised against CARGO. The Respondent never
changed its legal justification in order to justify the enforcement of CARGO’s guarantee
undertakings. To the contrary, the Respondent always invoked one single legal concept, i.c.
the unlawful removal of the guaranteed shipments from customs supervision within the
meaning of Section 240 of the Customs Act. It may therefore not be seriously disputed that
the Respondent has acted in a consistent manner towards the Claimant and CARGO.

353, Regarding the alleged failure to observe due process requirements, the Claimant
contends that the decision in which the customs debt was assessed in regard to the individual
customs declarants had a direct impact on the substantive position of CARGO as the
guarantor as its guarantor’s obligation was activated by this decision and CARGO did not get
the opportunity to defend its rights and interests in an effective manner, which resulted in a
breach not only of the Administrative Procedure Rules but also of the fundamental
constitutional right of CARGO iv have due process, The Respondent considers that the
argument is wrong for the following reasons:

       

{a} CA) WES de 8 6 CZ8uh Goiiits if urder iv ODjecL LO
the enforcement of its guarantee undertakings. To the contrary, CARGO seized Czech courts
in order to challenge the decisions taken by the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office ordering
CARGO to pay the customs debt due by the drivers by virtue of CARGO’s guarantee
undertakings. Furthermore, if cannot be seriously sustained that the outcome of these
proceedings and the way in which they were undertaken were inequitable. If a limited number
of decisions taken by the Bfeclav-dilnice Customs Office were set aside because they were
based on legal provisions that were then inapplicable, new decisions were subsequently
adopted in accordance with the relevant provisions and submitted to CARGO which still had

the opportunity to challenge them on other grounds.

(b) Finally two principles of international Jaw are important. The first one is that the standard
of due process and procedural fairness applicable in administrative proceedings is not the
same as in a judicial process. Hence, even if one were to see administrative irregularities in
the decision taken by the Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office (which is not the case), it would not
reach a sufficient level of gravity to breach the fair and equitable treatment rule. The second
one is that acts that would amount to a breach of the minimum standard of treatment under
customary international law are only those that constitute a gross denial of justice or manifest
arbitrariness falling below acceptable international standards.

71

354, Consequently, the Respondent finds that the Claimant’s contention ‘according to which
the-Respondent would have breached due process requirements must be rejected.

355. The Claimant also argues that the legislative situation regarding excise taxes and import
VAT was inconsistent in the years in question and:thatnoclear-cohesion-existed:between ‘the
individual public law provisions in this area, He considers that the terms establishing tax
liability were not.unambiguous and that there*were numerous ‘Joopholes.in -the legislation,
“which: male the interpretation off themelevant provisions by theiGzech authorities arbitrary,

356. The Respondent: ‘considers: that this claims is baseless and-must ibe entirely nejected by the
Agbitra] ‘Tribunal. Indeed; Czech :customs:regulations‘applicable during ‘the-years. 199421995
were deliberately and closely inspired by:oustorns regulations :in force.in'the‘European ‘Union
since thé entry into 'force.of the Community.Customs Code through Council Regulation ‘No.
2913/92 -dated 12.October 1992. This was-the consequence of ‘the Association Agreement
concluded by the Czech Republic on 4 October 1993 with the final aim of membership:in the

Buropean Union.

     
 

357, Asa result, c customs s regulations ‘applicable d in the years 1994- 1995 in-the-Czech ‘Republic

were mainly in line with regulations applicable al] across Europe. It cannot therefore be
sustained — and thé: Respondent understands that the Claimant does not — that ‘Czech-customs
regulations failed’to ‘comply with the ditty to grant and tnaintain a stable and predictable’ légal
“framework comprised in the fair and equitable: treatment standard.

358. “Moreover, even if one should find some imperfections in the execution of the state’s
obligation of predictability of the legal regime, | the Respondent argues that this i is not enough

YO constitite a breach of the fal atrd~ treatment dard; Ing
treaty cannot be invokéd:each time the'lew is flawed or is not fully, and roped implemented

by a state.
. 359, The Claimant lays emphasis on the obligation of the state to’ afiswer to the ‘legitimate
expectations of the foreign investor and to act in a consistent manner, free from ambiguity and

totally transparently in its relations with the foreign investor. However, the Respondent
submits that the Claimant gives no clue as to how the Respondent frustrated his legitimate

 

expectations.

360, The Respondent points out that, according to international case-law, the investors
legitimate expectations are grounded, inter alia, on the legal order of the host state as it stands
at the time when the investors made their investment. In other words, a claim based on
legitimate expectations cannot prevail when the investor fails to explain how its legitimate
expectations, as measured at the time when the investor made the investment, were not

satisfied,

361. In the Respondent’s view, the Claimant has failed to demonstrate that he received any
explicit promise or guarantee from the Czech Republic or that, implicitly, the Respondent
made assurances or representations that the Claimant took into account in making the
investment. As a matter of fact, the Czech Republic did not make any promise or guarantee,
The Claimant has also shown no proof of warranty as to particular characteristics or qualities
of the Czech legislation and court system, nor has he demonstrated any significant change for
the worse since the implantation of CARGO ini the former Czechoslovakia. Quite to the

72

contrary, due to the fact that the Customs Act (which was already in force in the period 1994~
1995) was directly inspired by the regulations in force in the European Union, Czech law was
perfectly in compliance with the European standards at the time when the Claimant made his
investment.

(r) No arbitrary or discriminatory measures

362. The Claimant contends that the Czech Republic also breached Article 2(2) of the BIT
which provides that investments shal] not be subjected to arbitrary or discriminatory
measures, He argues that the Respondent’s conduct was arbitrary in that its prosecution
authorities patently failed to investigate the circumstances that led to the failure of the
customs authorities to ensure payment of at least 1,86] transit shipments of a total of 2,054
involved in tax fraud, In other words, the Claimant sees arbitrary measures within the
meaning of Article 2(2) of the BIT in the Czech Republic’s alleged failure to ensure payment
of the customs debt from the fraudsters themselves, as opposed to the drivers and their
guarantor, CARGO,

363. First, however, the Respondent considers that there is no doubt that the drivers, as the
declarants of the transit shipments, were debtors according to Section 240(3) of the Customs
Act, Several persons can be debtors of one single customs debt, and in the case at hand, CWA
and the drivers were those who removed the goods from customs supervision, who
participated in the removal and who were or should have been aware that the goods were
being removed from customs supervision and/or were required to fulfil the obligations arising
from the use of the customs procedure under which the goods were placed. This is the reason
why the customs authorities enforced liability both against the drivers and CWA.

364, Second, as regards CWA, the Respondent points out that the customs administration
raised numerous claims against the declarants (/.c. the drivers). their guarantor (i.e. CARGO).
ihe consignees (Le. . , Horex, UNIIIP) and the importer (ie CWA). The
Respondent therefore finds it clear that it used its best efforts to collect the customs debt from
CWA and the drivers/declarants nrior to initiating proceedings against CARGO

with such proceedings.

   

365, It follows, in the Respondent’s opinion, that the Czech customs administration took all
available steps in the course of its investigation regarding the tax fraud scheme in order to
identify the people and/or entities that were involved in it, and that finally in no way the
Respondent treated the Claimant in an arbitrary manner. It must also be highlighted that the
allegation of “arbitrariness” is groundless from the point of view of international law. Indeed,
arbitrariness is wilful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least
surprises, a sense of juridical propriety. In the present case, the Claimant has been unable to
adduce any evidence that the Respondent’s acts were performed as a result of some form of
impropriety or capricious, despotic or irrational conduct.

366. The Respondent considers that the Claimant’s position regarding the alleged
discriminatory conduct is equally ill-founded. It is now well established in investor-state
arbitration case-law that for discrimination to be established, the investor who invokes treaty
protection has to demonstrate that (i) other investors, be they national or originating from a
third country, placed under the same circumstances, (ii) were better treated than the first
investor (iii) without any justification. The Respondent submits, however, that none of these
three requirements is fulfilled in the case at hand for the following reasons:

73

(a) CARGO and CWA were not in comparable situations as they were performing very
different functions in the Diesel case, In its capacity as customs agent, CARGO had very
specific dutiesswhich cannot-be compared. swith those catied, out. ‘A:.and other settee
ainvalvod ¢ in the hand scheme, such as;the. consignees.. be . .

ay

  
  
 

 
   

fe). More ‘generally, CARG Q:capnot sbe! ‘deemed to have been placed in. ‘situatic ion. ‘comparable
to.that of any-other-economic operator in the Gzech-Republic" CARG ‘the‘only cystoms
-sagent.involyed:in the Diesel :taxfraud scheme, It:could:therefore.not-have ‘been discriminated
vagainst, ‘inithe, absence: ofany: sather investor: placed inthe ‘same 0 circumstances; : 150 fe!

‘© The: Claimant's statement-acooxdin e to: which CARGO was treated: JTess fanourably, than
CWA: is:simply not true;since the:Respondent toolc.all.measures it-had_at its. ‘disposal against
GWai in.ordersto collect the hameeae ‘unpaid excise.taxes and VAT.

     
 

  
 

      

367, In any: eyent,.i.2.. vift treatment. afforded to- CARGO -were to: obe. qualifi ‘ied as less. favourable
than .that-reserved to other.entities, the Resporident:had a legal justification for the treatment

...dn.that:CAR.GO.expressly_accepted to be:the guarantor for-the.transit. ‘shipments, CARG@-was
therefore well saware that ‘its Guarantee undertakings could be :enforced-in case transit
shipments were unlawfully removed from customs supervision.

368.-Consequently, the Respondent considers that the Claimant’s position according ,to,which
CARGO was discriminated against cannot be accepted from.either.a-legal or.a factual:point of

view and must therefore be rejected.
(s) No violation of the full protection and security standard

369. ‘According ‘to the Claimant, ‘the Respondent yiolated its obligation..to provide full
protection and security in accordance swith Articles 2(3).and 4(1) of the BIT. ‘The*Claimant
contends that, although the full-protection.and security standard has been used predominantly
in the context of physica] protection, it extends -beyond an :obligation to ~protect physical
property and:includes the obligation to protect the legal security of investments.

370. In the Respondent’s opinion, however, the large majority of arbitral awards show that the
standard of full protection and security has only been applied. to physical harm suffered by
investors and/or their investments, Some arbitral tribunals that were asked to apply: the full
protection and security standard beyond its traditional scope, i,e. the protection against
physical violence, have explicitly denied the application of the standard in such

circumstances,
371. In the absence of any contention that the Claimant, or his investment CARGO, was the

victims of violent acts perpetrated by the Respondent, his argumentation regarding a breach of
the full protection and security standard fails in the Respondent’s view and must be rejected.

. (t) No violation of Article 7(1) of the BIT

372. The Claimant finally alleges that Article 7(1) of the BIT is a broad provision requiring
the contracting parties to treat investments at least as well as tequired ‘by “obligations under
international law existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties,
- -- whether general or specific”. In other words, .the Claimant contends that Article 7(1) of

74

the BIT would be the equivalent of the minimum standard of treatment of customary
international law.

373. The Respondent argues that this interpretation by the Claimant is nothing but a distortion
of the BIT. Far from incorporating within the BIT the minimum standard of treatment (as
contended by the Claimant), Article 7(1) is a sui generis clause allowing investors of one
Contracting Party to benefit from the provisions of the legislation of the other Contracting
Party, or of any obligations between the Contracting Parties, if such were found to be more
favourable than the provisions of the BIT. Therefore, in order to invoke Article 7(1) of the
BIT, the Claimant had to identify provisions of the Czech legal order or international
obligations — be they customary or inserted in a treaty ~ applicable between Germany and the
Czech Republic that would allow him a more favourable treatment than that afforded to him
in accordance with the BIT. However, the Respondent considers that the Claimant is
incapable of demonstrating in what way the general principles he relied upon — due process,
transparency, obligations of natural justice, good faith, due diligence and fair dealing, and the
protection of economic rights ~ would allow him a more favourable treatment than that
provided for by other standards of the BIT, especially the fair and equitable standard of
treatment, Furthermore, again the Claimant's argumentation is only based on general
statements which do not show that the Respondent may have breached these general
principles.

374. As a result, the Respondent concludes that the Claimant’s argumentation regarding
Article 7(1) of the BIT must also be rejected.

(u) Final remarks

375. The Respondent also considers that, contrary to what the Claimant contends, the in dubio
mitius principle is not applicable to the facts of the present case. Indeed, the applicability of
such principle depends on the existence of doubts about the correct interpretation of a certain
set of facts or ambiguity of a legal regulation. In the case of CARGO securing the payment of
the taxes on imports of oi] in 1994.1995, the Respondent finds no doubts
There was also no ambiguity of the relevant legal regulations in 1994 and 1995. The
submission that there was no ambiguity concerning the interpretation of the relevant legal
regulations especially with regard to surety bonds securing payment of excise taxes and VAT
is supported, in the Respondent's opinion, by the fact that the customs administration's
interpretation of the relevant legal regulations has never been challenged by anyone (in
particular, no party to the proceedings) except by the Claimant before this Arbitral Tribunal.

   

376. The Respondent argues that, despite the fact that CARGO challenged the Czech customs
authorities’ decisions in many instances and, therefore, became a party to a large number of
proceedings before Czech courts, CARGO never made to the Czech courts an assertion that
surety bonds did not secure payment of the excise tax and VAT or an assertion that the
relevant claims were time-barred or any other of the assertions made in this case. It follows
that the relevant legal regulations were not ambiguous. If there had been any doubts about
their interpretation, CARGO or the Claimant would certainly have made such an assertion
before the Czech courts. They had plenty of occasions to do so.

377. Furthermore, the Respondent considers that there can be no doubt about what was
secured by the surety bonds, since the exact amount was stated on these bonds. The amount
was calculated on the basis of the excise tax and VAT which were to be paid for the particular

75

consignment. Therefore, CARGO knew the exact amount it was securing before handing over
the surety’bond to the drivers. .

 

378. Jn the Respondent’ s.-view, the legality principle was not.breached ‘by .acts .of the Czech
customs authorities enforcing the surety bonds against CARGO, since CARGO decided freely
sand: independently. ‘to .secure:payment:ofsexcise taxes and VAT by issuing:the..surety bonds
‘and was'not-<forced to do so. byt thes ‘Czech customs ‘authorities or ye ‘any Provision of Czech

   

“legal regulations: pe ae

 

379. The surety bonds issued by CARGO ded sts promise:to pay:the amounts:which were
calculated on the basis of an assessment of excise taxes and VAT. The Claimant cannot assert
that-the ©zech.:customs :authorities breached-the.legality sprinciple.by enforcing CARGO’s
promise to pay the amount of excise taxes and VAT.

380, Furthermore, the Respondent argues that enforcement of the surety. bonds was in
-absolute .compliance’-with the Jegal:regulations which were valid and effective during the
relevant period of time. In its Section 323, the Customs Act stipulated that securing a customs
debt means also securing Payment of excise taxes and VAT.

381. The Respondent points out ‘that, i in its 5 surety bonds, CARGO specifically undertook to
secure payment.of.the customs debt. ‘In compliance with Section 323 ofthe.Customs Act, this
meant that CARGO was securing the payment of excise tax and VAT. Further, the, “taxes”
-were specifically-mentioned in the wording-ofthe surety bonds.

382. The Respondent concludes that there can be no breach of the legality Principle under

these circumstances,

 

383. The Respondent also relies on the fact that the stamps that were
copy 5ywere défintitely establishedi-as béing forgeriesin two expert'repotts*of1996 and4'998
established within a ctiminal investigation. This is clear evidence that the customs officers
whose -stamps:-were -copied-had-no involvement-in-the Diese] case. Similarly, -all..drivers
transporting oil shipments for CWA ef consortes have declared as witnesses in the criminal
proceedings that they never met any customs officer when their TCP, copy 5, was stamped.
This necessarily implies, in the Respondent’s opinion, that the person who printed the forged
stamp on the TGP, copy 5, was not a customs officer in uniform, While investigations were
conducted on ali people involved in the Diese] case, customs officers were asked to testify
before the competent criminal proceedings authority. None of these customs officers was

subsequently prosecuted or a fortiori sentenced.

384. In so far as the Claimant contends that CARGO was discriminated against during the
year 1995 when the drivers/hauliers using CARGO’s services were allegedly forced to
support excessive delays at border crossings for customs declaration, the Respondent finds no

support for this contention.
VIL The Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning

I. General considerations

385. The present arbitration is based on the bilateral Treaty between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic concerning the encouragement and

76

reciprocal protection of investments, here called the BIT. The question that the Arbitral
Tribunal is called upon to answer is whether the Respondent, /.¢, the Czech Republic, as one
of the two successor states of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, has violated its
obligations under the BIT in regard to the Claimants investment in the Czech Republic.

386. The alleged violations of the BIT essentially consisted in acts and omissions affecting the
company CARGO, formed and operated.by the Claimant, In the absence of any objection to
the Claimant's capacity to represent the interests of CARGO, the Arbitral Tribunal accepts
that any action affecting CARGO in the Czech Republic also affected the Claimant's
investment in that state, as protected under the BIT.

387, The Claimant alleges that the Respondent violated the following obligations in the BIT:
(a) the obligation to accord investments a fair and equitable treatment [Article 2(1)],

(b) the obligation not to impair investments by arbitrary or discriminatory measures |Articles
2(2), 3(1) and 3 (2)],

(c) the obligation to give investments full protection and security [Articles 2(3) and 4(1)],
(d) the obligation not to deprive investors of their investments [Article 4 (2)], and

(e) the obligation to treat investments at least as favourably as required by international law
{Article 7(1)].

388. The Respondent contests that it breached any of these obligations and asks for the
dismissal of all the Claimant's claims.

389. A considerable part of the argumentation in this case concerns questivus iclating iv dic
interpretation and application of Czech law. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore finds it
appropriate first to make a few general remarks on the relationship between rights and

obligations under domestic law and those founded on the BIT.

390, The BIT is an international treaty and should be interpreted in accordance with the
principles of international treaty law, as codified in the Geneva Convention on the Law of
Treaties. The Arbitral Tribunal derives its competence exclusively from the BIT and is not
competent to decide how Czech law is to be interpreted, this being a matter for the Czech
courts. Consequently, the Tribunal cannot review the interpretation of domestic law in Czech
court decisions. Nor can the Tribunal express an opinion on the interpretation of Czech law on
matters which have not been decided by Czech courts.

391. However, in this arbitration Czech law is one of the factual elements which the Tribunal
must take into account when establishing whether the Czech Republic has observed its
undertakings in the Czech-German BIT. It is the Tribunal’s task to examine whether Czech
law, as it was applied to the Claimant and his company CARGO, may have violated the
obligations of the Czech Republic in the BIT. In other words, if it should be found that Czech
law had such contents, or was applied in such manner, as to violate any of these treaty
obligations, the Tribunal is competent to establish that a violation occurred and to draw the
legal conclusions following from it. The Tribunal’s examination may not only concern
specific acts by the Czech authorities but also extend to general questions of whether the

77

-Czech legal:system, including-the availability of judicial :and administrative remedies, was
sufficient to :provide the Claimant ‘with adequate protection forh this investment in- the Czéch

‘Republic ic.

392, Asa general “le, the Claimant has the burden ofy sib i in sespect. of the facts ‘which are
alleged to violate the BIT. Moreover, it is also incumbent on the Claimant to be specific in
regard:to his-allegations, The:obligations.in the BIT:aredefined inzgeneial terms; such as fair
vand.equitable treatment, arbitrary or discriminatory:measures and-full-protection:and security,
vand .:theClaimant- should: sindicate..which. particular. wacts «or omissions; or which ‘specific
domestic laws or regulations, he considers.to :haye. violated: the Claimant's rights under :the
BIT. In so far as this has not been sufficiently specified by the Claimant, the Tribunal may
find it :appropriate,. -haying.. regard.a also .to sthe Respondent 's ‘Tight Of ‘defence;: to: limit: its

vexamination’ aceordin sly

 

 

     

2 Taxation ofi imports, from Slovaltia

393. The Claimant’s company CARGO was held liable, as guarantor, for,payments:of excise

taxes and VAT on oil products transported in 1994 and 1995 from Slovakia to the Czech

~Republic:-He objects to-such liability on the ground that, inthis, view,-goodssimported atithat
time from Slovakia were.not stibject:to excise taxes and value added. tax (VAN):in the:Czech
Republic. He relies in this respect-on the definition of:the term “customs debt’ ‘in the-Czech

Customs Act. In Section:2. ofthe Act, ‘customs -debt?, was defined.as ‘ithe.obligation of.a

person to:pay the amount of the import:duties-(customs debt on importation) or-export-duties

(customs:debt on-exportation)”.-However,.as a result of the customs union ‘between-thexCzech

and Slovak Republics, there were no.customs duties.on imports into the Czech:Republic.of

goods coming from :Slovakia: Consequently, the:Claimant considers that no‘icustoms -debt

resent: case which concerned import of oi] products ‘from Slovakia.-In-the

C p ald have the further consequence that there’ could be no excise’ tax
~or VAT on suckgoods;:sincesin the-Excise-Taxes Aict:and the VAT-Act:the dutystospay:taxes

arose on the day a customs.debt occurred.

could arise ‘in:

  
  

   

394. Moreover, the Claimant argues that the tax obligations were linked to the import of
goods and import was understood as the release of goods for procedures specified in the law,
in particular the release of goods for free circulation, the release of goods for inward
processing and the release of goods for temporary use. The removal .of goods from -customs
supervision, which occurred ‘in the present case, could not, in the Claimant’s opinion, be
regarded as import and could therefore not give rise to any tax obligations.

395. The Claimant also considers that customs officers were not competent to collect excise
taxes.and VAT on the oil products, since according to the regulations in force at the relevant
time the customs authorities acted as taxation authorities only upon import, and since there
‘was no import in this case, the customs authorities had no competence to decide on taxation.

396. In this regard, the Claimant further refers to two general principles of interpretation. The
first principle is the in dubio mitius principle which implies in this context that in matters of
taxation the interpretation of the law which is most favourable to the taxpayer is to be
preferred. The second principle is the legality principle from which it follows that an
obligation to pay taxes must be based on clear legal provisions.

 

78

397. The Claimant's interpretation of Czech law on these matters is contested by the
Respondent which argues that, while there was no liability for customs duties on imports from
Slovakia, excise taxes and VAT still had to be paid on goods imported from that country. The
Respondent also maintains that there was import in this case and that the customs officers
were competent to determine the taxation.

398, The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Czech court decisions which have been submitted to
the Tribunal do not provide support for his views on the interpretation of the Customs Act, the
Act on Excise Taxes and the VAT Act. Nor does it appear that the Claimant raised these legal
objections in the proceedings before the Czech courts.

399, The Arbitral Tribunal considers that it is not competent to determine how Czech law was
to be understood at the relevant time in respect of goods imported from Slovakia, However,
the Tribunal notes the divergence of opinion between the Parties and will keep their views in
mind, when examining the issues arising under the BIT,

3. The surety bonds

400. According to Section 139(1) of the Customs Act, as in force at the relevant time,
“transit” meant “a procedure covering goods transported under customs supervision from one
customs office to another customs office”. In Section 139(2), “transit operation” was defined
as “the movement of goods in transit from the customs office of dispatch to the customs office
of destination”. The person making the customs declaration, called the “declarant”, or the
company’ on behalf of which that declaration was made, was responsible as debtor for the
customs debt, and security had to be provided for the fulfilment of the debtor’s payment
obligation. In respect of the fuel transports from Slovakia now at issue, such security was
provided by CARGO in the form of security bonds issued separately for each shipment,

401, However, the Claimant maintains that the surety bonds issued by CARGO oniy
concerned customs duties (which could not be imposed on imports from Slovalcia) and did not
include liability for taxes, the argument being not only that, in the Claimant's view, such
imports were not st to taxation but also that the Clai

to taxation oi SG tai wc t.
surety bonds did not extend to taxes,

  
   

402. The Respondent takes the opposite view and considers that the surety bonds also covered
taxes and that excise taxes and VAT had to be levied on goods imported from Slovakia.

403, The Arbitral Tribunal has been provided with a sample of a surety bond. This bond
concerned a specific shipment and was signed by CARGO on I! November 1994, In the
absence of other information, the Tribunal will assume that all the bonds issued by CARGO
for transit operations were drafted in the same or a similar way, except as regards the
guaranteed amount which was filled in for each shipment, The Tribunal will therefore base its
considerations on the wording of the sample which has been submitted to the Tribunal.

404. In the introductory paragraph of the surety bond, CARGO, as guarantor, gives a payment
guarantee in a certain amount “as security for customs debts” and undertakes, jointly and
severally with the debtor, to fulfil the guaranteed amount of customs debts and to pay the
amount that owes or will be owing to the customs authority of dispatch due to dispositions
that are prohibited by the Customs Act and whereby, according to Chapter 13 Part One of the
Act, a customs debt arises regarding the goods admitted into the transit regime.

79

405. In the second paragraph of the bond, the guarantor undertakes, within a time-limit of ten
days ‘from the notification of the.amount-of.customs duty, tax and fees by the relevant-customs °
authority; forthwith to pay the. requested: amount, unless the -guarantor..or any..ather person
“eonéemed: furnishes:proofto ‘the customs. authority of dispatch before the expiration ofthis
‘tinio-limit, thats negotiations: ‘incthe transit regime‘that-are prohibited: bylawdid-nottake place
andl that'a customs 5 debt Sid not arise.: -~-

  

  
   

- 406: The ‘Axbitral Tribunal ‘first notes 5 that these ssutety ‘bonds are guarantees issued:under
‘vate ‘law-and-that-their legal veffects:should.be-determined. on’the ‘basis of ‘that ‘law. It

is not the Tribunal’s tasketo-make'stch a. determination?

 

407. However, what is relevant in the present proceedings’ is that the surety. bonds had

important economic consequences for CARGO and for the Claimant’s investment in the

Czech:Republic. ‘From’this ‘perspective, the ‘Tribuna]-must examine’ whether the-.guarantee

claims based:on the surety ‘bonds: and .the measures ‘taken :to.enforce these claims: affected the
-:Claimant*s rights underthe BIT4o protection forhis investment. oe

o

“408. ‘The Arbitral Tribunal considers ‘that: ‘the’ wording: “of. the surety bond is.to some extent
anibiguous ‘and not fully consistent. The first paragraph of the ‘bond specifies that.-the
‘guarantee is. security for “customs: debts” which, if the definition in the ‘Customs Act is
applied;:could ‘be:read:as referring only to customs"duties. ‘However, inthe secondspatagraph
oftthe-bond,.the guarantor undertakes to pay:not-only customs duties.butalso taxes.and:fees.

409. The Respondent has also pointed out — and this has not been contested by the Claimant —
that in the bond submitted to:the-Arbitral Tribunal the guaranteed amount corresponded-to the

~amountrof taxes. Cexciseitax-and VAT). to, be, levied on.the particular. shipment. of.cilproducts
covered “by: thé “guarant the Tribtinal’s view, must be séen as a rather: «strong
indication that the bond was -providé security ‘for these taxes.

   
 

410. It4s also-difficult-o understand why seourity would be-required at al]-if no question of
liability for either customs duties or taxes could arise in respect of goods coming from
Slovakia. The Claimant’s.explanation that the surety bonds were issued only for balance-of-
trade and statistical purposes does not appear convincing and is not supported by the evidence

in the case.

411. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore, despite the ambiguity in the wording of the surety
bonds, finds the conclusion unavoidable that, in so far as the application of the BIT is
concerned, the Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office, when accepting the bonds as security,
intended them to provide security for taxes and that CARGO, when signing the bonds, was

aware that this was.the purpose of its undertaking.

412, It must therefore be concluded that CARGO, by signing a large number of bonds of this
nature which together represented large sums of money, made a very substantial economic
undertaking and exposed itself to considerable economic risks in case the goods would not be
properly presented for clearance to the customs office of destination.

   

4. The fraudulent acts

413, It is common ground in this case that the relevant oil products imported from Slovakia
were removed from customs control and final clearance as a result of a large scale criminal
activity for which several persons have been prosecuted and some have been sentenced to
terms of imprisonment. However, some elements are in dispute between the Parties and may
be relevant for the consideration of the Claimant's rights and the Czech Republic's
obligations under the BIT. The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore give special attention to the
questions (i) whether the customs authorities had accepted that customs clearance could take
place outside a customs area, (ii) whether certain customs documents had been forged, and
(iii) whether one or more customs officers were involved in the fraud.

(a) Customs clearance at CWA 's premises

414, It appears that the drivers of the trucks transporting the oil products from Slovakia to the
Czech Republic, after being admitted to the transit regime at the border office of Breclav-
dalnice, did not proceed to an inland customs office for customs clearance. Instead, they went,
in accordance with the instructions they had received, to the CWA premises at Lipova or
Slugovice where they handed over the relevant documents, not to a customs officer but to the
staff of CWA, They were told that CWA would then regulate all customs matters with the
Zilfn Customs Office. Subsequently, confirmations (slips of the TCP), appearing to come from
the Customs Office Olomouc, were sent to the office of despatch at Bieclav-ddinice which
concluded that customs clearance had taken place and that the transit procedure had been
completed.

415. The Parties disagree on whether the drivers were entitled to deliver the customs
documents to CWA instead of the customs office of destination. The Claimant considers that
the drivers could do so under the simplified procedure granted to CWA hy the Ceské

AS ct Qustans. Office This is contested by ihe R ‘ent
Buddjuviee Customs Office. This is cuitiesicd by the Respondent.

416, The Arbitral Tribunal has been provided with a decision of the Ceské Budéiovice
Customs Office, dated 27 June 1994, and a supplement to that decision, dated 10 January
1995. According to the decision, CWA was granted permission, according to Section
124(1)(b) of the Customs Act, to import diesel oil and gasoline from the Slovak Republic in a
simplified procedure. It was specified that import of the goods would be permitted by virtue
of a commercial or an administrative document (invoice) which had to contain specific
information and which would replace a customs declaration.

417, The Arbitral Tribunal notes, however, that the decision of the Customs Office did not
indicate that clearance could be carried out at a place other than a customs office, Further, the
decision specified that it was based on Section 124(1)(b) of the Customs Act which authorised
a customs office to grant permission for goods to be entered at the declarant’s request on the
basis of a commercial or administrative document replacing the customs declaration. In view
of the wording of the decision and the legal provision concerned, the Tribunal cannot find it
established that the decision was intended to allow customs clearance to be carried out
outside a customs area.

418. The Claimant has also referred to three documents appearing to have been issued by the

Customs Authority at Zlin. According to these documents, dated 7 April, 1 May and —
probably — | June 1994, the company UNITIP, and the company HOREX Zl in had

8]

been ‘granted petmission, in respect of certain categories of diese].oil and gasoline, “to handle
* the-goods-before-it is let through; proVided thatthe declaring company each ‘Monday for:the
past'week hands ‘in-the relevant Single Customs Document:and :all other.administrative and
«commercial :documeritscontaining ‘information, .for. the..identification of ‘the .goods”,:. These
“:permits' were: said ‘to ‘be ‘baséd von"Sections :83(1) and:123 of thé Oustoms .Act.. The latter
“section allowed ‘a :customs” office to permit-goods to “be: disposed.<of prior to ‘theirrelease.
- However; the’ ‘Respondent *argues'that, the'-doouments ‘are’ forged :dnd »points »out .that the
customs. officer claimed to have'signed-the documents was:not ‘competent:to -do:8o and:that*the

“signature on’ n'the ‘three. documents i isno ‘his ignature::

  

 
 

    

419, The “Arbitral Tribunal considers the cirounstanoes to: Orbe such ‘as to ‘credte-serious ‘dotibts
about the authenticity of the three permits. However, even if they were genuine documents,
-the Tribunal «finds it\doubtfulwhether they-could -be-read, acoording*to.their wording;: as
-authorisations “to petform: customs* clearance of transit. goods: outsidé a customs area:. The
Tribunal therefore cannot accept them.as ‘justification for- “presentation of‘transit goods: and
* oustoms'documents to: as personnel: without any-‘supervision’ by customs: oft teers. ,

mipist gaits ee

     

420. The “Arbiteal Tribunal notes, however, that there are situstions in which customs
proceedings may-indeed legally take place outside a customs area. ‘While Section ~102(1).of
the Customs Act provides that customs proceedings shall be held at a customs office or in
-customs zones, ‘Section 102(3) ‘states, as.an exception, that, at the request-andJat théiexpense
ofthe declarant, customs proceedings may also be-conducted-outside.a customs:zoneSection
1:02(4) instructs the Ministry of Finance to lay.down in an Ordinance the-conditions ‘under
which customs proceedings may ‘beso conducted:and to set the amount of expenses:to..be
charged for conducting such proceedings. The Ministry of Finance issued instructions. in
Regulation No, 92/1993 which in Section 16 allows customs proceedings to take place outside
.-a.customs..area,if -this-is_justifi easons.,0feconomy,_especially_ifsit simplifies: the
“transportation of'the goods; or ‘if-iteis otherwise imper: and -does-not breach ith
activities of the customs*atithority. A request for ‘proceédings to be*held otitside:the tciistoms
area must be made sufficiently in advance, and the customs authority must be given
-information about-the approximate amount of-goods-and-the-type-of goods~Moreover, -it-is the
customs authority that will conduct the customs proceedings outside the customs area, and the
declarant who asked for this procedure will have to pay the costs for the participation of the

 

 
      

customs officers.

421. It is clear, however, that this special procedure for customs clearance outside a customs
area was not applied in the present case and that, in any event, that procedure would have
required the presence of one or more customs officers at the relevant place.

(b) The use of forged documents

422. The Arbitral Tribunal has found above (see para. 419) that there are serious doubts about
the authenticity of the three permits claimed to have been issued by the Customs Authority at
Zlin and allowing goods to be disposed of prior to their release.

423, The Respondent also claims that the part 5 slips of the TCPs confirming the termination
of the transit procedure which were returned to the Customs Office Breclav-dalnice were
provided with forged stamps appearing to be those of two customs officers at the Customs
Office at Olomouc. This has been questioned by the Claimant.

      

82

424. In support of their respective positions on this matter, the Parties have referred to expert
opinions, In one expert opinion, dated 20 March 1996, Martina Luidkova, of the Institute of
Criminology of the Police of the Czech Republic, reported that the Institute had received 20
pieces of customs documents containing imprints of the stamps of the Customs Office
Olomouc 1366.21 and 1373.12 and that a detailed examination of all these imprints of the
stamps had revealed that the TCPs in all cases bear the imprints of forged stamps. A similar
conclusion was reached in a subsequent expert opinion, dated 22 July 1998, by Miroslav
Bflek, of the Section of Criminal Technology and Expertise of the Police at Brno. The
accuracy of the findings in these expert opinions has been questioned in a Casework
Examination Report of 14 May 2008, issued by Anthony Stockton, Forensic Science Service,
Wetherby West Yorkshire, England.

425, The Arbitral Tribunal has no basis for making an assessment of its own as to whether the
stamps on the TCP slips were genuine or forged. The Tribunal notes, however, that, in
addition to the conclusions reached in the experts reports, the two customs officers who would
have been the proper owners of the stamps apparently denied that they had used their stamps
in this manner. It must therefore be concluded that there is doubt as to their authenticity.

(c) Involvement of customs officers

426, The Claimant maintains that customs officers must have been involved in the fraud.
since it would be most unlikely that the customs authorities would otherwise have been
unaware of large quantities of oil products, admitled under a transit regime, having
disappeared without customs clearance at an inland customs office over a considerable period
of time,

427. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the fraud in the Diesel case has been subject to extensive
investigations in the Czech Republic and that several persons have been prosecuted and some
of thetu sehtenced iv tertis of imprisonment, However, ihe investigation has apparently nor
provided sufficient evidence of the involvement of any public official. In the judgment of
29 July 2008 in the criminal case against . the Regional Court of Brno stated as

foMawice
follows:

“The interrogations did not prove involvement of any customs officer in the criminal activity, Even
though there is a suspicion that more persons were involved in the criminal activity, perhaps even
including anv of the customs officers, this fact has no effect on the criminal liability of the defendant

428. The Arbitral Tribunal is not a criminal court and has neither competence nor any
practical means to supplement the criminal investigations conducted in the Czech Republic.
The Tribunal notes that no customs officer has been prosecuted and convicted for any offence
in connection with the Diese! case and can only conclude that, in these circumstances, it has
not been proven that any customs officer was involved in the criminal activities.

5. Time bar

429, The Claimant argues that in any case the claims against CARGO were time-barred and
should not have been admitted by the Czech courts. The Respondent contests that there was

any time bar.

83

430, It is common ground between the Parties that, at the relevant time, the-Customs Act did
not Sonftain any provision ‘on a ‘time-limit for claims against guarantors such’ “as ‘CARGO.

 

. Bribunal cannot : Sau ‘how « Czech ‘ew was to ‘be understood at, tthe relevant:time and
concludes that the Claimant has not shown-that the:payments: ordérsiissued: ‘“@gainst‘CARGO
violated any domestic legal rule or principle based on a statute of limitations.

 

      
 
 

6. Legal Protection . . .

432. The Aibitral Tribunal notes that the Breclav~ nie Customs Offioe rendered a-large

 

G |
s ie sete fe against CARGO’ had Siena “by Feasts a
who, as declarants, were the primary débtors*but who were mostly unable to pay the claimied

amounts. As examples, the parties have referred to the following cases:

(@) The MORGAN case-(referred to by the Claimant)

On 8 July- 1994, a request was presented to the .Bieclav-dalnice Customs Office by the company
MORGAN. spol, s.t.0. for the release of transported goods into the ‘transit regime. ‘This was, granted.by.the
imit, be presented to the Zlin
_-Customs Office, After'it had: appeared that no présentatio Customs s Office hati taken
plates the’ -on'28'Mardh"1997-"issued ad to
cover the customs debt-(excise tax and VAT) of CZK:31:731 82600 On :9-Junedl.997;1thes ‘Bieclavadélnice
Regional Customs Office quashed the decision because of formal shortcomings and referred the matter
back to.the Bfeclav-dalnice Customs Office for new consideration and d . In its decision of
7 January 2000, the Bieclav-dinice Customs Office ordered CARGO to pay the customs debt in the
amount of CZK 316,943. The order was confirmed by the Brno Customs Directorate on 19 February
2001. On 14 November 2001, the Regional Court of Brno, upon CARGO’s appeal, set aside the-decision
and referred the case back to the Customs Directorate for further proceedings, the reason being that the
Act on the Administration of Taxes which had been applied was not applicable since the proceedings had
started before J July 1997. It is unclear whether a new administrative decision was taken by the Customs

Office or the Customs Directorate.

   
    

 

 

(2) The” ~~ case (referred to by the Respondent)

On 4 November 1994, a shipment of diesel oi] from Slovalia was presented to the Bfeclav-dalnice
Customs Office. The declarant was the driver The shipment was released on the same
day into the transit regime under cover of a guarantee by CARGO,

On 1 November 1995, the Bfeclay-dalnice Customs Office, with reference to Section 240(3)(d) of the
Customs Act, issued a payment order of CZK 342,467 against Jaroslav SoSolik. Payment was to be made
within 10 days of delivery of the decision, As no payment was made, the Customs Office, on 7 / December
1995, with reference to Section 306(1) of the Customs Act, ordered ' to pay the
outstanding amount within a further term of 20 days from the day of delivery of the decision,

Since payment was not made, the Customs Office, on 28 March 1997, with reference to Section 260 of
the Customs Act, issued a payment order in the amount of CZK 341,721 against CARGO as guarantor
according to its surety bond. On 9.June. 1997, the decision of the Customs Office. was quashed by the
Bfeclav Regional Customs Office which réferred the case back to.the Breclav-ddlnice Customs Office.

       

84

On 7 March 2000, the Breclav-dalnice Customs Office issued a new payment order against CARGO in
the same amount of CZK 341,721, again with reference to Section 260 of the Customs Act. On 27 August
2001, the Brno Customs Directorate quashed the decision of 7 March 2000 and referred the case back for
a new hearing and decision, the reason being that the procedural rules that had been applied were not
applicable to proceedings which had started before | July 1997.

On 4 April 2002, the Breclav-dilnice Customs Office, again referring to Section 260 of the Customs Act,
issued a new payment order in the amount of CZK 341,721 against CARGO. The decision of the Customs
Office was again appealed to the Brno Customs Directorate which upheld the decision on 8 August 2002.
CARGO’s appeal against the decision of the Customs Directorate was rejected by the Regional Court of
Brno on 30 April 2004. At that time Cargo had been declared bankrupt and was represented in the
proceedings by the administrator of the bankruptcy estate. A cassation appeal was lodged but was rejected
by the Supreme Administrative Court on 28 June 2006,

433. The Arbitral Tribunal has been informed that the hundreds of cases regarding CARGO's
guarantees may be divided into various categories. There were some decisions which were nat
appealed by CARGO. Another group consisted of decisions that were set aside for procedural
reasons either by a higher administrative body or by a court and then referred back to the
customs office for a new decision, A new decision would then normally be taken, and many
of these new decisions were also appealed but confirmed by a court. It could also happen that
no new decision was taken because CARGO was already in a state of bankruptey and it would
be considered not to make sense to pursue the matter,

434, The Arbitral Tribunal has not been provided with a complete picture of all cases
regarding CARGO's payment obligations but notes, on the basis of the available
documentation and information, that CARGO had administrative and judicial remedies at its
disposal and managed to have a number of decisions set aside for formal reasons. The
Tribunal also finds that the judgments in the two cases referred to above (see para. 432) the
Czech courts gave extensive reasons for their conclusions on the various arguments invoked
by CARGO in its appeals. It has not been alleged that the judgments in other cases were
substantially different in content or form.

435. It further appears that in a number of cases CARGO was able to appeal not only loa

ive Court.

 

Regionai Court bit also against that court’ juagment io the Supreme A
In some cases, CARGO lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court.

   

7. Evaluation under the Czech-German BIT

436. The Claimant alleges in general that the Respondent's breach of international law
consists of “the prosecution of illegal claims”, which ultimately “destroyed the Claimant's
investment in the Czech Republic”. He specifies only to a limited extent how, in his opinion,
the Respondent's acts relate to the specific provisions in the BIT which he claims to have
been breached. However, on the basis of the indications given by the Claimant, the Arbitral
Tribunal will proceed to an examination of whether the events of which he complains could
constitute violations of the provisions in the BIT on which he relies.

(a) Fair and equitable treatment

437. The term “fair and equitable treatment” appears frequently in BITs. It cannot be easily
defined, but it is generally considered to require at least respect for the international minimum
standard of protection which, according to international customary law, any State is obliged to
afford to foreign property in its territory.

 

 

85

438. As far as the precise relation between’ “fair and equitable: streatment” and the minimum
standard of international law is concerned, there are two main approaches in international
icase-law “regarding ‘investmen jally. in awards. rendered .ay ules
nizinational: ‘Centre for Settlennem Vestment Digaiies CCsmD).

  
 

    

   
 
 

standard of treatment “pro ided fet. in tional riternational’: ‘av. “By sway’ Of" a fhe
Arbitral Tribunal refers to the following statement by the tribunal in the case af CMS v,

 

440, There were other’ tribunals which * -joparled “fair and equitale. treatment” as an
and mo protective of the any ts ights tha the

        
 

“The-clause, as draft pernits to interpret fair and-equitable treatment and ‘full protection and security as
higher standards than required ‘by international Jaw: ' The pitrpose of the third sentence is to set 4:floor, not
a céiling in. order*to avoid .a possiblé: interpretation of :these standards below what :is:requiréd “by

international Jaw.”

441, The Claimant considers that the term “fair and equitable treatment” in the BIT should be

interpreted broad]y enough to encourage investors to participate in.the economy of the host

state. He argues that-it falls within the legitimate expectations of an inve:

“admitiistration” shotild“exercise ‘reasonabl ie

national-boundaries in. order-to. ensure: -that,investars.are-not exposed to «unnecessary. business

risks. The Respondent, for its part, argues that the term should be understood to incorporate
law andard of treatment, and, ngt to .constitute.anew

  

 
    

inding. :pon. the parties to the BIT.

442, The Arbitra] Tribunal notes that the term “fair and equitable treatment” appears in the
BIT as a second additional sentence in Article 2(1) whose first sentence provides that each
Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible investments of investors of
the other Contracting Party and admit such investments in accordance with its legislation, The
Tribunal considers that the two sentences should be read together which means that “fair and
equitable treatment” is to be given a sufficiently wide interpretation to be consistent with the
promotion of investments which is set out as a primary aim in Article 2(1),

443, In the Arbitral Tribunal’s opinion, a treatment, in order to be fair, equitable and
consistent with the general aim of Article 2(1) and of the BIT in general, should respect the
legitimate expectations of the investor. What the investor may legitimately expect must be
evaluated in the light of all circumstances in each given case, The expectations may relate not

2 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award,
12 May 2005, para. 284,

3 Azurix Corp. v..The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case ‘No, ARB/01/12), Award, 14 July 2006, para,
361. .

 

86

only to the existing contractual or other relations between the investor and the host state, but
may also concern the general legal framework in the host state.

444, Thus, when the host state, through its written or oral representations, undertakings or
other acts, has created the reasonable expectation on the part of the investor that it will
conduct itself in a certain way, the investor legitimately expects that the host state will indeed
act consistently with the assurances it has given to the investor. In the words of the tribunal in
the case of International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. Mexico:

“the concept of ‘legitimate expectations’ relates, within the context of the NAFTA framework, to a
situation where a Contracting Party’s conduct creates reasonable and justifiable expectations on the part
of an investor (or investment) to act in reliance on said conduct, such that a failure by the NAFTA Party to
honour those expectations could cause the investor (or investment) to suffer damages,”

445. The state’s failure to observe the legitimate expectations of the investor that it has itself
induced wil] amount to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard,*

446. The standard of fair and equitable treatment also requires that the host state maintain a
legal order that is stable and predictable, so as to afford the investor the opportunity to ) plan
and operate its investments in accordance with the state's legal and business framework.® The
elements of stability and predictability of the state’s legal order go hand in hand with the need
that the state act with reasonable consistency and transparency, as part of an overall aim of
enhancing legal certainty, 7 Indeed, having in mind that the purpose of the BIT is to promote
and protect foreign investment, these facets of the fair and equitable treatment standard are
essential Lo the maintenance of an environment in which foreign investment is fostered.

447, The standard of fair and equitable treatment also ensures that a state acts in good faith in
its dealings with the investor or its investment” and that it does not coerce, threaten or harass
the investor or its investment.’ Similarly. if the state conducts itself in an arbitrary or

discriminatory way, it will have violated the fair and equitable treatment standard.'”

448. An important part of fair and equitable treatment is the investor's access to independent
and impartial courts in order to vindicaie his rights and proicei aivestinent, If the courts
are unable to give effect to the law in an impartial and fair manner, the investor may find
himself in a situation of denial of justice which is clearly incompatible with the notion of fair

  

* International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v, United Mexican States, Award, 26 January 2006,
ata. 147,

See, for example, Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (1CSID Case No,
ARB(AF)/00/3), Award, 30 April 2004, para. 98.
® See CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/08),
Award, 12 May 2005, para. 274; Occidental Exploration & Production Co. v. The Republic of
Ecuador (LCIA Case No. UN 3467), Award, 1 July 2004, para. 190..

’ See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2), Award, 29 May 2003, para. 154; EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador (LCIA Case No.
UN3481), Award, 3 February 2006, para. 158.

8 9 oc Saluka Investments BV v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, para. 307.

° See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2), Award, 29 May 2003, para. 163; Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Government of Canada, Award
on the Merits of Phase 2, 10 April 2001, para. 181.

"0 See, for example, Saluka Investments BV v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award, 17 March 2006,
para, 309.

87

-and equitable treatment. The fair and equitable treatment .standard thus protects the investor
from manifest-maladministration of justice, which may-take the form of, inter alia, lack of
due process, lack of a fair ial, undue delay and obstruction of access to justice, as well as
grossly. unjust. judgments.””. Accordingly, .while..a denial of justice . normally .relates, to
egregious ‘procedural impropriety, it will ‘also-be triggered when the decision-of ‘a court-or.an
~.administrative organ. is, as-the tribunal in .the.Mondev v, USd case noted, ‘so “clearly
-discreditable and improper”’ #12 that it cannot-but imply manifest deficiency in the judicial or

administrative process,

 

449, A denial of justice will occur when, .in light of the international standards of proper
administration of justice, there.is a failure of the state’s administrative or judicial system in
«the treatment.of the investor and its investment. In the assessment of whether denial -of justice
chas taken place, itis the judicial or administrative system as .a whole-that is being put to the

test.

450, The Arbitral Tribunal -is not of the view that:for the whole judicial or administrative
system to have been tested the investor must have, attempted to pursue all-available judicial or
administrative avenues in the state in order to avail himself of his rights. As in the case of

’ other aspects’ of th stmenit protection affordéd imder the BIT (forexample, the obligation
not-to-expropriate without compensation or other aspects of the fair and equitable treatment
standard), exhaustion of local remedies is not required ‘for denial of justice to be found,
Indeed, as the tribunal in the case of Mondev v. USA held, “it is not true that the denial of
justice rule-and the exhaustion of local remedies rule ‘are interlocking and inseparable’”."?

     

 

   

45], Whatis required, however,.is evidence of failure of the judicial or administrative. system
as a whole. For example, an isolated instance where a judicial or administrative organ has
committed_a.gross error .and_an.adequate and effective.remedy to, redress..such .error.existed
will not meet the test. Conversely, when a set of decisions or procedures in relation :to the
same investor (or class of investors) or in relation to the same issue reveals a state of a
manifestly defective judicial or administrative process, irrespective of whether all local
avenues-for redress have ‘been pursued;-the test’ will-be met. This is the standard’ that the

Arbitral Tribunal! will apply in the present case.

452. The Claimant considers that CARGO did not benefit from fair and equitable treatment,
since the guarantees issued by CARGO were enforced without a legal basis, and that the legal
remedies at CARGO’s disposal were inadequate. He poirits out that until 1 January 2003 the
Czech Republic lacked a Supreme Administrative Court which, in his opinion, meant that
there was insufficient judicial protection in administrative matters, including those relating to

customs duties and taxes.

453. In the present case, the claims against CARGO were based on the surety bonds issued by
CARGO in large numbers and covering high total amounts. The guarantee undertakings made
by CARGO were general in character. They were wide and unconditional and only provided
for a very limited exception from liability. Their aim was to eliminate for the Czech treasury

"| See, for example, Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. Mexico (ICSID Case No.

ARB (AF)/97/2). Award, 1 November 1999, paras, 102-103.
” Mondev International Lid. v, United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award, 11

October 2002, para, 127.
8 See Mondev International, Lid. v. United States of America (ICSID Case-No. ARB(AF)/99/2),

Award, 11 October 2002, para. 96 (footnotes omitted),

 

 

 

88

all economic risks connected with the transit regime. In particular, they did not make
CARGO’s liability dependent on whether any negligence could be attributed to CARGO.
Consequently, CARGO could not have a legitimate expectation to escape liability by showing
that failure to present goods for customs clearance was not due to CARGO’s fault, Even if the
absence of customs clearance had been concealed through the use of forged documents, this
would not be sufficient to relieve CARGO of its liability as guarantor. The guarantee - with
the minor exception set out in the surety bond — covered all situations where a debt to the

treasury had not been paid.

454. As the Arbitral Tribunal has found above (see paras. 408-411), the argument that the
guarantees only covered customs duties - which could not be imposed on imports from
Slovakia — and not claims for excise taxes and VAT does not appear convincing for several
reasons. First, it would make the guarantees meaningless, since they would not cover any debt
at all. Secondly, the amount specified in each surety bond seems to have been related to the
applicable amount of taxes, It also does not appear that this argument was ever raised by
CARGO in the domestic court proceedings or that the Czech courts had any doubts about the
taxes on imports from Slovakia being subject to taxation,

455, In any case, the Claimant must be considered to have the burden of proof for
demonstrating that there was no tax liability, and the Arbitral Tribunal cannot find that he had
shown that Czech law should be interpreted in such manner,

456. As regards the facts of the case, it is clear that large quantities of oil products were
withdrawn from customs clearance at an inland customs office, and it is unlikely that there
was any justification for presenting the goods and delivering the relevant customs documents
at CWA’s premises to CWA staff members and not to a customs officer. Instead, this seems
to have been part of the a large-scale fraudulent scheme which subsequently resulted in
prosecutions and criminal convictions.

457, The risk of the occurrence of such events must be considered, at least in principle, to
have been covered by CARGO’s guarantees, When examining whether the enforcement of
claims based on these guarantees couid nevertheiess be a breach of the Ciaimant's right .o fair
and equitable treatment, the Arbitral Tribunal would find it relevant whether the Czech
Republic, through its customs officers, was itself involved in the fraud. If there was such
involvement by public officials, the state may be considered to have violated its obligation to
provide the investor with fair and equitable treatment, at least unless the state, when becoming
aware of the misbehaviour of its officials, took forceful action against the guilty persons by
bringing them to justice or otherwise, However, as stated above (see para. 428), the Tribunal
has found no evidence that there was in fact any such involvement of customs officials in the
criminal activities.

458, While the Arbitral Tribunal agrees that it is difficult to understand how the tax fraud in
respect of large quantities of imported oil products could remain undetected for a relatively
long time, the evidence in this arbitration does not show that this was due to the
“dysfunctionality” or negligence of the customs administration, as also alleged by the
Claimant, The Tribunal is therefore not called upon to determine whether any such
deficiencies could be sufficient to relieve CARGO of liability under the surety bonds.

459. The Claimant’s argument that the claims against CARGO were time-barred is based on
an interpretation of Czech law according to which a three year time-limit in the Act on the

89

.Tax System or the Act.on the;:Administration of Taxes: and. Fees :should-be ‘applicable ‘by
. analogy.to the. present .case..However, ‘he has.not.invoked-any Czech oase-lew 3 in Support of
this.inter pretation which has-been contested. byrthe Respondent.

at

    
 
    

1p detive fiom. itheterm, “fair and ‘equitable
je. applicable; statute.:of limitations. Gonsequen i
jen. eansiering ‘whether.

  

sreguirement xegardin|
wargement: canbe left
‘Jast entence f. the

 

 

 

 

 

‘to appeal tothe: Regional Courtiof Brno" hich’ CARGO: ae patentinatd son:warious, osvasions,
The few judgments made available to the Arbitral Tribunal show that the RegionalCourt
proceeded to an examination of CARGO’s arguments and delivered extensively reasoned
judgments:. There -were also-.cases swherei CARGO obtained a ‘further examinatioti by-ithe
»Supreme-Administrative:Court andithe Constitutional Court:

 

462. The argument that CARGO should have been invited, or. given the es to

participate in the proceedings regarding claims against :the-drivers.as.primary .débtors.would. .

be convincing only if the decisions or judgments resulting from these proceedings were
-binding.on-CARGO:or:predluded.CARGO sfrom. presenting arguments.or’adducinguevidence
sinuits\defence in-the stbbsequeritiproceedings regariding.its own guarantee'claims. However;it
:does not.appear that:the decisions ‘and judgments regarding: the liability-of:the.d vers: thad-any
such prejudicial effects: for CARGO. ‘ 3

 

463. The, Claimant attaches weightito. ‘the. fact that the Supreme Administrative-Court “was as-onily
set up on 1 January 2003 and argues that during the preceding years CARGO did noti benefit it

 
 
 
 

from * the. Tegal protection provided by th
“Ad may:-well :I i a sd the-Hjudi

administrative matters, the.Arbitral ‘(Pribunal ‘cannot find it-established that. CARGO; ‘ough
the absence-of such:a court before 2003,-was«deniedsjustice in- respect: ofits appeals. against

the payment orders: of the customs authorities.

 

464, The Claimant also claims that assets in excess of CZK 45 million were seized bya ithe
Czech authorities during the period 1999-2001 pending the ongoing administrative and
judicial -proceedings ‘and complains that-the seized assets were not returned toshim-dfter the
payment orders had been'quashed. The Respondent has-replied that.the total amount:seized
was some CZK 43.7 million and that CZK 18.6 million were returned to CARGO, which-the
Claimant contests. In any case, the Respondent considers that the maintenance of the:séizure
was legal because the proceedings continued and the courts had not dismissed the state’s
claims on the merits.

465. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the upholding of the seizure: of assets pending a
decision on the merits could not in itself constitute a breach of the BIT. A problem could
arise, however, if there were unacceptable delays in the further proceedings. As regards the

hundreds of proceedings regarding the guarantee claims against CARGO, the scarce
information provided by the Claimant does not allow the Tribunal to conclude that there were

unreasonable delays in these proceedings.

 

90

466. The Arbitral Tribunal observes that there may have been cases where, after a payment
order issued by a customs office was quashed on formal grounds and the case was referred
back to the customs office for a new decision, no new decision was in fact taken by the
custorns office but the seizure of assets as security for the debt was nevertheless maintained.
Such a situation might give rise to a question of unfair treatment, It is not clear, for instance,
whether the MORGAN case, referred to in para. 432 above, may have been such a case.
However, the Claimant has not informed the Tribunal whether, after the judgment of
14 November 2001 had been quashed, a new decision was taken by the customs authority, and
whether, if there was no such decision, the seizure of assets in respect of that particular
shipment was maintained, Consequently, there is an insufficient basis for concluding that a
seizure of assets was maintained despite the fact that the proceedings were terminated without
a decision on the merits. Nor has the Tribunal been informed of other cases where this

situation arose.

467, The Arbitral Tribunal has not found any other element which would show that CARGO
was faced with a situation of denial of justice or was not granted fair and equitable treatment
by the Czech authorities or courts,

(b) Arbitrary or discriminatory measures

468, The Claimant alleges that he was exposed to arbitrary or discriminatory measures contrary
to Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3(2) of the BIT. He has referred to the failure of the prosecution
authorities to investigate the circumstances of the tax fraud, which he considers arbitrary, and
argued that the failure to pursuc claims against the primarily responsible persons, while instead
concentrating on claims against CARGO as guarantor, was discriminatory, He has also alleged
that CARGO was exposed to harassment at the border which had negative consequences for its
business,

469. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot find it established that the criminal investigation conducted by
the prosecution authorities was deficient or incomplete. The Tribunal also points out that CARGO
had made very extensive guarantee undertakings and finds that it was within the discretion of the

lsd rat

had not

 

SCOR OF apocared that ta

‘antcos once it appoarcd that taxe:

 

or nat aly
s whather or not to rely on these

been paid on the imports of oil products. Consequently, no arbitrary or discriminatory behaviour
can be found in this respect,

        

470, The Arbitval Tribunal further notes that CARGO was apparently the only haulier who at the
relevant time guaranteed the fuel imports which became the subject of fraud. Consequently, since
there was no one else in the same position as CARGO, there is no evidence of discriminatory
treatment when pursuing the guarantee claims against CARGO.

471. The Claimant also alleges, in a general manner and without giving any details about specific
events, that the drivers who had used CARGO as customs agent were exposed to discriminatory
treatment at the Breclav-ddlnice customs office. They were allegedly harassed and had to wait for
a long time before they were allowed to proceed, which had affected CARGO’s business in a
negative way. This is contested by the Czech Republic, and there is no evidence showing any
occurrences at the border of such gravity as to be regarded as discriminatory treatment of
CARGO.

472. Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot find it established that the Claimant, or his
company, suffered arbitrary or discriminatory treatment contrary to the BIT.

 

91

(¢)’Full protection and security. ».

n to accord full protection and security to

 

474. The Arbitral Tribunal notes the-two rélated:provisions in.the BIT; i:e, Article 2(3), which
provides that investments and revenue arising therefrom shall enjoy full protection under the
BIT, and Article 4(1), which provides that investments :by .investors.:of either :Gontracting
Party shall enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party. It
not ‘entirely clear-what the ‘Contracting Patties thad-vin mind.when including -both :these
‘isions in the BIF;tone referring to:*full protection” :and the other ito “full:protection:and

P. ::
~' seourity’?,

 
  
 
 

  

»475::The-Arbitral Tribunal notes, however, -that:clauses about “full :protection:and-security”
sare-frequently to‘be found inBIFs:and have‘been the subject of interpretation.in. several cases.

476. In the case of Salukav. The-Czech Republic, the tribunal found that “[tJhe ‘full protection

- »aand:security’.. standard: ¢
. .Civilestrife:and physicalviolence” ‘and-that the-olause “is not-meant-to cover :just any kind of

“immpairment.of an investor’s:investment, but:to protect more specifically the:physical integrity
of an investment against interference by use of force”. 14 Tn the case of Azunix-v.: Argentina;-the
tribunal held in regard to a similar clause that “it is not only a matter of physical security; the
stability afforded by-a secure-environment:is as important from an investor’s:point of view”. !*

  

 

 

  

‘477, The Arbitra] Tribunalnotes that in the present case there is no question of'a violation:of

 

“security” clause shouldsbe:considered to :provide-further protection, itis difficultstorseeshow
~agach protection would:go:beyond that! of the:clause ‘on““fair and ‘equitable*treatment’?as “dealt
with.above (see paras, 437-467).

 

478, The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that there has been no infringement of the
Claimant’s right to “full protection” or to “full protection and security” of his investment.

(a) Deprivation of property

479. Article 4(2) of the BIT imposes on a Contracting Party the obligation not to deprive
investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments. In other words, it protects
against expropriation without full compensation and against other measures equivalent to
expropriation or having the same effect as expropriation.

480. The Claimant alleges that the failure to investigate the role of the customs authorities in
the tax fraud together with the pursuance of guarantee claims against CARGO are acts having
the effect of expropriation. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot find that such omissions or acts
could be assimilated to a deprivation of property under Article 4(2) of the BIT. It is true that
CARGO went bankrupt as a result of its indebtedness and that a considerable part of its debts

M4 saluka Investments BV v. The Czech Républic, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, paras. 483-484.
'S Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award, 14 July 2006, para.
08,

sapplies:essentially when the foreign.investment has :been affected!by _ ;

: 92
od

were based on the surety bonds, However, bankruptcy is not tantamount to expropriation, and
there is no indication that the bankruptcy in this case was unlawful or irregular or that it
pursued an expropriatory purpose.

481, Nor can the Arbitral Tribunal identify any other act by the Czech Republic which could
be assimilated to expropriation of the Claimant's investment. The Tribunal therefore
concludes that there has been no breach of the BIT in this regard.

(¢) Obligations under international law

482, The Claimant also alleges a breach of Article 7(1) of the BIT which provides that the
investor shall be entitled to more favourable treatment than is provided for in the BIT if such
treatment is provided for in the law of the investment state or follows from that state’s
obligations under international law. The Claimant points out that this is a broad provision
requiring that, in addition to all obligations under treaties or otherwise, general principles of
international law which provide a certain minimum protection to international investments
shall apply.

483. The Arbitral Tribunal agrees that Article 7(1) is a broad provision which entitles an
investor to benefit not only from more favourable provisions in domestic law and in treaties
between the Contracting Parties but also from more favourable treatment resulting from
general international law,

484, The Arbitral Tribunal has examined the Claimant's allegation that he was not granted a
“fair and equitable treatment” in regard to his investment and found this allegation not be
justified (see paras, 453-467), While the standard of “fair and equitable treatment” might be
broader than the minimum standard of protection of foreign investments in general
international law, the Tribunal considers that the opposite is not true. In other words, once it
has been concluded that there has been no breach of the requirement of “fair and equilabic
treatment”, it follows that the minimum standard of protection in general international law has
not been breached either.

485, The Arbitral Tribunal thus finds that the Czech Republic has not violated its obligations
under Article 7(1) of the BIT.

8 Conclusion

486. The Arbitral Tribunal has not found it established that the Czech Republic breached its
obligations under the BIT in respect of the Claimant's investment and must therefore reject
the Claimant's claims.

9. Costs

487, Article 10(2), read in conjunction with Article 9(5), of the BIT provides, inter alia, that
each Contracting Party shall bear the cost of its representatives in the arbitration proceedings.
It is added that the arbitral tribunal may decide on a different allocation of costs. Both Parties
in this arbitration have requested to be compensated for their costs.

488. When considering the costs for the Parties’ representation, the Arbitral Tribunal notes
that the present arbitration has given rise to a number of important and complex legal issues

93

regarding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as well as the merits of the Claimant’s claims. While the
Claimant was successful in arguing that the Arbitral Tribunal had jurisdiction to examine his
claims on the merits, the Czech Republic was successful in holding that there was no breach
of the BIT. The Tribunal further notes that, in the course of the proceedings, a considerable
number of procedural requests were addressed to the Tribunal by both Parties, and that each
Party was to a varying degree successful or unsuccessful in regard to these requests.

489. Having examined the proceedings as a whole, the Arbitral Tribunal finds it appropriate
to order that each Party shall bear its own costs and expenses in the arbitration.

490. As regards the arbitrators’ costs, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that, in a Decision of
9 February 2010, the Tribunal decided that the arbitrators should receive fees for the work
they had carried out until that time. The Tribunal added that the Decision was without
prejudice to the final determination of how the arbitration costs were to be finally borne by

the Parties.

491. Ina further Decision of 15 November 2010, the Arbitral Tribunal decided that two of the
Arbitrators — Professor Creutzig and Professor Gaillard — should receive additional amounts
as VAT on the fees awarded to them in the Decision of 9 February 2010.

492. In the present Award, a decision is taken on the arbitrators’ fees and expenses relating to
the time period after 9 February 2010.

493. Article 10(2), read in conjunction with Article 9(5), of the BIT provides that each
Contracting Party shall bear the cost of “its own member” in the arbitral tribunal and that the
cost of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be borne in equal parts by the Contracting
Parties. In this respect as well, it is provided that the tribunal may decide on another

allocation.

494. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that both Parties have, in equal parts, paid advances on the
costs of the Tribunal to a bank account administered by the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce. The amounts awarded to the arbitrators in the Decisions
of 9 February and 15 November 2010 have been paid from that account, and the Tribunal
finds it appropriate that the same should apply to the fees and expenses awarded to the
arbitrators in the present Award.

495, For the same reasons as those indicated in regard to the decision that each Party should
bear its own costs in the proceedings, the Arbitral Tribunal also considers that the Parties
shall, in equal parts, bear the costs for the arbitrators’ fees and expenses.

THE AWARD
The Arbitral Tribunal

(a) dismisses the Claimant’s claims regarding breaches of the Treaty of 2 October 1990
between the Federal Republic of Germany.and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic
regarding the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments, and .

(b) decides that each Party shall bear its own costs for the proceedings and half of the.
arbitrators’ fees and expenses.

   

oO

94

The arbitrators shall be entitled to the following fees and be compensated for the following
expenses:

Hans Danelius: a fee of ninety-one thousand four hundred and forty-five euro (EUR 91,445)
and expenses of two thousand one hundred and ninety-eight euro (EUR 2,198),

Jiirgen Creutzig: a fee of sixty thousand nine hundred and sixty-five euro (EUR 60,965), VAT
of five thousand seven hundred and ninety-one thousand euro and sixty-seven cents (EUR
5,791,67) and expenses of one thousand seven hundred and sixty-one euro (EUR 1,761), and

Emmanuel Gaillard: a fee of sixty thousand nine hundred and sixty-five euro (EUR 60,965),
VAT of five thousand nine hundred and seventy-four euro and fifty-seven cents (EUR
5,974.57) and expenses of five thousand five hundred and eleven euro (EUR 5,511)

These amounts shall be drawn from the funds provided by the Parties in equal parts to an
account (IBAN No. SE2712000000013423606959) at Danske Bank, Stockholm, administered
by the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.

 

O

Hans Danelius Jiirgen Creutzig Emmanuel Gaillard

