INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
RWE INNoGy GMBH
AND
RWE INNOGy AERSA S.A.U.

Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/34

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret, Arbitrator
Mr. Judd L. Kessler, Arbitrator
Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC, President

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 18 December 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing RWE Innogy GmbH and Representing Kingdom of Spain:

RWE Innogy Aersa S.A.U.:

Ms. Marie Stoyanov Mr. José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Mr. Antonio Vazquez-Guillén Ms. Gabriela Cerdeiras Megias

Ms. Virginia Allan Mr. Pablo Elena Abad

Mr. David Ingle Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antufia

Mr. Pablo Torres . Ms. Patricia Froehlingsdorf Nicolas
Ms. Patricia Rodriguez Ms. Maria del Socorro Garrido Moreno
Allen & Overy LLP

Serrano 73 Mr. Rafael Gil Nievas
28006 Madrid Ms. Lourdes Martinez de Victoria Gomez
Ms. Elena Ofioro Sainz

Spain oo“

Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar
and Mr. Mariano Rojo Pérez

Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin
Mr. Jeffrey Sullivan Mr. Javier Torres Gella
Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP Mr. Alberto Torré Molés
Temple Avenue Abogacia General del Estado
London, EC4Y 0HB Depto. Arbitrajes Internacionales
United Kingdom c/Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16

2". Planta

28004 Madrid

Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
Ill, THE REMAINING ISSUES ON QUANTUM .....ccccsescssesssseeeseeseseeseseessseesssnessstensseensaeneas 4

A. The Parties’ Positions 5
(1) The Claimants’ Position 5

a. The Claw-back 5

b. Tax Treatment of D: 9

 

ig

c. Additional Sensitivities to Damages. No Res Judicata 0.0.0.0... 10

(2) The Respondent’s Position

 

a. The Alternative Legal Interpretation of the Tribunal’s Decision.................. 12
b. Claw-back 13
c. Amounts Related to the Coverage Ratio
d

. Amounts Related to the Income Tax...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

e. Additional Sensitivities to Damages. Res Judicata ............ccceeeeneeeeeees 16
B. The Tribunal’s Analysis 18
(1) Res judi 18
(2) The Tribunal’s determination with respect to the repayment of any sums already
paid to the Claimants in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and
Order IET 1025/2014 23
(3) Damages arising out of the finding of breach through the disproportionate nature
of the new measures adopted 0.0... cece eeseseeeseeeeseesseeeeeseeaeseeeeseeasseeatseeeeeenees 30
(4) Conclusion in relation to the heads of damage ordered in the Decision............... 34
IV. RESIDUAL ISSUES ON QUANTUM... cciceecccceseseeeeeeeeteeeteseeeeseseneeesesteteteneteneteneneees 34
A. The Tax Gross-Up 34
(1) The Parties’ Positions 34
a. The Claimants’ Position .....0.c..ccsccesesseseeseseeseseeesecesseeesseeasseeeeeeeesseeseeeneenees 34
b. The Respondent’s Position ..........c.cccecesseeseessessesesseeseeseeseesessessseeneeeeeneenees 35
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi: 35
B. Interest 36
(1) The Parties’ Positions 36
a. The Claimants’ Position ............cccccessesseeseeseessesesesseeseeseeseesessssnssssseeneeneenees 36
b. The Respondent’s Position ..........c.cccecesseeseessessesesseeseeseeseesessessseeneeeeeneenees 37
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi: 37

 

C. Costs 39
(1) The Parties’ Positions 39

a. The Claimants’ Positio:

 
 

b. The Respondent’s Position.
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi: 39
Vv. AWARD a

 

iii

TABLE OF DEFINED TERMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

C-{#]

The Claimants’ Exhibit

 

Cl. Comments

The Claimants’ Comments on the Experts’
Joint Report, dated 1 May 2020

 

The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, dated

 

 

 

Cl. Mem. 26 February 2016
Cl. PHB The Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, dated 28
. July 2017, as revised on 7 August 2017
CL Rej The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction,
io dated 2 March 2017
The Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and
Cl. Reply Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, dated 11

November 2016

 

Cl. Response

The Claimants’ Responsive Submission on the
Experts’ Joint Report, dated 19 May 2020

 

CL-[#]

The Claimants’ Legal Authority

 

Cl. Skeleton

The Claimants’ Skeleton of the Case, dated 24
April 2017

 

The National Commission on Markets and

 

 

 

CNMC Competition (Comisién Nacional de los
Mercados y la Competencia)
The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction,

Decision Liability, and Certain Issues of Quantum,
dated 30 December 2019

ECT Energy Charter Treaty, adopted in Lisbon on
17 December 1994

Experts Compass Lexecon and BDO together.

 

 

Experts’ Joint Report

 

The Experts’ Joint Report in Response to the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability
and Certain Issues of Quantum by

 

 

 

Pablo T. Spiller and Anton Garcia of Compass
Lexecon and Gervase MacGregor, Eduardo
Pérez Ruiz, David Mitchell and Francisco
Javier Espel Sesé of BDO, dated 16 April 2020

 

Hearing on the merits and jurisdiction held in

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hearing Paris, France on 15 — 19 May 2017
: Convention on the Settlement of Investment

ICSID Convention Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States, dated 18 March 1965

ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

IRR Internal Rate of Return

R-[#] The Respondent’s Exhibit

RE Spain’s Renewable Energy power generation
sector
The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the

Resp. C-Mem. Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction, dated 20

May 2016

 

Resp. Observations

The Respondent’s Observations on the
Experts’ Joint Report, dated 1 May 2020

 

Resp. PHB

The Respondent’s Post Hearing Brief, dated 14
July 2017

 

Resp. Rej.

The Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and
Reply on Jurisdiction, dated 19 January 2017

 

Resp. Response

The Respondent’s Responsive Observations on
the Experts’ Joint Report, dated 19 May 2020

 

Resp. Skeleton

The Respondent’s Skeleton of the Case, dated
5 May 2017

 

RL-[#]

The Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

RfA

The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, dated
16 December 2014

 

 

Tr. Day [#] [Speaker(s)] [page:line]

 

Transcript of the Hearing

 

 

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral Tribunal constituted on 4 November
2015

 

vi

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Energy Charter
Treaty which entered into force on 16 April 1998 for Germany and the Kingdom of Spain
(the “ECT or “Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October

1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

2. The claimants are RWE Innogy GmbH (“RWE”), a company incorporated under the
laws of Germany, and RWE Innogy Aersa S.A.U. (“RWE Innogy Aersa”), a company
incorporated under the laws of the Kingdom of Spain (together, the “Claimants”). The

respondent is the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain” or the “Respondent”).

3. The Claimants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

4, This dispute relates to measures implemented by the government of Spain modifying the

regulatory and economic regime of renewable energy projects.

5. The Tribunal refers to section IV of its Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability, and Certain
Issues of Quantum, dated 30 December 2019 (the “Decision”), for the legal and factual
background of the case.

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

6. On 30 December 2019, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and
Certain Issues of Quantum (the “Decision”). The Decision is attached to this Award, and

constitutes an integral part of it.
7. In the Decision, the Tribunal ruled:

“For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(1) That it lacks jurisdiction to hear the claims of breach of Article 10(1) ECT
with respect to the two Taxation Measures introduced by Law 15/2012 of 27
December 2017, but that the jurisdictional objections of the Respondent are
otherwise rejected.

(2) That the Respondent has breached Article 10(1) ECT (i) to the extent that
it has procured repayment by the Claimants of sums previously paid by the
Respondent under the regime in place prior to adoption of the Disputed
Measures, and (ii) the disproportionate nature of the new measures that it has
adopted, with specific respect to Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I
and II, and Cepeda.

(3) All other claims and requests of the Parties are dismissed.

(4) The Parties are directed to attempt to reach an agreement on the amount
of compensation to be paid by the Respondent to the Claimants in respect of
its breaches of its obligations as identified in paragraph (2), in accordance
with the Tribunal’s findings. In a first phase, the Parties are invited to agree
by January 23, 2020 on a reasonable schedule within which to attempt to
reach agreement. If the Parties are unable to agree on such a schedule, such
will be fixed by the Tribunal through further directions.

(5) Insofar as the Parties fail to reach an agreement in accordance with (4)
above, the Tribunal will, following consultation with the Parties, fix a
calendar for further submissions of the Parties on the damages due to the
Claimants.

(6) The decision on the final determination of the damages due is thus
reserved and will be fixed in the Award, along with the Tribunal’s decisions
as to interest, tax and costs.”!

8. The Tribunal refers to section II of the Decision for the prior procedural history.

9. On 6 February 2020, pursuant to sub-paragraph 748(4) of the Decision, and following
the Tribunal’s granting of a two-week extension, the Parties communicated to the
Tribunal their agreement on the schedule within which to attempt to reach agreement on
the amount of compensation. The Parties proposed to do so in the form of a joint expert
report, and included a proposed schedule for the preparation and submission of the

experts’ joint report.

' Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Certain Issues of Quantum, 30 December 2019 (the “Decision”), § 748.

2

The Parties disagreed on the modality of the Parties’ eventual submissions (if any) on
matters directly relating to the experts’ joint report. On 6 February 2020, the Claimants
expressed their view that the submissions should be simultaneous, whereas the
Respondent submitted in its communication of 13 February 2020, that they should be

filed sequentially.

On 15 February 2020, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the above indicated
submissions, if any, should be simultaneous, with the possibility for the Parties to request

leave from the Tribunal for a responsive (simultaneous) round, if necessary.

On 17 April 2020, the Parties supplied to the Tribunal the Experts’ Joint Report in
Response to the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Certain Issues of

Quantum, dated 16 April 2020 (the “Experts’ Joint Report”).

On 1 May 2020, the Claimants filed Comments on the Experts’ Joint Report (“Cl.
Comments”), together with Legal Authorities CL-194 to CL-206.

On the same date, the Respondent filed Observations on the Experts’ Joint Report
(“Resp. Observations”), together with Legal Authorities RL-0101 and RL-0102.

On 19 May 2020, the Claimants filed their Responsive Submissions on the Experts’ Joint
Report (“Cl. Response”), together with Exhibit C-0347 and Legal Authorities CL-0207
and CL-0208.

On the same date, the Respondent filed its Responsive Observations on the Experts’ Joint

Report (“Resp. Response”).

On 20 May 2020, the Respondent filed a “conditional” request in the event that the
Tribunal follows the “alternative legal interpretation” as suggested by the Respondent, in
which case the Respondent requests to be afforded opportunity to verify the Claimants’
new evidence and to submit brief observations on the figures submitted by the Claimants

in their submission of 19 May 2020.

Also on 20 May 2020, (i) the Tribunal took note of the Respondent’s request of the same
date, noting that it would consider it whilst studying the Parties’ responses; (ii) the

3

Claimants filed observations on the Respondent’s request of 20 May 2020; and (iii) the
Tribunal acknowledged receipt and took note of the Claimants’ communication of 20
May 2020 in response to the Respondent’s communication of the same date, and noted
that the Tribunal would consider the Parties’ respective communications of 20 May 2020,

as appropriate, whilst studying the Parties’ responses.

On 16 November 2020, the Tribunal declared the proceeding closed in accordance with

ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(1).

Ill. | THE REMAINING ISSUES ON QUANTUM

20.

21.

22.

23.

The Tribunal refers to paragraphs 685 and 729-747 of the Decision. As noted there, the

Tribunal has found a breach of Article 10(1) ECT so far as concerns —

i. the procurement of repayment of any sums already paid to the Claimants in the

period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014;

ii. disproportionality with respect to certain of the Claimants’ plants, i.e. the wind

plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and the hydro plant Cepeda.

As to breach (i), the Tribunal found at paragraph 731 of the Decision that: “the Claimants
say that EUR 19.4 million had to be repaid, which has not been challenged. All that is

required is verification and precise quantification of amounts paid.”

As to breach (ii), the Tribunal found at paragraphs 732-746 of the Decision that it is
compensation with respect to the breach concerning the disproportionate impacts to
Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and Cepeda that the Tribunal must assess,
using as a base Table 10 to the second report of Compass Lexecon and the spreadsheet

that underlies it.

Consistent with the Decision and the Tribunal’s directions, the Tribunal now has the
benefit of the Experts’ Joint Report and also the Parties’ submissions as summarised

below.

A. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

(1) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants refer to the two heads of damages addressed in the Experts’ Joint Report:
(i) the “Claw-back”, which they define as the procurement of repayment of any sums
already paid to the Claimants in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and
Order IET 1025/2014 (the “Interim Period”); and (ii) the reduction of the remuneration
of the Claimants’ installations below the threshold of an appropriate return. In doing so,
they also address the alternatives set out in the Experts’ Joint Report to quantify both

head of damages.

a. The Claw-back

The Claimants recall that RDL 9/2013 repealed and replaced RD 661/2007, introducing
a new “cap” — the “permissible return” — that an installation could receive during the

plant’s “regulatory lifetime”, with the payments later defined in Order IET 1025/2014
(also referred to as the “June 2014 Ministerial Order”), which applied retroactively to

July 2013.7

According to the Claimants, the Claw-back, or retroactive application of the Order IET
1025/2014, implied that the plants were required “to return the difference between the
payments actually received from July 2013 and the payments that they would have

received under the June 2014 Ministerial Order.”?

As regards the Claw-back, the Claimants further submit, first, that the Claw-back is a

 

violation of the ECT, as has been found not only by this Tribunal, but also by the RREEF,
BayWa, Watkins, PV Investors and Hydro Energy tribunals when considering the same

Disputed Measures.*

Secondly, the Claimants assert that the Claw-back repayment obligation was imposed on

21 of the Claimants’ 24 installations, and was not limited to the Claimants’ 10 plants

2 Cl. Comments, § 13.
3Cl. Comments, § 16.
4 Cl. Comments, {15-17 (foot notes omitted).

considered by the Tribunal in its Decision. According to the Claimants, the information
concerning the 10 plants had been provided by Compass Lexecon in their First Report,
as an example of the plants that had both suffered the Claw-back and had to make a cash
payment to the CNMC.°

29. Thirdly, the Claimants further argue that the damages caused by the Claw-back are not
limited by the EUR 19.4 million figure, provided by Compass Lexecon only for
illustrative purposes. That figure did not purport to quantify the full impact of the Claw-

back, which were quantified in the Experts’ Joint Report.°

30. The Claimants note the disagreement between the Experts on the quantification of the

impact of the Claw-back:

31. For Compass Lexecon: (i) the Decision requires the quantification of damages with
respect to all of the Claimants’ installations that had to repay amounts already received
pursuant to the Claw-back; (ii) the Claw-back applied to 21 of the Claimants’ 24 plants;
(iii) those commissioned before 2004 (i.e., the Claimants’ 10 plants) had to make the
repayment by cash transfer to CNMC, whereas those commissioned after 2004 (i.e., the
remaining 11) had to make the repayment by way of set off against the future revenues
and paid in monthly installments; (iv) “both forms of repayment are equivalent: they are
amounts received which had to be returned”; and (v) in line with the Tribunal’s Decision
that “the Claimants are entitled to return of all sums repaid”, the Claimants’ 21 plants

should be considered in the quantification of damages.”

32. For BDO: (i) only the Claimants’ 10 plants, not receiving a Special Payment under the
New Regime, should be considered. They were not paid the outstanding payments they
were entitled to receive for the electricity they had already sold during the Interim Period.
Given that Spain did not pay them, that money never had to be repaid, these sums should

be excluded from the quantification of damages;® (ii) other plants have faced Claw-back,

5 Cl. Comments, ff 6, 16, 22.

© Cl. Comments, ff 18-24.

7 Cl. Comments, {ff 25-31 (footnotes omitted).
§ Cl. Comments, ff 25, 32.

but since they are receiving a Special Payment, that will allow them to obtain a reasonable
pre-tax return; and (iii) as a result, BDO only considered the Claimants’ 10 plants in their

analysis of damages.’

33. To refute BDO’s position, the Claimants submit that: (i) since the Experts agree that the
Claw-back applied to 21 of Claimants’ plants and not only to 10 of them, damages should
be quantified for the 21 plants;'° (ii) the Decision required the quantification regarding
the “the procurement of repayment of any sums already paid to the Claimants in the
period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 10{4]5/2014”,"' and did
indicate that Claw-back damages should be limited to the 10 plants;'? (iii) reference in
the Decision to the repayment made by the 10 plants and the related EUR 19.4 million,
originated from what Claimants claim was an “illustrative example” given by Compass

> and

Lexecon in its Second Report, and does not quantify the Claw-back damages;!
(iv) BDO’s argument that the 11 plants are still receiving Special Payments and may
obtain a reasonable pre-tax return, does not concern the first head of damages relating to

the quantification of the Claw-back. '#

34. As to the Respondent’s argument that the Claw-back should be limited to the 10 plants
because (i) it is “res judicata”, and (ii) making a case about the 21 plants would be
“belated”, the Claimants contend that (i) it makes no sense to suggest that the verification
and quantification required by the Decision is “res judicata’ or “belated”; (ii) the total
sums have been verified and quantified; (iii) Compass Lexecon has provided
explanations as to the repayments made by the 21 plants; and (iv) the resulting damages

have been quantified in the Experts’ Joint Report.!*

° Cl. Comments, § 32. Experts’ Joint Report, 4 18-20.
© Cl, Comments, § 34.

4! Decision, ] 729(i) (emphasis added by the Claimants).
2 Cl, Comments, 4 35.

3 Cl, Comments, § 36.

4 Cl, Comments, § 37.

'5 CL, Response, ff] 17-21.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

The Claimants submit that Spain’s failure to pay sums owing to the Claimants does not
relieve it of its obligation to pay damages pursuant to the Claw-back.'® This, is another

area of disagreement between the Experts.'7

The Claimants explain that the New Regime introduced a deferred payment system,
according to which, the sums owing to the Claimants’ plants accrued during the Interim
Period, were the subject of partial monthly payments determined by reference to the

“coeficiente de cobertura” or “coverage ratio.” !

As a result, prior to June 2014, the Claimants only received a portion (60%) of the sum
they were owed for the electricity that they produced and sold during the Interim Period.
Once the 2014 Ministerial Order was approved, “instead of paying the remaining sum
owed to the Claimants and requiring repayment of that amount, Spain simply cancelled

the payment owed to the Claimants.”!”

The Claimants refute the Respondent’s argument that “repayment as such did not exist”
because there was no “transfer of money [...] into the Spanish Treasury”, and that
damages should therefore be reduced to zero. The repayments concerned money taken
from the Claimants and transferred to the Respondent. Payment was required from the
plants, including the 10 plants, by way of negative invoices issued to each plant, that had
to be settled by repayments made to the CNMC, a wholly-owned entity controlled by
Spain. The Claimants assert that the total of such negative invoices amounted to EUR
31,564,458. The above-described set-off mechanism, according to the Claimants, is a

form of payment and a direct appropriation of the Claimants’ revenues.”°

The Claimants submit to the Tribunal’s attention Compass Lexecon’s explanation in this
regard: “[f]rom an economic viewpoint denying the Claimants’ Plants a collection right

for the energy already produced and sold (on credit to the Government) is equivalent to

6 Cl, Comments, #4] 41-53. Cl. Response, § 24.
"7 Cl. Comments, 4 41.

8 Cl, Comments, 49] 42-43.

© Cl, Comments, #¥] 45-49. Cl. Response, § 23.
20 Cl. Response, {ff 9-16.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

asking the Claimants’ Plants to return payments received for the energy already

produced and sold”.”!

b. Tax Treatment of Damages

The Claimants note that the Experts disagree on how a ‘tax shield’ that may result from
an entity’s net operating losses, asset impairments, and depreciations would affect the

quantification of the Claimants’ damages.”

Compass Lexecon takes into account the Claimants’ tax shield — the actual net operating
losses, impairments, and depreciations as reported in the Claimants’ 2013 annual account
—to determine the damages due to the Claimants to put the Claimants in the position they

would have been in but for the Respondent’s breaches.”*

BDO, to the contrary, justifies not considering the real-world tax obligations of the
Claimants that would apply in the “but for” because in its view (i) the net operating losses
or asset impairments are not related to the project performance; and (ii) the tax shield is
“not consistent with investment cost used to calculate the IRRs”.”*

The Claimants submit that BDO’s position is absurd and unsubstantiated because: (i) for
the application of the tax shield in the real world, it does not require to be linked to the
“project performance”; and (ii) the IRRs that inform the Tribunal’s findings in its
Decision are calculated on a pre-tax basis, and do not reflect the Claimants’ fiscal

obligations.”>

21 Cl. Comments, § 51.
22 Cl. Comments, § 55.
23. Cl. Comments, §| 61.
24 Cl. Comments, $f] 63-64.
25 Cl. Comments, $f] 64-65.

44,

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

c. Additional Sensitivities to Di No Res Judi

The Claimants have included two sensitivities, which in their view “are the only means
to achieve full reparation consistent with the Tribunal’s findings in the Decision.” They

are contained in Appendix A to the Experts’ Joint Report.°

First, the Claimants refer to the Tribunal’s choice of a 7.398% pre-tax rate of return as
the benchmark to assess the proportionality of the Disputed Measures. This determination
was on the basis that a 7% post-tax return — found relevant by the Tribunal after
appreciating the evidence of record?’ - associated with the tariff regime in Spain for

renewable energy and with the application of a margin of appreciation.”*

The Claimants point out that the Experts’ Joint Report shows the difference between the
7.398 pre-tax rate and the 7% post-tax return, and submit that the Tribunal should award
damages applying a 7% post-tax return, even taking into account the margin of
appreciation, which the Tribunal found should not be particularly wide.”?

This, submit the Claimants, would be in line with the findings by the Hydro Energy,
RREEF, NextEra and PV Investors tribunals that Spain was required to ensure that

investors would receive a reasonable rate of return.*°

Secondly, the Claimants also refer to the Tribunal’s choice of “the discount rate of 7.61%

advanced by the Claimants”?!

, arguing that it should apply to the additional cash flows
received by the Claimants’ plants to achieve a reasonable return, and submit that this is

an inadvertent error and that the discount rate ought to be the WACC of 6.06%.

The Claimants refute the Respondent’s argument that the appropriate minimum return

and the discount rate are res judicata and can only be subject to review until the rendering

26 Cl, Comments, § 8.

27 Cl. Response, § 3.

28 Cl, Comments, {ff 9, 67, 82.

2° Cl, Comments, ff 9, 67-68, 76, 86.

*° Cl. Comments, ff] 70-75 (footnotes omitted).

3! Cl. Comments, § 89, citing Decision, {| 744, in turn citing Cl. Mem., {| 568, and Compass Report, Table 11.
22 Cl. Comments, {9 89-94.

10

of the Award. This, on the following grounds: (i) the failure to make their submission on
this matter might be considered as a waiver under ICSID Arbitration Rule 27, and as
found by the ad hoc Committee in Lemire, it would be contrary to procedural economy
and would encourage the parties to submit their objections later as an attack to an
unfavourable award;* (ii) the Claimants contend that they only wish that the damages
resulting from the disproportionate impact that the Disputed Measures had on certain of
the Claimants’ plants, as found by the Tribunal, be quantified correctly, and submit that
they do not wish to relitigate the questions already decided by the Tribunal;** and
(iii) the Claimants submit that “the Tribunal’s finding on proportionality cannot be
considered res judicata before the necessary assessment of damages has been carried

out”, and invoke the RREEF decision in support.*>

50. The Claimants request the Tribunal to award damages in the amount of EUR 60,531,860,
on the basis of (i) Compass Lexecon’s computation of damages; (ii) a 7% post-tax return;

and (iii) a discount rate of 6.06%.°°

51. Alternatively, the Claimants also provide three other scenarios with Compass Lexecon’s
computation of damages in the event that the Tribunal elects to award damages applying

other rates of return and discount:

a) Damages of EUR 58.55 million, applying a 7% post-tax return, and a 7.61%

discount rate;

b) Damages of EUR 48.55 million, applying 7.398% pre-tax return, and a 6.06%

discount rate; and

33 Cl Response, | 5, citing Joseph Charles Lemire Joseph Charles Lemire v. Republic of Ukraine, CSID Case No.
ARB/06/18, Decision on Annulment, 8 July 2013, 203 (“Lemire”) (CL-0207).

CL. Response, 4 7.

35 Cl. Response, § 8, citing RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux
S.a rl. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of
Quantum, 30 November 2018, | 472 (“RREEF”) (RL-0099).

3 Cl. Comments, {ff 95-96.

ll

52.

53.

54.

55.

c) Damages of EUR 47.19 million, applying a 7.398% pre-tax return, and a 7.61%

discount rate.*”

(2) The Respondent’s Position
a. The Alternative Legal Interpretation of the Tribunal’s Decision

According to the Respondent “the issues addressed in the Tribunal’s Decision may have
not been accurately interpreted by the Parties’ economic expert teams.” This, because

they identify the term repayment with the “Claw-back” as the “first head of damages.”>*

In the event that the Tribunal has not considered those two terms as synonyms, the
Experts’ Joint Report’s conclusions regarding the “first head of damages” should be
adjusted, by providing to the Tribunal, at its request, with a table disaggregating the two

heads of damages.*?

The Respondent submits that the earnings accrued during the Interim Period were
deducted from the subsequent CNMC settlements, and that Claimants have provided no
evidence, such as wire transfers or bank receipts, that “these settlements amounted to any

effective repayment from the plants to the CNMC.”*?

Notwithstanding its view that the Claimants had the burden of proof, the Respondent in
light of the Claimants’ insistence that there had been “payments in cash”, requested the
CNMC to provide information regarding the settlements for the Claimants’ plants from
June 2014 onwards. From a preliminary examination of the documents that the
Respondent was able to obtain, the Respondent says in its Response “that indeed there
may have been some repayments but it is not in a position to quantify them”, and suggests
that the Tribunal directs the experts to analyze the relevant CNMC settlements, which

the Respondent could provide.”!

57 Cl. Comments, § 97.

38 Resp. Observations, § 12.

» Resp. Observations, {ff 13-14, 28.

4° Resp. Observations, {]j 17-18. Resp. Response, | 4.
4 Resp. Response, §f] 5-7.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

The Respondent further explains that the balance of the settlements was always positive,
because there were certain deductions that applied, which could not exceed 50% of the

payable amount.*?

According to the Respondent, if “the term repayment is to be understood as a transfer of
money from the plants to the Kingdom of Spain, the first head of damages should be

reduced to zero euros.”?

b. Claw-back

The Respondent notes the Experts’ disagreement as to the number of plants subject to
Claw-back, with (i) BDO limiting the damages to the 10 plants which no longer receive
subsidies, indicated by the Claimants and subject to the Tribunal’s Decision; and
(ii) Compass Lexecon’s position that the compensation should include “all of the plants

subject to the Claw-back”.*

The Respondent further asserts that there is a disagreement as to the interpretation to be

given to the Tribunal’s Decision, which is a legal issue.**

The Respondent recalls that the Tribunal had rejected in its Decision the Claimants’
argument on the retroactivity of the Disputed Measures, with the exception of the 10
plants and the alleged repayment of EUR 19.4 million to which the Claimants’ had
initially referred to, but that now claim such reference was only “illustrative”.

This conclusion, argues the Respondent, is res judicata and should not be discussed.*°

The Respondent notes that the Claimants now argue that the damages should not be
limited to the 10 plants, but to all of the Claimants’ plants which experienced a similar
economic effect. Although they limit their calculations to 21 of them, excluding the three

remaining plants which received additional income, and were thus compensated during

* Resp. Observations, { 19.

* Resp. Observations, § 24.

+ Resp. Observations, § 30. Resp. Response, {[ 10, citing Cl. Observations, 40.
45 Resp. Observations, 4 31.

4 Resp. Observations, {¥] 32-35, 39. Resp. Response, {ff 12, 16.

13

the subsequent settlements.*” This — argues the Respondent — is a further inconsistency,
given that it would seem from the Claimants’ argument that “it is irrelevant whether the
settlement of the amounts received was done by offsetting the amounts received against

future revenues or by transferring them in cash to the CNMC.”*8

62. The Respondent argues that (i) the Tribunal, referring to the EUR 19.4 million alleged
by the Claimants, only ordered the Experts the “verification and precise quantification
of the amounts paid”; (ii) the Tribunal’s conclusion that the 10 plants were an exception
to its general finding on retroactivity, does not extend to the rest of the plants and is res
judicata; (iii) in any event, the Claimants’ new argument is belated; (iv) as BDO has
explained, the rest of the plants are receiving “special payments that will allow those

949,

plants to yield a reasonable pre-tax return and (v) as a result, the compensation

should be limited to the 10 plants to which the Tribunal referred to in its Decision.*°

c. Amounts Related to the Coverage Ratio

63. The Respondent recalls that pursuant to Third Transitory Provision of RDL 9/2013
(subsequently Act 24/2013), the payments made were “payments on account’, with the
final amount to be paid to the plants to be adjusted in accordance with the new regime.
Accordingly, from January to May 2014, the plants received a percentage of the tariffs
resulting from the application by the CNMC of the “coeficiente de cobertura” — the

Coverage Ratio.*!

64. The Respondent explains that (i) to determine the “precise quantification of the amount
paid’, BDO referred to the amount actually paid and subsequently deducted, whereas
Compass Lexecon considered the amounts that, in their view, should have been paid to

the Claimants; and (ii) that both Experts “agree that the amounts related to the Coverage

47 Resp. Response, 13.

48 Resp. Response, {ff 13-14, citing Cl. Observations, §§j 28-29.
4 Experts’ Joint Report, § 19.

50 Resp. Observations, #f] 39-41. Resp. Response, {ff 15-20.

5! Resp. Observations, #f] 43-44.

®2 Resp. Observations, 45.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Ratio were never received by the Claimants and consequently were never paid back to
the Respondent”.*°.

According to the Respondent, Compass Lexecon referred in its calculations to the amount
that would be due from January 2014 to May 2014 “in the absence of the Disputed
Measures’, when the Tribunal had in fact directed the Experts to quantify the amount

paid.™*

The Respondent makes reference to the alleged deferral payment of sums pursuant to
Article 19 of Law 24/2013, noting that (i) the Tribunal did not find such provision to be
in breach of the Respondent’s obligations under the ECT, accordingly, the coverage ratio
should be taken into account for the actual and but for scenarios; (ii) following the
enactment of Law 24/2013, the monthly payments to the plants were made in accordance
with the “coverage ratio”, subject to the existence of funds in the Electricity System;
(iii) the plants were only entitled to payments under RDL 9/2013, as RD 661/2007 had
been abrogated; (iv) the plants received on a provisional basis, “the tariffs which would
have been due pursuant to Royal Decree 661/2007 and which were to be settled after the
enactment of Ministerial Order 1045/2014.”°5

Finally, the Respondent submits that the amounts exceeding the coverage ratio in force
at each of the monthly settlements were never paid, were not subject to repayment, and

must not be considered by the Tribunal under the first head of damages.*°

As a result, the Respondent submits that the Claw-back amount should not exceed EUR

14.82 million.*”

53 Resp. Observations, §] 46. Experts’ Joint Report, 431.
54 Resp. Observations, §f] 50, 53.
55 Resp. Response, {ff 25-30.

56

Resp. Response, § 34.

57 Resp. Observations, {{ 55. Joint Report, Table 3 (“Summary of Alternative Claw-back Amounts - In EUR million”).
The Respondent notes that this would need the final amount to be paid, but it should be adjusted in accordance with
the Experts’ Joint Report, § 13 (“The Experts agree that whatever the amounts found that should have been paid to the
Claimants’ Plants, either under the first head of damages or the second head of damages, these do not necessarily
translate 100% into damages to the Claimants.”).

15

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

d. Amounts Related to the Income Tax

The Respondent also notes the Experts’ disagreement on the inputs to calculate the
income tax payable in the actual and but-for scenario: (i) the accumulated negative
operating losses (“NOL”) at the end of 2012; (ii) the 2013 amount of impairments; and

(iii) the amount of depreciation.**

The Respondent submits in such regard that (i) “the tax assessment must be consistent
with the cash flows employed to calculate the returns of the Claimants’ plant’*?; (ii) the
above-indicated inputs “cannot be taken into account if they are not related to the project

or are not consistent with the inputs employed to calculate the IRRs.”®

e. Additional Sensitivities to Damages. Res Judicata

The Respondent makes reference to the “Additional Sensitivities to Damages” included
by Compass Lexecon, as Appendix A of the Experts’ Joint Report, specifically: (i) a
reasonable rate of return based on a post-tax 7% instead of the pre-tax 7.398% chosen by
the Tribunal; and (ii) to discount damages to 20 June 2014 at the Plants’ WACC of 6.06%
instead of the cost of equity of 7.61%.°!

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal already decided in its Decision the matters
concerning (i) the reasonable rate of return, and (ii) the discount rate, that such findings

are res judicata , and therefore cannot be revisited.

The Respondent, relying in ConocoPhilllips, Electrabel and RREEF,® contends that
(i) the Tribunal’s conclusions in its Decision are res-judicata; (ii) they are to be

incorporated in the Award; (iii) it is not possible for a tribunal to reconsider the

58 Resp. Observations, | 56. Experts’ Joint Report, {{] 36-37. Resp. Response, 35.

59 Resp. Observations, §] 57. Experts’ Joint Report, 4 48.

© Resp. Observations, §] 58.

6! Resp. Observations, § 2.

© Resp. Observations, {§ 3-6.

3 ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, (CSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on Respondent Request for Reconsideration, 10 March
2014, § 21 (“ConocoPhillips”) (RL-0102); Electrabel S.A. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB 07/19, Decision on
Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 30 November 2012, 4110.1 (“Electrabel”) (RL-0002); and RREEF, § 209
(RL-0099).

16

conclusions it reached in a previous decision; and (iv) those previous decisions can only
be subject to review afterwards, within the limits of the post-award remedies under the

ICSID Convention.“

74. According to the Respondent, the Claimants are relying on an alleged tax shield,
unrelated to the project performance, to avoid the tax burden. It is the Respondent’s
position that the benefit of such a tax shield “should be limited to those NOLs and asset

impairments generated directly from the operating performance of the plants.”

75. As to the reasonable rate of return, the Respondent recalls that the Tribunal found in its
Decision that 7.398% was “an appropriate minimum figure to protect against and
excessive and disproportionate burden being placed on investors such as the Claimants
with respect to the Respondent’s need to address the Tariff Deficit.” © Such decision,
argues the Respondent, is res judicata, and the debate on this issue should not be

re-open.”

76. The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ request for the Tribunal to rectify the
7.398% benchmark is procedurally inadmissible, their arguments inaccurate, and should

be rejected, with the relevant costs allocated to the Claimants.

77. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ reliance on the approach followed by the
Nextera® and RREEF” tribunals regarding the reasonable rate of return is misplaced.
Although the Tribunal was aware of the findings of those tribunals when it issued its

Decision, it nevertheless chose a different benchmark.”!

© Resp. Observations, §§] 7-8.

© Resp. Response, § 39.

& Resp. Response, § 41, citing the Tribunal’s Decision, § 599(d).
® Resp. Response, §] 44.

& Resp. Response, §f] 45-46.

 NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain Holdings B.V. v. Kingdom of Spain, (CSID Case
No. ARB/14/11, Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Quantum Principles, 12 March 2019 (CL-0195).

7 RREEF (CL-0134).
7! Resp. Response, 447.

78. Regarding the appropriateness or not of the return, and the margin of appreciation to be
allowed to the Respondent in accordance with the Tribunal’s Decision, the Respondent
submits that the Claimants’ reliance on the RREEF and PV Investors” benchmarks is

inapposite.”?

79. The Respondent criticizes the Claimants for (i) their attempt to have the Tribunal
reconsider its finding of the pre-tax 7.398% as the reasonable rate of return; and
(ii) providing new calculations on the assumption that the Tribunal had erred in its
findings; and submits that there is no need for the Tribunal to reconsider its conscious

and well-reasoned decision as to the benchmark to be applied.”

80. The Respondent further contends that the Claimants’ request to revisit the Tribunal’s
decision as to the 7.61% discount rate — originally advanced by the Claimants - to be
applied “with respect to cash flows that would have been received only in the future”,”°

is procedurally inadmissible and wrong from an economic point of view.’°

B. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
(1) Res judicata

81. | Given its potential importance to both the heads of compensation that have been ordered,
the Tribunal considers first the Parties’ contentions on the res judicata (or otherwise)

effect of the Decision.

82. As noted above, it is the Respondent’s position, referring to the decisions in
ConocoPhillips, Electrabel and RREEF, that the principle of res judicata applies to the
Decision with the result that it is not open to the Tribunal to seek to revisit matters that it

has already decided.”’ The Claimants make three points in response.

The PV Investors v. Kingdom of Spain, PCA Case No. 2012-2014, Final Award, 28 February 2020.
3 Resp. Response, § 48.

74 Resp. Response, ff 50-51.

5 Tribunal’s Decision, 744.

% Resp. Response, f] 52, 54-55.

7 Cl. Comments, §7.

83. As an initial point, the Claimants contend by reference to Lemire v. Ukraine that they
may be positively required to object to the terms and content of the Decision now so as
to avoid a later conclusion — at an annulment stage — that they had made some form of
waiver.’”* The Tribunal notes, however, that Lemire concerned a number of alleged
procedural violations which, according to the annulment committee, could and should
have been raised earlier than in the annulment proceedings so as to avoid a waiver
pursuant to Rule 27 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.” The current situation is in no way
analogous. There is no suggestion that the Tribunal engaged in any procedural
irregularities in its Decision and Rule 27 is not engaged. It was only in that context that
the annulment committee in Lemire was concerned with procedural economy and found
that, if there were no waiver, this “would mean it was correct for Respondent to leave
such procedural irregularity as future ammunition against a possible unfavourable

award” .®°

84. The Claimants also contend that there is an inescapable interaction between liability and
quantum in the present case and that, relying on RREEF v. Spain, the assessment of
damages must inform the finding on proportionality, such that the latter cannot be
considered res judicata before the necessary damages assessment has been carried out.*!
This is misconceived. The paragraph in RREEF relied upon concerns that tribunal’s
conclusion that it would “be in the position to determine whether the measures taken by
the Respondent have adversely affected the Claimants’ legitimate expectation for a
reasonable return only when it has evaluated the loss sustained by them, taking into
account all the relevant elements”.®? Thus the passage relied on tums on specific
conclusions as to the existence of a legitimate expectation to a reasonable return that this
Tribunal did not reach. This Tribunal does not understand the tribunal in RREEF as
intending to reflect a general principle that an assessment of proportionality must await

the detailed consideration of damages that forms part of a quantum phase. All will depend

*8 Cl. Response, § 5-6.

” Lemire, § 203.

* Lemire, § 216; cf. Cl. Response, 4 6.

8! Cl. Response, § 8, referring to RREEF, 472 (RL-0099).
© RREEF, § 472 (RL-0099).

19

on the individual case. In the current case, the Tribunal has already made its finding on

disproportionality.

85. As to res judicata more specifically, the Claimants do not contend that cases that the
Respondent relies on — ConocoPhillips, Electrabel and RREEF — were wrongly decided,
but they do portray these as confined. According to the Claimants, these cases “concern
the possibility of revisiting a decision on jurisdiction or a finding as to the applicable
law” whereas, by contrast, the Claimants “do not seek to challenge the Tribunal’s

findings on these issues or relitigate a question already determined by the Tribunal”.

86. While the finding on res judicata in RREEF may be seen as confined in the way the
Claimants contend,** the Tribunal does not consider that either the analysis or the finding
on res judicata in the ConocoPhillips case is confined to issues of jurisdiction or
applicable law. The ConocoPhillips decision at issue concerned the res judicata status of
a series of determinations made in a Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits dated
3 September 2013, deciding a number of matters including as to the rejection and
acceptance of various claims as to breach of treaty. All the determinations — without any
distinction as to jurisdiction or liability — were found to be res judicata. Referring to the
Electrabel case, the tribunal stated in a passage to which the Respondent now refers, and

the Claimants also:

“Those decisions [seven determinations on jurisdiction and liability in the
Decision of 3 September 2013 on Jurisdiction and the Merits] in accordance
with practice are to be incorporated in the Award. It is established as a matter
of principle and practice that such decisions that resolve points in dispute
between the Parties have res judicata effect. ‘They are intended to be final
and not to be revisited by the Parties or the Tribunal in any later phase of their
arbitration proceedings.” *°

87. The tribunal then went on to say why no different conclusion could be reached by

reference to the Convention or the Arbitration Rules:

3 Cl. Response, 4 7.
“ RREEF, § 209 (CL-0134).
85 ConocoPhillips, 4,21 (RL-0102).

20

“Do the provisions of the Convention and Rules to which the Respondent
referred make any difference to that position? The Tribunal does not think so,
for two reasons. The first is that those provisions are about procedural matters.
Article 44 of the ICSID Convention makes explicit the tribunal’s powers to
address procedural issues not dealt with in the Convention or the Rules. And
ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(2) has a much more limited function. Their
essentially procedural character appears from the cases on which the
Respondent relied. Those concerning Article 44 were about stay, allowing
amicus curiae submissions and participation of counsel. Article 44, it is
frequently said, is designed to enable gaps in the procedure to be filled. It
cannot be seen as conferring a broad unexpressed power of substantive
decision.

That gap filling character of the provision relates to the second reason for the
Tribunal’s conclusion that those procedural provisions cannot be the source
of a power to reconsider. The overall structure and the detailed provisions of
the ICSID Convention were plainly designed to provide for review or actions
in respect of decisions of a tribunal only once the Award was rendered. There
is no gap to be filled by the power proposed here. Section 3 of Part IV of the
ICSID Convention sets out the Powers and Functions of the Tribunal, with
nothing among its provisions even hinting at such a power. Section 4 deals
succinctly with the Award itself. And it is only in Section 5 that powers are
conferred on the Tribunal to interpret and revise the Award and on an ad hoc
Committee to annul an Award on prescribed grounds. It is in those ways and
those alone that decisions such as that in September 2013 can be questioned,
changed or set aside. Those various post-award remedies are, of course,
available to both Parties. Those provisions and that structure exclude the
possibility of the proposed powers of reconsideration being read into the
Convention. That reading of the Convention is also supported by the drafting
history mentioned above (paragraph 18).”*°

88. Neither this conclusion nor the underlying reasoning is challenged. Further, neither the
conclusion nor the underlying reasoning can be seen as confined to the possibility of
revisiting a decision on jurisdiction or a finding as to applicable law. Hence, on the
Claimants’ case, the remaining question is whether the Claimants are correct in
contending that they “do not seek ... to relitigate a question already determined by the
Tribunal” 8’ That question is considered as appropriate by reference to the individual

heads of claim in sections (2) and (3) below.

86 I. 99) 22-23.
57 Cl. Response, 7.

21

89. For completeness, the Tribunal notes that, at the passage in Electrabel to which the
Respondent has referred,** the tribunal stated its intention that the decision that it was
making “be final”, and did not refer to res judicata. Within the scheme established by the
ICSID Convention, this may be seen as a more accurate characterisation. According to

the analysis in Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania (TANESCO):

“(313] Decisions of tribunals are of course binding within the scope of the
proceedings, but this does not make them res judicata. That is so with
procedural orders and provisional measures as pointed out earlier. An
essential feature of res judicata is that the judgment in question produces
effects on the parties outside the proceedings in which it is granted. But
decisions of tribunals only have effect within the proceedings until they have
been incorporated into the final award.

[314] This conclusion is supported by the structure and architecture of the
ICSID Convention itself. Contracting States have an obligation to recognize
only an award as binding (Art. 54(1)); recognition and enforcement is
contemplated only in respect of an award (Art. 54(2)); only awards can be
challenged through annulment proceedings (Art. 52). The proper inference to
be drawn from these provisions is that only the Contracting State that is a
party to the proceedings is under an obligation to recognize decisions of a
tribunal as binding. Thus, decisions cannot have legal consequences outside
the ICSID proceedings in which they are issued (i.e. they cannot be
recognized and enforced and they cannot be challenged through annulment).
Indeed, if decisions were res judicata before incorporation in the final award,
then the requirement of incorporation into the final award under Article 48(3)
would be redundant. ...

[318] The Tribunal is of the view that it is incorrect to characterize the
decisions of ICSID tribunals, as opposed to their awards, as res judicata. They
are binding within the scope of the proceedings but do not impose obligations
upon the parties or other Contracting States outside the proceedings as is the
case with awards that are res judicata.”

88 Resp. Observations, § 7, referring to Electrabel, § 10.1 (RIL-0002): “This Decision is made in regard only to the
first phase of these arbitration proceedings, relating to extant issues of jurisdiction and liability; and it is not made in
regard to any issue of quantum (including interest). Although necessarily described as a “Decision” and not an
“Award” under the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rules, the several decisions and reasons contained in
this Decision are intended by the Tribunal to be final and not to be re-visited by the Parties or the Tribunal in any later
phase of these arbitration proceedings.”

8° Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania (TANESCO), ICSID Case No ARB/10/20, Award, 12
September 2016, §f] 312-313, 318 (*TANESCO”). See also Burlington Resources Inc v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID
Case No ARB/08/5, Decision on Reconsideration and Award, 7 February 2017, §{ 86-89 (“Burlington”).

22

90. On this basis, prior determinations such as made in the Decision would be seen as binding
on the Parties, but not res judicata as such. This does not in any way mean that such
determinations could be revisited at will: they still bind the Parties. Moreover, as usefully
explained by the tribunal in Burlington Resources Inc v. Republic of Ecuador, which

endorsed the approach of the tribunal in the Standard Chartered Bank case:

“Tn the words of the second Amco Asia tribunal, the approach is stated as a
general principle “that a right, question, or fact distinctly put in issue and
distinctly determined cannot be disputed”. Whatever the justification, these
tribunals express the opinion that an issue resolved once in the course of an
arbitration should in principle not be revisited in the same proceedings.
Irrespective of res judicata, the rationale for this opinion is obvious: a
contrary view would defeat the purpose of efficient dispute settlement,
entailing constant re-litigation of issues already resolved, with unavoidable
adverse consequences in terms of increased costs and length of proceedings.
In addition, the possibility of re-litigating issues would jeopardize legal
certainty and ultimately undermine the confidence of the users in the
system.”°?

91. The Tribunal has not been referred to the Standard Chartered Bank and Burlington
Resources cases and, in the current case, it does not see the slightly different approach
there adopted as material. While the Tribunal notes the conclusion reached by the
tribunals in Standard Chartered Bank and Burlington Resources that it may be
appropriate for an ICSID tribunal to re-open a decision in exceptional circumstances such
as, by analogy, where the circumstances would justify revision under Article 51 of the

Convention,*! no such circumstances have been put before the Tribunal.
(2) The Tribunal’s determination with respect to the repayment of any sums already

paid to the Claimants in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and
Order IET 1025/2014

92. The Parties have competing visions as to what the Tribunal decided with respect to the
repayment of any sums already paid to the Claimants in the period between the adoption
of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014. It is appropriate to start with the dispositif in

the Decision, pursuant to which the Tribunal decided that:

° Burlington, 4 91.
°! TANESCO, §§ 319-322; Burlington, {f 92-106.

23

“the Respondent has breached Article 10(1) ECT (i) to the extent that it has
procured repayment by the Claimants of sums previously paid by the
Respondent under the regime in place prior to adoption of the Disputed
Measures; ... .”°?

93. Consistent with basic principle, this must be understood in light of the Tribunal’s
reasoning on this issue. In this respect, at paragraphs 620-621 of the Decision, the

Tribunal found:

“As to the contention that EUR 19.4 million was paid by the ten plants that
do not receive a Special Payment under the new regime in the period between
the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014, and that this sum
subsequently had to be repaid, the Tribunal considers this to be of a different
order. This contention was made in the Reply and in oral opening and closing,
while the only response has been to accept the principle that there could be
no recovery of sums already paid, as follows:

“Something is forbidden in the international law, that is the idea of
claiming excessive premiums already received. Those cannot be
claimed and cannot be received by law.

If it did happen, then these can be recouped and proceedings may be
entered before the Supreme Court.”

The Tribunal does consider that it would be a subversion of the prior legal
regime, and in breach of the FET standard in Article 10(1), for the Respondent
to require repayment of sums already paid, including in the period between
the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014. The Claimants say
that EUR 19.4 million nonetheless had to be repaid. That fact has not been
challenged. It follows that, subject to verification and precise quantification
of the amount paid, there has been a breach of Article 10(1) ECT, and the
Claimants are entitled to return of all sums repaid.”

94, It is this conclusion to which the Tribunal referred at paragraphs 729(i) and 731 of the

Decision where it stated:

“(...) The Tribunal has found a breach of Article 10(1) in this case, but this is
a breach so far as concerns only —

°2 See Decision, {| 748(2).

24

95.

96.

(i) the procurement of repayment of any sums already paid to the
Claimants in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and
Order IET 1025/2014; (...)

As to breach (i) identified above, the Claimants say that EUR 19.4 million

had to be repaid, which has not been challenged. All that is required is

verification and precise quantification of amounts paid.”
The reasoning at paragraphs 620-621 concerns a specific contention by the Claimants:
that EUR 19.4 million was paid by the ten plants that do not receive a Special Payment
under the new regime in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET
1025/2014, and that this sum subsequently had to be repaid. This is confirmed by the
references to which the Tribunal referred in a footnote to paragraph 604 (footnote 728),
i.e. Claimants’ Reply, paragraph 478 referring in turn to Compass Lexecon, Second
Report, paragraph 149, both of which concern the 10 plants that no longer receive any
‘special payment’ and the EUR 19.4 million that allegedly had to be repaid in respect of
these. In this footnote, the Tribunal also referred to the Claimants’ oral opening at Day
1/146, where a submission was made with respect to this sum of EUR 19.4 million, i.e.

concerning the 10 plants only, as follows:

“The June 2014 Order which sets out the details is then applied as if it were

there from July 2013, so however you define retroactive, I think that probably

ticks the box! And this required RWE to pay back some 19 million in

revenues, €19.4 million in revenues, because they continued to pay under 661

in that period of uncertainty, and then once the June Order comes in, it’s

treated as if it were there from July 2013, obviously there is a big cut, and

RWE then had to pay back, just for that 11-month period, €19.4 million. You

can see this in the second Compass report, paragraph 149.”
The Tribunal found in favour of the Claimants so far as concerns the specific contention
that had been put, concerning the alleged repayment of EUR 19.4 million with respect to
the 10 plants which the Tribunal regarded as not having been challenged by the
Respondent. It follows that, correctly understood, the determination at paragraph 748(2)
of the Decision is limited in this respect. It is plain that, given that the alleged figure of
EUR 19.4 million had not yet been subjected to verification and precise quantification, it
was omitted from the dispositif: There is no basis on which now to re-open this

determination. It was not motivated by any error of fact but by the Claimants’ case as

25

97.

98.

pleaded, which — very understandably — drew specific attention to the 10 plants that no
longer received a special payment under the New Regime and that had even been required
(allegedly) to repay back certain sums received. The Claimants’ deployment of the EUR
19.4 million figure was not, and was not understood as, merely illustrative. Further, in
the context of the question of whether there had been some form of total and unreasonable
change to, or subversion of, the legal regime,* the Tribunal’s specific focus on these 10
plants — which were not to benefit from the New Regime and were moreover allegedly
required to repay sums received under the prior regime — could in no way be seen as

inadvertent.°>

The only question left open by the Decision is precisely what sums — if any — did the

Claimants procure repayment with respect to these 10 plants.

As to this, it is common ground that, in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013
and Order IET 1025/2014, the 10 plants were paid in accordance with the prior Special
Regime (established by RD 661/2007). In the period subsequent to Order IET 1025/2014,

96

Spain issued so-called negative invoices” and recovered certain sums that it had paid by

deducting these from sums that were due in respect of electricity that had been generated

by the 10 plants. As explained by the Claimants:

“Thus, the Claimants’ plants were issued negative invoices totalling EUR
31,564,458. This matches the figure for the Claw-back amount payable
excluding the impact of the coverage ratio calculated by BDO and Compass
Lexecon and set out in Table 3 of the Joint Report.

The negative invoices issued to each plant had to be settled by repayments
being made to the CNMC. This transfer of money to the CNMC was effected
by the CNMC appropriating the cash that the plants were entitled to receive
from the sale of the electricity they had produced in the months following
June 2014. This was even applied to the 10 plants no longer entitled to receive

3 Cf. Cl. Comments, § 36.

% See Decision, {| 610.

°5 The approach of the RREEF and other tribunals dealing with allegations of impermissible retroactivity with respect
to other claims concerning RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014 is not relevant to the current question, which
concerns what the Tribunal decided in its Decision. Cf. Cl. Comments, §] 15. Moreover, as the Respondent correctly
points out, the Tribunal expressly noted at fn. 751 of the Decision that its conclusion on retroactivity differed from
that reached at RREEF, $f] 326-329 (RL-0099).

© C-0347.

26

99.

100.

any incentive under the New Regime. There can be no question that power

plants in Spain are entitled to receive payment for the electricity they sell at

the market price on the open market. However, instead of allowing the 10

plants to keep the cash earned for the electricity sold, the CNMC appropriated

up to half of the revenues earned by the Claimants each month to satisfy the

repayment obligation imposed by the New Regime.”®”
The Tribunal has no doubt that this was a form of “procuring repayment”®® (as indeed is
consistent with the approach of both Parties’ experts in the Experts’ Joint Report).
It makes no difference that “the plants did not have to transfer any money to the
Respondent”.*? As a matter of economic reality and, more important, within the meaning
of what was ordered by the Tribunal, the repayment of sums can be procured just as
readily by deducting such sums from debts that are due as by requiring repayment in the
form of a transfer, and the Respondent’s so-called “alternative legal interpretation of the

Tribunal’s Decision”!

can accordingly be rejected in short order. It is inconsistent both
with the approach of the Respondent’s own expert and the plain meaning of the dispositif

in the Decision.

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has stated that the figures submitted by the
Claimants at paragraph 13 of their Response and the so-called negative invoices were
introduced by the Claimants without leave, and has requested “that, if the Tribunal is
minded to concur with the alternative legal interpretation proposed by the Kingdom of
Spain, Respondent is afforded an opportunity to verify Claimants’ new evidence and
submit brief observations on the figures presented by Claimants in yesterday’s
submission”.'°! As follows from the above, the Tribunal is not so minded, and anyway
does not accept the submission as to the figures and the invoices being submitted without
leave. In its Observations, the Respondent stated its case that there had been no
repayments (expressly noting at footnote 21 that it had no objection to Claimants

presenting evidence of alleged payments). The Claimants submitted the so-called

°7 Cl. Response, {fj 14-15 (footnotes omitted).

%8 See Decision, {| 748(2).

°° Cf. Resp. Observations, § 18.

100 Resp. Observations, section III.

101 See Respondent’s email of 20 May 2020.

27

negative invoices with their Response as evidence that payment was required from the
plants.' There has been no formal objection to the admission of these invoices onto the
record of this arbitration, and any such objection would be untenable because (i) the
invoices were submitted as responsive to a position adopted by the Respondent in its
Observations and (ii) the Claimants contend, and the Tribunal accepts, that the Parties’

experts relied on the invoices to prepare the Experts’ Joint Report and that the figures at

paragraph 13 of the Claimants’ Response are contained within the Report model.!°

101. In any event, the Respondent accepts that the sums at issue were deducted by it at
source,!* and the sums as to which repayment was procured have been verified and

quantified in the Experts’ Joint Report.

102. The last issue to be considered under this heading concerns the amounts related to the so-
called coverage ratio. The operation of the coverage ratio is explained at paragraphs

22-23 of the Experts’ Joint Report as follows:

“Following the enactment of 2013 Electricity Law (Article 19), starting in
2014 a deferred payment system was introduced under which the revenues
accrued by renewable energy source (RES) generators, including all of
Claimants’ Plants, were to be paid gradually and with a delay rather than upon
demand. Under this system, the regulated revenues accrued in a month are
received in successive monthly instalments. The amount of the accrued
revenues paid up to any particular point in time is driven by the so called
“coverage ratio” (“coeficiente de cobertura” in Spanish).The coverage ratio
is calculated on a monthly basis as the ratio of accumulated costs and the
accumulated revenues of the Spanish Electricity System (SES) over the year.
This ratio reflects that there is a lag between the moment regulated revenues
of the SES are accrued and when such revenues are collected by the SES.
Over a year, as the SES collects revenues, the coverage ratio increases
eventually reaching 100% (at such point in time RES generators finish
collecting 100% of their accrued revenues).

At the time the calculations of the claw-back amounts were made, June 2014,
the coverage ratio was 60%. That is, RES producers, including Claimants’

2 Cl, Response, | 13.
63 See Claimants’ email of 20 May 2020.
104 Cf. Resp. Observations, {| 18.

28

103.

104.

105.

Plants, had received only 60% of the regulated revenues they had accrued
between January 2014 and May 2014 (both inclusive).”
The thrust of the Claimants’ complaint is then that “in June 2014 the deferred payment
was cancelled and the Claimants never received the debt that was owed to them. ... In
essence through the June 2014 Order, Spain unilaterally cancelled a debt that had
crystallised and was owing to the Claimants in consideration for electricity that the

Claimants’ plants had already produced and sold.”!°°

However, as the Respondent correctly points out, “both Parties agree that the amounts
related to the coverage ratio were never received by Claimants and consequently were
never paid back to Respondent”.'°° By definition, such amounts, i.e. allegedly due
amounts that were never paid to the Claimants’ plants, fall outside the scope of the
recovery as defined at paragraph 748(2) of the Decision which concerns “procured
repayment by the Claimants of sums previously paid by the Respondent under the regime
in place prior to adoption of the Disputed Measures”. As a further and separate matter,
the Claimants’ description of the deferred payments as a crystallised debt appears very
questionable in light of the fact that the payments in this period were anyway made on

account pursuant to the Third Transitory Provision of RDL 9/2013.!°7

It follows that the Claimants are only entitled to recover in respect of the repayment of
sums actually paid in the first place, and only with respect to the 10 plants. This amount
has been calculated by the Experts as EUR 14.82 million.!°* As explained by the Experts,
however, this is not the sum to be awarded as damages as it is necessary to consider the
correct approach to taxation and the time value of money.'®? These are matters considered

in conjunction with the issues under the second head of damages.

5 C1, Comments, {ff 48-49.

Resp. Response, §] 32.

107 Resp. Response, { 26-27; R-0095.
108 See Experts’ Joint Report, Table 3.
109 See Experts’ Joint Report, section II.3.

29

(3) Damages arising out of the finding of breach through the disproportionate
nature of the new measures adopted
106. It is recalled that the Tribunal found a breach of Article 10 ECT arising out of the
disproportionate nature of the new measures adopted by the Respondent, with specific
respect to certain of the Claimants’ plants, i.e. the wind plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I
and II, Siglos I and II, and the hydro plant Cepeda. Three issues arise (two of which also

concern the damages to be awarded in respect of procured repayment).

107. The first issue concerns tax treatment, notably an alleged “tax shield” which, according
to the Claimants and their expert (Compass Lexecon), existed by virtue of available

reliefs in respect of net operating losses, asset impairments and depreciations.

108. There is a degree of common ground as to this issue. Both Parties accept that applicable
taxes must be taken into account so that the sum awarded as damages is net of such taxes,
and both Parties accept the availability in principle of a tax shield comprised of net
operating losses, asset impairments and depreciation.!!° Further, the Claimants’ starting
point, with which the Respondent does not take issue, is that the aim is to achieve full
reparation and to re-establish the situation that would have existed had the illegal acts not

been committed. !!!

109. The Tribunal accepts that, in principle, there should be no more accounting for tax than
there would be in what Compass Lexecon refers to as the “real world”.!!? If a tax shield
would indeed have been available, the Tribunal sees no reason in principle why account
should not be taken of it consistent with the Claimants’ position that: “Since the damages
must put the Claimants back in the position they would have been in but for Spain’s
breaches, the tax shield must also be taken into account in the experts’ damages

calculations.” !!3

110 Cl, Comments, {| 57-58; Resp. Observations, § 35; Experts’ Joint Report, $f 41 and 46.
111 Cl, Comments, 56.

'2 Experts’ Joint Report, 4 38.

113 Cl, Comments, § 61.

30

110. The Respondent’s position is that the inputs to the tax shield — net operating losses, asset
impairments and depreciation — cannot be taken into account unless these are (i) related
to project performance and (ii) consistent with the inputs employed to calculate the IRRs
at Table 10 of the Second Compass Lexecon report and the related spreadsheet (CLEX-
0235), which form the basis for the assessment of damages in this case pursuant to the

Decision.

111. As to (i), the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that what matters is whether the tax
shield existed under the applicable tax legislation in Spain (which is common ground)
and would have been applied to reduce taxable revenues (which the Tribunal is willing
to infer). In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it likewise accepts that there is
no requirement that the tax shield be linked to project performance for it to apply in the
real world.''* It has not been established to the Tribunal’s satisfaction that the supposed
lack of clarity as to whether net operating losses were generated by the plants, and
likewise the alleged fact that the 2013 asset impairments are referenced to other assets of
the Claimants (intangible assets, goodwill etc) apart from the tangible asset costs used
for the IRR calculation, would impact on the actual availability of the tax shield or lead

to any substantial inconsistency in the way that damages are being calculated.!'>

112. As to (ii), it is common ground between the Parties that the IRRs that form the basis of
the Tribunal’s decision are calculated on a pre-tax basis. On this basis, the Claimants say
that it is inevitable that these IRRs do not reflect the Claimants’ taxation obligations, and
that to determine on the basis of an alleged inconsistency that “the Claimants’ real world
taxation obligations should be ignored when assessing damages is absurd”,!!

By contrast, the Respondent contends that the calculations made to reach both sets of

damages must be consistent, including because damages under the first head of damages

operate to reduce damages under the second head because the receipt of the former would
increase the plants IRR. In this respect, it contends that the depreciation figures that

Compass Lexecon wishes to include in the tax shield are inconsistent with CLEX-0235

44 Cl, Comments, | 64.
45 Cf, Resp. Response, If] 38-39.
446 Cl, Comments, | 65.

31

as such figures include the depreciation of additional assets (intangible and goodwill,

etc).

113. The Tribunal considers that there is an air of unreality to the Respondent’s position. It is
not being said that, as a matter of the applicable Spanish tax legislation, it would be
impermissible to assess taxable returns depreciating only for tangible assets, but then
seek to include depreciation of intangible assets in a so-called tax shield. The issue is one
of alleged inconsistency, but the Tribunal accepts the Claimants’ basic proposition that
the Tribunal should be seeking to replicate the actual tax situation of the plants, and it
has not been established that the scope of depreciable assets must be precisely the same
when it comes to calculating returns and assessing taxes or that failure to do so leads to
a material discrepancy, including in the way the two heads of damages are assessed.

The Respondent’s submissions on this issue are rejected.

114. The second issue under this head of damages concerns the Claimants’ position that
damages should be awarded on the basis of a 7% post-tax return.!!? However, as the
Claimants correctly identify, the Tribunal concluded that a 7.398% pre-tax return was an
appropriate minimum rate of return,!'® and the Tribunal ordered damages on that basis
with respect to the disproportionality impacting certain of the Claimants’ plants, i.e. the
wind plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and the hydro plant Cepeda:
see the Decision at paragraphs 599 and 735-742. While the Claimants have focused on
paragraph 599(d) of the Decision, it is plain both in that sub-paragraph and in the
accompanying and later reasoning that the Tribunal decided that damages were to be
assessed on the basis of a 7.398% return. Indeed, at paragraph 599(e) of the Decision,

the following conclusion was reached:

“The Tribunal considers excessive and disproportionate the burden on the
Claimants’ Investments to the extent that even the 7.398% pre-tax return figure
is not reached so far as concerns the projected returns of actual plants.”

117 Cl, Comments, section 5.
118 Cl, Comments, § 81.

32

115. This conclusion is binding on the Parties, whether it is regarded as strictly res judicata
or not (see the discussion under (1) above). The Claimants’ suggestion that the
assessment of damages must inform the finding on proportionality, such that the latter
cannot be considered res judicata before the necessary damages assessment has been

carried out, is misconceived.!!?

116. As to whether there could be any basis for re-opening the conclusions in the Decision on
disproportionality, the Claimants’ position is that the Tribunal proceeded on the
appreciation that the 7.398% pre-tax figure and the 7% post-tax figure were roughly
equivalent, whereas this has now been shown to be incorrect through the Experts’ Joint
Report.'”° It is however clear from the paragraph that the Claimants cite (paragraph
599(d) of the Decision), as well as the Decision more generally, that the Tribunal was
well aware that these pre-tax and post-tax figures were different, and that the conclusion
reached at paragraph 599(e) was not based on any misapprehension. Thus, even if a
misapprehension as alleged could in theory justify re-opening the Decision, there could

be no basis for re-opening. The Claimants’ submissions on this issue are rejected.

117. The third issue concerns the discount rate which, as is common ground, the Tribunal
fixed at 7.61% by reference to the rate advanced by the Claimants in their Memorial, at
paragraph 568.'*! The Claimants may well be correct that the intention was, at this
particular paragraph, to refer to the discount rate as calculated by reference to the WACC,
i.e. 6.06%, not the cost of equity, i.e. 7.61%. However, the Claimants advanced a discount
rate both by reference to the WACC and the cost of equity. Thus it was explained in the

Memorial:

“Compass has made its DCF analysis following two approaches: A free cash
flows to firm (FCFF) approach, which is the cash flow available to the
company, based on revenues over the life of the project after deducting all
operating expenses, expenditures in working and fixed capital, discounted at
a rate that reflects the cost of raising capital, both equity and debt for a similar
company; and a free cash flow to equity (FCFE) approach, which also deducts

419 Cl, Response, 8.
20 C1, Comments, {ff 83-85.
'2! Decision, § 744, referring to Cl. Mem, § 568.

33

all debt interests and net debt capital payments, discounted at the rate that
reflects the cost of raising equity capital for a similar project.” !??

118. At paragraphs 568 and 570 of the Memorial, the Claimants then claimed damages by
reference to both discount approaches. The Claimants now argue that the WACC
discount is to be preferred and has been generally applied,'” but the Tribunal does not
see on what basis it can appropriately accord weight to such submissions.
Notwithstanding the possibility of error at paragraph 568 of the Memorial, the key point
is that the Claimants advanced two discount rates, and the Tribunal accepted the rate of
7.61% on the basis that it was advanced by the Claimants as was, and remains, correct.

Accordingly the Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ position on this issue.
(4) Conclusion in relation to the heads of damage ordered in the Decision
119, In light of the discussion above, the correct sum to be awarded to the Claimants, as

assessed in the Experts’ Joint Report and reflected at Table 1 thereof, is EUR 28,080,000.

120. The Tribunal wishes to express gratitude to the Experts for the extremely helpful and

accessible report that they produced.

IV.RESIDUAL ISSUES ON QUANTUM

121. As indicated in the Decision, the Tribunal has still to determine its position with respect

to the tax gross-up claimed by the Claimants, as well as interest and costs.

A. THE TAX GRoss-UP
(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

122. The Claimants submit that in order to achieve full reparation, they had previously

included a claim for tax gross-up to reflect the taxes payable on an award on damages. !*4

2 Cl. Mem, § 542.
23 Cl, Comments, ff] 83-85.
24 Cl, Comments, {| 105.

34

123.

124,

125.

Since such tax gross-up would need to be quantified following the Tribunal’s
determination on damages, the Claimants suggest instead that Tribunal “order Spain to
hold the Claimants harmless from any amount of tax due as a result of the Tribunal’s
Award.” The Claimants, in turn, would then request that damages be paid to the Second
Claimant, RWE Innogy Aersa S.A.U., which is a tax resident in Spain. The Claimants
submit that in the event that the Spanish tax authorities determine that tax is payable on
the Award, once the Award has been paid to the Second Claimant, Spain should pay the

Second Claimant the appropriate sum on the first demand of the Claimants. '?°

b. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the tax gross-up claim should be rejected because: (i) it
has not been justified or reasoned; (ii) no proof has been provided that an eventual award
would be subject to Spanish taxes; (iii) no expert tax report has been submitted to support
this claim; (iv) Article 21.1 of the ECT vetoes tax gross-up claims; and (v) it is

speculative, contingent and uncertain. !7°

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal notes that the position of the Claimants with respect to a tax gross-up has
evolved from payment of a specific additional sum to a request for an order of indemnity.
Yet it remains the case that the Claimants have failed adequately to demonstrate that the
Award will be subject to tax in Spain as is claimed. Although, in their Reply, the
Claimants relied on a 2007 tax ruling of Spain’s General Directorate of Taxation made
in response to a consultation in order to demonstrate that tax would be payable,'?’ the
Respondent contends that this and other such consultations are not applicable to this case
and are not in any way binding for the Spanish Tax Authority. As to this, it says that none
of the submitted consultations address the application of taxes to compensation granted

in an international arbitration award, and there is no identity between the facts and

25 Cl, Comments, 4106.
Resp.

27 Cl. Reply, | 732, referring to Exhibit C-0220, Binding tax ruling of the General Directorate of Taxation No. V0276-
07, dated 14 February 2007, p. 2.

Response, | 69.

35

126.

circumstances, as would be required for binding effect. The Respondent also notes that
the Claimants’ position is not supported by a tax expert.'?* In the light of these points,
which have not been satisfactorily rebutted, and the absence of any legal authority
supporting the case for a tax gross-up, the Tribunal does not consider that the case for a

tax gross-up has been made out.

Further, the Tribunal considers that Spain is correct to identify that there are two
Claimants in this case, and it appears to be accepted that the First Claimant would not be
subject to any taxation in Spain: hence the Claimants’ offer of an undertaking to request
that damages be paid to the Second Claimant.'”? This is not a practicable solution: the
Tribunal will be functus officio when it makes this Award, and therefore would not be in
place to ensure that such an undertaking was given or to ensure compliance. Moreover,

it has not been established that there is a problem that calls for a solution.

B. INTEREST

127.

128.

(1) The Parties’ Positions

a. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants request the Tribunal to award pre-award interest at the rate of 7.61% - the
cost of equity — compounded monthly. This, because (i) more than 95% of the estimated
damages correspond to losses of the Claimants’ equity stake; and (ii) awarding
compounded interest would be in line with the most recent practice of investment treaty

tribunals.'*°

The Claimants also request to be awarded post-award interest also at the rate of 7.61% ,

compounded monthly. Awarding post-award interest would be in line with what tribunals

28 Resp, Rejoinder, 1123, referring to Exhibit C-0245, Law 58/2003, of 17 December, on General Taxation, Article

89.1.

29 Cl, Comments, 106. See also Resp. Rejoinder, 1120.
30 Cl, Comments, 101.

36

129.

130.

131.

132.

Resp.
4 See e

35 Resp,
36 Cl, Comments, {| 103.

have awarded in other investor-state arbitrations against the Kingdom of Spain relating

to the same disputed measures. !*!

b. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the rate of 7.61% is associated to high risk investment, and
is not justified. '*?Accordingly, the Respondent asserts that the interest rate on the Spanish
Government bonds should be the one used to calculate both the pre-and post-award

interest. !33

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

Both Parties have approached the question of the appropriate interest rate for the damages
awarded on the basis that pre-Award and post-Award interest should be the same rate.
The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from such an approach, which is supported by

multiple cases. !*4

As to the appropriate interest rate, the Parties differ very widely: the Claimants argue for
a rate of 7.61% compounded monthly (on the basis of cost of equity approach), while the

Respondent argues for 0.6% (the return on a 2-year Spanish bond).

As to the rate, the Tribunal is mindful that interest rates have been historically low in the
period from June 2014, and does not consider it appropriate to award a rate as high as
7.61% as derived by the Claimants as the opportunity cost of equity. The Tribunal accepts
the Respondent’s position that such a rate would result in compensating the Claimants at
a rate linked to a high risk investment, when no such investment has been made.'** In
this respect, the Tribunal notes that while the Claimants have referred in their

submissions on interest to three cases concerning Spain’s New Regime,'*° the rates

51 Cl, Comments, {ff 102-104.
Resp.

Response, {| 64.
Response, {| 66.

.g. Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. The Republic of Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Award,
11 December 2013, § 1269.

Response, § 64; BDO First Report, § 261.

37

awarded in these cases were: 2.07% compounded monthly pre-award, and 2.50%
compounded monthly post-award (Eiser); 0.906% compounded monthly pre-award, and
1.60% compounded monthly post-award (Masdar); 1.4% compounded monthly pre-

award, and 3.5% compounded monthly post-award (Foresight).

133. The Tribunal does not, however, consider appropriate the rate of 0.6%, proposed by the
Respondent with respect to the return on a 2-year Spanish bond, by reference to the return
in June 2014. Although the Tribunal accepts that the return on a Spanish bond may be
appropriate, it would not be appropriate to fix a rate as if the Claimants were short term
investors willingly lending to Spain. The Tribunal considers more suitable the return on
a 10-year Spanish bond, and it is willing to adopt the Respondent’s approach by fixing
this by reference to the return in June 2014 which, consistent with various other awards,
it takes as 2.07%. It considers that interest at this rate should be payable from 30 June

2014, i.e. the end of the month in which Order IET 1045/2014 was adopted.

134. As to whether interest should be simple or compounded, there is of course no uniform
practice, but the Tribunal considers that, at least in the current context, the goal of wiping
out all the consequences of the illegal act is best-served by an order of compound interest,
to be compounded on a monthly basis as claimed. As the Claimants correctly contend,
the awarding of compound interest has been followed in multiples cases in the ICSID

investment treaty context.”

135. The Tribunal therefore awards interest from 30 June 2014 to the date of this Award at
the rate of 2.07%, compounded monthly, and interest from the date of the Award to the

date of payment at the rate of 2.07%, again compounded monthly.

'37 See the cases and materials referred to at Cl. Memorial, | 575; also Cl. Comments, § 101.

38

C. Costs
(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

136. The Claimants submit that the Tribunal has found that the Respondent has breached its
obligations to the Claimants under the ECT. As a result, the Claimants argue that they
are entitled to receive full payment of their costs in these proceedings on a full-indemnity
basis, including all expenses that the Claimants have incurred or will incur in respect to

the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, ICSID, legal counsel, experts and consultants. !*

137. The Claimants request the opportunity to submit an updated statement of costs, given
that they have incurred in additional costs than the ones reflected in their statement of

costs of 16 February 2019.!°

b. The Respondent’s Position

138. The Respondent submits that it has prevailed on most of the claims that were raised by
the Claimants. The Respondent argues that the amount claimed by the Claimants is
speculative, and requests the Tribunal to exercise its broad discretion to make an award

of costs in the Respondent’s favor. '°

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

139. Pursuant to Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention:

“Tn the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection
with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the
fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use
of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of
the award.”

38 Cl, Comments, {| 107.
89 Cl, Comments, | 108.
140 Resp, Response, 71.

39

140.

141.

142.

143.

144,

It follows from this provision that the Tribunal has a very broad discretion with respect
to allocation of the costs (in their various different forms) among the parties. Neither
here, nor elsewhere in the Convention or Arbitration Rules, is guidance given as to how

the discretion is to be exercised.

Both Parties have sought their costs in this arbitration, on the basis of the rejection of the
other Party’s case. It follows that both have adopted the principle — which is frequently
but far from universally applied in ICSID investment treaty arbitrations — that a losing

party should be responsible for costs.

The reality in this case is that neither Party can be seen as wholly successful. The
Claimants have succeeded in establishing jurisdiction over the greater part of their
claims, but it was not successful in respect of the claims of breach of Article 10(1) ECT
with respect to the two Taxation Measures introduced by Law 15/2012 of 27 December
2012. The Claimants have succeeded in establishing a breach of Article 10(1) ECT, but
did not succeed in certain limbs of the claim, and have not recovered the quantum they
sought. As follows from this Award, many of their claims made by reference to the

Experts’ Joint Report were rejected.

At the same time, each aspect of the claims was reasonably brought and skilfully and
appropriately pursued, while the same applies so far as concerns the jurisdictional
objections and defences raised by the Respondent. Moreover, the issues of law and fact
raised in the case have been multiple and difficult, whilst there is notable inconsistency

on many of the key issues when it comes to the pool of relevant arbitral cases.

In these circumstances, and with particular reference to the implicit endorsement by both
Parties in this case of the principle that a losing party should bear responsibility for costs,
the Tribunal considers it appropriate to accord recognition to the fact that the Claimants
have established a breach of Article 10(1) ECT, and have had to pursue time-consuming
and costly litigation to establish the wrongful acts of the Respondent. It therefore

considers it appropriate to order that the Respondent be responsible for 50% of the

40

Claimants’ costs for the jurisdiction and liability phase,'*! together with the costs of the
arbitration in their entirety, i.e. the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the costs of the

Centre and related expenses.

145. As to the legal costs and other expenses that the Claimants have incurred in the course of
the jurisdiction and liability phase of the arbitration, the Tribunal will take as a basis the
figures contained in the Claimants’ Statement of Costs dated 26 February 2019. Although
the Claimants have sought permission to put in an updated Statement of Costs, the costs
subsequent to 26 February 2019 substantially arose with respect to the quantum phase,
and the Tribunal considers that each Party should be responsible for bearing its own legal
and other costs with respect to the quantum phase.'4? According to the Claimants’
Statement of Costs dated 26 February 2019, their legal and other costs and disbursements
(such as travel and accommodation) for the jurisdiction and liability phase amount to
EUR 5,367,797.18, which however includes payments made to ICSID of EUR
619,978.70.'*8 The Tribunal considers that, given the scale of this arbitration, such costs
were reasonably incurred. Accordingly, the Tribunal awards to the Claimants 50% of

EUR 4,747,818.48, that is EUR 2,373,909.24.

146. As to the costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD):!#

'41 Arbitrator Joubin-Bret takes a different view from the other members of the Tribunal with respect to a central
aspect in the analysis by the Tribunal of the allocation of costs. The Tribunal could have focussed its analysis on
whether each aspect of the claims was reasonably brought and put forward as were the jurisdictional objections and
defences raised by the Respondent. Moreover, the issues of law and fact raised in the case have been multiple and
difficult, whilst there is notable inconsistency on many of the key issues when it comes to the pool of relevant arbitral
cases. However, the two other members of the Tribunal have preferred to limit themselves in their analysis given
that both parties have separately stated that costs should follow the event. It is the view of Arbitrator Joubin-Bret
that the reality in this case is that neither Party can be seen as totally successful or unsuccessful. Moreover, if the
Tribunal were to judge success by the amounts claimed vs. the amounts awarded to the Claimants in this case, it
would have to take into account that it is awarding less than 10% of the amounts claimed by the Claimants. It would
therefore be more appropriate for the Tribunal to limit the recovery of the Claimant’s costs to (at most) 10% of its
own legal and other costs.

'® The Tribunal recalls that, following their submissions on costs of February 2019, the Parties made a further advance
payment pursuant, as requested by letter of 10 January 2020.

'43 Claimants’ Statement of Costs, 26 February 2019.

'4 Upon resuming her position as member of the Tribunal in the present case, Arbitrator Joubin-Bret informed the
Parties that, due to her recent appointment as Secretary of UNCITRAL, she had sought specific authorization from
the Secretary General of the United Nations to be able to discharge her duties as arbitrator as a staff member of the

4l

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC USD 401,444.52

Mr. Judd L. Kessler USD 437,286.25
Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret USD 155,685.08
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 232,000.00
Direct expenses (estimated) USD 205,064.87
Total USD 1,431,480.72

147. The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal parts.

As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration amounts to USD 715,740.36.

148. Accordingly, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to pay the Claimants USD 623,886.96
for the expended portion of the Claimants’ advances to ICSID and EUR 2,373,909.24 in

respect of the Claimants’ legal and other costs and expenses.

Vv. AWARD

149. For the reasons stated in its Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Certain Issues of
Quantum of 30 December 2019 and the body of this Award, the Tribunal hereby declares,

orders and decides:

a) The Respondent shall pay to the Claimants a sum of EUR 28,080,000 as
compensation for the damages resulting from its wrongful acts as determined in the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, Liability and Certain Issues of Quantum.

b

The Respondent shall pay interest on the sum awarded above from 30 June 2014 to
the date of payment in full of all sums due pursuant to this Award at a rate of 2.07%,

compounded monthly.

United Nations. Arbitrator Joubin-Bret was subject to certain restrictions from the UN as to the fees she could charge
in the present case, and did not claim payment for time spent on the case during 2017. Subsequently, given the
numerous additional submissions made by the Parties and the time spent on the case, after discussing the matter with
her co-arbitrators and seeking advice from the Secretary-General of ICSID, she asked for authorization by the Legal
Counsel of the United Nations to record her time at a reduced hourly rate of 1 US$/hour, and so informed the Parties
by letter of 29 November 2018.

42

c) The Respondent shall bear 100% of the costs of the arbitration. The Respondent shall
thus pay the Claimants USD 623,886.96 for the expended portion of the Claimants’
advances to ICSID.

d) The Respondent shall reimburse the Claimants EUR 2,373,909.24 in respect of the
Claimants’ legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred in connection with the
jurisdiction and liability phase.

e

2

Subject to paragraph c) above, each Party shall bear the legal fees and other costs and
expenses which it incurred in connection with the quantum phase.

f) All other claims and requests of the Parties are dismissed.

43

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Mr. Judd L. Kessler Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(See separate opinion'*)
Date: December 1, 2020 Date: December 16, 2020

[Signed]

Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC

President of the Tribunal

Date: December 15, 2020

'45 As is emphasised in Arbitrator Kessler’s Separate Opinion, he joined fully in the Decision and joins fully
in this Award. Arbitrators Wordsworth and Joubin-Bret wish to express their sincere and abiding respect
for Arbitrator Kessler and, like Arbitrator Kessler, to emphasise the years of common effort and careful
deliberations, even though they do not share the differing perceptions addressed in his Separate Opinion.

44

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

RWE INNoGy GMBH
AND
RWE INNOGy AERSA S.A.U.

Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/34

 

SEPARATE OPINION OF
MR. JUDD L. KESSLER

 

I. Introduction and Background

1. I have joined in this Award (“the Award”) as well as in the Decision on
Jurisdiction, Liability, and Certain Issues of Quantum (hereinafter “the Decision”) and am in
agreement with my distinguished colleagues on a great many issues in this complicated and
demanding dispute. Areas of agreement include jurisdiction and applicable law, as well as the
standard of Fair and Equitable Treatment under international law which includes, importantly, the
principle of good faith, and as an element of this latter principle, the protection of legitimate
expectations. The key factual issues, of course, include what obligations each side undertook,
whether or not they complied with those obligations, and finally what compensation, if any, should
be due to the Claimants, who own and operate no fewer than 24 separate wind power and hydro
facilities in Spain - of different sizes, in different locations with investments made under differing

circumstances and at different times.

2. As a preface to this Separate Opinion, I consider it important to explain my
reasoning in writing it. As I understand it, the obligation of a three arbitrator tribunal is, insofar
as possible, to air among themselves any disagreements as to the facts or the law (and there are
almost always some), and at the end, if possible, to produce a coherent award that will be
enforceable. I have great respect for my distinguished colleagues and for the great effort and
professional integrity that has produced the Decision and the Award. Though, as you will see, I
have deep concerns about some of the reasoning that led to the outcome, I have joined in both the
Decision and the Award. To do otherwise, would potentially weaken or undercut our years of

common effort. I wish to make it clear that I have no intention to do so.

3. But I do feel obliged to express in detail how differently I perceive many of the
issues involved in this dispute. I do so not as a claimant-appointed arbitrator disappointed with
the quantum of the Award, but rather for reasons that I believe are more fundamental. If I may be
so bold, I have taken as my model the well-known Separate Opinion of Prof. Thomas Wailde in
Thunderbird Gaming v. Mexico, in which, while joining fully in the result, he expressed his
differing views in some 130 pages of sparkling insight and erudition.' His purpose, clearly, was

to influence future tribunals as they would struggle with the complex and difficult issues involved

' International Thunderbird Gaming Corp. v. Mexico, UNCITRAL, Award (Jan. 26, 2006)

in investment arbitration cases. I draw only my inspiration from him. The views expressed herein,

valid or not as they me be considered, are my sole responsibility.

4. The main outlines of the circumstances that have given rise to this and numerous
other cases involving Respondent are well known. Spain established a program of incentives
which by 2004 became quite specific and attractive to investors. These incentives were adjusted
somewhat in 2007 but remained essentially in place until 2013. In 2007-8 the world economy
experienced a severe crisis whose effects were felt strongly in the Kingdom of Spain as they were
in every other country in the world. One of the effects of that crisis was a diminution in
consumption of power at the retail level which seriously diminished funds which had previously
been available to cover the cost of incentives under the Special Regime for Renewable Energy.
This further resulted in a continuing increase of the tariff deficit which led Respondent to enact
the Disputed Measures which substantially reduced remuneration to RE producers under the
Special Regime. Spain maintains that it was required to make these changes which were within
its regulatory powers in order to protect the public as well as the sustainability of Spain’s electric
power network. Claimants maintain that the major changes made in the legal regime under which
they made their investments violated their rights under the ECT, for which they are entitled to

compensation.

5. While I believe that the above represents a fair general description of the
circumstances that gave rise to this dispute, I take a very different view of important elements of
the context and facts of this dispute from that of my distinguished colleagues. It is fair to say that
we agree that the Kingdom of Spain did violate Section 10(1) of the ECT, and that some measure
of compensation is due to the Claimants. But other than those two conclusions, I would have
weighed the facts differently and would have reached a different outcome regarding virtually

everything else.

6. I would have found that Spain did, indeed, enter into either a firm commitment,
or the equivalent thereof, with the Claimants; that Respondent failed in more important ways to
accord Fair and Equitable Treatment to the Claimants, and, accordingly, that Claimants should
receive substantially more compensation. Since this is a separate opinion and since my concerns
are rather broad and concrete I have, in parts of this opinion, not included extensive references to

other decisions or awards. I recognize that this choice may draw criticism, but my principal

purpose here is to leave no doubt about my areas of concern and the reasons for them. As I see it,
the reason for such a marked divergence of views among the Tribunal members is not that anyone
is biased in favor of or against one side or the other, or that anyone failed to understand the
evidence and argumentation presented by the Parties. All members of the Tribunal are well versed

in the law of international investment in general and the FET standard in particular.

7. My view, and this is not something that I have discussed directly with my
colleagues, is that, at least in part, these disparate views result from two different schools of legal
thought regarding the entire enterprise of international investment arbitration. IfI am correct, and
I may not be, these differences have their roots, on the one hand, in the origins of investment
arbitration where — after World War II — there was an urgent need to increase the flow of private
investment resources to developing nations. On the other hand, more recently, a significant
number of estimable practitioners and legal scholars have suggested that the investment arbitration
process is not sufficiently structured. They maintain that investment tribunals should not focus so
much on the tribulations of private investors. Instead they should be more deferential to the
decisions of governments - especially democratically elected governments - and their respective
agents. Some further elaboration of these disparate approaches, I believe, may help to explain how
this arbitrator might approach this dispute in a manner so at variance with the reasoning of my

distinguished colleagues.

II Guideposts for Analysis

8. Recognizing that any attempted summary of such complicated matters is likely to
displease someone, I, nevertheless, offer the following descriptions of what appear to me as two
poles or guideposts for analysis and as to how they may relate to a different appraisal of the facts

and the law with regard to this dispute.

A. School of Thought A — The Rationale for and the Rise of Investment Arbitration.
9. The system we now know as “investment arbitration” arose from the same post-
World War II efforts that gave rise to the World Bank, the IMF, the UNDP, and Regional
Development Banks as well as numerous bilateral aid programs. The developing world was in
urgent need of development finance and the demand exceeded by far the funds then available from
these new institutions. By the 1960’s foreign assistance levels across the board had stagnated. As

aresult, the prospects for major improvements to the lot of developing nations seemed limited at

3

best. It was hoped that private foreign investment would come to the rescue and might
dramatically expand the resources available for development. It was also observed that developing
nations were still attracting only a relatively small proportion of the world’s private investment

flows.

10. This situation arose from the perception of the world business community that
something drastic needed to be done to protect private foreign investment from political and/or
non-commercial risks in developing nations, where legal systems were often perceived to be weak
and unreliable. While protection against expropriation was the risk most often highlighted,
businesses had similar concerns about the dangers presented by other, less easily described,

governmental measures that might seriously impair the rights or assets of foreign investors.”

11. | And so began a remarkable effort of world leaders to create the Washington
Convention, and an institution within the World Bank Group dedicated to administering a rules-
based system for resolving international investment disputes transparently, in accordance with
widely accepted international law principles. It was also hoped that this new institution (which we
now know as ICSID), might relieve the World Bank of certain “extra-curricular burdens” - namely
being pushed to intervene forcefully in settling investment disputes with developing nations - often
under considerable pressure from a wealthy member government which was being pressed to back
one of its investors.> World Bank officials also urged signatory nations of the “ICSID”
Convention, to negotiate bilateral investment treaties (BIT’s) — also known as International
Investment Agreements (“IIA’s”) — that would provide a neutral arbitral forum, such as ICSID,
for the resolution of disputes. The expectation was that these arrangements would enable
investors, when making large and long term investment decisions, to rely on the undertakings of
and commitments by the government of a host State. And then, if a dispute did occur, investors
could expect a reasonably expeditious and fair resolution based on widely accepted international

law principles.

2 Anthony R. Parra, The History of ICSID, 12 (2012).

3 Id. at 141; See also Judd L. Kessler, Investment Arbitration, Legitimacy and National Law in Latin America: An
Arbitrator’s Perspective, Am. Rev. of Int. Arb. 2016, (Vol. 27, No.3) at p. 265-8; 298-310.

12. A World Bank Development Report in 2005 summarized the hoped-for benefits of

the system as follows:

“Governments and firms can both benefit. Governments benefit
from a commitment device that can address concerns from
investors, and thus help them attract more investment at lower cost,
and also reduce the risk of any later dispute becoming politicized.
Firms benefit from reduced risks and a more reliable mechanism
for protecting their rights if the relationship with the host
government deteriorates.”*

13. The Report also viewed the use of investment treaties as a “potentially powerful

tool to enhance the credibility of their contractual and policy commitments.”>

14. With his characteristic directness, Jan Paulsson expresses the rationale for treaties
to protect foreign investments as follows:

“. The obvious policy objective is to access international capital
at the lowest possible cost. Investors are rational: to insist that
those who act in the name of governments have an unfettered right
to alter the terms of investment in the alleged public interest would
lead to tragic disempowerment and dependence. If states were
incapable of giving reliable promises — because their
misconceived ‘sovereignty’ renders them powerless to do so — the
policy objective of attracting foreign investment would be
illusory.”

15. Finally, by entering into investment treaties, sovereign governments also made a
commitment to honor such treaty obligations and commitments as part of their domestic law —
even if such commitments were understood to include standards that are more demanding than
those normally applied in domestic law. Importantly, it was understood that the standards set forth

in investment treaties would impose little or no additional burden on nations that already had

highly developed legal systems.

+ World Bank Development Report (2005) p. 179.

5 Ibid.; See also Jan Paulsson, the Power of States to make Meaningful Promises to Foreigners, Journal of

International Dispute Settlement Vol.1, No. 2 (2010), pp. 341-352; doil0.1093/jnlids/idg 013.

§ Paulsson op cit. at 341.

B. School of Thought B — The Critique of Investment Arbitration — Involving
Concerns of Legitimacy, Appropriate Deference to Governmental Decisions, and
the Need for Proportionality Analysis.

 

16. Over the past 20 years at least, practitioners, scholars and governments —
predominantly from Europe — have expressed concerns that investment arbitration tribunals are
insufficiently connected to the political sources of legitimacy by comparison, for example, to
permanent tribunals authorized by domestic law. Such ad hoc arbitration tribunals are thought to
give insufficient deference to the decisions of agencies authorized by democratically elected
governments and to lack sufficient expertise or in-depth understanding of national circumstances.
Finally, these critics urge that arbitral tribunals would benefit greatly by making use of
proportionality analysis — a technique which originated in German administrative law. It involves
a sophisticated three stage process and has proved very useful, inter alia, in elaborating complex

relations between the European Union and its various member governments and court systems.

17. In summary the analysis would proceed more or less as follows: first, was the
measure addressed to a legitimate government objective (i.e., rather than an arbitrary or corrupt
purpose). If so, the measure is considered “suitable. ““ Second, was the measure “necessary” — i.e.
having found the objective “suitable,” were the measures reasonable/appropriate? Were there less
restrictive means reasonably available to the State for meeting the given objectives? And third,
even if the previous requirements were found to be satisfied, was the impact of the measures on
the affected parties “disproportionate?” And in answering that question, did the government, in
the decision-making process, give due consideration to the interests of the impact on the affected

parties.”

18. The proponents of this approach believe that increased use of proportionality
analysis in international investment arbitration would result in a more careful balancing of public
vs. private interests. They urge that this approach would require ad hoc arbitration tribunals to be
more accountable and to justify their decisions in a more detailed fashion. Finally, it is thought

that this approach might provide a gateway for non-investment principles to enter the investment

7 Decision 4552-597.

arbitration framework of argumentation, thereby avoiding the fragmentation of international law

between functional and special investment-related systems.®

19. Needless to say there are ardent supporters and opponents of these two approaches.
I confess to leaning toward School of Thought A, though I respect and agree with elements of
School of Thought B. My purpose at this point is simply to summarize these views so as to allow
fair consideration of them as we now enter into examination of the detailed issues presented in this

case.

II. Main Elements in the Logic of the Decision/Award

20. Like any decision in a complex dispute, the Decision and the Award build to their
conclusions in a series of steps. For purposes of this Separate Opinion, I will limit my comments
to certain key issues on which I see things differently. In summary, the major steps in the reasoning

of the Tribunal seem to me to proceed as follows:

21. The language of the ECT, Titles I and II, regarding a stable and transparent legal
framework is “focused on establishment of arrangements at the national level as opposed to the

acceptance of international legal obligations owed to Investors.”

qd) According to the Decision’s interpretation of the FET Standard, there was

no specific commitment by the Kingdom of Spain or an explicit undertaking because, inter alia:

(i) Spain’s alleged “commitment” arose from a regulation of general
application — which should not be interpreted as the equivalent of a contractual commitment —

or more specifically a “stabilization clause.”!?

(ii) The law of Spain provides for a hierarchy of laws, regulations, etc.
which means that where a law sets forth a particular policy, no regulation may conflict with or

contradict such policy — and this is something that potential investors must know when they

* Public Law Concepts to Balance Investors’ Rights with State Regulatory Actions in the Public Interest — the
Concept of Proportionality. Benedict Kingsbury and Stephan W. Schill. ©Oxford University Press 2010. Published
2010 by Oxford University Pres.; Robert Alexy, A Theory of Constitutional Rights (Oxford University Press, 2002).
° Decision 4 438.

‘© ‘The Decision does acknowledge, however, that the absence of a specific commitment does not mean that an
investor that has invested on the basis of a given tariff regime ceases to be a relevant factor in applying the FET
Standard under Article 10(1). Decision 4 462.

decide to invest. In addition the Supreme Court of Spain has held on numerous occasions that, for
example:

There is no legal obstacle that exists to prevent the Government, in

the exercise of the regulatory powers and of the broad entitlements

it has in a strongly regulated issue such as electricity, from

modifying a specific system of remuneration ... |!
Because of the above circumstances, it is concluded that there could not have been a firm
commitment regarding RE tariffs in the first place, or, stated otherwise, the existence of these
features of Spanish law undercut a claim by these investors based on “reasonable and legitimate
expectations.” Also, if one views this transaction by the standards of normal commercial
negotiations — there were weaknesses in Claimants case on “due diligence” and “reliance.”

(iii) Nonetheless, it is found that these alleged weaknesses in the Claimants’
case do not mean that Claimants have no legal rights if the Tribunal finds (as it does) that there
has been a complete change in the system on which Claimants’ made their investments. Their
compensation will, however be limited to those situations in which Spain has not taken their
interests sufficiently into account, or where the impacts on Claimants’ investments have been

“disproportionate.”

(iv) Finally, the Tribunal examines whether Spain’s Measures were
“proportionate” or “not disproportionate” making use of the accepted three-part test described at
417, supra. The conclusion reached is that Spain’s Measures have passed the test of
proportionality with the exception of minor adjustments regarding seven of Claimants’ 24 plants.
The Tribunal also requires Spain to return to Claimants certain sums which Claimants had received
as compensation for a given quantity of electric power sold in 2013 — and which Claimants were
later required to return to Respondent, when RD 413/2014 and IET/1045/2014 retroactively

lowered the price to which Claimants had been previously entitled for those sales.

IV. A Different Appreciation of the Dispute

22. Respectfully, I am not in agreement on any of the above elements for the following

reasons:

"| Judgment of the Supreme Court, 15 December 2005; translated extract at R-0137; cited in Award 4234.

8

A. The Background of the ECT and its Relation to Application of the FET

The Tribunal’s analysis of the scope of Section 10(1) is detailed and precise in parsing
the language of the ECT. It reasons, in summary, that the ECT’s concerns, especially in Title I,
go beyond protection of investment, including for example, references to “non-discrimination

and market oriented price information.”!?

As to investment protection, the Tribunal views
references in Titles I and II to a “stable and transparent legal framework” to be focused on
establishment of such a framework at the national level “as opposed to the acceptance of
international legal obligations owed to Investors. . .”! Regarding references in Title II to legal
framework, the Decision indicates that norms to be established at the national level should be in

conformity “with the relevant international laws and rules on investment and trade.”

23. The Decision properly raises the question as to what such international laws and

tules are — and after discussion §423 to 438, states:

“Tn the view of the Tribunal, the objects and purposes of the ECT
are therefore more balanced than either Party allows for, and it
approaches the interpretation of Article 10(1) on that basis.”!>

I cannot agree. To conclude that the ECT is relatively neutral regarding protection of
foreign investment is not I believe, an appropriate conclusion. The careful analysis of the words
of Section 10(1) does not, I believe, give sufficient weight to the context and origin of the ECT.
The Berlin Wall fell in November 1989.

24. As explained by the great Professor Wilde, himself an expert on the subject of the

energy industry and investments:

“The overall background of the Treaty [the ECT] was the effort to
help the transition economies of Eastern Europe to attract
investment, mainly by helping to install a rule of law, safeguarding

2 Decision 4 438.
Bd.
“Id.

'S Decision 4] 439

of property, respect for contracts and liberalization of investment
conditions in the model of Western market economies.”!®

Prof. Wiilde continues:

25.
protection was by no means novel. By 1998, nations had already signed more than 1700 BIT’s,

virtually all of which required Host nations not to expropriate without compensation and, inter

“.,,[T]he overriding purpose of the Treaty [ECT] is the
encouragement of private investment by stable, equitable,
transparent conditions at a “high level” of protection... The tools
— the ‘investment disciplines’ in part III of the Treaty — have to
be seen as instruments to implement the overall emphasis on
promotion of private investments...

...the Treaty [ECT] emphasizes a “high” (i.e. not as other BITs a
“normal”) level of protection of foreign investors, highlights the
importance of “liberalization”, i.e. movement away from socialist
command-control energy economy and monopolies with a new
emphasis on property, contract and competition and highlights all
features of a market economy in energy which are the opposite of
socialist energy industry — that is respect for property rather than
pervasive state control, separation of private ownership and
entrepreneurship from politicized comingling of state, politics and
energy industry, fair and transparent treatment of foreign investor
— rather than exposing them to the volatilities and vagaries of
intricate and not easily intelligible political maneuvering ... The
Treaty’s language has therefore to be seen before the background
and overall objectives and context — liberalization and
modernization of still state-dominated energy industries, and the
objects and purposes — to provide in a legally binding form with
maximum effectiveness a high degree of investment security ...

From this detailed identification of relevant objectives of the
Treaty identified in a formal, explicit and legally relevant form (i.e.
not super-imposed by the interpreter’s personal subjective views
and preferences) it seems clear that the broad thrust of the ECT is
intended to offer extensive, rather than restrictive, protection

to foreign energy investors and their investments”. (emphasis
added)!”

As the Decision indicates, at §447, the language of the ECT regarding investment

"© CL-0010; CM 4397.

"7 Id; CL. Mem. 4 401.

alia, required the Host nation to provide Fair and Equitable Treatment. The former Communist
countries clearly lacked the kind of legal framework conducive to inspiring the confidence of long-
term private foreign investors. This background accords comfortably with words of Article II of
the ECT confirming its purpose to:

“Testablish] a legal framework in order to promote long-term co-

operation in the energy field, based on complementarities and

mutual benefits, in accordance with the objectives and principles of

the [European Energy] Charter.”!*

26. Surely this background and the objective of increasing the flow of ample capital
from the West to develop East European energy, and for that energy to be transferred to the West
suggests at least a continuity of minimum international law protections of foreign investment and
more likely an expansion of such protections as urged by Prof. Wilde. I see nothing in the
language of the ECT to suggest, as the Decision does, that the ECT should be understood to grant
generous deference, for example, to the national laws of any signatory nation, much less the former
Communist bloc nations.

B. The Context and Facts of the Dispute: The Issue of a Specific Commitment;

Legitimate Expectations

27. Anyone who has had the honor of being entrusted to decide a dispute between an
investor and a sovereign government knows the weight of responsibility that comes with it. As
one human element of a human institution, all arbitrators can do is attempt to view the facts and
the law in a way that accords full respect to both Parties — here the RWE Claimants and the
Kingdom of Spain, Respondent.

28. The Decision provides a detailed listing of the various legal and regulatory
provisions enacted in the Kingdom of Spain — as well as the timing of each of the investments —
but, in my view, does not provide adequate discussion of the economic and, business context of
the dispute. I recognize that the Parties may take very different views of the legal significance of

certain facts, but as to certain fundamentals there is no significant disagreement.

29. The Kingdom of Spain recognized that its balance of payments, and indeed its

industrial competitiveness (including job creation) were being impacted negatively by the high

18 C.0001; Cl. M. 4 395.

cost of imported petroleum-based energy resources. Spain further recognized that its geography
provided attractive conditions for Renewable Energy (hereafter “RE”) generation of all sorts, but
that it was especially favorable for solar and wind power. Needless to say, increased generation
from these power sources also would also provide a significant reduction in Spain’s carbon

footprint, thereby reducing its contribution to global warming.

30.  Atabout the same time, and for very similar reasons, the European Union undertook
to foster an increase in the percentage of power generation from RE sources for the region as a
whole. Between 2001 and 2009 it enacted, inter alia, two directives — EU Directive 2001/77/EC
and EU Directive 2009/28/EC. These Directives created specific and binding requirements that
member nations take steps to achieve RE generation of at least 12% by 2010, and 20% by 2020.
In so doing, the EU also, consistently, called attention to the benefits of Feed-in Tariff (FIT)
arrangements and advised strongly and repetitively against making retroactive changes to such

tariff arrangements once they were put in place. !

31. It probably should be said here that different nations surely have different views
about the role of the private sector in their economies. There is certainly no international mandate
requiring any nation to seek foreign investment generally. And if a nation does seek to attract
foreign investment, there are no fixed formulae for doing so. But once having made policy choices
about obtaining the foreign investment it seeks, international norms, including the requirement of
Fair and Equitable Treatment do attach. In seeking RE investment, Spain made a number of policy
choices. First, it might have established incentives applicable only to Spanish nationals, in which
case the rules of international law likely would not apply. But, in fact, the RE incentives were
offered to, and actively sought from, foreign investors as well. Another policy choice was made
regarding the precise nature of RE investments to be eligible under the Special Regime. Those
incentives might, for example, have been limited to “green field” investments — meaning only
investments made to construct new RE generation facilities. But in fact the Special Regime also
applied to investments made to purchase and operate existing RE generation facilities. Finally,
the specific terms of the incentives themselves — i.e. the remuneration rates as well as the number

of years they were to be effective — involved another choice. As will be demonstrated, infra,

'® Decision § 131.

Spain’s incentives were put in place at a time when the costs of RE generation plants — especially
those for wind and solar — were too high to make an unassisted private investment viable. Because
of this, and because the moment of investment is, of course, crucial for the long-term investor,
Spain chose to provide incentives that would pertain essentially for the operational life of each

category of equipment involved.

32. Viewed from the present moment, with perfect hindsight, one might be critical of
one or more of these policy choices. In particular, it seems that Respondent might rightfully have
expected that the cost of wind and solar capacity would gradually decline — so that after a given
period, RE generation costs would fall to the point that additional economic incentives would no
longer be required.”° But the point of this discussion is not to exercise hindsight, but rather simply
to make clear that Respondent made certain choices in inviting investors, and that this is the policy

framework which we have before us in this dispute.

33. While Spain first created a separate category for RE generators in 1994, Spain’s
first major legislation which included this general subject was the 1997 Electricity Law (“Law
54/1997” or the “Electricity Law”). This law covered a wide range of different activities related
to electric power generation, transmission etc. Included within that law were two elements of
fundamental importance to the dispute before us. First, in Title IV, it distinguished between the
“Ordinary Regime” for electricity generation (Chapter I of Title IV) and the “Special Regime”:
which was focused especially on “non-consumable renewable energies.” The specific key features
of the Special Regime (Chapter II of Title IV) were also distinguished from those of the “Ordinary

Regime.”

34. As described in §131-132 of the Decision, Article 28(1) then established a
requirement of prior administrative authorization of the construction and operation of installations
under the Special Regime, while a series of rights and obligations for such installations were set
forth in Article 30.4, which stated, inter alia that:

“The remuneration arrangements for electric power
generation...under the Special Regime shall be supplemented by

the payment of a premium under statutory terms set out in
regulations...

 

°° Indeed Respondent has introduced evidence that it is now able to conduct competitive auctions which will result
in new investments in the RE generation without the need of incentives. Mr. Santacruz, Day1/271.

13

“To work out the premiums, the voltage level on delivery
of the power to the network the effective contribution to
environmental improvement, to primary energy saving and energy
efficiency, the generation of economically justifiable useful heat
and the investment costs incurred shall all be taken into account as
to achieve reasonable profitability rates with reference to the cost
of money on capital markets.” (Emphasis added) *!

35. According to Respondent, the above language establishes the principle of a
“reasonable return” with reference to the cost of money on capital markets. But of greater
importance in the judgment of this arbitrator is the statement that the remuneration arrangements
for power generation under the Special Regime shall be supplemented by the payment of a
premium under statutory terms set out in Regulations.” The first regulation implementing the
above language was not enacted until Royal Decree 2818/1998 which, in its Preamble, stated:

“for the facilities based on renewable energies and waste, the
incentive established has no time limit as the environmental
benefits need to be internalized, and because of their special
characteristics and technological level , their higher costs do not
allow them to compete in the free market.”*} (Emphasis added).

36. But in March of 2004, the Spanish government repealed RD2818/1998 and enacted
RD436/2004 which, for the first time, set forth a more specific remuneration scheme for the
Special Regime. It contained two key elements which remained, with relatively minor variations,
from 2004 until 2013-14. First, investments, once they were found to be qualified for the Special
Regime could choose each year between being remunerated (1) in the form of a regulated tariff
i.e. a single, flat rate defined as a percentage of the average referenced tariff (TMR) or (2) by
selling directly into the market in which case the operator would receive the market price plus an

incentive, as well as a premium if the specific plant was entitled to receive one.”+
37. | _RD436/2004 then added a second key element regarding future changes in the

remuneration rates. The tariffs and premiums established in RD434/2004 would be revised in

2006, and every four years thereafter. However, Articles 40(2) and (3) provided as follows:

21 R-3 at 50-51
2 |

23. C-0177 and R-98
24 Decision {| 144-145.

“2. The tariffs, premiums, incentives and supplements resulting
from any of the revisions provided for in this section shall come
into force on January Ist of the second year subsequent to the year
that the revision has been carried out.

3. The tariffs, premiums, incentives and supplements resulting
from any of the revisions provided for in this section shall apply
solely to the plants that commence operating subsequent to the date
of the entry into force referred to in the paragraph above and shall
not have a backdated effect on any previous tariffs and
premiums.”?5

38. It is evident to this arbitrator that Spain, for its own good and sufficient reasons,
had created a sophisticated invitation to long-term RE investors. Recognizing that the generators
under the Special Regime used technologies “involving higher costs that do not allow them to
compete in the free market,””° Spain’s invitation was, in essence, as follows:

We want to expand RE electric generation in Spain as quickly as
possible. In order to incentivize long-term RE investment in
Spain, you may be assured of the following: Once your plant has
been approved as qualified under the Special Regime you may sell
all of your power either (1) at a favorably regulated market rate, or

(2) directly into the market in which case you will receive an
incentive payment, and, if qualified, also a premium.

Finally we know that in order to make these investments you need
the assurance of reasonable stability. Therefore, though
remuneration rates may change beginning in 2006, no such
changes will affect plants already approved and in operation at that
time — and future rate changes will only take effect on January 1
of the second year subsequent to the year that the revision is
carried out.

39. For a potential investor, this presented a clear and unmistakable message. The
investor knew its capital and operating costs. The investor could easily see how these Special
Regime rates were established and knew the operational life of its equipment. If the investor
considered that these incentives were sufficient to earn an acceptable profit, Spain would welcome

this investment and Spain would do its best to maintain stability over the long term.

25 Decision 4 146; similar language was included in RD 661/2007, Sec 44.3.

26

See 30 supra.

40. As Respondent affirms correctly, this arrangement did not guaranty the investor a

 

particular annual profit in Euros, or even a guaranteed percentage of profit. Ministry statements
and press releases refer to a guaranteed return of (at least?) 7% for wind and hydro installations?”
But in concrete business terms, it is evident that, according to the established remuneration system,
the success of any investment would, in fact, depend on the efficiency of the particular plant in
terms of capital cost, operating cost and, crucially, the actual volume of power it produced and
sold to the grid each year over the useful life of its wind, solar or hydro generation equipment.
The remuneration math was rate per unit of power — under either of the two options times the

number of MWh produced.

41. Giving due respect to Respondent’s intentions at the time, this appears certainly to
have been what Spain intended and what the investor relied on. In business vernacular, this was
“the deal.” There was an invitation by Respondent and an acceptance by means of reliance by the
investor. The resulting plants were then each, initially, administratively approved as properly
qualified for remuneration under the Special Regime, or later were granted registration under the
RAIPRE. In either case they were remunerated in the same way. Benefits and responsibilities
flowed in both directions. Each year the investor operated the respective plants, kept accounts,
delivered the power to the grid, paid their taxes and proceeded to do the same each successive
year. Each year, as a result, Respondent required smaller quantities of imported petroleum
products and improved its carbon footprint. This continued for approximately 10 years, from 2004
to 2013-14. In terms of the Paulsson article referred to above, the Respondent made “meaningful
promises” to such foreign investors. It did so to enhance the flow of capital into Spain’s RE sector
on the most favorable terms. It did so following the best advice of the EU as well as its own CNE
and other related knowledgeable sources — all of whom knew that FIT schemes not only worked,

but worked well — provided, however, that reasonable stability was maintained.

42. The Claimants, for their part, believed that Respondent was making this invitation
honorably and in good faith and this would seem to have represented good business judgment.
The record in this case shows that from 2004 onward, this invitation was accepted by Claimants
as well as many other investors who have since made similar claims. Indeed, if one has doubts

that Respondent, in fact, did recognize the essence of this agreement, one needs to look no further

 

2” Decision 4 174-5.

than the record of Spain’s conversations with the RE investors in 2010. While asserting that it had
the right to make changes to the remuneration system, Spain made clear that the temporary
reductions, for which it was seeking the Investors concurrence in 2010, would be for one year

only. 78

43. Thus the story of these and other RE investments during this period is the history
of a highly successful campaign by the Respondent to attract billions of Euros in RE investment
in Spain; as well as to comply with the ambitions and binding Directives of the EU regarding

increased RE generation capacity.

44, — The question of whether or not Spain’s invitation and investments by the Claimants
should be considered to constitute a “specific commitment” may be fairly debated. Common law
principles normally applied in circumstances such as this generally come under the heading of
estoppel. But the civil law also honors the same sound equitable principles, which are referred to
as venire contra factum propium, or in Spanish law the Doctrine of Actos Propios.?? In essence,
no party may rely upon its own inconsistency to the detriment of another. This principle has been
traced back through 12 centuries of Islamic jurisprudence and has deep roots in Roman law,
common law, and modern civil law.*° Unlike common law estoppel, actos propids applies so long
as the conduct is capable of creating an objective expectation in third parties — actual detrimental
reliance by the other party based on its subjective expectations is not typically required.*! In other
well-known investment arbitration cases, the Tribunal in ADC v. Hungary stated that “[when’

Hungary enters into and performs these agreements for years and takes full benefit of them, it lies

28 Decision {| 183-5.

9 See, CHARLES T. KOTUBY JR. and LUKE A. SOBOTA, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AND INTERNATIONAL DUE PROCESS,
C. 119, (Oxford Univ Press, 2017; See also HECTOR MAIRAL, THE DOCTRINE OF ACTOS PROPIOS AND THE
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE {ff 2,5 (1988) (analyzing the doctrine in Spanish); MARCELO J. LOPEZ MESA, THE
DOCTRINE OF ACTOS PROPIOS IN JURISPRUDENCE 93-95 (1997) (analyzing the doctrine in Spain and Argentina)
Rubén S. Stiglitz & Gabriel A. Stiglitz, Actos Propios, in Contracts 491-512 (1994) (analyzing the doctrine in Spain
and Argentina); MIGUEL PASQUAU LIANO AND VOIDABILITY OF CONTRACTS 246-51 (1997) (analyzing the doctrine
in Spain and Germany). As the Ecuador Supreme Court has recognized, the principle of venire contra factum
proprium is a “principle of universal law, accepted by all legal systems.” Cobos Peiia v. Asociacién Mutualista de
Ahorro y Crédito, R.O. No.363, Decision No. 195-2001 (July 6, 2001).

30 See Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, \CSID Case No. AARB/05/17, Award, § 207 (Feb. 6, 2008);
Case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Tha.), Merits, Judgment, 1962 L.C.J. 6.

31 See Mairal, supra note 28.

17

ill in the mouth of Hungary now to challenge the legality and/or enforceability from these

Agreements.*

45. Another source in the same vein is Prof. Walde’s well known Separate Opinion in
Thunderbird Gaming v. Republic of Mexico regarding situations involving “invitations to invest,”
I believe that he was correct in that dispute, though the present case is a lot stronger on the facts
than was Thunderbird. He maintained that in “invitation disputes,” it was a mistake to analyze
due diligence and reliance as if an arbitral tribunal were considering a normal commercial dispute.
He emphasized the challenges for a foreign investor to find its way in a strange legal system,
political system and culture. The investor in Thunderbird was a relatively small and
unsophisticated company, which RWE certainly is not. Nonetheless, if the above description of
Spain’s initiative to attract RE investment is accurate, it would seem of doubtful legal significance
to insist on the most exhaustive evidence from Claimants as to due diligence and reliance in the
circumstances of this dispute. His opinion also references actos propios and other national laws

that lead to a similar result.

46. But, no matter. If one considers that this position represents perhaps, the law as it
should be, rather than as it is, we may move instead to a legal foundation that the Decision does
accept, at lease in principle. The Decision, ({462) recognizes that even in the putative absence of
a specific commitment, this does not mean that an investor, who has invested under a given tariff

regime, has no rights under the FET Standard and Article 10(1).

47. If the Decision had proceeded from that conclusion to calculate the amount due to
fully compensate Claimants for the damage caused, I would not be writing this Separate Opinion.
Had this been done, the measure of damages to Claimants in accordance with the venerable
Chorzow principles might have been determined by calculating the present value of the reduction
in the cash flow for the remaining years of the term under the Special Regime remuneration system,
and by using DCF (as Claimants’ expert had suggested) to come up with an appropriate level of
compensation. In so doing, the 7% tax and other modest changes to the original remuneration
structure would be removed from the but-for expected cash flow. But this is not what the Decision

did.

2 ADC Affiliate Ltd. v. Republic of Hungary, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award 4475 (Oct. 2, 2006.
18

48. Instead the Decision, through a complex series of steps — attempts to weigh the
interests of these private investors against Respondent’s much broader responsibilities to protect
the interests of Spanish citizens and the political and economic stability of the Kingdom of Spain.
In so doing, the Decision gives credence to the creative advocacy of Spain’s counsel, which framed
this dispute as one which requires recognition of Spain’s sovereign right to regulate, as well as its
need to exercise broad discretion to address the public interest, not merely the interests of private

investors. This, I believe, is a mistake.

49. Inmy view, this dispute does not, in any way, call into question Respondent’s right
to regulate. Respectfully, I believe that the Decision would have more appropriately taken the path
of the tribunals in Eiser, Novenergia and RREEF, among others that found Respondent squarely

at fault.>

Cc. Balancing the Interests of the Public vs. Private Investors: A Different View
1. Brief Comments Regarding the Saluka Case
50. One of the most highly regarded investment arbitration awards on the subject of
balancing public vs. private interests was the Award in Saluka.*4 In that case the tribunal began
by citing language from the Mondeyv case that:

“{a] judgment of what is fair and equitable cannot be reached in the
abstract; it must depend on the facts of the particular case.”*>

51.  Saluka further found that, under the treaty in question, the Preamble and statements
of purpose of the treaty were, as in the ECT, tied directly to the stimulation of foreign investment.*°
The tribunal also found that encouragement of foreign investment was not the sole aim of the treaty
but was rather a necessary element alongside the overall aim of encouraging foreign investment

and extending and intensifying the parties’ economic relations. This language, the tribunal found

3° This reference to RREEF award is limited to its finding regarding violation of the FET Standard as well as ECT
Article 10(1). The tribunal’s treatment of appropriate compensation, I believe, was erroneous, and will comment
farther on this point, infra.

4 CI. Memorial § 456; See, e.g., CL-0034, Saluka Investment B.V. v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award on
Jurisdiction and Merits, 17 March 2006, | 302.

38 Id. at 4285.

36 Jd. at 4298.

did not exaggerate the protection to be provided to foreign investments. Instead, in a more
balanced way, the tribunal understood that “fair and equitable treatment” under the treaty should
be understood, if not to be proactively stimulating the inflow of foreign investment capital, at least
not to deter foreign capital by providing disincentives to foreign investors. The Saluka tribunal

concludes: “...an investor’s decision to make an investment is based on an assessment of the state
of the law and the totality of the business environment at the time of the investment as well as on
the investor’s expectation that the conduct of the host State subsequent to the investment will be

fair and equitable.”*”

52. As indicated above at { 23 to 26, I believe that the protections provided to investors
under the ECT are stronger than those in the treaty in the Sa/uka case. I, nonetheless, find this to
be a fair expression of the general scope of the FET standard. Regarding a State’s right to regulate,
the Saluka award cites with approval language from the award in S.D. Myers, that in determining
the scope of the obligation of a host state under FET, tribunals should decide “‘in the light of the
high measure of deference which international law generally extends to the right of domestic
authorities to regulate matters within their own borders.”** Compared to this case, however, the
facts in Saluka were relatively simple and straightforward. There was a financial crisis that
affected all five major banks in the Czech Republic. The essence of the Claimants’ case related to
being treated differently, as a foreign investor, from the way the other four banks were treated.

Unfairness as “discrimination,” however, is not one of the allegations of the Claimants in this case.

53. The dispute in the present case is based on the Measures taken by Spain in 2013-
44. As we know, the Special Regime became effective in 2004. When we examine the facts —
and especially when we examine how the Respondent managed its responsibilities regarding the
Special Regime, some interesting elements emerge. Obviously, this dispute was triggered by the
Disputed Measures in 2013-14. But the tariff deficit began in 2000. If one is to balance public
and private investor interests, a lot may depend on when the balancing takes place. As will be
seen below, there were many significant moments during the period 2004 to 2013-14. A snapshot

taken in 2006, 2008 or 2010 would involve different elements of weight in the imagined scales.

3) Id. at 4301.

38 Saluka at § 305.

20

With this in mind, we proceed to examine balancing in the present dispute, including consideration

of Respondent’s role as regulator.

2. The Right to Regulate and Its Relation, If Any, to the Dispute Before Us

54. A major issue which, in my view, has led to confusion relates, in one way or
another, to Respondent’s right to regulate and, as appropriate, to change laws or regulations in the
public interest. For the avoidance of doubt, as we have stated earlier, numerous tribunals have
found that, in the absence of a specific commitment, States retain the right to modify their
regulatory regimes. *? Such tribunals have found that “in order to adapt to changing economic

” 40 And where there is not a

circumstances the State’s regulatory powers still remain in place.
specific stabilization clause or its equivalent, investors must expect that legislation or regulations

may change.*! I recognize and accept this.

55. But the issue before us is to what extent Treaty protections, and, specifically, the
obligation to accord investors Fair and Equitable Treatment under the ECT may give rise to legal

liability and compensation notwithstanding the State’s acknowledged right to regulate.

56. The Decision, properly takes note of the Ziser tribunal’s language to this effect,

namely that:

“.,, the Respondent’s obligation under the ECT to afford investors
fair and equitable treatment does protect investors from a
fundamental change to the regulatory regime in a manner that does
not “take account of” existing reliance on the prior regime. The
ECT did not bar Spain from making appropriate changes to the
regulatory regime of RD 661/2007. Thus, the Tribunal does not
accept Claimants’ contention that RD 661/2007 gave them
immutable economic rights that could not be altered by changes in
the regulatory regime. Nevertheless, the ECT did protect
Claimants against the total and unreasonable change that they
experienced here.”

% See, e.g., Parkerings -Compagniet AS v, Lithuania, CSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award, 11September 2007
4332, RL-0035, EDF (Services) Ltd. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009, $f] 217-218.

“© CL-0049, BG Group Ple. v. Argentine Republis, UNCITRAL, Award 24 December 2007, § 298.
| CL-0052, Micula v. Romania, § 666.

® Decision 4 449.

21

57. The Decision takes note of similar language from the Blusun case which, in turn,
refers to the E/ Paso Award which speaks of “a total alteration of the entire legal setup for foreign
investments” as well as language from the LG&E tribunal which speaks of “complete dismantling
of the very legal framework constructed to attract investors.” Finally, the Decision takes note of

the B/usun award’s conclusion that: “The emphasis is on the subversion of the legal regime.”

58. | The Decision recognizes that, in addition to the Eiser case, tribunals in other
Spanish investment cases — including Novenergia have also found that even if no “specific
commitment” to the investor was found, that the relevant question:

“is[still] whether the statement or conduct is objectively sufficient
to create legitimate expectations in the recipient. Such conduct or
statements can take the form of laws or regulations.”**

59. Inasimilar vein, but in factually different circumstances, Judge Higgins said in the
Martini case:

“Tn my view the right distinctions are here being drawn:
governments may indeed need to be able to act gua government
and in the public interest. That fact will prevent specific
performance (including restitution) from being granted against
them. But that is not to liberate them from the obligation to
compensate those with whom it has entered into specific
arrangements. That is the reasonable place to strike the balance

between the expectations of foreign investors and the bona fide
needs of governments to act in the public interest.”*5

3. The Heart of the Matter

60. The Decision recognizes that Claimants are protected from total and unreasonable
change or the subversion of the legal regime under which they invested, but the Decision still

worries that recognition of anything less than a “specific commitment” may “constitute an

 

3 Decision | 450; Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and Michael Stein v. Italian Republic (ICSID Case No.
QRB/14/3, | 363 (CL-0187), referring to El Paso Energy International Co v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/15, Award, 31 October 2011, 517; LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006, § 139.

“4 Decision | 456; Novenergia II — Energy Novenergia Il - Energy & Environment (SCA) (Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg), SICAR v. Spain, SCC Case 2015/063, Final Decision, 15 February 2018, § 547.

45" R. Higgins, The Takings of Property by the State: Recent Developments in International Law, (Ill) Collected
Courses of the Hague Academy of International Law, p. 338; cited in National Grid v. Argentina, 151.

22

excessive limitation on power of states to regulate the economy in accordance with the public

interest.”

6l. I believe that in the circumstances of this case, this concern in not warranted
because the situation that gave rise to this dispute, respectfully, has nothing to do with a limitation
on Respondent’s regulatory powers. First, as has already been demonstrated (see 29 to § 40,
supra) Respondent created the structure of incentives for RE investments for perfectly
understandable national interest reasons. Spain, alone, established the detailed remuneration
system which came together first in RD 434/2004 and was further refined in RD 636/2007.
Respondent does appear to have had in mind that investors under the Special Regime would earn
what Respondent’s authorities considered a reasonable return, 7.398% per annum before taxes.
But what Respondent established, in fact, was a remuneration system that gave investors an annual
choice of two measure of remuneration per unit of electric power produced. The structure did not
guarantee investors any specific level of return, but permitted them, if they were efficient, to earn
as much as they could Further, I see no evidence in the record that participants in the Special
Regime were advised that continuation of their remuneration under the Special Regime was, in
any way, conditioned on revenues received by Respondent from electricity consumers, or indeed
from any other budgetary account or source of funds. No such condition was established because

none existed.

62. Regarding Respondent’s right to regulate, I was struck by the representation that
under Spain’s system of regulation for electric power generally, that regulators were charged with

“the obligation of a result.”4°

Respondent had created a system whereby remuneration was
calculated by multiplying the applicable rate (fixed tariff or market plus premium) times the
numbers of MWh produced. Having done so, it is difficult to see how one could even speak of
“over-remuneration.” But if somehow that were genuinely the concern, and if earnings seemed to
be in excess of Respondent’s conception of a “reasonable return, one would have expected that as
power plants were commissioned, regulators might have given some attention to the actual returns
achieved by Claimants and other investors similarly situated. If it appeared, for example,

beginning in 2004-5 that the incentives Respondent had provided for Special Regime investors

had been too generous — i.e. genuinely in excess of the returns Respondent envisioned in

-Mem. § 342.

 

23

establishing the RE remuneration regime -- the regulators might, without legal objection from
anyone -- have reduced the regulated tariff or the market price plus premium — not for plants
already approved — but for future investors. But no evidence of such regulatory attention was

presented. I find this interesting.

63. As RE investments flowed into Spain, some limits were established in 2010, on the
minimum and maximum number of KWh eligible for remuneration under the Special Regime but
the remuneration system remained the same. The only matter that did receive significant attention
was the growth of the tariff deficit. And this became important only after the world economic
crisis of 2007-2008. It caused a substantial reduction in Respondent’s revenues from retail power
consumption. Previously, revenues from power sales had been used to cover the cost of the
incentives provided under the Special Regime. But as previously mentioned, investments under
the Special Regime had, in no way, been tied to, or conditioned upon, Respondent’s revenues from

that or any other source.

64. — Clearly the world economic crisis of 2007-8 created serious problems for many
countries — and, perhaps especially, for those countries in Southern Europe. These countries,
including Respondent, had, before the days of the Euro, been able to adjust to major crises by
devaluing their currencies. But that was long ago. Respondent was obviously faced with great
stresses for which Respondent certainly deserves compassion and understanding. But, the crisis
of 2007-8 did not undo the conditions under which billions of Euros in RE investments had come

to Spain from 2004 on, and which continued to arrive until 2013.

65. Respondent has made much of a series of decisions of the Supreme Court of Spain
indicating that no private party could reasonably have expected that any regulation affecting its
business interests could not “change”. As indicated supra, international law also recognizes that
governments must be able to change laws and regulations in the public interest to adapt to changed
circumstances. I will say more about these decisions below, but what I find striking is that, once
again, Respondent, at any time, if it had so wished, could have made a number of changes to the
Special Regime that would have had a direct impact on the tariff deficit, changes that almost

certainly would have given rise to no negative legal consequences.

66. For example, in addition to reducing the level of Special Regime incentives for

future investments, as suggested above, Respondent could have announced that, because of

24

economic circumstances, it would authorize only a limited number of new generating facilities
under the Special Regime. Or, Respondent could simply have announced the elimination of the
Special Regime as of a certain date (for installations not yet in operation). Either of these choices
would certainly have stopped the growth of the tariff deficit. But of course they probably would
also have halted the large flows of new RE investments — and caused Respondent’s percentage of

RE generation capacity to fall far short of the levels called for by the binding EU Directives.

4. The Significance of the Decisions by the Spanish Supreme Court

67. The legal system of Spain is certainly among the world’s oldest and most
sophisticated. No serious arbitrator can view decisions of Spain’s Supreme Court other than with
appropriate respect. But as to the decisions regarding the issue of “change” of regulations, such
as those cited in the Decision (at § 234 to § 236 and 4 515 to § 534), this arbitrator was struck by
the absence of any discussion at all of the role of international law arising from treaties to which
Spain is a signatory. As called for by Article 26 of the VCLT, parties to a treaty are required to
abide by their terms and perform their obligations in good faith - (Pacta Sunt Servanda). Article
27 provides that a party may not invoke provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure

to perform a treaty.
68. Indeed, in Article 96 of the Constitution of Spain it is provided that:

“I. Validly concluded international treaties, once officially
published in Spain, shall be part of the internal legal system. Their
provisions may only be repealed, amended or suspended in the
manner provided for in the treaties themselves or in accordance
with general international law.”

This means that the terms of the ECT, including the standard of Fair and Equitable
Treatment are considered to be part of Spanish law. As a result, if Respondent made a change in
Spanish law or regulations which might have resulted in a violation of the FET standard,
Respondent would be required to conform its actions to the FET standard, or provide some
explanation as to why the standard did not apply, or face the consequences of a violation of
international law.

69. This being the case, I found it remarkable that the Supreme Court did not, in the

decisions cited, so much as mention international law or the ECT. That being the case, it would

25

seem that the Supreme Court decisions to which Respondent has referred were of marginal

significance, if any, as regards the issues before us.
70. But in any event, as stated in the Tribunal in CMS v Argentina in its Award:

“The Tribunal is mindful that, in its Decision on Jurisdiction, the distinction was made
between measures of a general economic nature, such as those concerning the economic
and financial emergency, and measures specifically directed to the investment’s operation.
It then reached the following conclusion:

...the Tribunal concludes on this point that it does not have jurisdiction over
measures of general economic policy adopted by the Republic of Argentina and
cannot pass judgment on whether they are right or wrong. The Tribunal also
concludes, however, that it has jurisdiction to examine whether specific measures
affecting the Claimant’s investment or measures of general economic policy having
a direct bearing on such investment have been adopted in violation of legally
binding commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts.”*”

71. Ifthe discussion to this point seems still to leave open concerns about Respondent’s
right to regulate and possible undue limitation on its power to adjust laws and regulations in the
public interest, perhaps the following hypothetical will be useful. To review, the Decision as well
as Section IV.B of this opinion concluded that Respondent, beginning at least in 2004, had invited
Claimants to invest on the basis of two approved tariff arrangements available only to power plants
qualified under the Special Regime. Respondent further provided that, beginning in 2006, these
remuneration rates could be changed, but that the changes would not affect plants already qualified
and producing under the Special Regime. From 2004 until 2013, these regulations with minor

adjustments, remained in place.

72. The tariff deficit began in 2000 and proceeded to grow — especially after the world
economic crisis of 2007-8. Spain’s tariff shortfall was financed, until 2014, by Respondent’s major
utilities who were responsible for selling power to end-users. The record demonstrates that the
increase in the tariff deficit was not due to a change in the cost of capital between 2004 and 2014.
Instead, it resulted from reduced revenues paid by end-users, which revenues had previously been

the main source of funds used to pay the producers under the Special Regime.

47 CMS Gas Transmission Company v Republic of Argentina, ISCID Case No ARV/O1/8 (2005), | 124; citing to its
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003, 42 ILM 788 (2003) | 25-32, 33; see also RREEF Award 4
593

26

73. Prior to the Measures, Respondent’s obligation to investors under the Special
Regime consisted of a flow of funds sufficient to cover the incentive payments to Special Regime
producers each year originally for the remainder of the useful life of the plant; later it related to
the remaining balance of the established 20 or 25 year period. Those payment obligations can
easily be conceived as a sort of amortization schedule. Until 2014, these were financed by

Respondent’s five major utilities.

74. Now imagine that, instead of financing these Special Regime costs as Respondent
chose to do here, Respondent had gone to a major international bank and entered into a loan
agreement that allowed Respondent to cover the Special Regime tariff deficit. Under these
circumstances, having undertaken to repay the loan in accordance with its terms, does it seem
realistic or possible that Respondent might then rely on its right to regulate, or appeal for a margin
of appreciation to protect it from default? Many sovereign governments were shocked by the crisis
of 2007-8. The growth of the tariff deficit was but one aspect of a larger macroeconomic crisis. It
would seem that recourse to a private financial institution, or the World Bank or IMF, or a
renegotiation of debt might have been a more appropriate solution. Surely this analogy to the
situation of Special Regime beneficiaries is not perfect, but this arbitrator considers the reasoning
to be sound and finds Respondent’s arguments in defense of Claimants’ claims based on broad
sovereign discretion to regulate to be specious. I tip my hat to the skill of Respondent’s legal team,

but I am not persuaded.

V. Appropriate Deference: Proportionality (As Conceived and as Applied
A. Appropriate Deference

75. As an arbitrator attempting in good faith to give respect and appropriate
deference to policy decisions of a sovereign government, many questions come to mind. But, in
the dispute before us, the first and most serious question is, “To which legitimate and sovereign
government of the Kingdom of Spain shall we defer?” Respondent gradually developed and
refined the characteristics of the Special Regime beginning in 1998. It settled, with the enactment
of RD 434/2004 and subsequent provisions, on a regulatory structure that was intended to attract
major RE investments, and was very successful in doing so. Having attracted major RE
investments on this basis and with RE plants already in place and committed to operate for their

useful life (or for 20 to 25 years, as later amendment provided), the Kingdom was faced with a

27

financial crisis involving multiple contributing factors. Respondent decided to move forcefully to
deal with this crisis., and, in 2013-14, enacted the Disputed Measures. In doing so it changed the

fundamental rules pursuant to which these investment had been made.

76. The Tribunal has accorded to Respondent a wide degree of deference. This is
accomplished by giving credence to Respondent’s sophisticated and elaborate effort to
demonstrate that Claimants were only entitled to a “reasonable return.” It is understandable that
Respondent might have utilized the means that it did given the predicament in which the
government found itself. In the circumstances, it is also understandable for a tribunal to attempt
to somehow honor fully both the sovereign decisions of 2004 and 2013-14. But we are not charged
with deciding this dispute ex aequo et bono. Respondent also appeals to and purports to apply the

principles of proportionality. To this final consideration, we now turn.

B. Proportionality

77. It seems that someone once asked the American author and humorist, Mark
Twain, what he thought of the music of Richard Wagner. Twain did not pretend to expertise in
classical music. “People tell me,” Twain said, “that Wagner’s music is much better than it sounds.”
This arbitrator does not pretend to expertise regarding the respected principle of proportionality.
But, it is clear to me that proportionality, at least as it applied to these investors, is not nearly as

good as it sounds.

78. To examine this, we return to the three stage process of proportionality analysis
summarized at § 17, supra: First, were the Measures addressed to a legitimate government
objective (rather than an arbitrary or corrupt purpose)? Here there was clearly a need to deal with
a number of serious economic problems, including the costs arising from the tariff deficit. In these

circumstances, the Measures would therefore be considered “suitable.”

79. Second, having found the objective suitable, were the Measures “necessary,” i.e.,
reasonable/appropriate. As stated in the Decision, the issue here is not whether there was a state
of necessity precluding wrongfulness.** The Decision recognizes that passing this step is more

difficult but concludes that the Measures do pass that test. My understanding, however, is that

 

+8 Decision 4 559; Cf. Cl. Reply 4 506, 585-7.
28

where the impact on a party is harsh, the threshold of “necessity” must be substantially raised.*?
Based on the reasoning provided, it seems to this arbitrator that the correct answer could be, and
should be, “no.” These Measures were not “necessary” because, if this was, in fact, one element
of a much larger macroeconomic crisis, there were many other ways to obtain the funds to resolve
it.

80. But the Tribunal reaches the opposite conclusion on this step, and so we must
proceed to look at the impact of the Measures on the affected parties, the RWE Claimants. Without
repeating the changes made in 2013-14, it should suffice to supply the Decision’s language
regarding impact on the Claimants.

“Overall, Claimants plants are impacted by a drop in future revenue in excess of

EUR 400 million, with Claimants suffering a 54% reduction in forecasted cash

flows from their plants. These are by any standards very substantial reductions.”>°
The Tribunal concludes that by allowing Claimants their return of 7.398%, Respondent has used
an acceptable standard to protect the Measures, generally, from being declared
“disproportionate.” The Tribunal does find a violation of the FET standard, but only to the
extent that seven of Claimants’ plants had returns below that minimum return figure. In other
words, with that sole exception, the Tribunal finds the Measures to have successfully passed each
of the three requisites of proportionality analysis. I see this matter differently.

81. First, as an arbitrator functioning as part of an institution based on the rule of
law, I find it impossible to condone the fundamental procedural elements utilized by Respondent
in establishing the Disputed Measures. Claimants were invited to invest in Spain on specific terms
and conditions. As acknowledged earlier, it is not that these conditions could not be changed, but
investors were protected against “a complete dismantling of the very legal framework constructed
to attract investors.” See, 954-56, supra. Putting aside investments made before 2004, Claimants,
in the case of each specific investment, were found by Respondent to qualify under the conditions

established for the Special Regime. Claimants successfully operated their RE plants, paid their

*” ECtHR, Sporrong and Lénnroth v Sweden, 23 September 1982, Series A, No. 5, para 73. See also Van Dijk and
van Hoof, Theory and Practice of the European Convention on Human Rights, 3"!. Ed.(The Hague, Boston:
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1998) at 629;; Burke-White and von Staden, ‘Investment Protection in Extraordinary
Times” 48 Virginia Journal of International Law (2008) at 347

59 Decision {[569(a) — based on Compass Lexecon slide No. 38 and Dr. Spiller at Day 3/190. These figures do not
appear to have been disputed. See Mr. Perez at Day 5/56. Also, Slide 39, based on Compass Lexecon second
report.

29

taxes, and generally conducted themselves as responsible corporate citizens. After operating
successfully for about 10 years, I find it impossible to accept, in terms of any understanding of the
tule of law, that Claimants — and other Special Regime investors -- were subjected to the “time
machine” introduced by the Disputed Measures. Lawyers everywhere, I am confident, understand
the fundamental inequity of a State inviting and accepting investment on one set of conditions and
then, for its own reasons, establishing new rules to be applied “as if” they had been in force in the

first place.*!

82. It may be that under Spanish law, a measure is only considered to be retroactive
when a party is actually required to repay to the State amounts it had already earned in full
compliance with the law. It may also be that, under Spanish law, there is no legal problem if a
measure, merely, goes back to recalculate earnings beginning in 2004 and uses those subsequently
determined amounts of “over-remuneration” to reduce remuneration to which foreign investors
would otherwise be entitled for the remainder of the 20 or 25 years that their installations will be
in operation. But this arbitrator finds no reason to believe that such treatment passes muster under
the FET standard. Respondent’s apparent efforts to avoid retroactively reducing Claimants’
earnings from 2004-2013-14 below 7.398% cannot rectify the situation. I believe that it is not
possible to justify these actions in terms of due process of law and I would have found them clearly

to be found wrongful under the FET standard.

83. But should proportionality analysis change this result? The Decision, after all,
places on one side of the scale the very substantial impact on Claimants. On the other scale,
according to the Decision, is placed the impressive tariff deficit and the entire financial health of
the Kingdom of Spain. But this arbitrator believes that proper respect for both parties requires
respect for their carefully considered policy decisions. Spain decided in 2004 and onward that it
urgently wanted to attract investment in renewable energy. It actively sought and was successful
in attracting billions of Euros in foreign investment. Claimants and many others responded to that
call and behaved as responsible corporate citizens. It is undisputed that the cost of money on
capital markets did not change from 2004 to 2013-14. Moreover there is no evidence that the

conduct of the Claimants or others similarly situated was the cause of the growth of the tariff

5! See generally, Legitimate Expectations and Informal Administrative Representations, Hector A. Maiiral, Oxford
University Press 2010.

30

deficit. The real cause was a macroeconomic crisis for Spain, resulting largely from the world
economic crisis of 2007-08 and perhaps some sort of budget stretching in prior years — a

phenomenon with which the citizen of virtually every democratic nation is, unfortunately, familiar.

84. If the above is correct, the Disputed Measures, per se, to constitute wrongful
action under international investment law and I would have preferred that they be treated as such.
Without, in any way criticizing proportionality analysis per se,, my view of the lesson of this case
is that proportionality, as applied in this dispute, points in a rather dangerous direction. It could
mean that every time a State encounters a macroeconomic crisis, foreign investors become fair
game — because the interests and legal rights of those private investors will be placed on one scale
—and the well-being of citizens and the State’s financial well-being will be placed on the other. If
that is what occurs, not only Respondent but nations with much more urgent developmental needs,

will find foreign investment hard to attract and maintain.

85. I reiterate that I join fully in both the Decision and the Award. It will be for
others to determine whether some or all the views expressed by my fellow arbitrators or those
expressed in this Separate Opinion will better serve the interests of justice, of international
investment law, or of international law generally. As for the role of this arbitrator, and with sincere

respect for my fellow arbitrators, I believe I have said what I must.

Signed
Judd L. Kessler

December 1, 2020
Date

 

31

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
RWE INNoGy GMBH
AND
RWE INnoGy AERSA S.A.U.

Claimants

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/34

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION, LIABILITY, AND CERTAIN ISSUES OF QUANTUM

 

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret, Arbitrator
Mr. Judd L. Kessler, Arbitrator
Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC, President

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: December 30, 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing RWE Innogy GmbH and
RWE Innogy Aersa S.A.U:

Mr. Antonio Vazquez-Guillén
Ms. Marie Stoyanov

Ms. Virginia Allan

Mr. David Ingle

Mr. Pablo Torres

Ms. Patricia Rodriguez

Allen & Overy LLP

Serrano 73

28006 Madrid

Spain

and

Mr. Jeffrey Sullivan

Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP
Temple Avenue

London, EC4Y 0HB

United Kingdom

Representing Kingdom of Spain:

Mr. José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Mrs. Elena Ofioro Sainz

Mr. Roberto Fernandez Castilla
Mrs. Maria José Ruiz Sanchez

Mr. Diego Santacruz Descartin

Mr. Antolin Fernandez Antufia

Mr. Javier Torres Gella

Ms. Amaia Rivas Kortazar

Mrs. Patricia Froehlingsdorf Nicolas
Mr. Pablo Elena Abad

Mr. Alberto Torré Molés

Mr. Rafael Gil Nievas

Ms. Alicia Segovia Marco
Abogacia General del Estado
Depto. Arbitrajes Internacionales
c/Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16
2*. Planta

28004 Madrid

Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES .....c.ccscsssssssssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessssessseees 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
A, REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION sssessssssssssscsssseesssssnsesesssnsesscsesnsesee 1

B. CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

 

 

 

C. WRITTEN AND ORAL PHASES OF THE PROCEEDING...ssssesssesssesssesssesssesssesssessseseseseseesses 2
THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF .......cc.csssssssssssssssssssesssseees 23
A. THE CLAIMANTS’ CLAIMS 23
B. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF....sssssssssssscssssssssssecesesessecececssssesesessnsnsnseeesee 24
C. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION 26
LEGAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND...
A. THE SPECIAL REGIME: LEGAL AND ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK onssssssssesssesssessssssesssesese 28
(1) The 1997 Electricity Law (Law 54/1997) .....ssssssssssessescsessessessesnessceneeneeseenneenes 28

(2) Royal Decree 2818/1998 (“RD 2818/1998”) and the Plan for Renewable
Energy Promotion 2000-2010 (“2000 PER”).....

 

(3) Royal Decree 436/2004 and Further Implementing Regulations, including
Royal Decree No. 661/2007

a. Royal Decree 436/2004 (“RD 436/2004’’) ...
b. The 2005-2010 Plan for Renewable Energy (“2005 PER”;
c. Royal Decree Law 7/2006 (“RDL 7/2006”) .
d. Royal Decree No. 661/2007 of 25 May 2007 (“RD 661/2007”) ......s+1+1000 40

   
  

 

 

e. Royal Decree Law 6/2009 (“RDL 6/2009”) and the Pre-Assignment
Regi 48
f- Further developments in the Special Regime 2009-2010... 50
B. THE CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENTS IN SPAIN ssscosssssscsnscsnscenscssscenscenscenscenscenscenscenscenscsnes 54
C. SPAIN’S MEASURES AND THE NEW REGIME ......cssssssssssssssssesecscecesescsessssssesesesesessceceseee 62
a. The CNE report of 7 March 2012; the MOU of 20 July 2012... 63
b, Law 15/2012 64
c. RDL 2/2013, RDL 9/2013 and Law 44/2013 vsssssssssssssessseessseesssseeseeesseess 65
d. The impact of Spain’s measures on the Claimants’ investments .........1+ 69
e. European Commission State Aid Procedures .....sssssesseevesvesveseieserierieeee 71
D. THE SUPREME COURT JUDGMENTS ..essscssscssscssscssscnsscnsccssccssccnsccnsccnsccssscnnscasecsnccnsecnsces 73
JURISDICTION 74

 

A. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS 74

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ CORPORATE RESTRUCTURE
C. THE INTRA-EU OBJECTION 77
(1) The Parties’ Positi: 77
a. The Respondent’s Positi 77
b. The Claii ? Positic 83
(2) The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Submission............sssseseeeeeeees 87
(3) The Achmea Jud 88
a. The Respondent’s Position on the Achmed JUdQMeNt .....ssssssveeereerververs 90
b. The Claimants’ Position on the Achmea Judgment
(4) The European Commission’s Updated Amicus Curiae Submission............... 94
a. The Respondent’s Position on the EC’s Updated Submission .........1+000+ 96
b. The Claimants’ Position on the EC’s Updated Submission... 97
(5) The Declarations of 15-16 January 2019
a. The Respondent’s Position on the 2019 Declarations... 99
b. The Claimants’ Position on the 2019 Declaration .....s.ssssseerereervers 101
(6) The Tribunal’s Analysis
a. The law applicable to the intra-EU objection...ccssssssssssssseessseevsseevseeees 102
b, Interpretation and application of Article 26(1) ECT pursuant to the VCLT.
105
c. The Respondent’s argument that EU law applies and prevails........... 15
d. Conclusion re the intra-EU objection...o.ssssssserserverveevesvesresressensensensennes 123
D. THE TAX OBJECTION 123
(1) The Parties’ Positi 123
a. The Respondent’s Positic 123
b. The Claii Pe
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi
LIABILITY
A. APPLICABLE LAW
B. ATTRIBUTION AND AUTHORISATION.
C. ARTICLE 10(1) OF THE ECT: ISSUES OF INTERPRETATION WITH RESPECT TO STABLE

 

 

CONDITIONS AND LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS ..ssssssssssssesesseeeeceseee: 135
(1) The Parties’ Positi 135
a. The Claii ? Positic 135

 

b. The R dent’s Positic 139

iii

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
a. The first sentence of Article 10(1
b. The second sentence of Article 10(1): FET.
RWE’s CASE ON BREACH OF ARTICLE 10(1) BY REFERENCE TO ALLEGED

 
  
 

 

 

 

LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS 156
(1) The Parties’ Positi 156
a. The Claii ? Positic 156
b. The Respondent’s Positic 161

 

 

(2) The Tribunal’s Analys'

 
 
  

a. The significance of the time when the Investments were made.

b. The question of whether, as a matter of fact, the Claimants relied on the
RD 661/2007 regime in making investments post-2007 ...scssssssessseessseeesseeees 168

c. Due diligence

 

 

d,. The decisions of the Spanish Supreme Court

e. Do the Claimants | have legitimate expectations based on specific

 

 

 

of the Respond 189
f Conclusions as to the Clai ’ case on legitil exp i
disproportionalit 198
FAILURE TO CREATE STABLE CONDITIONS ...ccssssssssssssscssssscessessserssnssesssnssessenssersenecors 225
(1) The Parties’ P

 

a. The Claii Pe

b. The Respondent’s Pe
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
THE DISPUTED MEASURES WERE UNREASONABLE ..sssscsssssssssssscessesssersssssersensserenesors 234
(1) The Parties’ P

a. The Claii Pe

b. The Respondent’s Pe
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

 

 

 

BREACH OF TRANSPARENCY
(1) The Parties’ P
a. The Claii Pe

 

b. The Respondent’s P%

(2) The Tribunal’s Analys'
VIOLATION OF THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE

 

(1) The Parties’ P
a. The Claii Pe
b. The Respondent’s P%
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
VII. REPARATION
A. RESTITUTION
(1) The Parties’ P
a. The Claii Pe
b. The Respondent’s Pe
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
B. COMPENSATION
(1) The Parties’ P
a. The Claii Pe
b. The Respondent’s P%
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
VIII. DECISION

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF DEFINED TERMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

The Claimants’ Exhibit

 

 

 

 

 

C-[#]
The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated
Cl. Mem. 26 February 2016
The Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief dated 28
Cl. PHB July 2017, as revised on 7 August 2017
. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated
Cl. Rej. 2 March 2017
The Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and
Cl. Reply Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 11
November 2016
CL-[#] The Claimants’ Legal Authority

 

Cl. Skeleton

The Claimants’ Skeleton of the Case dated 24
April 2017

 

Energy Charter Treaty, adopted in Lisbon on

 

 

ECT 17 December 1994
. Hearing on the merits and jurisdiction held in
Hearing Paris, France on 15-20 May 2017
Convention on the Settlement of Investment
ICSID Convention

Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

 

R-[#]

 

The Respondent’s Exhibit

 

vi

 

 

 

 

 

RE Renewable Energy

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the
Resp. C-Mem. Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 20

May 2016

The Respondent’s Post Hearing Brief dated 14
Resp. PHB July 2017

The Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and
Resp. Rej.

Reply on Jurisdiction dated 19 January 2017

 

Resp. Skeleton

The Respondent’s Skeleton of the Case dated 5
May 2017

 

RL-[#]

The Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

RfA

The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration dated
16 December 2014

 

Tr. Day [#] [Speaker(s)] [page:line]

Transcript of the Hearing

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral Tribunal constituted on 4 November
2015

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’”) on the basis of the Energy Charter
Treaty which entered into force on 16 April 1998 for Germany and the Kingdom of Spain
(the “ECT or “Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October

1966 (the “ICSID Convention’).

2. The claimants are RWE Innogy GmbH (“RWE”), a company incorporated under the
laws of Germany, and RWE Innogy Aersa S.A.U. (“RWE Innogy Aersa’”’), a company
incorporated under the laws of the Kingdom of Spain (together, the “Claimants”). The

respondent is the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain’” or the “Respondent’”).

3. The Claimants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

4. This dispute relates to measures implemented by the government of Spain modifying the

regulatory and economic regime of renewable energy projects.

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION

5. On 19 December 2014, ICSID received a request for arbitration dated 16 December 2014
from RWE and RWE Innogy Aersa against Spain (the “Request”), together with Exhibits
C-001 to C-0015.

6. On 23 December 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in
accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the
registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d)
of ICSID’s Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings.

B.

Cc.

Il.

CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

By letter of 23 March 2015, the Claimants, noting that the Parties had not been able to
reach an agreement on the method for the appointment of the Tribunal within 60 days
after the registration of the Request, informed the Secretary-General that they chose the
formula provided for in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, according to which
the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and

the third and presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the Parties.

On 3 June 2015, the Parties informed the Centre of their agreement on the method for
appointing the presiding arbitrator. The President was to be appointed by agreement of
the Parties. Absent an agreement, there would be a ballot procedure, and in the event that
this resulted in no appointment, it was agreed that ICSID would then make the

appointment.

The Tribunal is composed of Mr Samuel Wordsworth QC, a national of the United
Kingdom, President, appointed by the Secretary-General of ICSID pursuant to the
Parties’ agreement; Mr Judd Kessler, a national of the United States, appointed by the
Claimants; and Ms Anna Joubin-Bret, a national of France, appointed by the Respondent.
Mr Kessler and Ms Joubin-Bret accepted their respective appointments on 3 April 2015
and 3 June 2015.

On 4 November 2015, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal
was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms Mercedes Cordido-
Freytes de Kurowski, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the

Tribunal.

WRITTEN AND ORAL PHASES OF THE PROCEEDING

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with

the Parties on 14 December 2015 by teleconference. The Parties confirmed that the

Tribunal was properly constituted and that no party had any objection to the appointment

of any Member of the Tribunal.

Following the first session, on 15 December 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order
No. 1 recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters and the decision of
the Tribunal on disputed issues. Procedural Order No. | provides, inter alia, that the
applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the
procedural languages would be English and Spanish, and that the place of proceeding
would be the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. Procedural Order No. 1 also sets out

the agreed timetable for the various phases of the proceeding.

On 15 December 2015, the European Commission filed an Application for Leave to
Intervene as Non-Disputing Party pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2) (“EC’s First
Application”).

At the Tribunal’s invitation, on 8 January 2016, each party filed observations on the EC’s
First Application of 15 December 2015. The Respondent filed together with its
submission Legal Authorities RL-0001 to RL-0003.

On 10 February 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 dismissing the EC’s
First Application pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2). The Tribunal noted that the
proceeding was still at a very early stage, the Respondent had not yet raised any
jurisdictional objections. The Tribunal felt that it was ill-equipped at the time to assess
whether the European Commission’s submission would assist it in the determination of
an issue related to the proceeding by bringing a perspective, particular knowledge or

insight that is different from that of the Parties.

On 26 February 2016, the Claimants filed a Memorial on the Merits together with its
supporting documentation (“Claimants’ Memorial” or “Cl. Mem.”), including: witness
statements of Mr Hans Biinting, Mr Ulrich Schafer, Mr Alan Henderson, and Mr Robert
Navarro; the expert report of Compass Lexecon dated 24 February 2016, together with
Exhibits CLEX-001 to CLEX-0147; Exhibits C-0016 to C-0212; and Legal Authorities
CL-0001 to CL0094.

20.

21,

22.

23.

24.

On 7 April 2016, the Claimants notified the Tribunal that they were going through a

corporate restructuring process.

On 13 April 2016, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on the Claimants’
letter of 7 April 2016.

On 21 April 2016, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it reserved its right to
submit its comments about the Claimants’ restructuring process at the timely procedural

step.

By letter of 25 April 2016, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s letter and
requested the Tribunal to instruct the Respondent to refrain from making any untimely
submissions. This was followed by the Respondent’s comments by letter of 29 April

2016.

After consultation with the Parties, on 11 May 2016, the President of the Tribunal
confirmed that the Hearing would be held at the World Bank Conference Centre in Paris,

France from 15 May until 20 May 2017 (the “Hearing”).

On 20 May 2016, the Tribunal took note that the Respondent would comment on the
Claimants’ corporate restructuring process in its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and
Memorial on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal also allowed the Claimants to raise any
objections to the Respondent’s comments if they saw fit, as long as reference was made

to the Claimants’ letter of 24 March 2016.

On the same date and in accordance with the procedural calendar, the Respondent filed
a Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction together with supporting
documentation (“Respondent’s Counter-Memorial” or “Resp. C - Mem”), including:
the witness statement of Mr Juan Ramén Ayuso; the expert report of BDO dated 20 May
2016; Exhibits R-0001 to R-0254; and Legal Authorities RL-0001 to RL-0067.

On 20 June 2016, the Claimants submitted a copy of the agreement regarding the merger

by absorption of RWE Innogy GmbH by RWE International SE.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

On 21 June 2016, the European Commission filed a Second Application for Leave to
intervene as a Non-Disputing Party pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2) (“EC’s
Second Application”).

On 24 June 2016, the President of the Tribunal invited: (i) the Parties to provide any
observations on the EC’s Second Application; and (ii) the Respondent to comment on

the merger agreement provided by the Claimants on 20 June 2016.
On 5 July 2016, each party filed their observations on the EC’s Second Application.

On the same date, the Respondent filed its comments on the Claimants’ merger

agreement provided on 20 June 2016.

On 13 July 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 regarding the EC’s Second

Application, making the following ruling:

“Ruling:

(i) Subject to (ii) below, the European Commission’s Application for
Leave to Intervene as a Non-Disputing Party dated June 21, 2016 is
accepted with respect to sub-paragraphs 27(i) and (ii) of the
Application.

(ii) The deadline for filing of the European Commission’s written amicus
curiae submission will be one month from the date of this Order. The
submission will be limited to the matters of jurisdiction identified in the
Application, and will be limited to 25 pages in length (following the
same format as the Application). No permission is given to the
European Commission to attend any hearing in these proceedings.

(iii) The Application is rejected with respect to its sub-paragraph 27(iii).
Accordingly, the European Commission shall have no access to the
documents filed in this case.

(iv) There be no order as to costs (either with respect to the determination
of the Application or the subsequent consideration and determination
of such written amicus curiae submission as is submitted in accordance
with the above).”

30.

31.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

On 22 July 2016, following exchanges between the Parties, the Claimants filed the
Parties’ Joint Document Production Application with their respective Redfern Schedules
for the Tribunal to decide on production of documents. On 26 July 2016, the Respondent
confirmed its agreement to the Joint Document Production Application submitted by the
Claimants. Together with the Parties’ Joint Document Production Application, the

Claimants filed two annexes, which they later identified as Exhibits C-0213 and C-0214.

On 1 August 2016, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that the Claimants’ Redfern
Schedule submitted on 22 July 2016 was incomplete, as a number of the requests had
been inadvertently omitted. The Claimants filed a corrected version of the Joint
Document Production Application of 22 July 2016, that replaced the one originally filed.
On 2 August 2016, the Respondent confirmed its agreement to the text contained in the

corrected version.

On 11 August 2016, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2), the European
Commission filed a written amicus curiae submission in accordance with the Tribunal’s

instruction on Procedural Order No. 3 (“EC’s amicus curiae submission’).

On 23 September 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 concerning the

Parties’ Joint Document Production Application.

On 29 September 2016, the Parties submitted an agreed amendment to the procedural

calendar.

On 30 September 2016, the Respondent filed a submission regarding the Spanish Council
of Ministers’ discussions Minutes as outlined in Procedural Order No. 4. On 7 October

2016, the Claimants filed their objections in such regard.

On 25 October 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 addressing the
Claimants’ requests on production of documents regarding discussions of the Council of

Ministers of Spain.

On 3 November 2016, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement to a one-week

extension of the deadline for the filing of the Reply and the amended procedural calendar.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

On the same date, the Tribunal confirmed the revised procedural calendar, as agreed by
the Parties: the Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
would be filed on 11 November 2016; the Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and
Reply on Jurisdiction on 13 January 2017, and the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

on 24 February 2017.

On 11 November 2016, the Claimants submitted a Reply on the Merits and Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Claimants’ Reply” or “Cl. Reply”), with supporting
documents including: a second expert report of Compass Lexecon; Exhibits C-0215 to
C-0332; Legal Authorities CL-0095 to CL-0160; and four appendixes: Appendix 1 —
Table of Spanish Supreme Court Judgments, Appendix 2 — the Claimants’ Consolidated
Table of Defined Terms, Appendix 3 — The Claimants’ Consolidated List of Factual
Exhibits and Appendix 4 — The Claimants’ List of Legal Authorities.

On 24 November 2016, the Respondent filed a request dated 18 November 2016 for the
Tribunal to decide on the admissibility of the Award rendered in [solux Netherlands BV
v Spain (SCC Arbitration V2013/153) (“Isolux award”) as new evidence on the record,
together with a request for the Tribunal to order the Parties and their counsel to keep the
Isolux award strictly confidential. The Respondent also requested that both Parties be

allowed to submit a brief submission regarding the Jsolux award.

On 28 November 2016, following an invitation from the Tribunal of 27 November 2016,
the Claimants filed their observations to the Respondent’s request of 24 November 2016.
In their communication, the Claimants invited the Respondent to confirm whether Isolux
Netherland BV had consented for the Jsolux award to be included in the record of this

proceeding.

By communication of the same date, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on
the Claimants’ communication and, in particular, to confirm whether Isolux Netherlands

BV had consented for the Jsolux award to be put on the record in this proceeding.

The Parties’ subsequent communications (the Respondent’s communications of 29

November 2016, 15 and 22 December 2016, and the Claimants’ communications of 5

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

and 16 December 2016) referred to the issue of confidentiality that had been raised with

respect to the /solux award.

On 11 January 2017, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement to extend the
deadlines for the Parties’ Memorials and translations. On the same date, the Tribunal
confirmed the extension of the deadlines for the remaining submissions and translations,

as agreed by the Parties.

On 19 January 2017, the Respondent filed a Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on
Jurisdiction together with its supporting documentation (“Respondent’s Rejoinder” or
“Resp. Rej.”), including: the second witness statement of Juan Ram6n Ayuso; the second
expert report of BDO, Exhibits R-0254 Bis to R-0336; and Legal Authorities RL-0068
to RL-0087.

On 20 January 2017, the Respondent requested the Tribunal for leave to include under a
footnote reference to a legal authority that was inadvertently omitted from its Rejoinder

on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction of 19 January 2017.

On 24 January 2017, the Tribunal authorised the Respondent to include a legal authority
as a footnote reference, and to provide updated Spanish and English versions of its

Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction.

By letter of 2 February 2017, the Respondent requested leave from the Tribunal to file
two additional documents which had become known to the Respondent after the
submission of the Rejoinder of the Merits: (i) the Claimants’ Cuatrecasas Legal Report
titled “changes to the legal framework applicable to solar thermal plants” as Exhibit R-
337, and (ii) the European Commission’s Decision regarding the ECT, in a Czech State
Aid procedure, which is publicly available in the European Commission website, as
Exhibit R-0338. The Respondent also ratified its request to add to the record of the

proceedings the /solux award.

On 3 February 2017, the Tribunal invited the Claimants to make any observations they

might have on the Respondent’s request. The Tribunal also informed the Parties that it

49.

50.

51.

53.

54.

55.

would decide on the Respondent’s request regarding the /solux award, together with the

Respondent’s request of 2 February 2017.

On 9 February 2017, the Claimants filed observations to the Respondent’s request of 2
February 2017.

On 13 February 2017, the Tribunal posed certain questions to the Parties concerning the
issue of confidentiality raised with respect to the /solux award, and fixed the deadlines
for the Parties to submit their respective responses (the Respondent by 20 February 2017
and the Claimants by 27 February 2017).

On 15 February 2017, at the request of the Respondent, to which the Claimants had no
objections, the Tribunal extended the above deadlines to 27 February 2017 for the
Respondent and 13 March 2017 for the Claimants.

Pursuant to the revised schedule, the Parties filed their respective responses to the

Tribunal’s questions concerning the confidentiality of the /solux award.

By letter of 24 February 2017, the Tribunal invited: (i) the Claimants to provide a “Memo
on the fulfilment by Marquesado Solar SL of the conditions described in sections e) and
S) of article 4 of Royal Decree 6/2009 of 30 April for the registering of the thermosolar
plant promoted by it in the Registry for Pre-Assignation of Tariff’ issued by CMS
Albifiana & Suarez de Lezo (the “Further CMS Note”), to which the Claimants had
referred to in their letter of 9 February 2017, and (ii) the Respondent to produce the

confidentiality order or agreement in the Jso/ux matter.

On 27 February 2017, the Claimants produced the Further CMS Note referred to in the
Claimants’ letter of 9 February 2017. On the same date, the Tribunal acknowledged
receipt of the Claimants’ submission and invited the Respondent to file a brief

submission, if it so wished, on the Further CMS Note.

On 2 March 2017, the Respondent submitted a response to the Tribunal’s invitation of

24 February 2017, clarifying that there was no further confidential agreement between

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

the Parties of the /solux matter different than the one established in the Procedural Order

No. 1 issued by the tribunal of the case.

On 2 March 2017, the Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (“Claimants’
Rejoinder” or “Cl. Rej.”), including Exhibits C-0333 to C-0335, and three Appendixes:
Appendix 1 — the Claimants’ Consolidated List of Defined Terms, Appendix 2 — the
Claimants’ Consolidated List of Factual Exhibits and Appendix 3 — the Claimants’ List

of Legal Authorities.

On 6 March 2017, the Respondent filed a submission regarding the Further CMS Note,

in accordance with the Tribunal’s directions of 24 February 2017.

By letter of 8 March 2017, the Claimants requested the opportunity to file a pre-hearing
skeleton brief, recalling that such a possibility was left open during the first session to be
considered at a later stage. By communication of the same date, the Respondent objected
to the Claimants’ proposal, mainly for reasons of cost, and because in its view such

additional pleadings were not reasonably justified.

In preparation for the Hearing, by letter of 13 March 2017, the Tribunal (i) invited the
Parties to prepare an agreed consolidated USB with the Parties’ submissions; (ii)
proposed dates for a Pre-Hearing Organisational Meeting provided under Section 19.1 of
Procedural Order No. 1; (iii) provided a Draft Agenda for the Pre-Hearing Organisational
Meeting, inviting the Parties to submit a joint proposal advising the Tribunal of any
agreements on the agenda items, or of their respective positions; and (iv) after
considering the position of the Parties on the question of skeleton arguments/outline
submissions, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit Skeleton Arguments/Outline
Submissions of up to 20 pages long, as follows: (i) the Claimants by three weeks before
the hearing (i.e., by Monday, 24 April 2017), and (ii) the Respondent by ten days prior
to the hearing (i.e., by Friday, 5 May 2017).

On 18 March 2017, the Tribunal confirmed that the Pre-Hearing Organisational Meeting
would be held by telephone conference on Thursday, 30 March 2017.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

On 22 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 concerning the
Respondent’s request filed on 24 November 2016 for authorisation to add the Jsolux

award to the record, making the following ruling:

(i) “Subject to (iii) below, the Respondent is not excluded from deploying
before this Tribunal extracts from the Isolux award containing the
reasoning of that tribunal, together with an English translation of the
same.

(ii) The Respondent shall inform the Tribunal within 7 days of the steps
taken, if any, pursuant to the invitation to it at item No. 41 of the
Redfern Schedule appended to PO No. 4.

(iii) The Parties shall seek to agree between themselves any specific
confidentiality protections that they may consider appropriate with
respect to the Isolux award and any decision or award that may
eventually be made available to this Tribunal in accordance with (ii)
above, and shall report back to the Tribunal in this respect within 14
days.”

On 28 March 2017, the Parties submitted a Joint Draft Agenda for the Pre-Hearing
Organisational Meeting, including the Parties’ confidentiality agreement on the use of

the Isolux award.

On 28 and 29 March 2017, each of the Parties submitted a proposed schedule for the

Hearing.

On 30 March 2017, the Tribunal held a Pre-Hearing Organisational Meeting with the

Parties by telephone conference.

On 31 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 reflecting the agreements

and decisions taken during the Pre-Hearing Organisational Meeting.

On 6 April 2017, in accordance with Tribunal’s letter of 2 February 2017, the Respondent
filed two new exhibits: (i) R-0337 - Memorandum on Changes to the legal framework
applicable to solar thermal plants by Cuatrecasas, dated 27 January 2011, and (ii) R-
0338 - State Aid SA.40171 (2015/NN) — Czech Republic Promotion of electricity

production from renewable energy sources, dated 28 November 2016.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

On 18 April 2017, the Claimants filed their comments on the Respondent’s Exhibits R-

0337 and R-0338, and on 26 April 2017, the Respondent sent a message in such regard.

On 19 April 2017, the Claimants filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on the
admissibility of five exhibits as new evidence. On 25 April 2017, the Respondent filed
observations on the Claimants’ request. By letter of 25 April 2017, the Tribunal took note
that the Respondent had no objection to the filing by the Claimants of two of the exhibits:
Exhibit C-0339 - Order ETU/130/2017 dated 17 February 2017, and Exhibit C-0340 -
CNMC Report on the draft order dated 12 January 2017. As a result, the Tribunal
decided to admit those two documents into the record as the Claimants’ Exhibits C-0339

and C-0340.

On 24 April 2017, the Claimants filed a Skeleton Brief, as did the Respondent on 5 May
2017.

On 27 April 2017, the Claimants filed a response to the Respondent’s observations of 25

April 2017 on the Claimants’ request for admissibility of new evidence of 19 April 2017.

By letter of 28 April 2017, the Tribunal authorised the Claimants to add into the record:
Exhibit C-0336 (Jberdrola Presentation “Renewable Energies in Spain: New Regulation
(RD 661-2007) dated 29 May 2007); Exhibit C-0337 (Iberdrola’s Presentation
“Renewable Energies in Spain: New Regulation (RD 661-2007)” dated 22 October
2009); and Exhibit C-0338 (Iberdrola Renovables, S.A. and Subsidiaries Audit Report,
Consolidated Financial Statements and Consolidated Management Report for the year
ended December 31, 2010 dated 22 February 2011). The Tribunal also authorised the
Respondent to add into the record: Iberdrola’s presentation called “Renewable Energies:
New Regulation’, dated 17 March 2004. This presentation was filed by the Respondent
on 10 May 2017 as Exhibit R-0339.

On 8 May 2017, the Claimants filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on the
admissibility of the award rendered in EJSER Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar
Luxembourg S.a r.l. v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36) (the “Eiser

award”’) as new evidence on the record. On 9 May 2017, the Respondent stated that it

12

2B.

74.

did not have objections to the Claimants’ request. Accordingly, with the Tribunal’s
authorisation, on 10 May 2017, the Claimants filed the Eiser award in its English and

Spanish versions as CL-0170.

On 10 May 2017, with the Claimants’ agreement and the Tribunal’s authorisation, the
Respondent filed a Supreme Court Judgment of 12 April 2012 as Exhibit R-0144, to
replace another Judgment that had been mistakenly filed as Exhibit R-0144.

A hearing on the merits and jurisdiction was held at the World Bank Conference Centre
in Paris, France from 15 May to 19 May 2017 (the “Hearing”). The following persons

were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:
Mr Samuel Wordsworth QC President
Ms Anna Joubin-Bret Arbitrator
Mr Judd L. Kessler Arbitrator
ICSID Secretariat:
Ms Mercedes Cordido-Freytes Secretary of the Tribunal

de Kurowski

For the Claimants:

Counsel:

Mr Antonio Vazquez-Guillén Allen & Overy LLP
Mr Jeffrey Sullivan Allen & Overy LLP
Mr Antonio Jiménez-Blanco Allen & Overy LLP
Ms Marie Stoyanov Allen & Overy LLP
Ms Virginia Allan Allen & Overy LLP
Mr David Ingle Allen & Overy LLP
Mr Tomasz Hara Allen & Overy LLP
Ms Stephanie Hawes Allen & Overy LLP
Mr Gonzalo Jiménez-Blanco Allen & Overy LLP
Parties:

Mr Jutta Dissen Innogy (RWE)

Mr Gunnar Helberg Innogy (RWE)

75.

For the Respondent:
Counsel:
Mr Diego Santacruz

Mr Francisco Javier Torres

Ms Elena Ofioro
Mr Antolin Fernandez

Ms Patricia Frohlingsdorf

Parties:

Ms Carmen L6pez

Ms Carmen Maria Roa
Court Reporter(s):

Ms Claire Hill

Mr Leandro Iezzi

Ms Luciana Sosa

Interpreters:
Mr Jestis Getan Bornn

Ms Amalia Thaler de Klemm

Ms Roxana Dazin

Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Justice

IDEA
IDEA

English-Language Court
Reporter (The Court Reporter
Ltd)

Spanish-Language Court
Reporter (DR-Steno)
Spanish-Language Court
Reporter (DR-Steno)

English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants:

Witnesses:

Mr Hans Biinting
Mr Robert Navarro
Mr Alan Henderson

Experts:

Mr Pablo Spiller
Mr Antoén Garcia
Mr Alan Rozenberg
Mr Rui Pratinha

On behalf of the Respondent:

Witness:
Mr Juan Ayuso

Innogy (RWE)
Innogy (RWE)
Innogy (RWE)

Compass Lexecon
Compass Lexecon
Compass Lexecon
Compass Lexecon

IDEA

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

Experts:

Mr David Mitchell BDO
Mr Gervase Macgregor BDO
Ms Susan Blower BDO
Mr Eduardo Pérez BDO
Mr Javier Espel BDO
Mr Manuel Vargas BDO

By letter of 26 May 2017, the Tribunal (i) took note of the Parties’ agreement regarding
the further proceeding, as informed by the Parties during the last day of the Hearing, and
amended by the Parties’ emails of 26 May 2017; and (ii) posed a number of questions to

the Parties to be addressed in their Post-Hearing Briefs.

On 7 July 2017, the Parties filed the Final Transcripts of the Hearing, incorporating the

corrections agreed by the Parties.

By letter of 11 July 2017, the Claimants requested leave to submit two additional
documents into the record: (i) Transcript of the Spanish Parliamentary Session No. 13
on Energy, Tourism and Digital Agenda dated 28 June 2017 (as Exhibit C-0343); and
(ii) Article in Cinco Dias: “Nadal wants to cut renewables premium by half’ dated 26

June 2017 (as Exhibit C-0344).

By letter of 12 July 2017, the Respondent filed observations in such regard.

By communication of 13 July 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that unless either
party raised any objection by 14 July 2017, the Tribunal had decided (i) to extend the
deadline for the filing of the Parties’ simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs by two (2) weeks;
(ii) to authorise the Claimants to incorporate the Additional Documents into the record
as Exhibits C-0343 and C-0344); (iii) to invite the Respondent to submit any responsive
documents within ten days; and ( iv) that the Parties could comment as they saw fit on

the new documents in their Post-Hearing Briefs.

The Parties filed simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs on 28 July 2017, including answers
to the questions posed by the Tribunal on 26 May 2017. The Respondent filed with its
Post-Hearing Brief Exhibits R-0345 to R-0353.

83.

84.

85.

86.

By letter of 30 July 2017, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to (i) strike Exhibits R-
0345 to R-0353 from the record; (ii) strike paragraphs 174 and 182 from the
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief where the Respondent referred to those new exhibits;
and (iii) direct Spain to file a revised Post-Hearing Brief not containing paragraphs 174
and 182 and otherwise left unchanged for the exclusion of evidence. On 31 July 2017,
the Respondent filed observations on the Claimants’ request for the exclusion of the new

evidence.

On 31 July 2017, the Tribunal, considering that no prejudice would be caused to the
Claimants so long as they had the opportunity to respond to the new documents, admitted
them into the record, and invited the Claimants to comment on exhibits R-0345 through
R-0353. The Claimants were also encouraged to include any such comments in a revised
version of their Post-Hearing Brief. On 7 August 2017, the Claimants thus filed a revised

Post-Hearing Brief.

On 23 November 2017, the Respondent filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on the
admissibility of a Decision from the European Commission regarding the Spanish State
Aid Framework for Renewable Sources (the “EC Decision on State Aid”) into the
record, and to allow the Parties to file a short submission regarding the implications of
the EC Decision on the issues discussed in this proceeding. On 30 November 2017, the

Claimants filed observations on this request.

On 30 November 2017, following the resignation of Arbitrator Anna Joubin-Bret, the
Secretary-General notified the Parties of the vacancy on the Tribunal and the proceeding
was suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2). On 12 January 2018, Ms Anna
Joubin-Bret accepted her reappointment as arbitrator by the Respondent in accordance

with ICSID Arbitration Rule 11(1).

On 14 January 2018, the Tribunal decided to allow the introduction of the EC Decision
on State Aid onto the record on the basis that its relevance and weight would be assessed
by the Tribunal together with all the materials submitted. Subsequently, on 19 January
2018, the Respondent filed as its Legal Authority RL-0089 the European Commission’s
Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support

16

87.

88.

89.

for Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste,
together with a submission as to its relevance and importance. On 26 January 2018, the
Claimants filed their Reply to Respondent’s Comments on the European Commission’s

Decision SA.40348 (2015/NN).

On 2 March 2018, the Claimants filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on the
admissibility of the final award rendered in Novenergia II — Energy & Environment
(SCA) (Grand Duchy of Luxembourg), SICAR v Kingdom of Spain (SCC Arbitration
(2015/063)), dated 15 February 2018 (the “Novenergia award’) as an additional legal
authority into the record. The Claimants further requested that the Tribunal allow the
Parties to file brief comments on the relevance of the Novenergia award in the event that

the document was admitted into the record.

Following the Tribunal’s invitation, the Respondent filed observations on 9 March 2018
on the Claimants’ request of 2 March 2018, concerning the admissibility of new
documents. With regard to the Novenergia award, the Respondent requested leave from
the Tribunal to file the clarifications, corrections and/or complements of that award and
the further Judgment rendered by the competent Swedish Jurisdictional Court in the
appeal filed against the Novenergia award. The Respondent further requested
authorisation from the Tribunal to file into the record: (i) the award rendered in the Blusun
S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and Michael Stein v Italian Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/14/3), dated 27 December 2018 (the “Blusun award”); (ii) the Final award
rendered in the Mr Jiirgen Wirtgen, Mr Stefan Wirtgen, Mrs Gisela Wirtgen, JSW Solar
(zwei) GmbH & Co. KG v The Czech Republic, dated 11 October 2017 (the “Wirtgen
award”); and (iii) the Final Judgment issued by the Court of Justice of the European
Union (the “CJEU”), in Case C-284/16, Slowakische Republik v Achmea BV (the
“Achmea Judgment”).

Following the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimants filed a response on 13 March 2018 to
the Respondent’s observations and further request of 9 March 2018, concerning the

admissibility of new documents.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

On 15 March 2018, the Tribunal decided to allow the introduction into the record of (i)
the Novenergia award, together with, so far as they were in existence as of that date, any
clarifications, corrections and/or supplements to the Novenergia award and the Judgment
in the appeal filed against the Novenergia award; (ii) the Wirtgen award; and (iii) the
Achmea Judgment. The Tribunal invited the Parties to submit comments on their
relevance. The Respondent’s application to introduce into the record the Blusun award

was denied because it was already on the record.

On 22 March 2018, the Claimants requested leave from the Tribunal to file the

Novenergia award without having to wait for the Respondent’s further documents.

By email of 22 March 2018, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that an Application
for Clarification, Amendment and Correction of calculation errors of the Novenergia
award was filed on 14 March 2018, but that no Resolution had been issued yet. The
Respondent submitted with its communication: (i) the Respondent’s Comments on the
Achmea Judgment together with four annexes, including the Blusum award; (ii) the
Wirtgen award and the Dissenting Opinion, both as RL-89; and (iii) the Achmea
Judgment, as RL-90.

On 23 March 2018, the Claimants filed a request for the exclusion of the new legal
authorities attached as annexes to the Respondent’s comments to the Achmea Judgment
submitted on 22 March 2018. This was followed by the Respondent’s observations of the

same date.

On 28 March 2018, the Claimants filed comments on the Wirtgen award and the Achmea
Judgment. On 2 April 2018, the Claimants filed the Novenergia award, together with
their comments on its relevance. On 11 April 2018, the Claimants filed a revised
submission on the Achmea Judgment incorporating their observations on Annexes 2-4 to

the Respondent’s submission on the Achmea Judgment.

On 16 May 2018, the European Commission offered to update the EC’s amicus curiae
submission of 11 August 2016 in light of the Achmea Judgment, and set out its view on

the consequences of that judgment for pending arbitration cases based on the ECT (the

18

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

“EC’s Communication”). On 31 May 2018, the Tribunal invited each Party to file its

observations on the EC’s Communication.

On 29 May 2018, the Claimants requested leave (i) to introduce the award dated May 16,
2018 rendered in Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID
Case No. ARB/14/1) (the “Masdar award”) as an additional authority to the record; and
(ii) to allow the Parties to file simultaneous submissions on its relevance. On 30 May
2018, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on the Claimants’ request and, by
letter of 5 June 2018, as revised by letter of 6 June 2018, the Respondent filed its

observations.

On 6 June 2018, the Tribunal decided to allow the Claimants to introduce the Masdar
award as an additional authority, and the Parties to submit consecutive comments on its
relevance. The Tribunal emphasised (i) that it would not be assisted by any attempt to re-
litigate issues that were before the Masdar tribunal, and (ii) that the Masdar award might
(or might not) be of assistance to the Tribunal because of the persuasive (or otherwise)
nature of the reasoning on issues of law, and not because of the facts, given that the facts

in the present case are unique (just as those of the Masdar case).
On 7 June 2018, each Party filed observations on the EC’s Communication.

On 13 June 2018, the Claimants filed the Masdar award as CL-0191, together with their

comments thereon. The Respondent’s comments followed on 20 June 2018.

On 22 June 2018, the Tribunal accepted the European Commission’s invitation of 16

May 2018 to update the EC’s amicus curiae submission dated 11 August 2016.

On 13 July 2018, the European Commission filed its updated amicus curiae submission

(the “EC’s Updated Submission”), together with annexes | to 6.

On the same date, the Tribunal informed the Parties that, upon receipt of the EC’s
Updated Submission, the Respondent would be able to submit comments of up to three
pages within the following seven days, and then the Claimants likewise within a further

seven days.

104.

105.

106.

On 24 July 2018, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it had not been able to submit
its comments by the deadline, because of a hearing in another case, and requested leave
to submit its comments on 25 July 2018. On the same date, the Claimants informed the
Tribunal that although the deadline for the Respondent’s comments had expired, they

had no objections to the Respondent’s request.

Also, on 24 July 2018, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties, that the
Respondent’s request had been granted, with its comments due on 25 July 2018. The
Claimants would be afforded a similar extension of the deadline, if they so wished, in
which case their comments on the EC’s Updated Submission would be due by 6 August
2018. Accordingly, the Respondent filed its comments on 25 July 2018, and the
Claimants theirs on 6 August 2018.

On 10 August 2018, the Claimants requested leave (i) to introduce the award dated 15
June 2018 rendered in Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.a.r.1 and Antin
Energia Termosolar B.V. v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31) (the “Antin
award”’) as an additional authority to the record; and (ii) to allow the Parties to file
simultaneous submissions on its relevance. On 17 August 2018, the Respondent filed
observations on the Claimants’ request of 10 August 2018, regarding the Antin award.
On 20 August 2018, the Tribunal allowed the Claimants to introduce the Antin award as
an additional authority, and the Parties to submit consecutive comments on its relevance.
Thus, on 27 August 2018, the Claimants filed this award as CL-0192, together with their

comments thereon. The Respondent’s comments followed on 3 September 2018.

On 12 September 2018, the Claimants requested leave (i) to introduce the “Decision on
the Achmea Issue” dated 31 August 2018 issued in Vattenfall AB and others v Federal
Republic of Germany (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/12) (the Vattenfall Decision) as an
additional authority to the record; and (ii) to allow the Parties to file simultaneous

submissions on its relevance.

On 21 September 2018, the Respondent expressed that it did not have objections and, on
23 September 2018, the Tribunal authorised (i) Claimants to introduce the Vattenfall

Decision as an authority, as agreed by the Parties, and (ii) the Parties to submit

20

108.

109.

110.

consecutive comments on its relevance.! Thus on 2 October 2018, the Claimants filed
this Decision as CL-0193, together with their comments thereon. The Respondent’s

comments followed on 9 October 2018.

On 25 January 2019, the Respondent requested authorisation from the Tribunal to submit
to the record the “Declaration of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member
States, of 15 January 2015 on the legal consequences of the judgment of the Court of
Justice in Achmea and on Investment Protection in the European Union” (the

“Declaration of 15 January 2019”).

On the same date the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement to file

simultaneous submissions on costs on 8 February 2019.7

On 30 January 2019, the Claimants opposed the Respondent’s request of 25 January
2019, noting that in the event that the Tribunal was minded to allow the Respondent to
introduce the Declaration, the Claimants requested leave to introduce as additional
authorities to the record: (i) the “Declaration of the Representatives of the Governments
of the Member States, of 16 January 2019, on the enforcement of the Judgment of the
Court of Justice in Achmea and on investment protection in the European Union” signed
by the Representatives of the Governments of Finland, Luxembourg, Malta, Slovenia and
Sweden (the “Five Member States’ Declaration”); and (ii) the “Declaration of the
Representative of the Government of Hungary, of 16 January 2019, on the legal
consequences of the Judgment of the Court of Justice in Achmea and on investment

protection in the European Union’, signed by Hungary (“Hungary’s Declaration’).

' On 26 September 2018, Arbitrator Joubin-Bret, informed the Parties of her intention to participate in the Euro-
Mediterranean Community Conference in Madrid on 19 and 20 October 2018. The Claimants filed observations on 3
October 2018. Subsequently, by letter of 8 October 2018, Arbitrator Joubin-Bret clarified certain questions regarding
the conference program, and informed the Parties that she had decided to cancel her participation in the conference,
where she could be replaced by one of her colleagues.

? On 3 October 2018, the Tribunal had informed the Parties on the status of the Award and invited the Parties to confer
and submit to the Tribunal’s consideration an agreed date for the simultaneous filing of the Parties’ submissions on

costs.

21

114.

115.

On 1 February 2019, the Tribunal authorised the submission (i) by Respondent of the
Declaration; and (ii) by Claimants of the additional Declarations identified in Claimants’
letter of 30 January 2019, and fixed the deadlines for the Parties to submit comments on
their relevance. Accordingly, on 5 February 2019, the Respondent filed the Declaration
and the Claimants in turn introduced the Five Member State’s Declaration and Hungary’s
Declaration. In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the Respondent filed its

comments on 12 February 2019, and so did the Claimants on 19 February 2019.3
On 26 February 2019, each Party filed a Submission on Costs.*

On 11 April 2019, the Respondent filed a request for leave from the Tribunal to submit
the Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum rendered in the RREEF
Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux S.é.r.1
v Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30) (the “RREEF Decision”), on 30
November 2018, jointly with the Partially Dissenting Opinion. On 22 April 2019, the
Claimants filed observations on the Respondent’s request of 11 April 2019. On 25 April
2019, the Tribunal allowed the Respondent to introduce the Decision and Partial Dissent,

and the Parties to submit consecutive comments.

On 3 May 2019, the Respondent filed the RREEF Decision and the RREEF Partial
Dissent as RL-099EN and RL-100EN, respectively, together with their comments

thereon. The Claimants comments followed on 10 May 2019.

On 9 August 2019, the Claimants requested the Tribunal (i) to confirm that it had

sufficient availability to work expeditiously to issue the Award; (ii) to declare the

> On 25 February 2019, the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties the following message from the
President of the Tribunal: “J have recently become aware that, in a bilateral investment treaty case in which I am
instructed on issues of jurisdiction and liability (only), BDO (Mr Gervase MacGregor) is acting as the expert on
quantum for the opposing party (the case concerns the alleged expropriation and other BIT breaches with respect to
a Finnish investor's property in Egypt in the early 2000s). I have not been following the issues on quantum in that
case, have not read and will not read the report(s) prepared by BDO in that case, and will not attend the hearing
during the examination of the BDO expert or be in any way involved in that aspect of the case. The above of course
does not affect in any way my impartiality and independence as arbitrator in this case.”

+ On 6 February 2019, the Claimants had informed the Tribunal of the Parties’ agreement to request an extension of.
the deadline for the Parties to submit their submissions on costs until 26 February 2019. Following the Respondent’s
confirmation on 7 February 2019 of its agreement, on the same date the Tribunal confirmed the extension of the
deadline, as agreed by the Parties.

22

proceeding closed in accordance with Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules; and

(iii) to provide clarity as to when it intends to render its Award.

116. On 13 August 2019, the Tribunal provided the following update to the Parties: “Since its
letter of 3 October 2018, the Tribunal has met for deliberations in person, and has
additionally held multiple teleconferences and kept regular contact by email, almost on
a weekly basis. The Tribunal has concluded its deliberations and has very recently
completed its final draft, albeit that time must be allowed for final edits, translation, and

proofreading, a process which may push delivery into the early autumn (...)”.

Ill. | THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

A. THE CLAIMANTS’ CLAIMS

117. The Claimants submit that Spain has violated Article 10(1) of the ECT, and that the

Claimants are entitled to relief accordingly. In particular, it is alleged that:

i) “Spain has breached its obligation to accord, at all times, FET to the
Claimants’ investments. This is because:

a. Spain’s measures have violated the Claimants’ reasonable and
legitimate expectations at the time the relevant investment decisions
were made;

b. Spain has failed to provide a stable and predictable regulatory
framework;

c. Spain’s implementation of the New Regime was not transparent, and
the New Regime does not provide certainty as to the economic and
regulatory regime that will apply to the Claimants’ investments in
Spain from now on;

d. Spain’s actions are profoundly unreasonable, as Spain’s
justifications behind the measures (the Tariff Deficit and
overcapacity of the RE infrastructure) are the result of Spain's own
regulatory decisions; and

e. Spain’s actions are disproportionate, as there is no reasonable
relationship between the burden imposed on the Claimants’

investments and the stated goal of addressing the Tariff Deficit.

23

Spain’s measures had a disproportionate impact on RWE’s
investments — significantly reducing the fair market value of the
Claimants’ investments and causing damages in an amount superior
to EUR 275 million — and were adopted notwithstanding Spain’s
alternative options to adopt less harmful measures with respect to
ECT-protected investments.

ii) Spain caused substantial impairment of the Claimants’ investments
through unreasonable measures; and

iii) Spain’s wrongful measures depart from the obligations it entered into
with respect to the Claimants’ investments, in breach of the umbrella
clause under Article 10(1) of the ECT (the Umbrella Clause). Those
obligations, specifically to “grandfather” the Claimants’ already-existing
installations, i.e., not to subject them to future tariff reviews, were
endorsed in RD 436/2004, and RD 661/2007, as well as in the July 2010
Agreement and RD 1614/2010, regarding the 'guaranteed' application of
the RD 661 economic regime going forward.”°

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

118. The Claimants included in their Request for Arbitration (“RfA”) the following Request
for Relief:

(i) “declaring that Spain has violated Articles 10 and 13 of the ECT, as well
as its obligations under the applicable rules and principles of
international law;

(ii) requiring that Spain make full reparation to the Claimants for the injury
or loss to their investments arising out of Spain's violations of the ECT
and international law, by way of: (1) full restitution to the Claimants by
reinstating the legal and regulatory framework in place before the
issuance of, including but not limited to, Law 15/2012, RDL 2/2013,
RDL 9/2013, Law 24/2013, RD 413/2014 and the Ministerial Order; or
(2) full compensation to the Claimants for all losses suffered by them as
a result of Spain's violations of the ECT and international law, in an
amount to be determined in the course of these proceedings, including
interest on all amounts awarded at a reasonable rate;

(iii) directing Spain to pay all costs incurred in connection with these
arbitration proceedings, including the costs of the arbitrators and ICSID,
as well as the legal and other expenses incurred by the Claimants,
including but not limited to the fees of their legal counsel, experts and

5 Cl. Mem. 73.

24

consultants and those of the Claimants’ own employees, on a full
indemnity basis, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate;

(iv) directing Spain to pay post-award interest, compounded monthly, on the
amounts awarded until full payment thereof; and

(v) any other relief the Arbitral Tribunal may deem appropriate in the
circumstances.”°

119. In the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated 26 February 2016, they requested the
following Request for Relief:
(i) “DECLARING that Spain has breached Article 10(1) of the ECT; and
(ii) ORDERING that Spain:
a. provide full restitution to the Claimants by re-establishing the situation
which existed prior to Spain's breaches of the ECT, together with

compensation for all losses suffered before restitution; or

b. pay the Claimants compensation for all losses suffered as a result of
Spain's breaches of the ECT; and

in any event:

a. pay the Claimants pre-award interest at a rate of 7.61% compounded
monthly; and

b. pay the Claimants post-award interest, at a rate of 7.61% compounded
monthly from the date of the award until full payment thereof; and

c. pay the Claimants the costs of this arbitration on a full-indemnity basis,
including all expenses that the Claimants have incurred or will incur in
respect of the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, ICSID, legal counsel,
experts and consultants; and

d. any other relief that the Tribunal may deem just and proper.”

REA { 128.
7 Cl. Mem. 4580.

25

120. The Claimants reserved their rights to amend or supplement their Memorial on the Merits

and to request such additional, alternative or different relief as may be appropriate.®

121. In the Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 11

November 2016, they included the following Request for Relief:

“The Claimants repeat the relief set out at paragraph 580 of the Memorial
and also ask the Tribunal to dismiss all of Spain’s jurisdictional objections.
In addition to the reservation of rights contained at paragraph 581 of the
Memorial, the Claimants also reserve their right to address any
discrepancies that the Claimants subsequently discover between the English
and the Spanish versions of Spain’s Counter-Memorial, the Claimants
having relied on the English translation.”

122. In the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 2 March 2017, the Claimants included

the following Request for Relief:

“Insofar as Spain’s jurisdictional Objections are concerned (and in addition
to the relief set out at paragraph 580 of the Claimants’ Memorial and
paragraph 736 of the Claimants’ Reply), the Claimants hereby request the

Tribunal to:
. dismiss both of Spain’s jurisdictional Objections; and
. order that Spain bear the Claimants’ costs associated with these

jurisdictional Objections.” !°

Cc. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION
123. In the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
20 May 2016, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to:

a) “Declare its lack of jurisdiction over the claims of the Claimants or, if
applicable, the inadmissibility of said claims.

b) Secondarily, in the event that the Arbitral Tribunal decides that it has
jurisdiction to hear this dispute, to dismiss all the claims of the Claimants

* Cl. Mem. (581.
° Cl. Reply { 736.
CL. Rej. 177.

26

regarding the Merits, as the Kingdom of Spain has not breached the ECT
in any way, pursuant to section III herein, with regard to the Merits.

c) Secondarily, to dismiss all the Claimant’s claims for damages as the
Claimant has no right to compensation, in accordance with section V
herein; and

d) Order the Claimant to pay all costs and expenses derived from this
arbitration, including ICSID administrative expenses, arbitrators’ fees,
and the fees of the legal representatives of the Kingdom of Spain, their
experts and advisors, as well as any other cost or expense that has been
incurred, all of this including a reasonable rate of interest from the date
on which these costs are incurred until the date of their actual
payment.”!!

124. |The Respondent reserved the right to supplement, modify or complement its Counter-
Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction and present any and all additional
arguments that might be necessary in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the ICSID
Rules of Arbitration, procedural orders and the directives of the Arbitral Tribunal in order

to respond to all allegations made by the Claimants in regard to this matter. !?

125. In its Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction dated 19 January 2017, the
Respondent asked the Tribunal to:
a) “Declare its lacks of jurisdiction to hear the claims of the Claimants, or

if applicable their inadmissibility, in accordance with what is set forth
in section III of this Document, referring to Jurisdictional Objections;

b

Secondarily, for the case that the Arbitral Tribunal decides that it has
jurisdiction to hear this dispute, that it dismiss all the claims of the
Claimants on the merits because the Kingdom of Spain has not breached
in any way the ECT, in accordance with what is stated in paragraphs (A)
and (B) of section IV of this Document, on the substance of the matter;

c

Secondarily, to dismiss all the Claimants’ claims for damages as said
claims are not entitled to compensation, in accordance with section V of
this Document; and

d) Sentence the Claimants to pay all costs and expenses derived from this
arbitration, including ICSID administrative expenses, arbitrators’ fees,

4! Resp. C-Mem. 1084.
2 Resp. C-Mem. 1085.

27

126.

and the fees of the legal representatives of the Kingdom of Spain, their
experts and advisors, as well as any other cost or expense that has been
incurred, all of this including a reasonable rate of interest from the date
on which these costs are incurred and the date of their actual
payment.”!?
The Respondent again reserved the right to supplement, modify or complement its
Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and present any and all additional
arguments that may be necessary in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the ICSID

tules of arbitration, procedural orders and the directives of the Arbitral Tribunal in order

to respond to all allegations made by the Claimants with regard to this matter. '*

Iv. LEGAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND

127.

The following section of the Award sets out an overview of the legal and factual
background to the dispute, referring in turn to (A) the most important elements of the
electricity generation regime into which the Claimants invested, (B) the actual
investments of the Claimants, (C) the disputed measures, and (D) the Spanish court

decisions on which emphasis has been placed by the Respondent.

A. THE SPECIAL REGIME: LEGAL AND ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK

128.

129.

From the mid-1990s, Spain has sought to develop its renewable energy (“RE”)

generation sector.

The 1997 Electricity Law (Law 54/1997)'°
On 27 November 1997, Spain adopted Law 54/1997 on the Electric Power Sector (“Law
54/1997”). According to its Preamble, the basic purpose of Law 54/1997 was “to regulate
the electricity sector with the traditional, three-fold goal of guaranteeing the supply of

electrical power, its quality and the provision of such supply at the lowest cost possible.”

5 Resp. Rej. J 1136.
4 Resp. Rej. J 1137.

'5 €.0028/R-0003, Law 54/1997, on the Electricity Sector (the 1997 Electricity Law), 27 November 1997 (published
28 November 1997) (hereinafter “Law 54/1997”), Arts, 27 et seq.

28

130. The financial regime for activities regulated by Law 54/1997 was established by its Title

Ill, including Article 15 “Remuneration of activities” which provided as follows:

“1. The activities involved in the supply of electric power shall be
remunerated economically in the manner provided by this Act, as charged
to the rates and prices paid.

2. To determine the rates and prices that consumers must pay, the
remuneration of activities shall be stipulated in regulations with objective,
transparent and non-discriminatory criteria that act as an incentive to
improve the effectiveness of management, the economic and technical
efficiency of said activities and the quality of the electricity supply.”!°

131. Law 54/1997 distinguished in its Title IV between the “Ordinary regime” for electricity
generation (Chapter I of Title IV) and the “Special regime” (Chapter II of Title IV), which
applied to installations generating no more than 50 MW and in particular to “non-
consumable renewable energies” (Article 27(1)). Pursuant to Article 27(2) of this Law,
generation under the special regime was to be “governed by specific provisions and, in
cases not provided for in these special provisions, by the general regulations on electricity

generation where applicable.” !”

2. rticle then established a requirement of prior administrative authorisation for inter
132. Article 28(1) th blished a req f pi di hi f
alia the construction and operation of installations under the special regime, whilst a
series of rights and obligations for such installations was established by Article 30. In

particular, Article 30(4) provided:

“4. The remuneration arrangements for electric power generation
installations operating under the special regime shall be supplemented by
the payment of a premium under statutory terms set out in regulations and
in the following cases:

a) The installations referred to in letter a) of point 1 in article 27.
b) Hydroelectric power stations whose installed capacity is equal to or less

than 10 MW and all other installations referred to by letter b) of point | in
article 27.

6 R-0003, Law 54/1997, p. 33.
7 R-0003, Law 54/1997, p. 47; see also Art. 16(7) with respect to remuneration.

29

133.

134.

For the purposes of this Act, neither solid urban waste nor hazardous waste
shall be considered biomass.

c) Hydroelectric plants of between 10 and 50 MW, the installations referred
to in letter c) of point 1 of article 27 as well as the installations mentioned
in the second paragraph of point | in article 27.

To work out the premiums, the voltage level on delivery of the power to the

network, the effective contribution to environmental improvement, to

primary energy saving and energy efficiency, the generation of

economically justifiable useful heat and the investment costs incurred shall

all be taken into account so as to achieve reasonable profitability rates with

reference to the cost of money on capital markets.” !*
According to the Respondent, this provision established the principle of “reasonable
return”, which it portrays as the stable basis of the remunerative regime with respect to
the production of energy from renewable sources.” It portrays this as a key, overarching
concept, that (i) requires a balance between the cost of the premiums for consumers and
profitability for the investor, (ii) has a dynamic character, (iii) represents a guarantee for
the investor, and (iv) imposes on the regulator an obligation of a result.?° The Claimants
contend that the reference to “reasonable return” in Law 54/1997 is undetermined and
unquantified, and thus has no meaning on its own, except when implemented through
regulations establishing the tariff to which qualifying RE installations are entitled, which
is what RD 2818/1998 did by implementing the Special Regime FIT (“feed-in” tariff
system: “FIT”).?!

Law 54/1997 also provided (in its Sixteenth transitory provision) that: “Jn order for
renewable energy sources to cover at least 12% of Spain’s total energy demand by the
year 2010, a plan shall be drawn up to promote renewable energies and whose objectives

shall be taken into account in the setting of premiums.”

8 R-0003, Law 54/1997, pp. 50-51.

© Resp. C-Mem. {fff 335-355, Resp. Rej. $91 301 et seq.
2 Resp. C-Mem. { 342.

2! CL. Reply 270-271.

30

2

)

135.

136.

Royal Decree 2818/1998 (“RD 2818/1998”) and the Plan for Renewable Energy
Promotion 2000-2010 (“2000 PER”)*

RD 2818/98 was subsequently promulgated to “[t]he regulatory development, as regards
the special plan of Law 54/1997 ... in relation to the requirements and procedures to

adhere to the special plan, to the registration procedures in the corresponding Record
24

 

establishing a regime of incentives for installations under the special regime.

 

According to the Preamble of RD 2818/98, “for the facilities based on renewable
energies and waste, the incentive established has no time limit as the environmental
benefits need to be internalised, and because of their special characteristics and

technological level, their higher costs do not allow them to compete in the free market.”

The incentives established by RD 2818/98 were in the form of a premium to be paid on
top of the market price for power generated or alternatively a fixed tariff for each kWh
of electricity sold, in lieu of the market price (Articles 26 and 28).”° Pursuant to Article
32, there was to be a review every four years “taking into account changes in the price
of electric energy in the market, the share of these facilities in the coverage of demand

and their impact on the technical management of the system.”?"

According to the Claimants, the incentives established by RD 2818/98 were to apply
during the whole useful life of RE plants,?® whilst the (i) FIT mechanism, (ii)
encouragement of and reward for efficiency in production, (iii) choice between Premium
and Regulated Tariff, and (iv) availability of the FIT for the life of the installation were

to remain common features of the Spanish RE regulatory framework throughout the

2 €-0177, Royal Decree 2818/1998 of 23 December 1998, on electricity production installations supplied by
renewable energy, waste or cogeneration (hereinafter “RD 2818/1998”).

23 C-0035/R-0118, Ministry of Science and Technology and IDAE (the Instituto para la Diversificacién y Ahorro de
la Energia), “Plan for the Promotion of Renewable Energy in Spain 2000-2010” (hereinafter “Renewable Energy
Promotion Plan 2000-2010” or “2000 PER”), December 1999.

2 C0177, RD 2818/1998, Article 1.

25 C.0177/R-0098, RD 2818/1998.

2 See also, Cl. Mem. ff 131-136. C-0177, RD 2818/1998, Article 28; Compass I {{ 64-67; C-0152, Harpen 2003
Report, p. 5; Cl. Skeleton If 14-16.

27 C-0177/R-0098, RD 2818/1998; Cl. Mem. {| 136; Resp. C-Mem. { 395.
28 Cl. Mem. { 108; Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/69.

31

entire period that RWE made its investments in Spain.”? According to the Respondent,
the remuneration framework was designed to meet the legal principle of reasonable
return, did not include the “grandfathering” of the subsidies, while factors relating to the
economic sustainability of the electricity system or the reasonableness of the profitability
received could make it possible at any time to make reforms other than those provided

for in RD 2818/1998.°

138. The RD 2818/1998 regime was in force when the Claimants first invested in the Spanish
wind and hydro sectors.*! Under this regime, nine of the Claimants’ plants began

operating.*?

139. On December 1999, Spain approved the 2000 PER for the promotion of RE, establishing
a series of targets per area that would enable renewable energy sources to meet at least
12% of Spain’s primary energy demand by 2010. The Claimants submit that the plan
acknowledged that one of the key elements for its success was the recognition that, for
investors, financial resources were dependent upon the principles of profitability,

opportunity and stability.**

140. According to the Respondent, the 2000 PER indicated that it was not necessary to
increase the remuneration for wind and hydroelectric technologies to reach the target.
The plan established the methodology for determining the remunerative regime of the

RE which consisted of:

“defining, within each technology and according to the state of the art
existing from time to time, different standard facilities. Once these standard
facilities had been determined, different standards were established in each

2° Cl. Mem. 431.

8 Resp. C-Mem. 4{f 25 and 394-395.

51 CL. Reply 284.

* Resp. C-Mem. 4 387; Cl. Mem., Appendix 4: List of facilities, These facilities were: i) wind technology: Wind Farm

in Acampo Armijo, Wind Farm la Ciesma de Grisel, Wind Farm Bosque Alto; Wind Farm Plan de Maria; Wind Farm

Rio Gallego; Wind Farm Plana de la Balsa; Wind Farm Los Labrados; Wind Farm Plana de Zaragoza; ii) hydroelectric
: Mora Hydroelectric Plant; Villal Hydroelectric Plant.

3 Cf. Cl. Mem. 4 269; Compass Report { 117.

4 Cl. Mem. { 123; C-0035, Renewable Energy Promotion Plan 2000-2010, Introduction.

 

 

 

32

(3)

a.

142.

143.

one of them (investment cost, operation cost, useful life of the plant, hours
of rewarded production, market price) that allowed such plant to reach, ina
given period of time (useful life), a reasonable return according to the cost
of money in the capital market.”*>

Royal Decree 436/2004 and Further Implementing Regulations, including Royal
Decree No. 661/2007

Royal Decree 436/2004 (“RD 436/2004”)*©

On 27 December 2002, RD 1432/2002 was adopted, establishing the methodology for
the approval or modification of the average or reference tariff (the “tarifa media de

referencia’: “TMR”).

On 12 March 2004, the Spanish Government enacted RD 436/2004, which repealed RD
2818/1998.*7

As part of the backdrop to this new regulation, on 27 September 2001, the European
Union (the “EU”) issued Directive 2001/77/EC (2001 Renewables Directive”) which
mandated the Member States of the EU to take certain actions to meet the objectives of
the Kyoto Protocol. According to the Claimants, the 2001 Renewables Directive
recognised the need to provide government-backed economic incentives for RE power
generation projects, including through FITs.** The Respondent accepts that the 2001
Renewables Directive recognised the need to give public aid to RE, although it
emphasises that this would be as set by States within the obligations imposed by Articles

87 and 88 of the Treaty on State Aid. According to the Respondent, in 2014 the Court of

35 Resp. C-Mem. 405; R-0118, Renewable Energy Promotion Plan 2000-2010, pp. 200-218.

36 €-0016, Royal Decree 436/2004 of 12 March 2004, establishing the methodology for the updating and
systematisation of the legal and economic regime for electric power production in the Special Regime (published on
27 March 2004) (hereinafter “RD 436/2004” or “RD 436”).

37 Cl. Mem. {f 32-33; Resp. C-Mem. § 409.

38 Cl. Mem. {| 113; C-0178, Directive 2001/77/EC of the European Parliament and Council on the promotion of
electricity produced from renewable energy sources, Official Journal of the European Union Series L 283, 27.10.2001,
Recital (12) and Recital (14).

33

144,

145.

 

Justice of the European Union (“ECJ”) recognised as State aid the amounts that end users

pay to private companies producing energy.”

As explained in the Preamble to RD 436/2004, the plant operator would have a choice to
sell energy produced in return for remuneration in the form of a regulated tariff, i.e. a
single, flat rate defined as a percentage of the TMR fixed in accordance with RD
1432/2002, or to sell directly in the market, in which case the operator would receive the
market price plus an incentive and a premium if the specific plant was entitled to receive
one (as also calculated by reference to the TMR, although specified on a case-by-case
basis taking into account the criteria mentioned in Article 30(4) of Law 54/1997). The

Preamble continued:

“Whichever remuneration mechanism is chosen, the Royal Decree

guarantees operators of special regime installations fair remuneration for

their investments and an equally fair allocation to electricity consumers of

the costs that can be attributed to the electricity system although incentives

are offered for market participation because this is deemed to be the way to

minimise administrative intervention in the setting of electricity prices as

well as to better, and more efficiently allocate the system costs especially

with respect to deviation (differences) management and the provision of

ancillary services.”
Article 1(a) further defined the purpose of the Decree as to “update, systematise and
consolidate the regulatory provisions issued to develop and implement the legislation on
the legal regime for electric power production in the special regime covered by” Law
54/1997. The economic regime outlined in the Preamble was provided for in Articles 22-
23. Article 22 established that operators had a choice between a fixed tariff and payment

of a payment above the wholesale market price per kWh of energy produced, while

pursuant to Article 23, the regulated tariff and the premium were to be calculated by

. C-Mem. ff 309-310; RL-0015, Directive 2001/77/EC, Recital (12); RL-0019, Court Order of 22 October

2014, issued in a Preliminary Ruling C-275/13 (“Elcogds Case”) { 21: “in order for benefits to be classified as aid in
the sense established in Article 107.1 TFEU, they must be granted directly or indirectly through State resources, on
the one hand and, on the other, be attributable to the State.” {| 33: “the sums awarded to a private electricity producer
that are financed by all the end users of electricity within the national territory and distributed among the companies
in the electricity sector by a public organisation according to predetermined legal criteria constitute aid granted by the
State or through State resources.”

34

reference to set percentages of the TMR, fixed each year in accordance with Article 2 of

RD 1432/2002.

146. Pursuant to Article 40(1) of RD 436/2004, “in view of the findings of the monitoring
reports on the degree of performance of the renewable energies promotion Plan”, the
tariffs and premiums as defined in the Decree were to be revised in 2006, and then every
four years. However, as established by Article 40(2) and (3), such revisions were not to

have any backdated effect:

“2. The tariffs, premiums, incentives and supplements resulting from any of
the revisions provided for in this section shall come into force on January
1st of the second year subsequent to the year that the revision has been
carried out.

3. The tariffs, premiums, incentives and supplements resulting from any of
the revisions provided for in this section shall apply solely to the plants that
commence operating subsequent to the date of the entry into force referred
to in the paragraph above and shall not have a backdated effect on any
previous tariffs and premiums.”*°

147. — Article 34(5) also provided specifically in relation to wind energy:

“Notwithstanding the provisions of article 40, whenever group b.2
[installations that solely use wind power as primary energy] reaches 13,000
MW of installed capacity the figures for the tariffs, incentives and premiums
stated in this article shall undergo revision.”*!

148. RD 436/2004 also established a transitional scheme. Pursuant to the Second Transitory
Provision: “Electric power production installations covered under Royal Decree
2818/1998, dated December 23", which on the entry into force of this Royal Decree have
full registration in the Administrative Register of special regime production installations
attached to the Ministry of Economy, shall have a transitional period available to them
until January Ist 2007.” Pursuant to this provision, it was also permitted to opt for such

installations to be covered by RD 436/2004 right away.

“© €-0016/R-0100, RD 436/2004, Article 40.
+1 According to Cl. Reply, | 340, this 13,000 MW figure was passed in the course of 2007.

35

149. The Claimants contend that RD 436/2004 guaranteed the economic conditions that it
contained for the entire life of a plant, and also established a stability commitment,
according to which future changes to the RE tariffs would not apply to installations that
had already achieved start-up unless of equivalent or better economic terms.*” Relying
on the report of 14 February 2007 of Spain’s National Energy Commission (“CNE”),“?
the Claimants say that Article 40.3 of RD 436/2004 “introduced an explicit
grandfathering guarantee”,** and they also contend that Spain’s internal documents
confirm that the greater stability provided for by RD 436/2004 was specifically to

incentivise investment.*°

150. |The Respondent submits that RD 436/2004 was linked to the 2000 PER and responded
to the same methodology for determining the remunerative regime of the RE established
in the 2000 PER, i.e. the subsidies granted were calculated through a methodology aimed
at granting a standard facility a reasonable return over a given period of time.*® It
contends that the wording of Article 40.3 of RD 436/2004 is confined and does not extend
to all possible revisions to the remunerative regime.*” The Respondent also says that RD

436/2004 linked the evolution of the subsidies in the collection to the evolution of the

2 Cl. Mem. | 33; C-0016, RD 436/2004, Article 40.3; Biinting Statement J 49; Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/78-
79.

43 C-0249, CNE, “Report 3/2007 on the proposed RD regulating the activity of electricity production under the special
regime”, 14 February 2007, (hereinafter “CNE Report 3/2007”), pp. 23-24. As noted in C-0103, Péyry Report,
Report, Current and Future State of Wind Energy in Spain and Portugal, | July 2007 (hereinafter “Péyry July 2007
Report (Wind)”), p. 30: “The CNE (Comisién Nacional de Energia) was created by the Hydrocarbons Law (Law
34/1998) and acts the regulatory entity of the energy sector. The powers of CNE are limited at present to
consultation, participation, inspection, arbitration, and the provision of reports.” See also, the position of the
Respondent at Day 2/18-19.

# Cl. Reply {]] 291-292; Biinting Statement { 53. The principle of “grandfathering” was explained by the Claimants
in their oral opening, day 1/57, as follows: “Once an investment is made, it is entitled to the tariff for its service life,
and we know the cost of renewable will come down over time, but only new investments take advantage of that cost
reduction. ... That is why you have this grandfathering principle ... .”

45 Cl. Reply { 293: referring to C-0263, Draft Proposal for RD 436/2004, dated 30 January 2004, pp. 3-4; C-0264,
Memoria Econémica for RD 436/2004, undated, p. 10; C-0265, Ministry of Economy Report on RD 436/2004, 9
February 2004, p. 1.

46 Resp. C-Mem. {i 409(b) and 411.

47 Resp. C-Mem. {i 423-427; R-0100, RD 436/2004, Article 40.3.

 

36

TMR, which potentially endangered the economic sustainability of the Spanish

Electricity System (“SES”) in addition to producing situations of over-remuneration.**

b. The 2005-2010 Plan for Renewable Energy (“2005 PER”)*”

151. In August 2005, Spain published a Renewable Energies Plan for 2005-2010 (the “2005
PER”), maintaining the 12% target for energy from renewable sources that had been set

in the Plan for 2000-2010.”

152. The 2005 PER noted that satisfactory progress had been made with respect to wind
energy, but that small-scale hydroelectric energy generation had grown more slowly than
envisaged. Certain areas, including solar, were identified as growing at well below the
desired rates. A new target was set for the wind energy sector in the form of an increase
in output of 12,000 MW over the period 2005-2010 (which would mean ending the decade
with a total installed potential of 20,155 MW).>! It was also stated with respect to wind
energy that it was “essential that the current legislative framework be retained without
substantial changes over the period 2005-2010 (Law 54/1997 on the Electricity Sector

and Methodology for Revision of Tariffs established in Royal Decree 436/2004 on the

Special System).”>

48 Resp. C-Mem. 26.

4° €-0034, 2005-2010 Renewable Energy Plan.

5° Ministry of Science and Technology and IDAE, “Plan for the Promotion of Renewable Energy in Spain 2005-2010",
August 2005. See, the Summary at C-0047 and extracts at C-0034 and R-0119. According to a report from Péyry
dated March 2011 entitled “Current State and Future Trends of Solar Power in Spain” submitted by the Respondent:
“The renewable energy planning documents - Plan de Energfas Renovables (“PER”) - set out the specific growth
projections for each technology and breaks it down by autonomous region. Based on the documents, the Government
sets a tariff (published in the form of a Royal Decree) for each technology depending on the level of growth that is
required from each technology. Renewable energy planning documents are the best indicators of the future
development of the different renewable technologies.” See, R-0277, Pyry, Current and Future Trends in the Spanish
Solar Sytem, March 2011, p. 22.

51.0047, 2005-2010 PER Summary p. 17. See, pp. 20-23 for the target re hydroelectric power generation. See also,
Henderson Statement, {| 17, referring to this 20,155 MW target.

52 €.0047, Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce & IDEA, Summary of the Spanish Renewable Energy Plan
(PER) 2005-2010, p. 40. At Cl. Reply, {{ 301, the Claimants also rely on and emphasise a passage p. 48 where it was
said that “it is necessary to provide further incentives if possible in particular technology areas in order to make them
more attractive to future investors.” However, it appears from the context that this does not concern wind energy (or
micro-hydro).

 

 

37

153. |The 2005 PER included a detailed section on the funding of the Plan. In introducing this
section, reference was made to a stable regulatory framework, and it was explained that
the funding requirements were established on the basis of an assumed 7% return (after

tax) for a standard facility.

154. | The Claimants submit that the 2005 PER laid the groundwork for further improvements
to the Special Regime, and recognised that the legal framework of wind energy must be
maintained without substantial changes between 2005-2010.*4 They say that the stability

of the framework was recognised as the decisive factor.*°

155. The Respondent claims that the 2005 PER is essential to understanding the remuneration
scheme set in RD 661/2007, and that the plan “followed the traditional methodology and
established its profitability targets for the plants in a given period of time (lifetime) based
on the calculation of the costs of the standard facilities for the various technologies and
revenue forecasts, according to the prevailing macroeconomic circumstances.”*® The
Respondent contends that the remuneration scheme set the different parameters required
for each standard facility to reach a return on the project close to 7% on equity throughout

its lifetime.*”

c. Royal Decree Law 7/2006 (“RDL 7/2006”)°*

156. On 23 June 2006, the Spanish Government adopted Royal Decree Law 7/2006 which,

through its Article 1, de-linked the calculation of tariffs and premiums from the TMR (as

53 €.0034, 2005-2010 Renewable Energy Plan. The Claimants rely on an extract from the 2005 PER, p. 52, stating
with respect to Law 54/1997 and RD 436/2004: “Royal Decree 436/2004, on the Special Regime, explains the law,
and establishes an economic regime guaranteed for the whole life of the facility, by updating and revising the legal
regime that affects photovoltaic solar energy.” However, this passage is concerned with the photovoltaic sector, and
does not appear in the equivalent passages of the detailed sections in the 2005 PER dealing with wind and hydroelectric
power.

54 Cl. Mem. 4] 142-143; C-0047, Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce & IDAE, “Summary of the Spanish
Renewable Energy Plan (PER) 2005-2010", August 2005, p. 40.

55 Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/83.

56 Resp. C-Mem. {| 446.

57 Resp. C-Mem. ¥ 456; R-0119, Renewable Energy Plan 2005-2010 { 274.

58 €.0053, Royal Decree Law 7/2006, on the adoption of urgent measures for the energy sector, 23 June 2006
(hereinafter “RDL 7/2006”), Preamble.

38

the method of calculation under RD 436/2004 was having an unforeseen upwards impact
on the rates of tariffs and premiums) and froze the tariffs. This was intended as an urgent
and temporary measure, with the intention being that new regulations be developed for
the establishment of tariffs and premiums. Industry associations (including the APPA
and AEE of which the Second Claimant is an active member) reacted with extreme

hostility.*°

157. The Claimants submit that RDL 7/2006 provided further incentives: (i) froze the
consumer tariff paid by electricity consumers for the purposes of determining the FIT for
RE installations, and (ii) conferred on qualifying RE installations priority of access to
the transmission and distribution network.®! This was done to enhance the economic

regime for RE to comply with the EU’s policy.

158. | According to the Respondent, RDL 7/2006 was adopted to correct the negative effects
that RD 436/2004 had on the sustainability of the SES caused by the ties of the RE
subsidies to the TMR.® Thus, RDL 7/2006 froze the subsidies of the Special Regime
until a new remuneration model was developed, as well as de-linking the calculation of

tariffs and premiums from the TMR.™ The Claimants accept this point as to de-linking.©

59 See, R-0015, The Controversial Energy Decree-Act, APPA Alegaciones magazine No. 22, May-July 2006; and R-
0016, APPA Info magazine No. 23, August-December 2006. Representatives of the Second Claimant attended the
meetings of the APPA and the AEE, at least from 2008: see, e.g. Mr Henderson at Day 3/3-4. See also, Resp. C-Mem.
{ 439-442; R-0224, “Review Economic Regime of Renewable Energy; Report on APPA proposals”, November 2006.

©0053, RDL 7/2006, Second Transitional Provision.

&! Cl. Mem. {{ 149; C-0053, RDL 7/2006, Article 1 J 12, amending Article 30(2)(b) of the 1997 Electricity Law.
© Cl. Mem. 9 148 and 149.

© Resp. C-Mem. {ff 432 and 437.

© Resp. C-Mem. {{ 26 and 437; R-0088, RDL 7/2006, Second Transitory provision. “Until the regulatory
implementation of the provisions contained in paragraphs one to twelve of Article | in accordance with the provisions
of the second final provision of this Royal Decree-Law: 2. The revision of the average rate performed by the
Government shall not apply to prices, premiums, incentives and tariffs that form part of the remuneration of the activity
of production of electricity in the special regime.”.

6 Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/85.

39

d. Royal Decree No. 661/2007 of 25 May 2007 (“RD 661/2007”)°

159. | New draft regulations were published in November 2006, and these were reviewed by
the CNE in a report of 14 February 2007, following adverse reaction to the draft from
industry bodies such as the APPA and the AEE.°’ The CNE listed out a number of
“fundamental criteria” that it considered must influence the legal and economic

regulation of electricity production, including:

“(b) Minimize regulatory uncertainty. The NEC [National Energy
Commission] understands that transparency and predictability in the future
of economic incentives reduce regulatory uncertainty, incentivising
investments in new capacity and minimizing the cost of financing, thus
reducing the final cost to the consumer. The regulation must offer sufficient
guarantees to ensure that the economic incentives are stable and predictable
throughout the service life of the facility. In each case, regulation must
provide both transparent annual adjustment mechanisms, associated to
robust trend indexes (such as the average or reference tariff, the CPI, ten-
year bonds, etc.) and regular reviews that only affect new facilities (e.g.
every four years) with regard to investment costs, which could also affect
the reduction of operating costs at existing facilities.”

160. The CNE also stated, however, that it did not regard legal certainty or the protection of

legitimate expectations as meaning that legislation would be immune to reform:

“As shown both in the scientific doctrine and case law, in a social and
democratic State of Law the principles of legal certainty and protection of
legitimate expectations cannot be built on insurmountable obstacles to the
innovation of a body of law, nor can they be used as instruments to petrify
current Law at any moment. In other words, the principle of legal certainty
is not by definition as anti-evolutionary or conservative principle; it does
not mean that legislation is resistant or immune to reform. In this sense,
these principles do not impede dynamic innovation ... . Thus the principles

 

6 Royal Decree No. 661/2007 of 25 May 2007, regulating the activity of electricity production under the special
regime (published on 26 May 2007) (hereinafter “RD 661/2007” or “RD 661”).

67 ©.0249/R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, regarding the proposed Royal Decree, regulating the activity of electricity
production under the special regime and of certain facilities of comparable technology under the ordinary regime, 14
February 20017 (hereinafter “CNE Report 3/2007”).

68 €.0249/R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, p. 16, bold in original. See also, p. 24: “The developers who have invested in
special regime production facilities during the validity of Royal Decree 436/2004 have done so in stable regulatory
conditions, fundamentally based on a secure and predictable regulated tariff during the entire service life of the facility.
The guarantees covered in Royal Decree 436/2004 have allowed cheaper financing, with lower project costs and a
lower impact on the electricity tariff ultimately paid by the consumer.”

40

only require that regulatory innovation—especially if sudden, unpredictable
or unexpected—be carried out with certain guarantees and caution
(sufficient transition periods for adaptation and, where applicable,
compensatory measures) that cushion, moderate and minimise as far as
possible the defrauding [sic] of expectations generated by previous
regulations.”°?

161. |The new regulation, RD 661/2007, was adopted on 25 May 2007 and came into force on
1 June 2007. It is of central importance to the Claimants’ case in these proceedings.”
The Claimants say that they made the following investments on the basis of the RD
661/2007 regime: Project Ulysses, investing €363.5m (the Urvasco acquisition); Project
Aldea, investing €12m; and Project Dia, investing €48m.7! Further, consistent with the

provisions of RD 661/2007, the Claimants contend that they spent €6.8m upgrading

various wind plants (Grisel, Acampo, Armijo, Muel, Balsa, Labrados, and Zaragoza).””

162. Inits Preamble, RD 661/2007 explained that the “modification of the economic and legal
framework which regulates the special regime existing to date has become necessary for

various reasons.” These reasons were stated to be:

“First of all, the growth seen in the special regime over recent years tied to
the experience accumulated during the application of Royal Decree
2818/1998, of 23 December and Royal Decree 436/2004, of 12 March, has
shown the need to regulate certain technical aspects in order to contribute
to the growth of those technologies, while maintaining the security of the
electrical system and ensuring the quality of supply, and minimising the
restrictions on the production of electricity generated in this manner. In
view of the behaviour of the prices in the market, where certain variables
which were not considered in the cited compensation system for the special
regime have, over recent times, acquired greater importance, the economic
circumstances established by Royal Decree 436/2004, of 12 March, make it
necessary to modify the compensation system and de-link it from the Mean
Electricity Tariff, or Reference Tariff, which has been used to date. Finally,

69 ©-0249/R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, p. 18.

® €-0017; R-0101, Royal Decree 661/2007, regulating the activity of electricity production under the special regime
(hereinafter “RD 661/2007").

7! Cl. Skeleton J 27; C-0091, Circular decision by Executive Board of RWE AG, April 2008; and C-0098, Transaction
Approval Request Form (TARF) for RWE Innogy Project DIA, April 2009; Biinting Statement {¥[ 42 and 47. See also,
Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/86.

® Cl. Skeleton { 27.

4l

it is necessary to include the changes in the legislation deriving from
European law, and from Royal Decree-Law 7/2006 ... .””°

163. |The Preamble further explained:

“The economic framework established in the present Royal Decree
develops the principles provided in Law 54/1997, of 27 November, on the
Electricity Sector, guaranteeing the owners of facilities under the special
regime a reasonable return on their investments, and the consumers of
electricity an assignment of the costs attributable to the electricity system
which is also reasonable, although incentives are provided to playing a part
in this market since it is considered that in this manner lower government
intervention will be achieved in the setting of prices, together with better,
more efficient, attribution of the costs of the system, particularly in respect
of the handling of diversions and the provisions of supplementary services.

To this effect, a system which is analogous to that provided in Royal Decree
436/2004, of 12 March, is maintained, in which the owner of the facility
may opt to sell their energy at a regulated tariff, which will be the same for
all scheduling periods, or alternatively to sell this energy directly on the
daily market, the term market, or through a bilateral contract, in this case
receiving the price negotiated in the market plus a premium. ...””

164. The Claimants submit that the Government introduced RD 661/2007 with the aim of
achieving the EU objectives concerning RE production and the 2005-2010 PER.” By
contrast, the Respondent argues that RD 661/2007 was adopted to ensure the economic
sustainability of the SES, which could be affected by a system of subsidies linked to the
TMR.”°

165. Pursuant to Article 9.1 of RD 661/2007, and in line with previous legislation (e.g. Article
21.4 of Law 54/1997, Article 9 of RD 2818/1998, and Article 9.1 of RD 436/2004),

7 €-0017 and R-0101, RD 661/2007, pp. 1-2.
 €-0017 and R-0101, RD 661/2007, pp. 2-3.

5 Cl. Mem. {| 151; Cl. Reply {J 300, 303 and 304; C-0017, RD 661/2007, Preamble; C-0246, Ministry of Industry,
“Report on the draft of RD regulating the activity of electricity production under the special regime”, dated 23 March
2007, p. 3.

% Resp. C-Mem. { 460.

 

42

facilities under the special regime were subject to compulsory registration in the Registro

Administrativo de Instalaciones de Produccion en Régimen Especial (the “RAIPRE”):

“In order to ensure appropriate monitoring of the special regime and in
particular in order to ensure the management and control of the receipt of
the regulated tariffs, the premiums and supplements, both in respect of the
categories, groups, and sub-groups, the installed power, and where
applicable the date of entry into service, and in respect of the evolution of
the electrical energy produced, the energy sold to the grid, the primary
energy employed, the useful heat produced, and the primary energy saving
achieved, facilities for the production of electrical energy under the special
regime shall be subject to compulsory registration in Section Two of the
Public Authority Register of facilities for the production of electrical energy
indicated in Article 21.4 of Law 54/1997, which is a part of the Ministry of
Industry, Tourism, and Trade. Section Two of the Public Authority Register
indicated above shall hereinafter be known as the Public Authority Register
for production facilities under the Special Regime.”””

166. Chapter III of RD 661/2007 (Articles 16-23) was concerned with the rights and duties of
facilities under the special regime. Article 17 established certain key rights, with Article

17.1 providing as follows:

“Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 30.2 of Law 54/1997, of 27
November, the proprietors of production facilities under the special regime
shall enjoy the following rights:

a) To connect their generating unit or units in parallel to the grid of the
distribution or transport company.

b) Transfer to the system their net production of electrical energy or energy
sold, by way of the distribution or transport company upon condition that it
is technically possible for it to be absorbed by the grid.

c) Receive, for the total or partial sale of their net electrical energy generated
under any of the options appearing in Article 24.1, the compensation
provided in the economic regime set out by this Royal Decree. The right to
receive the regulated tariff, or if appropriate the premium, shall be subject
to final registration of the facility in the Register of production facilities
under the special regime of the General Directorate of Energy Policy and
Mines, prior to the final date set out in Article 22.

77 €-0017 and R-0101, RD 661/2007, p. 16.

43

d) To sell all or part of their net production by way of direct lines.

e) To enjoy priority in access and connection to the electricity grid under
the terms and conditions set out in Annex XI of this Royal Decree, or in
such regulations as may supersede them.”7®

167. Chapter IV (Articles 24-51) then established the new economic regime. Pursuant to
Article 24.1, producers under the special regime benefited from an option to choose
between sale of energy on the basis of a fixed tariff or by reference to the market price
plus, where appropriate, a Premium (subject to a cap and to a floor). Detailed provisions
then followed for calculation of the Fixed Tariff and the Premium, including with specific
respect to wind energy and hydroelectric power (Articles 36, 38 and 40). The Premium
option for wind and hydro technologies was subject to (i) an upper limit or “cap” of
8.4944 € cent/kWh, and (ii) a lower threshold or “floor” of 7.1275 € cent/kWh. According
to the Claimants, the fact that the lower Premium price was very close to the Fixed Tariff

of 7.3228 € cent/kWh, made the Premium option more attractive. ”?

168. Article 22 established the “Period of maintenance of the regulated tariffs and premiums”,

providing in this respect that:

“1. As soon as 85% of the power target for any Group or Sub-Group as
established in Articles 35 to 42 of the present Royal Decree has been
reached, the maximum period during which such facilities as have been
registered in the Public Authority Register of production facilities under the
special regime prior to the date of the termination of such period shall have
the right to a premium or if applicable the regulated tariff established in the
present Royal Decree for such Group or Sub-Group, which shall be no less
than twelve months, shall be established by Resolution of the General
Secretariat for Energy... .”

169. Article 44 provided for “Updating and review of tariffs, premiums, and supplements.”
Article 44.3, and in particular its final paragraph, are of great importance in the way the

claim has been put, providing that:

8 C0017 and R-0101, RD 661/207, p. 23.
7 Cl. Mem. 170.

44

170.

“During the year 2010, on sight of the results of the monitoring reports on
the degree of fulfilment of the Renewable Energies Plan (PER) 2005-2010,
and of the Energy Efficiency and Savings Strategy in Spain (E4), together
with such new targets as may be included in the subsequent Renewable
Energies Plan 2011-2020, there shall be a review of the tariffs, premiums,
supplements and lower and upper limits defined in this Royal Decree with
regard to the costs associated with each of these technologies, the degree of
participation of the special regime in covering the demand and its impact
upon the technical and economic management of the system, and a
reasonable rate of profitability shall always be guaranteed with reference to
the cost of money in the capital markets. Subsequently a further review shall
be performed every four years, maintaining the same criteria as previously.
The revisions to the regulated tariff and the upper and lower limits indicated
in this paragraph shall not affect facilities for which the deed of
commissioning shall have been granted prior to 1 January of the second year
following the year in which the revision shall have been performed.”*°

RD 661/2007 also contained detailed transitional provisions, enabling those facilities
operating under RD 436/2004 to elect to continue receiving premiums under that regime
until 31 December 2012 (see Transitory Provision One). It is common ground that most
wind energy producers took the benefit of these provisions and remained under the old
tariff regime. The Claimants’ plants opted for the application of RD 436/2004 until 31
December 2012, and the application of RD 661/2007 thereafter.*!

Pursuant to the Fifth Transitory Provision of RD 661/2007, older wind farms had to
upgrade their technology to qualify for the application of RD 661/2007.*? The Claimants’
case is that, in reliance on the provisions of RD 661/2007 to the effect that the tariffs
would apply during the whole operational life of the plant and that any future reviews

would not affect those plants that had already complied with all registration and other

8 C-0017 and R-0101, RD 66 1/2007, pp. 45-46. Cf. the first draft of what was to become RD 66 1/2007, as summarised
by the CNE in its February 2007 report. See, C-0249 and R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, p. 6 (| 11). See also, C-0266,
the Memoria Econémica for RD 661/2007, 21 March 2007, describing the provision on revisions as ultimately
included in Article 44(3), p. 9.

8! Cl. Mem. 4 40.

© Cl. Mem. { 164. C-0017, RD 661/2007, Transitory Provision Five.

45

requirements and achieved start-up, the Claimants invested funds to carry out those

upgrades.*>

172. In light of the above provisions, the Claimants submit that RD 661/2007 provided for a
FIT mechanism (Fixed Tariff or Premium), incentives based on production to encourage
and reward efficiency, long-term tariff guarantee (entitlement expressly granted for the
life of the installation), and the promise of “grandfathering” existing installations in the

event of future tariff reviews.**

173. |The Respondent says that the provisions of RD 661/2007 must be analysed in harmony
with the principles of Law 54/1997 and keeping in mind that RD 661/2007 maintained
the link of the subsidies with the prior methodology, as well as with the base economic
parameters embodied in the 2005-2010 PER.* It refutes the argument that, due to a
“grandfathering” commitment, the Claimants’ investments made between April 2001 and
December 2012 became entitled to the RD 661/2007 regime during the lifetime of all the

plants.*°

174. The adoption of RD 661/2007 was accompanied by a press release from Spain’s Ministry
of Industry, Tourism and Commerce entitled “The Government prioritises profitability
and stability in the new Royal Decree on renewable energy and combined heat and
power.” This three-page document set out the basic lines of the Royal Decree. In the

opening paragraph, the Ministry stated as follows (in relevant part):

“The purpose of this Royal Decree is to improve the compensation for those
technologies that are less mature, such as biomass and solar thermal, in
order to be able to reach the objectives of the Renewable Energy Plan 2005-
2010, as well as the objectives imposed on Spain by the EC. By developing
these technologies, renewable energy in Spain will cover 12% of energy
consumption in 2010. The new regulation guarantees a return of 7% for
wind farms and hydro-electric facilities that opt to transfer their production

83C]. Mem. { 41.

Cl. Mem. 36. See further, the Claimants’ oral opening at day 1/86-99 identifying five key benefits arising from RD
66 1/2007: a FIT scheme, identifying the actual tariff, with a cap/floor, stability through Articles 22 and 44.3, and a
transitional regime.

85 Resp. C-Mem. {| 462.

86 Resp. Skeleton {if 1-2.

46

to distributors and between 5% and 9% if they participate in the electricity
production market. ... Tariffs will be revised every 4 years, taking into
account the fulfilment of the objectives set out. This will make it possible
to adjust the tariffs based on the new costs and the degree of fulfilment of
the objectives. Future adjustments to said tariffs will not affect installations
which are already in operation. This guarantees legal certainty for the
electricity producer and stability for the sector, favouring development. The
new legislation will not be retroactive. Facilities functioning by 1 January
2008 may keep to the previous legislation in the fixed tariff option during
their entire lifespan. When they participate in the market, they may keep to
their regulation prior to 31 December 2012. The emission of 6.3 million
tonnes of C02 per year will be avoided by achieving the objectives set out
for combined heat and power for 2010.”8’

175. It was also reiterated at page 2 of the press release:

“Renewable energy Returns With regards to returns, the new regulation
guarantees an average return of 7% for wind farms and hydro-electric
facilities that opt to transfer their production to distributors and returns
between 5% and 9% if they participate in the electricity production
market.”**

176. The Claimants submit that the Spanish Government, led by the Ministry and the State

Company for the Promotion and Attraction of Foreign Investment (“‘InvestinSpain”’),*

also launched a domestic and international campaign to attract foreign investments in the
Spanish RE sector, highlighting the economic conditions and long-term tariff of RD

661/2007.° The Claimants referred in particular to presentations in 2007 in Graz,

87 €.0238, Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce, announcement of RD 661/2007, “The Government
prioritises profitability and stability in the new Royal Decree on renewable energy and combined heat and power”,
25 May 2007 (hereinafter “Announcement of RD 661/2007").

88 C0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007, p. 2. These figures are the same as are found in the Memoria Econ6mica
for RD 661/2007, 21 March 2007, at C-0266, 17.

89 InvestinSpain’s website explicitly states that it is “subject to control mechanisms characteristic for public limited
companies that are fully owned by the [S]tate.” See, C-0059, InvestinSpain website, “About Us”, , available at
<www.investinspain.org/invest/en/cabecera/about-us/index.html> (last accessed on 15 February 2016) (hereinafter
“InvestinSpain website, ‘About Us”).

°° Cl. Mem. {if 181-185. See, C-0059, InvestinSpain website, “About Us”. C-0030, Manuela Garcia, “Opportunities
in Renewable Energy in Spain”, INTERES InvestinSpain Power Point presentation, Graz (Austria), 15 November
2007, pp. 4, 15, 18, 19, 32, 40 and 42.

    

 

47

Austria?! and in Germany in 2008 on “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain.”

Reference was also made to two presentations made by the CNE in February 2009.”
While the Claimants do not contend that they relied on what was said at specific
presentations, they do rely on such presentations as evidence of how Spain itself

understood the Special Regime that it has established.

e. Royal Decree Law 6/2009 (“RDL 6/2009”) and the Pre-Assignment Register

177. On 30 April 2009, Spain adopted Royal Decree Law 6/2009. Royal Decree-Laws have
the same value as a law and may be issued by the Spanish Government in cases of

extraordinary and urgent need.”

178. As recorded in its Preamble, RDL 6/2009 was adopted against the backdrop of the
international financial crisis of 2008 and what was portrayed as an increasingly

unsustainable electricity tariff deficit in Spain:

“The growing tariff deficit, that is to say, the difference between revenue
from the regulated tariffs that are set by the Administration and that
consumers pay for their regulated supply and from the access tariffs that are
set in the liberalised market and the real costs associated with these tariffs,
is causing serious problems which, in the current context of international
financial crisis, is having a profound effect on the system and placing at risk
not only the financial situation of the companies that make up the Electricity
Industry, but also the very sustainability of the system. This imbalance is

°! €.0030, Manuela Garcfa, “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain”, INTERES InvestinSpain Power Point
presentation, Graz (Austria), 15 November 2007, p. 32.

2 Cl. Mem. if 183-184. C-0060, Manuela Garcia, “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain”, InvestinSpain and
the Spanish Ministry for Industry, Tourism and Commerce, November 2008.

3 Cl. Mem. {| 183-187. C-0133, Luis Jestis Sanchez de Tembleque, “The Regulation of Renewable Energy”, CNE
Power Point presentation, Barcelona, February 2009; C-0183, Carlos Solé Martin, Luis Jestis Sanchez de ‘Tembleque,
“Renewable Energies: The Spanish Case”, CNE Power Point presentation, Cartagena de Indias, 9-13 February 2009.
It is striking that if the Tariff Deficit was a problem to solve, Spain continued to encourage further RE investments
that would increase the system costs. Cf. Resp. Skeleton { 3.

 

% See e.g., Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/103.

°5 €.0061, Royal Decree Law 6/2009, which adopted certain measures within the energy industry and approved the
special rate, 30 April 2009 (published on 7 May 2009) (hereinafter “RDL 6/2009”).

°6 Cl. Mem., fn. 232; Resp. C-Mem. {1 504. See, C-0021, Constitution of Spain of 27 December 1978, Section 86(1):
“In case of extraordinary and urgent need, the Government may issue temporary legislative provisions which shall
take the form of decree-laws and which may not affect the legal system of the basic State institutions, the rights, duties
and freedoms of the citizens contained in Part 1, the system of the Self-Governing Communities, or the general
electoral law.”

48

unsustainable and has serious consequences, as it undermines the security
and the capacity to fund the investments needed for the supply of electricity
at the levels of quality and security that Spanish society requires.”°”

179, With specific reference to facilities under the special regime, the Preamble explained that:

“".. due to the growing impact on the tariff deficit, mechanisms are
established with respect to the remunerative system of special regime
facilities. The trend that these technologies are following could place
system sustainability at risk in the short term, both from the economic point
of view due to its impact on the electricity tariff and from the technical point
of view, also compromising the economic viability of already completed
facilities whose operation depends on the suitable balance between
manageable and non-manageable generation. Therefore there is a need to
adopt an urgent measure that serves to guarantee the necessary legal security
of those who have made investments, and lays down the bases for
establishing new economic regimes that encourage compliance with the
intended objectives: the achievement of certain power objectives from
technology at a reasonable cost for the consumer and the technological
evolution thereof, which makes possible a gradual reduction in their cost
and consequently their concurrence with conventional technologies.”°*

180. Pursuant to its Article 1, RDL 6/2009 sought to eliminate the tariff deficit by 1 January
2013, amending the additional provisions to Law 54/1997 so as to provide that: “As of 1
January 2013, access fees shall be sufficient to satisfy the entire costs of the regulated
activities without the possibility of any ex ante deficit appearing.” Article 4 of RDL
6/2009 also introduced a new requirement of registration in the Remuneration Pre-

assignment Registry as a necessary condition to being awarded the right to the economic

$7 €-0061, RDL 6/2009, p. 1.

°8 €.0061, RDL 6/2009, pp. 3-4. Cf. the description of this part of the Preamble at Reply, {{ 350, where it is said that
it confirms the Claimants’ understanding of Article 44(3) of RD 661/2007 and guarantees the fixed tariff for existing
installations. At Reply, {| 352, the Claimants refer to section 5 of the Memoria Econémica for RDL 6/2009, dated 5
May 2009, saying that this makes expressly clear that RDL 6/2009 was designed specifically to protect the legitimate
expectations of existing investments. The passage referred to, in context, is as follows: “Application of the
remuneration system foreseen in Royal Decree 661/2007, of 25 May, has proven to be excessively inflexible and
ineffective to guarantee the achievement of its two fundamental objectives. In turn, if this change is not immediately
put in place an irreversible situation could arise, consisting of authorised facilities being implanted no longer legally
affected by the intended amendment, endangering the system's technical and economic sustainability and consequently
damaging both electricity consumers and the facility owners themselves. In any case, possible expectations are taken
into account, with the necessary precautions to ensure that, certainly, no acquired rights or legitimate expectations are
affected without adequately foreseeing the necessary transitional regime.”

% €-0061, RDL 6/2009, p. 6.

 

 

   
   

 

49

regime established in RD 661/2007, enabling the Government to stagger the entry into

operation of new installations.!”

181. Industry associations including the APPA strongly criticised this RD.'°! Both parties
agree that there was a tariff deficit in the SES and that the main goal of RDL 6/2009 was
to eliminate this. According to the Claimants, by 2009 the tariff deficit was in excess of
EUR 20 billion.'!°? The Claimants say that the tariff deficit was caused by the
Respondent’s failure to comply with Law 54/1997 and ensure that end-user tariffs for
electricity are at levels sufficient to cover the actual costs of the SES, including the costs
of the Special Regime. '°? The Respondent say that imbalance in the SES was largely due

to the sharp reduction in the demand for electricity caused by the economic crisis. !°*

f. Further developments in the Special Regime 2009-2010

182. On April 23, 2009, the EU adopted Directive 2009/28/EC (the “2009 Renewables
Directive”),'” fixing 2020 as the date by when the EU would seek to obtain 20% of its
total energy consumption requirements from RE sources (the “2020 Target”).!°° In
accordance with the 2009 Renewables Directive, on 30 June 2010, Spain adopted a
National Action Plan for Renewable Energy (“NAPRE”) to meet the targets of the
directive.'°’ With respect to “Future developments in support schemes for electricity

generation from renewable energies”, this Plan stated that: “Electrical energy production

10 Tt is understood that all of the Claimants’ plants were in operation by this time, and this provision therefore had no
direct impact on the Claimants’ plants. See, Cl. Mem. {| 195. However, the Claimants contend that RDL 6/2009
confirmed their understanding that if a plant had obtained the definite RAIPRE registration it had secured its right to
benefit from the economic conditions of RD 661/2007.

191 See, R-0018, Europe, new policy. Spain, new imposed decree, APPA info magazine No. 29, May 2009. See also,
Resp. C-Mem. {f 510-515; cf. Cl. Reply {ff 396-397.

102 Compass Report, Figure 8.

103 See e.g., Cl. Mem. 70; C-0029, Law 54/1997, on the Electric Power Sector (version as of 1 January 2008).

104 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 503 and 517.

105 €.0018, Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009, on the promotion
of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and
2003/30/EC, Official Journal of the European Union Series L 140/16, 5.6.2009, pp. 16-62 (entered into force on 25
June 2009) (2009 Renewables Directive”).

106 Cl. Mem. { 39.

107 Resp. C-Mem. {[ 531-532; National Action Plan for Renewable Energy in Spain (hereinafter “PANER”) 201 1-
2020 (R-0120).

50

under the special procedure is founded on three basic principles, namely legal certainty,
19108

feasibility and regulatory stability.
183. The Respondent contends that, during 2010, there was an exceptional reduction in
electricity demand, which among other factors, led to the need for reform in the Electricity

Sector. !

184. On 2 July 2010, Spain’s Ministry of Industry, Tourism, and Trade issued a press release
announcing that it had reached “an agreement with the solar thermal and wind power
sectors to revise their rate structures” (the “July 2010 “agreement””).!'° This referred to
a cap on the number of hours that would benefit from the tariffs of RD 661/2007, and a
reduction of the Premium until 2013. However, the incentives and rates of RD 661/2007

were otherwise to be maintained.'!! The press release announced that:

“The agreements include short-term measures, which will allow the impact
on the price of electricity to be reduced, as well as long-term measures,
which will guarantee stability and certainty to both sectors for its future
development.

The premium for wind provided by RD 661/2007 will be reduced by 35%
until 2013. ...

It is agreed to limit the number of hours with above-market remuneration
rights for wind power and solar thermal plants, taking into account the
different technologies and the provisions of the Renewable Energies Plan
2005-2010 for the calculation of the profitability of the facilities. ...

With this measure, which does not jeopardise the profitability of the existing
facilities, it will be guaranteed that the production of renewable energy
above the expected amounts will benefit consumers and not jeopardise the
financial sustainability of the system.

This pact furthermore assumes the reinforcement of the visibility and

108 R.0120, PANER 2011-2020, p. 118.

109 Resp. C-Mem. 33.

410 €.0063, Government of Spain, Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce, press release: “The Ministry of
Industry, Tourism and Trade Reaches an Agreement with the Solar Thermal and Wind Power Sectors to Revise their
Rate Structures”, 2 July 2010 (hereinafter, “2 July 2010 Press Release”).

41 Cl, Mem. {ff 199-204; C-0063, 2 July 2010 Press Release.

Sl

stability of the regulation of these technologies in the future, guaranteeing
the current incentives and rates of RD 661/2007 for the facilities in
operation (and for those included in the pre-registration) starting in 2013.

The Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Trade will immediately start the
proceedings that allow the content of the agreements to transfer into
regulation.” !!?

185. Shortly before the July 2010 “agreement”, representatives of the First Claimant (including
Mr Henderson and Mr Navarro) had met with representatives of the Government. As to

this meeting, Mr Henderson said:

“They [the Spanish Government representatives] believed that Article 44.3
gave them the right to change the premium but not the fixed tariff, that was
their interpretation of it, so the fixed tariff they couldn't touch, but the
premium yes. And their proposal to the sector was that in return for these
temporary adjustments, as I say, to reduce the premium component for a
limited period, and also the operating hours, with some caps on operating
hours, they would guarantee to the sector, and they did guarantee to the
sector in the July 2010 agreement and subsequent legislation, that they
would never again touch the parameters applicable to 661 and to our
assets.”!!3

186. On 19 November 2010, Spain issued Royal Decree 1565/2010 (“RD 1565/2010”)!"4
which introduced certain technical and economic measures for the wind energy sector.
This was followed on 7 December 2010 by issue of Royal Decree 1614/2010 (“RD
1614/2010”).!!°

112 ©.0063, 2 July 2010 Press Release, pp. 1-2.
113 Mr Henderson, Day 3/33. See also, Navarro Statement, {| 69: “In conversation with RWE, Spain made clear that
this was a temporary course of action and that normality would be restored.” See also, C-0191, Minutes of the meeting
held between representatives of RWE Innogy and the Ministry of Industry, 23 June 2010 (hereinafter “Minutes of 23
June 2010 Meeting”).

114 R.0104, RD 1565/2010 of 19 November 2010.

115 €.0065 and R-0105, Royal Decree 1614/2010 of 7 December 2010, regulating and modifying certain aspects
relating to the production of electricity based on thermoelectric and wind technologies (published on 8 December
2010) (hereinafter “RD 1614/2010” or “RD 1614”).

52

187. In its Preamble, RD 1614/2010 recorded that with “the growth in wind, solar
thermoelectric and photovoltaic technologies, the objectives for 2010 for installed power
having been equalled and indeed exceeded”, and that the support regime “must adapt,
while ensuring the legal security of investments and the principle of fair return ... .” A
limit on the number of hours entitled to remuneration at the fixed tariff or to a premium
was established by Article 2(4).''® Article 5 of RD 1614/2010 also provided that reviews
under Article 44(3) of RD 661/2007 would not apply to installations that had obtained the
definitive registration in the RAIPRE on or before 7 May 2009,'"” nor to any installations
that at the time of entry into force of RDL 6/2009 met the requirements for registration in
the Pre-Assignment Register, and were effectively registered in the RAIPRE on or before
31 December 2013.!'

188. Article 5(3) thus reiterated the final sentence of Article 44(3) of RD 661/2007 with
specific respect to facilities registered definitively in the RAIPRE as of 7 May 2009 and
those that had met the requirements for registration in the Remuneration Pre-assignment

Registry (see Article 4 of RDL 6/2009).!!°

189. The final legislative act establishing the framework into which the Claimants were
making their various investments is Royal Decree Law 14/2010, adopted on 23

December 2010 (“RDL 14/2010”).'° This RDL required producers under the ordinary

116 Cl. Mem. {J 206-207; C-0065, RD 1614/2010, Article 5(3).

117 Tt is recalled that Article 44(3) of RD 661/2007 stated that a review of the Fixed Tariffs or the Premiums would be
carried out in 2010, at the end of the planning period set forth in the PER 2005-2010 and when Spain anticipated it
would reach its RE installed capacity goals. C-0065, Article 5(3) thus provides: “Without prejudice to that which is
set forth in this Royal Decree, for wind technology facilities adhered to Royal Decree 661/2007, of 25 May, the
revisions of the tariffs, premiums and upper and lower limits referred to in article 44.3 of the aforementioned Royal
Decree, shall not affect facilities registered definitively in the Administrative Registry of production facilities entitled
to the special regime that is maintained by the Directorate-General for Energy and Mining Policy as of 7 May 2009

 

 

118 Cl. Mem. 211; C-0065, RD 1614/2010, Article 5(3).

19 According to the Reply, {| 364-365, Article 5 was included despite a warning from the State Council as to this
i ility” with respect to in the future. Refe is made to C-0269, State Council Report

on draft RD 1614/2010, 26 November 2010, p. 18 and C-0268, Memoria Econénica for RD 1614/2010, p. 11.

Following a careful review, the Tribunal does not see these documents as assisting the Claimants with respect to the

intended scope of Article 5.3 of RD 1614/2010.

120 R-0090, Royal Decree Law 14/2010, establishing urgent measures for the correction of the tariff deficit in the

electricity sector, 23 December 2010, Preamble (hereinafter “RDL-14/2010").

53

regime (traditional electric power plants) and under the special regime to pay an access
fee for the use of transmission and distribution networks and affected the RE producers’
profit.'2! According to the Respondent, this demonstrates that RD 1614/2010 was not
intended to freeze the economic regime established in RD 661/2007.'? The Claimants
contend that these cuts were only for PV installations, so the wind and hydro sector did
not suffer.'?? The Tribunal notes, however, that the introduction of the access fee under
RDL 14/2010 was of general application, whereas certain provisions of this RDL were

confined to the PV sector i.e. certain limits on operating hours.
B. THE CLAIMANTS’ INVESTMENTS IN SPAIN

190. Between April 2001 and December 2011, the Claimants bought and developed in Spain
(i) four hydroelectric plants (Cepeda and La Mora in Avila, Chomba in Asturias, and
Villalgordo in Albacete) with a total installed production capacity of approximately 12.20
MW and (ii) 16 wind farms (Grisel, Acampo-Armijo, Muel, Bosque Alto, Plana de Maria,
Rio Gallego, Lanternoso, Los Labrados, Plana de la Balsa, Plana de Zaragoza, Bancal,
Siglos, Juno, Luna, Urano and Aldehuelas) with a total installed production capacity of
approximately 446.75 MW.!*4 The Claimants say that they invested more than EUR 577

million in these plants between 2001 and 2011.!75

191. As follows from the details below, the investments were acquired in three broad tranches:
first, in a series of transactions in 2001 to early 2004 totalling in excess of EUR 45 million,

in particular with respect to the acquisition of 100% of the share capital of Agrupacié

121 R.0090, RDL-14/2010, First transitory provision.

122 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 584-591, relying also on R-0150, the Supreme Court ruling of 25 June 2013 for the proposition
that this was lawful as a matter of Spanish law, and noting that the Supreme Court here reiterated its conclusion that
RD 661/2007 was not inalterable or unchangeable by reference to alleged principles of legal certainty and legitimate
expectations and still less did such principles obstruct the regulator from taking general or non-tax measures. The
Court concluded: “It is therefore legitimate to decide that all producers of electricity, without exception, should
contribute through the payment of tolls to the costs that can be attributed to investments required to make it possible
for the energy produced to be transported and distributed.”

123 Cl. Mem. 212.

124 Cl. Mem. 17, Appendix 4 of Cl. Mem., CLEX-0004, pp. 93-94.

125 Claimants’ oral opening, Day 1/24; also at Day 1/133-135.

   

   

54

Energias Renovables, S.A.U. (Aersa) (the “Aersa Acquisition”);'7° second, on 6 June
2008, the Claimants acquired a 100% interest in Urvasco Energia, S.A. (Urvasco) for
EUR 363.5 million (the “Urvasco Acquisition”); !”’ third, in a series of transactions from
December 2008 up until December 2012, the Claimants increased their shareholding
interests in the various plants in which they already had an interest through their prior

acquisitions.

192. The Claimants’ first investments were made through the First Claimant’s predecessor

company, Harpen AG (Harpen).'?*

193. In April 2001, Harpen acquired the Grisel wind farm for EUR 3,500.'” In June 2001,
Harpen and PEG entered into an agreement with BBB Umwelttechnik Erneuerbare
Energien GmbH (BBB) and Germania Windpark GmbH & Co. (GWP), in which PEG
acquired from BBB all authorisations, permits and licences of the Grisel plant for EUR

3.5 million.!°°

194. In May 2002, Harpen acquired 100% of the share capital of Agrupacié Energias
Renovables S.A.U. (Aersa) for EUR 42 million. Harpen thus acquired interests in the
following wind farms: Acampo Armijo (100%); Muel (77.67%); Puena de la Balsa
(81%); Los Labrados (81%); Plana de Zaragoza (81%); Aldehuelas (20.81%). Also
through the Aersa acquisition, Harpen acquired a 100% interest in the hydroelectric plants
Chomba del Plagano, Cepeda and La Mora, and a 60% interest in the hydroelectric
plant Villalgordo.!*!

26 Cl, Mem. | 216; C-0069, Public deed of sale and purchase agreement between Harpen Aktiengesellschaft as buyer
and Agrupacién Mutua del Comercio I de la Industria, Mutua D’Assegurances I Reassegurances a Prima Fixa,
Agrupacién Bankpyme Seguros de Vida y Salud, $.A., and Agrupacién Mutua Fondo de Pensiones as sellers, dated
17 May 2002, pp. | and 10; Schafer Statement | 29.

27 Cl. Mem. § 233.

8 Cl, Mem. ff 22 and 215-219.

29 Cl. Mem. ¥ 215.

30 Cl, Mem. { 215; C-0174, Public deed of sale and purchase agreement entered into between Windfarm Holding
GmbH and Harpen, dated 10 April 2001; Public deed of sale and purchase agreement between BBB, GWP, Harpen
and PEG, dated 18 July 2001, pp. 2, 7 and 15; Schiifer Statement [ 27.

3! Cl, Mem. fff 216-234.

 

55

195. As at the time of the Aersa Acquisiton, RWE Aersa owned 90% of Prodenergias-2, S.L.
(“Prodenergias 2”),'°* which owned 46.26%! of each Parque Eélico La Luna
(“Luna”), Parque Eédlico Juno (“Juno”) and Parque Edlico Urano (“Urano”) through the
company Danta de Energias, S.A. The percentage interest was increased to 50% on 1
April 2004 due to a capital increase in Dante, with the result that the Claimants had a 45%

in Luna, Juno and Urano as of that date. !°+

196. A draft due diligence report was produced by Price Waterhouse Coopers in April 2002
with respect to the Aersa acquisition, although this focused on the individual plants as
opposed to the details of the Spanish regulatory regime.'*° In July 2002, Ilex Energy
Consulting (Ilex) prepared for the Claimants a report entitled “Projecting Wholesale
Electricity Prices in Spain.”'*° This report drew attention to RD 2818/1998, which it
described as “encourag[ing] new investments in co-generation and renewable energies by
placing them under a Special Regime and subsidising electricity purchases from
renewable energy generators with a capacity of less than SOMW.”!?” Under the section
“Future of the Special regime”, a “main risk” was identified as “the possibility of partial
or total elimination of the Special regime subsidies”, although it was added that “we

consider it unlikely that support for renewable energy would disappear completely.” !**

197. On 30 December 2003, a further 21.97% interest in Aldehuelas was acquired for EUR
586,363.'°

198. — It follows that the Claimants invested in excess of EUR 49.5 million under the regulatory

regime put in place by RD 2818/1998 and prior to the adoption of RD 436/2004. A further

52. Cl, Mem. 4 219; Schafer Statement { 30.

53 Cl, Mem. 219; C-0209, “Danta de Energfas, S.A.”, Landwell and PriceWaterhouseCoopers Summary. p. 4. See
also, C-0211, Registry Book of Shares of Danta de Energias, $.A., dated 15 April 2002, p. 6.

84 C]. Mem. § 220.

85 €.0085, Financial Review Due Diligence Draft Report, for Agrupacién Energias Renovables, S.A., PWC
PowerPoint presentation, April 2002.

'36 €.0088, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to Harpen, Projecting wholesale electricity prices in Spain, July 2002.
'57 €.0088, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to Harpen, Projecting wholesale electricity prices in Spain, p. 11.

'38 €.0088, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to Harpen, Projecting wholesale electricity prices in Spain, p. 12.

89 Cl, Mem. § 230.

56

199,

200.

201.

1.77% interest in this plant was acquired on 1 April 2004 for around EUR 40,000, i.e. a
few days after RD 436/2004 was adopted. '°

In October 2004, Ilex prepared for the Claimants a further report, entitled “Wind Power
Price Projections for Spain’, having been retained by Harpen “to examine the background
to, and project the prospects for, wind power in Spain for the period to 2022.”'*! In this

report, Ilex stated in the Executive Summary that:

“The future for renewable generation will depend on the form and level of
any support mechanism. The Special Regime mechanism is subject to
periodic review, and there have been discussions about introducing a
market-based mechanism in accordance with the latest EU directive on
renewable generation. However, given the success of the current
mechanism, ... it is likely that the current tariff/premium methodology will
continue, at least until 2010...

Given the uncertainty surrounding the Special Regime and the future policy
and support mechanism for the development of renewable energy to meet
the set targets, it is difficult to accurately project potential additional
revenue to wind generators. However, there is a commitment by the Spanish
Government to continue support in some form, whether it is through
subsidies set annually and funded by the regulated tariffs, or through
market-based mechanisms.” !?

In July 2007, Ilex (now called Péyry) prepared a report for RWE Power AG, “Current
and Future State of Wind Energy in Spain and Portugal.”'“? This report post-dates RD
661/2007 (25 May 2007) but pre-dates the Claimants’ acquisition of Urvasco (6 June
2008, see further below). It is noted that the Claimants’ witnesses did not read this report,

and it has not been established that it was relied on in the acquisition of Urvasco.!“4

In its Executive Summary, Péyry identified under its first heading “Recent market events

in Spain” various matters including “ongoing problems with the tariff deficit” and

49 Cl, Mem. § 230.
41 Cl, Mem. 4 230; C-0089, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to RWE, Wind power price projections for Spain.

'2 At (ii), footnotes omitted and (v)-(vi); C-0089, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to RWE, Wind power price
projections for Spain, pp. 6 and 9.

143

Cl. Mem.; C-0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind).

‘4 The Claimants’ witness, Mr Navarro, was aware of but did not read this report, whilst the Claimants’ witness, Mr
Henderson, was not aware of it. See, Day 2/193 and Day 3/25.

s7

“changes in legislation to cap revenue to Special Regime generators.” It also stated that
“given recent high Pool prices, Special Regime generators, in particular wind farms, have
been making supra-normal profits. As a result of these excessive profits the government
has intervened in order to cap profits by modifying RD 436/2004 (the main special regime
legislation for the period 2004-2007) and publishing RD 661/2007 to replace it.” It

continued:

“Due to these major changes by the Government, Poyry believes the
Spanish market will continue to be dominated by the government, with it
actively managing the market to try and maintain a cap on generator profits.
What seems increasingly probable is that the government is unlikely to opt
for direct intervention in the Pool. Rather it appears to prefer intervention
outside the Pool (as RD 1634/2006 and ITC 400/2007 legislation to cap
generators profits and total system cost). Thus the government is more
likely to intervene to tax companies for windfall profits, or cap revenues
(RD 661/2007), than it is to directly intervene in the wholesale market and
cap prices.” !4°

202. In the ensuing “Summary of legislation for renewables in Spain”, Péyry set out the basic

elements of RD 661/2007, stating inter alia:

“The Spanish Government, through Royal Decree (RD) 661/2007,
encourages new investments in co-generation and renewable energies by
placing them under a Special Regime, and subsidising electricity purchases
from renewable energy generators. Under RD 661/2007, these subsidies
(environmental premiums) are guaranteed during the operating lifetime of
the plant. RD 661/2007 supplants the previous legislation governing the
special regime market, RD 436/2004.

The main conclusion for the industry from the implementation of RD
661/2007 is that although the potential income to be received has been
capped so have the potential losses. In our opinion the revised remuneration
for wind generators will not cause any real lasting damage to the Spanish
wind industry — a concern that had been raised after the publication of the
first draft in November 2006.” '4°

203. Péyry’s forecast was, in its summary form, as follows:

“The Spanish wind farms remuneration has changed with the recent
introduction of RD 661/2007. It provides a new measure to control revenues

45 €.0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), pp. 1-2.
446 €.0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), pp. 2-3. See also, pp. 81-82.

58

204.

205.

wind farms by imposing a cap and a floor (also referred to as a ‘collar’).
This way the Spanish Government limits the return wind assets will obtain.
Péyry estimates that the expected IRR (Internal Rate of Return, post-tax
nominal) ungeared for wind farms at market prices would be in the range of
5% to 7.5% (see Péyry’s DCF model in Annex E). The IRR range implies
a decrease in expected IRR compared to those that result from RD 436/2004
scheme which allowed higher returns. Existing wind farms opting for the
transitory period will have an IRR ungeared in the range of 5.5% to 8%. We
estimate that the impact RD 661/2007 for the existing assets is, therefore,
limited.” !47

In the section on regulatory/political risks, Péyry explained that: “2006 saw a significant
increase in Government intervention in the energy market in Spain. The ever-increasing
tariff deficit caused by low hydro and ever increasing Brent prices forced the Government
to take drastic measures. Towards the end of 2005, the Government announced that it
intended to analyse the Special regime remuneration (specifically wind), since it was
viewed as profiting from the high SMP [pool] price as well as the increasing TMR.”'*®
As it had in the 2004 report, Péyry also considered the possibility of introduction of a
market-based mechanism to replace the tariff system, but it considered this very unlikely.
The report stated that: “Jn any case, in the event of a change from the current feed-in tariff
mechanism to a market mechanism (possibly at the end of 2010), we would expect to see
a transitory period essentially extending the feed-in tariff mechanism applicable to

operating wind farms for a number of years.” '*°

Approximately one year following issue of the 2007 Péyry report, on 6 June 2008, RWE
Aersa acquired a 100% interest in Urvasco Energia, S.A. (Urvasco) for EUR 363.5
million.!° As a result, RWE Aersa acquired 100% of: (i) Parque Edlico Bancal, S.L.,
which held the Bancal wind farm; (ii) Parque Edlico Los Siglos, S.L., which held the Los

Siglos wind farm; (iii) Guijosa Edlica, $.A., which held the Lanternoso wind farm; (iv)

147 €.0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), p. 7. See also, pp. 97-98. As stated there, Pdyry considered that its
estimation suggested that the majority of wind generators would remain under the market option as opposed to opting
for the fixed tariff.

48 €.0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), pp. 57-58.
49 €.0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), p. 58.
59 Cl, Mem. § 233.

59

Parque Eélico Rio Gallego, S.L., which held the Rio Gallego wind farm; (v) Parque
E6lico Bosque Alto, S.A., which held the Bosque Alto wind farm; and (vi) Explotaciones
Eélicas Plana de Maria, S.L., which held the Plana Maria wind farm.'>! The Claimants
consider that they paid a high price for these assets, which was justified because they were

able to afford the price under the regime in place. '**

206. On 23 December 2008, the Second Claimant acquired a further 23.75% interest in
Aldehuelas for EUR 12 million.!°

207. On7 May 2009, a few days after the adoption of Royal Decree Law 6/2009, the Second
Claimant acquired a further 49.23% interest in La Luna, Juno and Urano for EUR 48
million.'*4 Also, in the second half of 2009, upgrades to fourteen plants were made in
accordance with the Fifth Transitory Provision of RD 661/2007, in the amount of EUR

6.8 million.!*>

208. In a series of transactions in October-December 2010, i.e. in the months after the
Ministerial press release of 2 July 2010 concerning the “agreement with the solar thermal
and wind power sectors to revise their rate structures”, the Claimants acquired further

interests in Plana de la Balsa (a further 13.7% for EUR 1.2 million!*®), Los Labrados

151 C_0081, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Grupo Urvasco, S.A., Mr Rodolfo Di Pietro, Mr Luis
Alonso, Mr Pablo Couto, Mr Jestis Esparza, Mr Julio Esparza and RWE Aersa, dated 6 June 2008, pp. 1, 14, 15, 29
and 30; Biinting Statement 42.

'S2 Biinting Statement { 63.

153. Cl. Mem. 231.

154 Cl. Mem. { 221; C-0212, Public deed of sale and purchase agreement between Elica Renovables de Inversiones,
S.A. and Agrupacié Energfas Renovables, $.A.U., dated 7 May 2009, pp. | and 8. See also, Biinting Statement {J 44-
45, referring to Transaction Approval Request Form dated 6 April 2009. That Form contains the same “assumption”
referring to RDs 436/2004 and 661/2007 as the Form of 12 December 2008.

155 Cl. Mem. J 235-236.

156 Cl. Mem. { 224; C-0077, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Compafifa Leonesa de Energfas
Alternativas Renovables, S.L. and RWE Aersa, dated 19 October 2010, pp. 1, 5 and 6.

   

60

(a further 13.98% for EUR 1.65 million'*’), Plana de Zaragoza (a further 19% for EUR
2.725 million!>*), and Muel (a further 17.32% for EUR 1.7 million).!°°

209. Further significant investments were made by the Claimants in 2011 (subsequent to the
adoption of RD 1614/2010 and RDL 14/2010). In February 2011, the Second Claimant

acquired a further interest in Muel through the acquisition of Promotura Acurado SA

),160

(approximately 5% for EUR 4.6 million and also bought the remaining 10% interest

in Prodenergias 2, thereby increasing its interest in Plana de la Balsa and Los Labrados
to 100%.'*! On 2 December 2011, RWE Aersa acquired a further 47.50% of the share
capital of Aldehuelas for EUR 25,540,000, '° increasing its interest in the Aldehuelas
wind farm to 95%.!° Finally, on 1 December 2012, the Claimants acquired a ‘golden

share’ with respect to the Muel plant (for EUR 50,000). !

157 Cl. Mem. { 226; C-0078, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Compajifa Leonesa de Energias
Alternativas Renovables, S.L. and RWE Aersa, dated 19 October 2010, pp. 1,5, 6 and 12.

158 Cl. Mem. {[ 228; C-0162, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Compajfifa Leonesa de Energias
Alternativas Renovables, S.L. and RWE Aersa, dated 2 December 2010, pp. 1, 5 and 6.

159 Cl, Mem. i 223-224, 226 and 228. See also, Biinting Statement I] 44-45, referring to Transaction Approval
Request Form dated 12 July 2010; also C-0072, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Compafifa Leonesa
de Energias Alternativas Renovables, S.L. and RWE Aersa, dated 19 October 2010, pp. 1 and 5; C-0073, Public deed
of share purchase agreement between Hidrdulica del Loureiro-Enorsa, S.L. and RWE Aersa, dated 22 December 2010,
pp. 1,5, 6 and 13.

160 Cl. Mem. {{ 223.

161 Cl, Mem. if 221, 225 and 227; This 10% interest was achieved by means of Aersa’s purchase (i) to Promotora
Acurado of a 5% interest in Prodenergias 2 (C-0074, Public deed of share purchase agreement between Ms Maria
Begofia Amann Garbisu, Mr Joaquin Barrera Amann, Mr Antonio Barrera de Irimo, Ms Marfa Teresa Barrera Amann,
Ms Gracia Barrera Amann, Mr Iiiigo Barrera Amann, Ms Maria Asuncién Barrera Amann, Ms Ana Maria Barrera
Amann, Corporacién Atlantica de Servicios, S.A. and RWE Aersa, dated | February 2011, pp. | and 8-9) and (ii) the
remaining 5% interest from Servicios Generales Corporativos, S.L. (C-0086, Public deed of share purchase agreement
and loan amortisation between Servicios Generales Corporativos, S.L. and Agrupacié Energias Renovables, $.A.U.,
dated 2 February 2011, pp. 1,5 and 6.)

162 C_0185, Public deed of share purchase agreement entered into between Enel Green Power Espajia, S.L. and RWE
Aersa, dated 2 December 2011, pp. 1, 7 and 9. See also, C-0148, Registry Book of Shares of Explotaciones Eélicas
Aldehuelas, $.L., p. 8.

163 Cl. Mem. { 232.

164 Cl. Mem. 223; The Golden Share refers to a minority stake representing 0.001% of the share capital of Muel (that
is, one out of 110,000 shares) owned by Taim-Weser, S.A., a Spanish company acting in several industry fields
including crane manufacturing, waste treatment or renewable energy. Its existence is due to the fact that the
Municipality of Muel, at the time, required a company based in the Spanish region of Aragén to be part of the share
capital of Muel holding a minimum of one share. C-0075, Resolution of the Board of Directors of RWE Aersa on the
“Acquisition of the “Golden Share” Explotaciones Edlicas de Muel, S.L.”, dated 6 June 2012, p. 1. Taim-Weser, S.A.,
as original owner of 100% of the share capital of Explotaciones Edlicas de Muel. S.L. retained the “Golden Share”,
which granted it certain rights including the approval of sales to third parties; C-0189, Transaction Approval Request

61

210. The Respondent does not make any challenge to the Claimants’ ownership of the
investments in Spain. However, it does emphasise that the investments were acquired
over a period of more than 12 years, and it criticises the Claimants for giving the
impression that the only regulations in the Spanish Regulatory Framework that any
investor had to take into account were RD 661/2007 and RD 1614/2010.'* The
Respondent also says that the Claimants failed to carry out any due diligence subsequent
to July 2007.!% The issue of due diligence, as with the evidence on actual reliance on the

applicable regulations, is considered in section VI below.
Cc. SPAIN’S MEASURES AND THE NEW REGIME

211. According to the Claimants, from December 2012 until June 2014, Spain adopted a series
of measures (the Disputed Measures) which seriously undermined the RD 661/2007
economic regime and amounted to the reneging of the promises that had induced the

making of the Claimants’ investments. '°7

212. The Respondent says in contrast that the measures adopted to reform the Electricity Sector

8

had been announced publicly,'°* were reasonable and proportionate, and affected all

subjects of the SES. The Respondent says that the measures affected in particular
consumers whose electricity bills had increased disproportionately between 2003 and

2012,'®? and that the Disputed Measures were adopted in a context of international crisis

Form for RWE Innogy Project, 28 September 2010, p. 4 and fn. 2, p. 3. The obligation was waived on May 2012,
after Aersa’s formal request for waiver. Therefore, on 1 December 2012, by means of a sale and purchase agreement
entered into between Aersa and Taim-Weser, S.A., Aersa was able to acquire the Golden Share, consolidating its stake
in Muel and becoming its sole shareholder; C-0207, Resolutions of the Board of Directors of RWE Innogy GmbH on
the Acquisition of the “Golden Share” Explotaciones Eélicas de Muel, S.L., dated 6 June 2012, p. 1).

165 Resp. Rej. ff 205-212.

166 Resp. Rej. 213.

167 Cl. Mem. {J 54-55.

168 The Respondent refers to R-0192, a speech by Mariano Rajoy in his inaugural address as President of the
Government, to the Spanish Congress, Monday 19 December 2011, www.lamoncloa.gob.es; R-0170, a press release
by the National Energy Commission: “The CNE (National Energy Commission) is analysing the revision of access
tolling and certain tariffs and premiums of installations under a special regime”, press release of the National Energy
Commission”, 28 December 2011.

169 Resp. C-Mem. 36.

 
     

62

213.

214.

215.

that produced severe effects on the demand for electricity and capital market yields. !7° In
the Respondent’s view, the reforms maintained the essential elements of the support

system for renewable energies. '7!

The CNE report of 7 March 2012; the MOU of 20 July 2012

On 27 January 2012, the Spanish Government asked the CNE to prepare a report on the
regulatory adjustment measures that could be adopted in the energy sectors, including in
terms of addressing the development of the tariff deficit in the electrical sector. The CNE
issued a report on 7 March 2012.'* According to the CNE, the deficit between revenues
and costs of the electrical system was unsustainable, the system debt having grown to
€21,812 M.'” It stated that “the urgent adoption of regulatory solutions is needed, in the

electrical and natural gas sectors.”'™*

The CNE proposed a number of possible “urgent and necessary” short and medium term
measures, some of which were radical in nature i.e. financing the cost of the special
regime through CO2 auctions and a tax on the sale of petrol and gas, some of which
envisaged relatively minor reductions to the current remuneration to RE generators (such
as reductions to the annual increase in accordance with the CPI, reductions impacting
solar thermoelectric plants pre-registered but not yet finally registered in the RAIPRE,
and restrictions on use of fossil fuels in generation of renewable energy to 5%), some of
which envisaged an increase in access tolls.!”> The CNE did not propose the replacement

of the Special Regime fixed tariff / premium put in place by RD 661/2007.

Three months later, on 25 June 2012, the Spanish Government requested external
financial assistance from the EU in the context of the ongoing restructuring and

recapitalisation of the Spanish banking sector. This led, on 20 July 2012, to conclusion

170 Resp. Skeleton ff 31-33.
"71 Resp, C-Mem. 37.
12 €.0163 and R-0131, CNE, Report on the Spanish Electricity Sector, 7 March 2012 (hereinafter “2012 CNE

Report”).

"73 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 6.
174 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 4, emphasis in the original.
175 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 10.

63

of a Memorandum of Understanding with the EU on “Financial Sector Policy
Conditionality.” This MOU recorded how the global financial and economic crisis had
exposed weaknesses in the growth pattern of the Spanish economy, how Spanish banks
had largely lost access to wholesale funding markets on affordable terms, and set out a
roadmap for the restructuring and recapitalisation of Spanish banks. Further, at paragraph

31 of the MOU it was stated:

“31. Regarding structural reforms, the Spanish authorities are
committed to implement the country-specific recommendations in the
context of the European Semester. These reforms aim at correcting
macroeconomic imbalances, as identified in the in-depth review under the
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP). In particular, these
recommendations invite Spain to: ... 6) complete the electricity and gas
interconnections with neighbouring countries, and address the electricity
tariff deficit in a comprehensive way.”!7°

b. Law 15/2012

216. Law 15/2012 of 27 December 2012 (“Law 15/2012”),'"’ which came into force on I
January 2013,'* imposed (i) a 7% levy on all income obtained by all generators,
renewable or otherwise, and (ii) a 22% levy on the use of mainland waters (reduced to
2.2 % for hydro plants with an installed capacity of less than 50 MW). According to the
Claimants, this was not a ‘tax measure’ but rather a disguised tariff cut.'7? The
Respondent states that the economic impact of the taxes on RE producers is neutralised
because they are one of the costs remunerated to RE producers under the payment regime

applicable to them.'*°

176 RL-0067, Memorandum of Understanding signed with the European Union: VI. Public Finances, Macroeconomic
Imbalances and Financial Sector Reform (hereinafter “MOU with the EU”), emphasis added.

17 ©.0019, Law 15/2012 of 27 December 2012, concerning tax measures to ensure energy sustainability (published
on 28 December 2012) (hereinafter “Law 15/2012”).

178 Resp. C-Mem. {| 652; R-0030, Law 15/2012, Fifth Final Provision: “This Law shall enter into force on 1 January
2013”.

179 Cl. Mem. 55.

180 Resp. C-Mem. if 661 and 672; R-0115, Order IET/1045/2014, dated 16 June 2014, approving those compensation
parameters for standard energy facilities applicable to certain electric power production facilities from renewable
energy sources, cogeneration and waste, Explanatory Memorandum III. “On the other hand, other costs among those
variable operating costs that depend on the standard facility’s output are taken into account including, but not limited
to: insurance costs, administrative costs and other general costs, representation costs on the market, taxes on access to

64

c. RDL 2/2013, RDL 9/2013 and Law 44/2013

217. Spain issued Royal Decree Law 2/2013 on 1 February 2013 (“RDL 2/2013”).'*! This
adopted further “Urgent Measures within the Electricity System and the Financial
Sector’, pursuant to which: (i) the value of the Premium was reduced to nil; and (ii) the
inflation adjustments that were envisaged under RD 661/2007 for the FIT were reduced,
removing key components of the CPI, because it replaces the CPI with the Consumer
Price Index at constant taxes excluding unprocessed food and energy products (“CPI-
IP”).'*? In the Preamble to RDL 2/2013, these measures were explained as being a
response to new increases in the tariff deficit, it being said that this was to a great extent
“due to a greater increase in the cost of the special regime on account of an increase in
operating hours which was greater than expected, to an increase in remuneration values
due to their being indexed to the Brent price, and to a decrease in revenue from fees due

to a very marked fall in demand which was consolidated during this tax year.” !*

218. On 12 July 2013, the Spanish Government adopted Royal Decree Law 9/2013 (“RDL
9/2013”)!*4 the principal measure of which the Claimants complain in this case.
According to the Preamble of RDL 9/2013, the electricity sector debt had become
unsustainable, and urgent and immediately-applicable measures were needed. The
Preamble described the urgent measures that had previously been taken by Spain, gave
an explanation as to why these had not proved sufficient, and then described the new

measures and their legal basis as follows:

“First of all, the Government is empowered to approve a new legal and
economic regime for existing electricity production installations using
renewable, co-generation and waste energy sources. In this way article 30.4

transport and distribution networks that must be paid by producers of electric power, operation and maintenance (both
preventive and corrective), the tax on the value of the electric power produced envisaged by Law 15/2012, dated 27
December, fiscal measures for energy sustainability, as well as other taxes whatsoever regulated by the aforesaid
law..””

181 €.0020, Royal Decree Law 2/2013 of 1 February 2013, concerning urgent measures within the Electricity System
and the financial sector (published on 2 February 2013) (hereinafter “RDL 2/2013”).

182 Cl, Mem. 9.55, Resp. C-Mem. 674.

183 ©0020, RDL 2/2013. The Claimants challenges the reference to over-remuneration: see e.g., Cl. Mem. {ff 284-
285.

184 €.0024, Royal Decree Law 9/2013 of 12 July 2013, by which urgent measures are adopted to guarantee the
financial stability of the Electricity System (published on 13 July 2013) (hereinafter “RDL 9/2013”).

65

of Law 54/1997, of 27 November, concerning the Electricity Sector, is
modified to introduce the concrete principles on which this regime will be
based, in order to establish the scope of activity of the Government in
developing remuneration regimes for these installations. This shall be based
on receiving the revenue deriving from market participation, with an
additional remuneration which, were it to prove necessary, covers those
investment costs that an efficient and well-run company cannot recover
from the market. In this way, in line with Community jurisprudence, an
efficient and well-run company shall be understood to be one that has the
necessary resources to carry out its activity, whose costs are those of a
company that is efficient in its activity, and taking into account the
corresponding revenue and a reasonable return for carrying out its
functions. The objective is to guarantee that the high costs of an inefficient
company are not used as a benchmark.

Furthermore, in Law 54/1997 of 27 November, the concept of reasonable
return is embodied and regulated, and is established, in line with
jurisprudence and doctrine that has been laid down in recent years, in a
project profitability that will depend, before tax, on the average yield from
ten-year Government Bonds on the secondary market, by applying the
appropriate differential.”

219. Pursuant to Article 1 of RDL 9/2013, Article 30.4 of Law 54/1997 was radically amended

so as to read as follows (in relevant part):

“Additionally, subject to the terms that the Council of Ministers might adopt
pursuant to Royal Decrees, in relation to the remuneration for the generation
of electricity calculated according to market price, installations may receive
a specific remuneration [the Special Payment] composed of an amount per
unit of installed capacity. Such amount shall cover, as appropriate, the
investment costs of a standard installation that cannot be recovered through
the sale of energy, as well as an amount for the operation of the installation
to cover, as the case may be, the difference between exploitation costs and
the revenues obtained from the participation of such a standard installation
in the market.

This remuneration regime shall not exceed the minimum required level to
cover the costs that are necessary for installations to compete on an equal
footing with the rest of the technologies in the market in order to allow those
installations to obtain a reasonable return, by reference to the standard
installation, as the case may be. Notwithstanding the above, exceptionally

66

the remuneration regime might also include an incentive to investments and
timely execution of an installation, if this was going to result in a significant
cost reduction for the Spanish islands or the extra-peninsular territories’
electricity systems.

Such reasonable return will be based on, before taxes, the average returns
in the secondary market of the State's ten-year bonds plus the adequate
differential.

The parameters of the remuneration regime can be revised every six years.”

220. Pursuant to this RDL’s First Additional Provision, the adequate differential referred to in

the revised Article 30(4) was fixed at 300 base points.

221. On 4 September 2013, a report was produced by CNE!*° in which the impact of the new

methodology was described inter alia as follows (emphasis in original):

“The new methodology incorporates periodic revisions of the specific
payment in order to ensure that so-called reasonable rates of return are
obtained, avoiding underpayments and also overpayments; however, the
methodology also presents great uncertainties for its application to the
approximately 60,000 existing installations, since its application depends
on a series of standard parameters that will be defined in the development
order of the royal decree.”

222. On 26 December 2013, Spain introduced a new Electricity Law, Law 24/2013 (“Law
24/2013”), repealing Law 54/1997 save with regard to certain limited provisions. '*° The
new Law confirmed and developed the principles set out in RDL 9/2013, with Article
30(4) of Law 54/1997 as amended by RDL 9/2013 becoming Article 14(7) of Law
24/2013. Pursuant to its Article 26(2), RE producers were accorded priority of dispatch
where market economic conditions are equal, and priority of access and connection to

the grid.!8”

185 €.0123, CNE, Report 18/2013 on the proposed RD regulating activities of electrical energy production from

sources of renewable energy, cogeneration and waste, 4 September 2013 (hereinafter “CNE Report 18/2013”).

186 €.0025, Law 24/2013 of the electricity sector, 26 December 2013 (published 27 December 2013) (hereinafter

“Law 24/2013”), p. 7.

'87 The Claimants contend that Law 24/2013 nonetheless deprived RE installations of the unconditional right of
riority of grid access and priority of dispatch that existed under the previous regime. See, Cl. Mem. {{] 319-320;

P ry OF gi PI y Pi P 8!

Reply 555.

67

223. Law 24/2013 did not however define what the precise economic regime would be going
forward, or the precise amount of the Special Payment. This transitory period lasted for

11 months. !88

224. Spain then enacted Royal Decree 413/2014 of 6 June 2014 (“RD 413/2014”)'®? and
Ministerial Order IET/1045/2014 of 16 June 2014 (“June 2014 Order”)', which
established the parameters for the Standard Installation, i.e. an important factor in

calculation of remuneration under RDL 9/2013.'°!

225. As a result of the new Law and the new regulations, RE producers obtain the pool price

for electricity sold in the open market, plus a Special Payment.'°? This Special Payment:

a) _ is limited to the regulatory useful life of 20 years (for wind) or 25 years (for hydro
as opposed to the previous regime which guaranteed the incentives for the whole

useful life.!°°

b) _ is composed of two elements: i) a remuneration per MW of installed capacity; and
ii) a remuneration per MW hour (“MWh”) of electricity produced, seeking to cover
the operating costs that cannot be met by market prices;!*4 and is determined by

reference to a standard installation (the “Standard Installation”) and capped by

188 Cl. Mem. 59.

189 €.0026, Royal Decree 413/2014 of 6 June 2014, regulating the activity of electric power production from
renewable energy sources, cogeneration and waste (published on 10 June 2014) (hereinafter
“RD 413/2014”).

190 €.0027, Order IET/1045/2014 of 16 June 2014, app: the i of standard HT

that apply to specific installations for the production of electricity from renewable energy sources, co-generation, and
wastes (published on 20 June 2014) (hereinafter “June 2014 Order”).

191 Cl. Mem. 4 60; C-0027, June 2014 Order.

192. Cl. Mem. { 304.

193 Cl. Mem. {1 305; C-0025, Law 24/2013, Article 14(7); C-0024, RDL 9/2013, Article (two); and C-0026, RD
413/2014, Articles 16 and 19. C-0027, June 2014 Order, Article 5.

194 Cl. Mem. {| 62 and 307; C-0024, RDL 9/2013, Article 1 (two); C-0025, Law 24/2013, Article 14(7); and C-0026,
RD 413/2014, Articles 11, 16 and 17.

 

68

226.

227.

228.

229.

the concept of “reasonable return”, defined as a rate of return of 300 basis points

above the average yield on Spanish ten-year government bonds, set at 7.398%; !°>

c) is subject to revision every six years;

d) takes into account the amounts received under the RDL 661/2007 regime in
assessing whether a plant has achieved a reasonable return during the regulatory
life,!°° i.e. if a plant has obtained in the past a return higher than the capped rate,
that plant will receive a lower Special Payment (or none at all) to compensate for

the excess and reach the target of a 7.398% return. !°7

It follows that although certain of the benefits accorded to RE producers by RD 661/2007
have remained in place, the structure of remuneration was radically altered by RDL

9/2013, Law 24/2013 and the further regulations of June 2014.

The impact of Spain’s measures on the Claimants’ investments

As identified above, the Claimants acquired Investments in Spain through acquisitions
and improvements costing in excess of EUR 513 million. The Claimants’ RE plants are
now substantially less profitable than they were prior to the adoption of the Disputed

Measures.

According to the Claimants, the Disputed Measures have “wiped out 56% of the fair
market value of RWE's investments”, reducing the fair market value by EUR 267.7
million.'®* Their position is also that the equity value of RWE Aersa has been reduced to

zero (taking into account inter-company debt).!*

According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ plants have received or will receive a

reasonable return. Its case is that:

5 C], Mem. 63; C-0024, RDL 9/2013, First Additional Provision; C-0025, Law 25/2013, Third Final Provision; C-
0026, RD 413/2014, Article 19.

9 Cl, Mem. 4 65.

57 Cl, Mem. 4 334; C-0026, RD 413/2014, Annex XIII.

1.
18 Cl,
1.

Mem. §{{ 67, 73 and 328; Claimants’ PHB, { 7.c.

99 Cl. Reply {if 14, 399, 429 and 597.

69

a) — Certain plants have already been exceptionally profitable and hence are no longer
entitled to a subsidy. Thus, the rates of return are stated as: with respect to Muel,
11.2%; Acampo Armijo, 18.6%; Bosque Alto, 10.1%; Los Labrados, 11.4%; Plana
Maria, 10.1%; Plana Zaragoza, 13.7%; Rio Gallego phase I, 10.8% and phase II,
16.1%; Aldehuelas, 19.2%. It is said that, overall, “the Claimants recover their
investment costs and, taking operating costs into account, will obtain a total

consolidated rate of return of 10.6% before tax or 8.2% after tax.”?°

b) Pursuant to the Claimants’ ‘But-for scenario’, the average rate of return would be
14.5% for the Claimants’ wind farms and 7.1% for the Claimants’ hydro plants.

The Respondent says that these return rates are disproportionate in relation to the

tisk profile of the investments.7°!

230. The Claimants have put forward, through Compass Lexecon, various rates of return

figures, including figures based on standard plants corresponding to the Claimants’

plants.?°

a) According to Compass Lexecon, the expected rate of return achieved by the
standard plants corresponding to each of the Claimants’ plants is 5.7% after tax as

a result of Spain’s measures (“the actual scenario”), as opposed to 9% after tax

under their “but-for scenario.”?"

20 Resp. Rej. {§[ 1046 and 1102, referring to BDO Second Report, Table 13: “BDO calculated the rates of return
obtained by the plants after the measures as 10.7% for wind power and 7.5% for hydro, before tax (average, 10.6%
before tax, equivalent to 8.27% after tax).” It is noted that these rates of return are calculated by reference to the asset
and construction cost of the various plants (i.e. as if they were greenfield sites), giving a figure of EUR 462 million.
The Claimants’ actual cost of acquisition was higher, i.e. around 513 million.

20! Rejoinder {| 1103, and see, Compass Lexecon, Second Report, p. 120, Table 10. These are pre-tax figures.

202 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, { 117, where it is said that “there is evidence that the Claimants’ wind plants
have above-average performance. The fact that above-average performance naturally leads to higher returns (and that
vice versa below-average performance leads to below-average returns) needs to be taken into account when assessing
whether the returns achieved by the Claimants’ Plants are reasonable. To account for this, we have not used for each
the Claimants’ Plants’ revenues and costs, but we have used those of the corresponding standard plant as defined by
Spain in the Order, which according to the Spanish Government and BDO are representative of an efficient and well-
managed plant.”

 

 

23 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, {¥f 117-121 and Table 4. These % figures take wind and hydro together.

70

b) A comparison is made by Compass Lexecon to the percentage figures to the rates
of return referred to in the CNE Report 3/2007, on the basis that these were what
the CNE had considered to be reasonable. The Tribunal notes, however, that the
rates of return contained in the CNE report concerned (i) CNE’s calculation of
average rates of return under the then draft RD, i.e. 8.2% (wind) and 9.7% (hydro)
for both the fixed tariff and premium options, and (ii) CNE’s proposed rates of
return for plants coming into operation after | January 2008, being the same for the
fixed tariff option, but 9.9% (wind) and 11.2% (hydro) for the premium option.?™
Given that none of the Claimants’ plants came into operation after 1 January 2008,
the Tribunal does not consider the CNE proposed rates (9.9% (wind) and 11.2%
(hydro)) to be relevant.”°° It is also not clear to the Tribunal whether these CNE

figures were pre- or post-tax.

e. European Commission State Aid Procedures

231. Respondent submits that, following the European Court of Justice (“ECJ”) preliminary
ruling C-275/13 (the ELCOGAS case),°° in which a definition on the concept of state aid
was given, Spain was obliged to notify the European Commission (“EC”) of the support
measures provided for RE relating to this arbitration.?°’ Respondent informed the
European Commission of the measures adopted through the June 2014 Order and the
European Commission opened an investigation procedure No. SA.40348 2014/N.> It

is the Respondent’s position that, under Article 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of

the European Union (“TFEU”), the EC has the exclusive competence to declare the
compatibility of an aid with EU law. The Respondent also notes that the ECJ is the only

body competent to review the EC’s decision.”

204 R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, pp. 53-54.
25 Cf, Compass Lexecon, Second Report, ff 117-121 and Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/120.

206 R-0024, Order of the European Court of Justice laid down regarding the preliminary ruling C-275/13, ELCOGAS,
on 22 October 2014.

207 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 800 and 805; Article 4.3 of the Treaty on the European Union (“TEU”).
208 Resp. C-Mem. { 801.
2 Resp. C-Mem. { 807.

71

212

233.

According to the Claimants, the State aid issues are irrelevant to the resolution of this

arbitration for the following reasons:

4)

b)

d)

The EC investigation concerns the June 2014 Order, so the New Regime is what is
under investigation, not the Special Regime on which the Claimants relied to

invest.7!

There is no evidence that the Disputed Measures were motivated by State aid

concerns, as the preambles do not mention State aid.2!!

Neither the Community Guidelines on State Aid for Environmental Protection and
Energy 20142020, Number 2014/C200/0170 (the “2014 Guidelines”), nor the
guidelines approved by the Communication from the European Commission
2008/C82/0171 (the “2008 Guidelines”), mentioned by Respondent, required

Spain to adopt the Disputed Measures.?!?

It is a principle of EU State aid law that beneficiaries of support schemes should be
allowed to rely upon a stable legal framework. The 2014 Guidelines provide that a
reduction in renewable incentives should apply prospectively to new RE

installations.?'3

On 10 November 2017, the EC made its the Decision on the State Aid SA.40348

(20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for Electricity Generation from

Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste.”'4 In light of this Decision, the

20 Cl. Reply | 489.
2! Cl. Reply 490.

Cl. Reply 4.491.

213 Cl. Reply { 492; C-0281, European Commission, Guidelines for State Aid for Environmental Protection, OJ
2014/C200/01, 28 June 2014 {{ 249: “such aid can be granted for the entire period under the conditions laid down in
the scheme at the time of the confirmation to the extent that the aid is compatible with the rules applying at the time
of the confirmation.”

214 EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for Electricity
Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste (RL-0089, it being noted that the Respondent
has accorded this exhibit number to more than one exhibit).

72

Parties developed their respective positions on the State aid issue, as considered further

in Section V (Jurisdiction) below.

D. THE SUPREME COURT JUDGMENTS

234. The Respondent has put before the Tribunal multiple judgments of the Spanish Supreme
Court, and it contends that since 2005 a consistent case-law on the remuneration scheme
for RE has been established.”!* It refers to the Judgment of 15 December 2005, involving
a challenge to RD 436/2004, in which the Supreme Court stated that: “There is no legal
obstacle that exists to prevent the Government, in the exercise of the regulatory powers
and of the broad entitlements it has in a strongly regulated issue such as electricity, from
modifying a specific system of remuneration [...].”?'* In the years following this Judgment
— in particular in 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012, 2013 and 20167!” — the Supreme Court issued

further judgments which, according to the Respondent, confirmed that:
a) There was no right to an economic system remaining unaltered;

b) The only limit to be respected by the Government in regulatory modifications was
the provision to SR facilities of a reasonable return with reference to the cost of

money on the capital market;

c) The integration of SR facilities into the SES implied that companies had to assume

acertain regulatory risk.7!8

215 Resp. Skeleton J 23.

216 R-0137, Judgment of the Supreme Court, 15 December 2005 (translated extract).

217 Resp. C-Mem. {[ 361-379; R-0138, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 12/2005, reference El Derecho EDJ
2006/282164 (Spanish), 25 October 2006; R-0139, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 11-2005 EDJ 2007-18059,
20 March 2007; R-0140, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 13-2006 EDJ 2007-175313, 9 October, 2007; R-
0141, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 151/2007 EDJ 2009/307349, 3 December 2009; R-0002, Judgment of
the Supreme Court of 9 December 2009, rec. 152/2007, reference The Law 2009/307357, Fifth Point of Law; R-0144,
Judgment of the Spanish Supreme Court of 12 April 2012, rec. 40/2011, Fourth Point of Law; R-0146, Judgment of
the Supreme Court of 19 June 2012 (appeal 62/2011); R-0150, Judgment of the Supreme Court of 25 June 2013
(RJ/2013/6733), rec. 252/2012; R-0155, Judgment 63/2016 of 21 January 2016, of the Supreme Court handed down
in cassation appeal 627/2012.

218 Resp. Rej.| 238.

73

235. In judgments of 1 June and 12 July 2016, the Supreme Court considered and rejected
various challenges to RD 413/2014 and Order IET/1045/2014. In rejecting the arguments
put before it on legitimate expectations and legal certainty, the Supreme Court stated that
“no provisions of RD 661/2007 ... guaranteed that the regulated tariffs could not be
changed.”?'? According to the Supreme Court, its jurisprudence “has been constant over
the years on indicating that, in the interpretation and application of the rules ordering
the legal and economic system for electricity generation based on renewable energy
sources, such regulations guarantee reasonable return on their investments to the owners
of these facilities, but do not acknowledge an unmodifiable right to them regarding the
unalterability of the remuneration framework approved by the owner of the regulatory

powers.”

236. The Claimants reject the relevance of the various judgments on the basis that they are not
analogous, i.e. they did not relate to incentives that were part of the guaranteed RE
regime, and/or they post-date the period when the Claimants made their investments.77!

The Parties’ competing positions as to the Supreme Court judgments are considered in

Section VI (Liability) to which the Tribunal turns following its consideration of the

jurisdictional issues below.

Vv. JURISDICTION

A. JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS

237. The Respondent has raised two jurisdictional objections:

219 R.0264, Ruling of the Supreme Court, 1264/2016, | June 2016, p. 8; R-0336, Supreme Court Judgment,
1730/2016.rca 456.2014 AEE, 12 July 2016, p. 8; in each case referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court of 15
December 2005 (appeal 73/2004) as well as judgments of 25 October 2006 (appeal 12/2005), 20 March 2007 (appeal
11/2005), 9 December 2009 (appeals 149/2007 and 152/2007), 12 April 2012 (appeal 40/2011), 13 September 2012
(appeal 48/2011), 15 October 2012 (appeal 64/2011), 10 December 2012 (appeal 138/2011), 29 January 2013 (appeal
232/2012), 29 May 2013 (appeal 193/2010) and 16 March 2015.

220 R-0264, Ruling of the Supreme Court, 1264/2016, 1 June 2016, pp. 8-9; R-0336, Supreme Court Judgment,
1730/2016.rca 456.2014 AEE, 12 July 2016, pp. 8-9.

221 Cl. Reply (¥{ 367-368 and 371-372.

74

(i) Lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal ratione personae to rule on the dispute raised
by the Claimants due to the absence of investors protected under the ECT: the
Claimants are not from the area of another Contracting Party as Germany and Spain
are Member States of the European Union, and the ECT does not apply to disputes

relating to intra-EU disputes;

(ii) Lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear an alleged breach by Spain of obligations
derived from Article 10(1) ECT through the introduction of taxation measures by
Law 15/2012: Spain has not consented to submit this matter to arbitration given
that, pursuant to Article 21 ECT, Article 10(1) ECT does not generate obligations

regarding taxation measures of the Contracting Parties.?”?

238. Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that: “The Tribunal shall be the judge of

its own competence.” Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1) “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally. (...)”

239. Article 26 ECT, which concerns the “Settlement of disputes between an Investor and a

Contracting Party”, provides in relevant part as follows:

1) “Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another
Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of
the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the
former under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably.

2) If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on which
either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the Investor
party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

222 Resp, Rej. III (B).
23 Resp, Rej. III (C).

75

B.

(a) To the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party,
party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure;

(c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs b) and c), each Contracting Party
hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of a dispute
to international arbitration or conciliation in accordance with the
provisions of this Article. ...

4) In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute resolution
under subparagraph (2)(c), the Investor shall further provide its consent
in writing for the dispute to be submitted to:

(a) (i) The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes, established pursuant to the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Dispute between States and Nationals
of other States opened for signature at Washington, 18 March
1965, (hereinafter referred to as the “ICSID Convention’), if the
Contracting Party of the Investor and the Contracting Party,
party to the dispute, both parties to the ICSID Convention; ...

5) (a) The consent given in paragraph (3) together with the written consent
of the Investor given pursuant to paragraph (4) shall be considered to
satisfy the requirement for:

(i) written consent of the parties to a dispute purposes of Chapter II of
the ICSID Convention ...

6) A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and
principles of international law.”

THE CLAIMANTS’ CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING
240. In its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Memorial on Jurisdiction of 20 May 2016,
the Respondent reserved its right to supplement or modify its claims and arguments, and
to formulate additional jurisdictional objections where appropriate in view of the

supporting documentation concerning the corporate restructuring by which RWE

International SE had allegedly succeeded RWE Innogy GmbH.?* However, in its

224 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 49-55.

76

Cc.

Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction of 19 January 2017, the Respondent
confirmed that it raised no jurisdictional objection related to the Claimants’ corporate

restructuring.??>

THE INTRA-EU OBJECTION

()
241.

242.

The Parties’ Positions

The Tribunal has considered not only the positions of the Parties as summarised below,
but also the numerous detailed arguments made in their written submissions and
authorities submitted. To the extent that these arguments are not referred to expressly,
they have been subsumed into the Tribunal’s analysis, and the same applies so far as

concerns the submissions received from the EC.

The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae to
hear the present intra-EU dispute brought by alleged investors from Germany against the
Kingdom of Spain due to the absence of a protected investor under the ECT. The
Claimants are not investors protected under the ECT from the area of another Contracting
Party, as required by Article 26 ECT in order to be able to resort to arbitration.?”° Both
Germany, the Claimants’ State for the purposes of this arbitration, and Spain are and
were, at the time of ratification of the ECT, EU Member States, whilst the EU is also a
Contracting Party to the ECT.??’ Hence, the Claimants fail to comply with the
requirement of Article 26(1) ECT which states that to access arbitration the dispute must

be “between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party.”?*8

According to the Respondent, the requirement in Article 26(1) ECT that the dispute occur

between “a Contracting Party” and an “Investor of another Contracting Party” “implies

the exclusion of this article from any case where an investor of an EU State has a dispute

25 Resp. Rej. 17.

226 Resp. C-Mem. 15

27 Resp. Skeleton J 7.

228 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 5 and 108. Resp. Skeleton 7.

77

244,

245.

246.

with an EU State, in relation to an investment in said State” (respectively, an “intra-EU

dispute” and an “intra-EU investment”).”””

The Respondent’s case is that because both Spain and Germany were already members
of the EU at the time of their ratification of the ECT, “they were unable to contract
obligations between themselves within the framework of the Internal Energy Market
harmonized by the EU.”**° The Claimants’ investments were made within the framework
of the internal market in electricity of the EU. The Respondent submits that the EU
system confers particular protection upon the EU-national investor, which is preferential
to the protection conferred by the ECT, and which must prevail over any other
international treaty. It is said that “EU Law forbids the existence of any dispute settlement
mechanism other than that established by its Treaties, which may interfere with the bases

of the Internal Market.” >>!

According to the Respondent, the above is reflected in the literal interpretation, context
and purpose of the ECT: (i) the literal interpretation of the ECT provides that between

232

EU Member States, the EU system prevails;~~ (ii) Article 26 ECT prevents arbitration

between an intra-EU investor and an EU Member State;?*and (iii) the purpose of the

ECT confirms this interpretation.?**

Thus, the Respondent contends that the special regime for intra-EU disputes follows from
the literal interpretation of the wording of the ECT with respect to Regional Economic
Integration Organizations (“REIOs”), the EU being the only REIO that is Party to the
ECT. According to the Respondent, Article 1(3) ECT, which defines REIO as “an

229 Resp, C-Mem. 157.

230 Resp. C-Mem. 61. At Resp. Rej. { 83, the Respondent distinguishes the Award in Electrabel v Hungary on the
basis that “Hungary signed the ECT when it had not yet joined the EU. Therefore, Hungary, unlike Spain and
Germany, was able to contract obligations under Part III of the ECT.”

231 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 62-63 and 66 et seq.

232 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 76-83.

233 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 84-93; Article 344 of the TFEU; R-0022, Opinion 1/91 of 14 December 1991 issued by the Court
of Justice of the European Union regarding the “Agreement to Create a European Economic Area” (EEA) (original
Spanish version).

24 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 94-97; RL-006, Article 1 of the ECT and Preface to the ECT.

78

248.

249.

organization constituted by states to which they have transferred competence over
certain matters a number of which are governed by this Treaty, including the authority
to take decisions binding on them in respect of those matters” acknowledges the special
nature of the EU and the transfer of competence. The Respondent also cites Articles
1(10), 16, 25 and 36(7) ECT as further illustration of the special status of the EU and the

supremacy of the treaties governing the EU over the ECT.?*°

The Respondent particularly emphasises Article 26(6) ECT, which provides that a
tribunal established under Article 26 “shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance
with this Treaty and applicable rules and principles of international law” and which, it
is said, means treating EU law and applicable international law on equal terms when it

comes to resolving the dispute.?*°

The Respondent relies on Electrabel v Hungary where the tribunal concluded “that
Article 307 EC precludes inconsistent pre-existing treaty rights of EU Member States
and their own nationals against other EU Member States; and it follows, if the ECT and
EU law remain incompatible notwithstanding all efforts at harmonization, that EU law
would prevail over the ECT’s substantive protections and that the ECT could not apply

inconsistently with EU law to such a national’s claim against an EU Member State.”?*"

According to the Respondent, submission of an intra-EU dispute to arbitration under
Article 26 ECT would be contrary to Article 344 TFEU which precludes Member States
from submitting “a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of the Treaties
to any method of settlement other than those provided for therein.” Such dispute would
in turn require an arbitral tribunal to rule on the rights of EU investors within the EU’s

internal market, matters over which only the ECJ is competent, and in this respect it relies

235 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 79-82.

236 Resp, C-Mem. 83.

237 Resp. C-Mem. {{ 84 referring to RL-0002, Electrabel S.A v Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/19, Decision on
Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 30 November 2012 (original version in English) | 4.189 (hereinafter
“Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability”).

79

250.

251.

in support on Legal Opinion 1/91 regarding the “Agreement to Create a European

Economic Area.””*

The Respondent relies on the purpose of the ECT and cites the objective of the ECT
established in Article 2 as “a legal framework in order to promote long term cooperation
in the energy field, based on complementarities and mutual benefits, in accordance with
the objectives and principles of the Charter” and further intended to “promote East-West

blish,

industrial coo, ion through the ent of legal ‘ds in areas such as

investment, transit and trade.” The Respondent also relies on the writings of Bruno
Poulain” and Professor Jan Kleinheisterkamp.”“° The Respondent says that, according
to Professor Kleinheisterkamp, the issue is not the selection and application of the “most
favourable regulation’, but the fact that between EU Member States and their citizens,
EU Law puts aside the application of any other regulation by dint of the principle of
supremacy.”*' It is said that both the Respondent and the EC have taken the position that
arbitration under the ECT is not a suitable means to review the legality of government
measures that are governed by EU law and that affecting the fundamentals of the EU by
means of the ECT would be incompatible with EU law, which cannot have been the
intention of the Contracting Parties. Moreover, the rules and principles of the EU are
tules and principles of international law, and must be applied with the same hierarchy as

the ECT.”

The Respondent also refers to the impact on the result of this arbitration of the EC

evaluation of the measures supporting Renewable Energies and cogeneration in Spain

238 Resp. C-Mem. [ 85-90, referring to R-0022, Opinion 1/91 on 14 December 1991 issued by the Court of Justice
of the European Union regarding the “Agreement to Create a European Economic Area” (EEA).

239 Resp. C-Mem. {| 98. See, RL-0060, Développements récents du droit communautaire des investissements
internationaux, Bruno Poulain, Revue Générale de Droit International Public, C XII/2009, 4, p. 881. The omitted
footnote says: “Our opinion is grounded on Article 25 of the [ECT], [which proposes] a disconnection clause for the
benefit of the parties of a regional economic integration organisation and in article 16 which seems to link material
law and dispute settlement mechanism.”.

240 Resp. C-Mem. 99-101. See, RL-0064, Investment protection and EU Law: the intra- and extra-EU dimension of
the Energy Charter Treaty, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, Journal of International Economic Law 15 (1), Oxford University
Press, 2012, pp. 101, 103 and 108.

241 Resp. C-Mem. { 101.

242 Resp. C-Mem. {| 100-103.

80

252.

 

(procedure SA.40348 2014/N). Reference is made to the Order of 22 October 2014 of
the Court of Justice of the European Union (“CJEU”) regarding preliminary ruling C-
275/13 (the ELCOGAS case) where it was said with respect to Spain:

“Article 107.1 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that the sums awarded
to a private electricity producer that are financed by all the end users of
electricity within the national territory and distributed among the companies
in the electricity sector by a public organisation according to predetermined

legal criteria, constitute aid granted by the State or through State

resources.”

It is contended that Member States are required to bear in mind the EC Guidelines on
State aid, and it is said that the existence of this procedure is particularly relevant in the
light of the decisions of the EC of 26 May 2014 and 30 March 2015, ordering Romania
to suspend payment of the award in Micula v Romania, and then deciding that such
payment breached the EU State aid rules and had to be returned by the beneficiary
companies.”“+ The Respondent has also relied subsequently on the EC’s Decision of 10
November 2017 on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s
Support for Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and

Waste.4

In its Reply on Preliminary Objections, the Respondent drew the Tribunal’s attention to
pending cases before the ECJ and the then forthcoming decision in Achmea (considered
further below). The Respondent also insisted on the principle of primacy of EU law and

its recognition in the ECT, as said to be stated in Article 25(1) of the ECT:

“The provisions of this Treaty shall not be so construed as to oblige a
Contracting Party which is party to an Economic Integration Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as “EIA” to extend by means of most favoured
national treatment, to another Contracting Party which is not a party to the

p. C-Mem. 104-105, referring to RL-0019, Order of the Court of Justice of the European Union laid down

regarding the preliminary ruling C- 275/13, ELCOGAS, on 22 October 2014.

24 Resp. C-Mem. {{f| 106-107, referring to R-0025, Decision (EU) 2015/1470 by the Commission on 30 March 2015
pertaining to State Aid SA.38517 (2014/C) (ex 2014/NN) carried out by Romania, Arbitration Award Micula/Romania
on 11 December 2013.

25 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for

Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sourc

Cogeneration and Waste.

 

81

254.

255.

256.

EIA, any preferential treatment applicable between the parties to that EIA
as a result of their being parties thereto.”

According to the Respondent, under this principle, it is the laws of the EU and not the
ECT which must be applied to resolve this dispute, as it is EU law that has always applied
to the investments of the Claimants. In addition, the dispute affects essential elements of
EU law such as State aid, free movement of capital and freedom of establishment, that
the Tribunal does not have the power to rule on, this power being reserved to the EU’s

own judicial system and ultimately to the CJEU.?*°

The Respondent rejects or distinguishes the arbitral awards cited by the Claimants,
including on the basis that such concern disputes based on intra-EU BITs, or obligations
contracted by given States before acceding to the EU, or fail to analyse the argument
based on the principle of primacy. By contrast, in addition to Electrabel, the Respondent

has referred the Tribunal to:

a) Blusun v Italy, where the tribunal considered that it must apply EU Law “as part of
international law or as part of the law of Italy. The Tribunal evidently cannot
exercise the special jurisdictional powers vested in the European courts, but it can

and where relevant should apply European law as such.”?*”

b) Jiirgen Wirtgen et al. v Czech Republic which, it is said, supported the reasoning
and conclusions of the Electrabel, concluding that that the applicable international

law in addition to the Treaty encompasses EU law.4®

The Respondent also challenges the Claimants’ interpretation of the ECT, saying that it
would lead to an ineffective interpretation which does not recognise that the EU Member

States could not be linked to each other under Part III of the ECT and because the ECT

26 Resp, Rej. {11 70-78; Resp. oral opening at Day 1/270-271.
247 Resp, Comments on Achmea of 22 March 2018, citing CL-0187, Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and Michael
Stein v Italian Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/14/3, Award, 27 December 2016 (hereinafter “Blusun”) | 278.

Annex |.

28 Resp. Comments on Achmea of 22 March 2018, citing RL-0089, Mr Jiirgen Wirtgen et al. v The Czech Republic,
PCA Case No. 2014-03, Final Award, 11 October 2017 (hereinafter “Wirtgen”) {if 177 and 178.

82

itself recognises in Article 25 the principle of primacy of EU law. Furthermore, by
advocating the inapplicability of the TFEU dispute settlement mechanism to the dispute
at hand, the Claimants ignore the fact that the Tribunal would have to rule on essential
pillars of EU law and that Spain cannot be submitted to any other system than the EU

judicial system in relation to this matter.7#

257. | According to the Respondent, this first jurisdictional objection affects the entirety of the

dispute raised by the Claimants.?°°

b. The Claimants’ Position

258. The Claimants say that every single investment-treaty arbitral tribunal that has
considered the issue has concluded that the intra-EU nature of the dispute does not
preclude jurisdiction.”*! They say that there is no basis for distinguishing between States
that were not Member States of the EU at the time they ratified the ECT and States that
were (such as Spain and Germany), contending that the awards in Charanne v Spain, PV
Investors v Spain, and RREEF v Spain have confirmed that Article 26 ECT applies
amongst ‘old’ Member States. It is said that there is no support for the argument that
Article 26 ECT applies to an intra-EU dispute so long as either the home or host State

was not an EU Member State at the time the ECT was ratified, but that it does not apply

249 Resp. Rej. {i 100-125.

250 Resp. C-Mem. 7.

251 Cl. Reply { 107; CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability. In the context of
other investment treaties see, CL-0097, Eastern Sugar B.V.(Netherlands) v The Czech Republic, SCC Arbitration No.
088/200, Partial Award, 27 March 2007; CL-0099, Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v The Slovak Republic,
UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30 April 2010; CL-0098, Eureko B.V. v Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2008-
13, Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, 26 October 2010; C-0218, L E Peterson, “Details Surface on
Jurisdiction Holding in Binder v Czech Republic; Ad-Hoc Tribunal Saw No Conflict between BITs and EU law”; and
CL-0095, European American Investment Bank AG (EURAM) v The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Award on
Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012. In addition, it has been reported that the tribunal in EDF v Hungary upheld EDF's
claims of unfair and inequitable treatment, notwithstanding an Intra-EU Objection being advanced. C-0219, L E
Peterson, “Intra-EU Treaty Claims Controversy: New Decisions and Developments in Claims Brought by EU
Investors vs. Spain and Hungary”; CL-0096, The PV Investors v The Kingdom of Spain, PCA Case No. 2012-14,
Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction, 13 October 2014 {| 375; CL-0134, RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and
RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux S.4 r.l. v The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 6 June 2016 (hereinafter “RREEF, Decision on Jurisdiction”), | 232(4); and CL-0094, Charanne
B.V. and Construction Investments S.A.R.L. v The Kingdom of Spain, SCC Arbitration No. 062/2012, Award, 21
January 2016 | 432 (hereinafter “Charanne”).

 

83

259.

260.

252

Cl. Reply {| 108-109; cf. Resp. CM 44 61 and 108.

to intra-EU disputes if both of the relevant States were EU Member States at that time.”>
It is also said that there are numerous ECT cases involving disputes between EU Member
States and EU investors where no intra-EU Objection was even raised by the respondent
State, such as AES Summit Generation Limited v Hungary, Electrabel v Hungary or

Micula v Romania.?>

The Claimants refute the Respondent’s reliance on Opinion 1/91 on intra-EU disputes,
saying that the Respondent ignores the fact that “the CJEU has stressed that an
international dispute-settlement mechanism set forth by an international treaty to which
the EU is a party is compatible with EU law, and that the decisions of the court with
jurisdiction to decide disputes under that treaty will be binding on the CJEU.”?*4 Spain’s
reliance on the EC’s intervention in the enforcement of the award in Micula v Romania
to support the intra-EU Objection is said to be misleading and only serves to highlight

the frivolous nature of the objection.?>

The Claimants also reject the Respondent’s argument that the text of the ECT indicates
that Investors from an EU Member State may not bring a claim against another EU
Member State under Article 26 ECT. The Claimants say that: (i) a good faith
interpretation of the ordinary meaning of Article 26 shows that there is no intra-EU
exception to the Contracting Parties’ unconditional consent to arbitration; (ii) the
ordinary meaning of the terms of Article 26 of the ECT is clear and the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to hear the present dispute as Article 26 applies to disputes between any
Contracting Party of the ECT and an Investor of any other Contracting Party; (iii) the
phrase “in the Area of the former [Contracting Party]” in Article 26(1) ECT refers to the

particular dispute initiated by the Investor; (iv) the relevant “Area” is that of the

283 Cl. Reply | 111, referring to CL-0101, AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft v The Republic
of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22, Award, 23 September 2010, (hereinafter “AES Summit, Award”), Section
6; CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability; and CL-0052, Joan Micula, Viorel
Micula and others v The Republic of Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Award, 11 December 2013 (hereinafter
“Micula”).

254 Cl, Reply 4 114; CL-0102, CJEU, Opinion 1/91, Economic Area Agreement, ECR 1991, 1-6079, 14 December
1991.

285 Cl. Reply { 115.

84

26

26

26

lL

Contracting Party “that is party to the dispute.” The relevant “Area” in this case is the
territory of Spain (not of the EU); and (v) that there are no valid grounds to contend that
an intra-EU dispute brought under Article 26 would contravene Article 344 TFEU as it
applies only to disputes between EU Member States “regarding the interpretation of EU
law” and does not prohibit Member States from submitting disputes that are not related

to EU law to other fora.?°°

According to the Claimants, the fact that the ECT expressly recognises the existence of
the REIO under Articles 25, 1(2), 1 (3) and 1(10) does not impact on the rights of
Investors under Article 26: it does not set any limitation to disputes, but merely clarifies
the possibility to bring a claim against the REIO itself (Article 1(10) defining the REIO

area) or Article 25 limiting more favourable treatment via the MEN provision).

Regarding the argument that the relevant “Area” is the territory of the REIO as opposed
to the territory of the Contracting State, the Claimants rely on the findings in PV
Investors v Kingdom of Spain,?>" where it was held that: “While it is true that the second
sentence of Article 1(10) of the ECT defines Area with respect to a REIO as ‘the Areas
of the member states of such Organization’, the first sentence of Article 1(10) of the ECT
defines Area with respect to a state that is a Contracting Party as the territory under the
state’s sovereignty. Therefore, the Area under consideration in Article 26(1) is that of the
Contracting Party that is party to the dispute. The Claimants say that the Charanne
Tribunal?** made the same finding, and they submit that the connection between the term
Area and the REIO are relevant when a dispute is brought against the REIO, which is a

possibility as the EU is a signatory to the ECT.

The Claimants also say that the Respondent’s objection would require the Tribunal to
speculate as to what might have been the private and unexpressed intentions of the EU

and its Member States when they took part in the conclusion of the ECT. The Claimants

286 Cl, Reply #4 117-125.

257 CL-0096, PV Investors v The Kingdom of Spain, PCA Case No. 2012-14, Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction, 13
October 2014 4 178-180.

258 CL-0094, Charanne, {| 427-432.

85

264.

265.

266.

submit that the meaning of Article 26 is clear and unambiguous, so there is no
justification for the Tribunal to resort to supplementary means of interpretation, whereas

the Respondent seeks to take into account the subjective intention of the parties.??

The Claimants also refute the argument that the provisions of the ECT contradict EU law
and that the EU internal market protections are superior to those contained in the ECT.
Protection under EU law is different from the protection provided in the ECT to investors
and investments. Protection under EU law is primarily focused on ensuring access to the
market of another Member State.”® Additionally, EU law does not provide for an
investor to bring claims in international arbitration proceedings for violation of any
illegal governmental action taken against foreign investment. Therefore, the ECT grants
investors rights that are additional to any other rights provided by the internal market and
there is no inconsistency between EU law and the ECT. This was made very clear by,
among others, the tribunals in Electrabel and Eastern Sugar?! Further, even if it were
found that EU law and the ECT cover the same subject matter, Article 16 of the ECT

provides that the provisions more favourable to the investor shall apply.?°

Finally, the Claimants submit that the ECT does not contain an explicit or implied
disconnection clause that would allow the Tribunal to disregard its provisions in an intra-
EU dispute. It is said that the EU has experience in disconnection clauses, but that there
is no such disconnection clause in the ECT whereby the provisions of the ECT could not

apply to the EU Member States’ inter se relationship.?°

The Claimants conclude by asking the Tribunal to rule that the Claimants have an
unconditional right to bring a claim against Spain in arbitral proceedings under Article

26 and to recognise that it has jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims.?*+

2° Cl. Reply #¥f 127-130.

2 See for example, CL-0112, C. Barnard, The Substantive Law of the EU: The Four Freedoms (2nd ed., Oxford
University Press, 2007), p. 19.

26 Cl, Reply {if 130-135. See, CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, | 4.166; and CL-0097, Eastern Sugar
BV. v The Czech Republic, SCC Arbitration No. 088/2004, Partial Award, 27 March 2007 {| 165.

262 Cl. Reply { 135.

263 Cl. Reply #¥f 137-146.

264 Cl. Reply | 146.

86

2

)

267.

268.

269.

265

26 The European Commiss

267

‘The European Commi

The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Submission

On 11 August 2016, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2), the EC filed a written
amicus curiae submission, stating its position that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
under Article 26 ECT. The EC says that the applicable investment protection law to intra-
EU investments is EU Law, in particular the rules of free movement of capital and
freedom of establishment. Pursuant to Article 3(2) of the TFEU, EU Member States are
barred from concluding agreements between themselves that may affect or alter the scope
of EU Law. Therefore, it follows that the EU Member States lack the competence to

conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements concerning protection of investments.?”

Neither Spain nor Germany, who were Member States of the European Communities
when they ratified the ETC, had the competence to enter into inter se obligations
concerning the protection of intra-EU investments. That competence laid with the
European Communities (currently, with the EU and EURATOM).?°° Thus, the EC
submits that those EU Member States that were members of the European Communities
when they entered into the ECT did not create any inter se obligations between Member
States, but only between third countries and the competent subject of international law,
i.e. either the EU or its Member States. However, the EC contends that even if the ECT
did create certain obligations between the EU Member States in the areas where they
retained competence, the Tribunal would still lack jurisdiction because the substantive
competence for protection of intra-EU disputes and the jurisdictional competence for
those disputes have been transferred to the EU by the Member States. The EC also
submits that if the ECT is interpreted as having created inter se obligations, including in
the protection of intra-EU investments, those obligations would have been superseded by

the ratification of other treaties that postdate the ECT, like the Lisbon Treaty.?”

The EC contends that the appropriate forum is the competent national court or tribunal

which is the “juge du droit commun du droit de l'Union.” In this forum, the Claimants

 

n’s Amicus Curiae Brief 45.
n’s Amicus Curiae Brief 7.

  

The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Brief 4 11-13.

87

could have asked the judge to decide whether the ECT, which is part of EU Law, applies

to their dispute, and this question could have been referred to the ECJ.7°°

270. The EC insists on the essential characteristics of EU law and in particular its primacy
over the laws of the Member States and the direct effect of a series of provisions which
are applicable to nationals and to EU Member States. These characteristics set EU law
apart from other treaties. The EC affirms that it has both internal and external competence
over Foreign Direct Investment matters, and thereby to conclude investment

agreements,”

whereas, energy matters are a shared competence. This prevents EU
Member States from agreeing investment protection rules inter se, outside of the Union
legal order. The EC also finds support in the applicable principle of international law for
the determination of the extent of international obligations and international liability of

Member States: “Liability follows competence.”>”

271. Alternatively, should the Tribunal find that it has jurisdiction, the EC invites the Tribunal
to stay the proceeding until the EC has issued its decision regarding the Respondent’s

State aid under the Special Regime.?”!

(3) The Achmea Judgment

272. On 6 March 2018, the Court of Justice of the European Union (“ECJ’”) issued its
Judgment in Slowakische Republik (Slovak Republic) v Achmea BV (Case C-284/26) (the
“Achmea Judgment’), submitted by the Respondent as Authority RL-90.

273. At the origin of the Achmea Judgment is an award rendered against the Slovak Republic
on 7 December 2012 by reference to the 1991 bilateral investment treaty concluded
between The Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic. The Slovak
Republic sought to set aside the award before the German courts, arguing inter alia that
there was no valid consent to arbitration because the provision on which the jurisdiction
of the arbitral tribunal was based violated Union law, and in particular Article 267 and

268 The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Brief { 8.

Amicus Curiae Brief $f 21-24.
Amicus Curiae Brief 35, 73 and 88-92.
2 The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Brief 4.

  

2 The European Comm

20 The European Comm

88

344 of the TFEU as well as the general principle of EU law of autonomy. When the
matter came before the German Bundesgerichtshof, it suspended proceedings and made

a request for a preliminary ruling to the ECJ.
274. The questions put to the ECJ by the German Bundesgerichtshof were as follows:

“(1) Does Article 344 TFEU preclude the application of a provision in a
bilateral investment protection agreement between Member States of the
European Union (a so-called intra-EU BIT) under which an investor of a
Contracting State, in the event of a dispute concerning investments in the
other Contracting State, may bring proceedings against the latter State
before an arbitral tribunal where the investment protection agreement was
concluded before one of the Contracting States acceded to the European
Union but the arbitral proceedings are not to be brought until after that date?

Tf Question | is to be answered in the negative:
(2) Does Article 267 TFEU preclude the application of such a provision?
Tf Questions | and 2 are to be answered in the negative:

(3) Does the first paragraph of Article 18 TFEU preclude the application
of such a provision under the circumstances described in Question 1?”

275. The ECJ gave an affirmative answer to both Questions 1 and 2 and decided that there

was hence no need to answer Question 3. The Court ruled as follows:

“Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be interpreted as precluding a provision
in an international agreement concluded between Member States, such as
Article 8 of the Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and
Slovak Federative Republic, under which an investor from one of those
Member States may, in the event of a dispute concerning investment in the
other Member State, bring proceedings against the latter Member State
before an arbitral tribunal whose jurisdiction that Member State has
undertaken to accept.”

89

a. The Respondent’s Position on the Achmea Judgment

276. On 22 March 2018, the Respondent filed written comments on the Achmea Judgment. It

contended that the Judgment was not “something new” but rather stemmed from a long

tradition in EU law,

a)

b)

c

d)

272 namely:

In order to ensure that the specific characteristics and the autonomy of the EU legal
order are preserved, the EU Treaties have established a judicial system intended to

ensure consistency and uniformity in the interpretation of EU law;

In that context, in accordance with Article 19 TEU, it is for the national courts and
tribunals and the Court of Justice to ensure the full application of EU law in all
Member States and to ensure judicial protection of the rights of individuals under

that law;

In particular, the judicial system as thus conceived has as its keystone the
preliminary ruling procedure provided for in Article 267 TFEU which, by setting
up a dialogue between one court and another, specifically between the CJEU and
the courts and tribunals of the Member States, has the object of securing uniform
interpretation of EU law, thereby serving to ensure its consistency, its full effect
and its autonomy as well as, ultimately, the particular nature of the law established

by the Treaties;

Given the nature and characteristics of EU law, that law must be regarded both as
forming part of the law in force in every Member State and as deriving from an

international agreement between the Member States.?”

277. With respect to the application of these principles, the Respondent notes that the ECJ

found:

22 Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 ff 12-24.

 

Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 {{ 27.

90

a) The arbitral tribunal was not part of the judicial system and could not be classified

as a court or tribunal of a Member State within the meaning of Article 267 TFEU;

b) Investment arbitrations are different from commercial arbitration proceedings.
While the latter originate in the freely expressed wishes of the parties, the former
derive from a treaty by which Member States agree to remove from the jurisdiction
of their own courts (and hence from the system of judicial remedies which the
second subparagraph of Article 19(1) TEU requires them to establish in the fields
covered by EU law) disputes which may concern the application or interpretation

of EU law.

c

The States parties to the BIT had thus established a mechanism for settling disputes
between an investor and a Member State which could prevent those disputes from
being resolved in a manner that ensured the full effectiveness of EU law, even

though they might concern the interpretation or application of EU law.”

278. The Respondent submits that this reasoning applies equally so far as concerns the ECT
“since the ECT arbitration clause, as interpreted by the Claimants, remove the dispute
between an EU investor and EU member State from the jurisdiction of their own courts
and therefore prevent those disputes from being resolved in a manner that ensures the

full effectiveness of EU law.” Moreover, it relies on three additional reasons as follows:

a) EU law would be especially relevant for this dispute, insofar as the claim concerns
a tariff scheme that the EC has qualified as State aid. In this respect, on 19 January
2018, the Respondent had already submitted its Comments on the EC’s Decision
of 10 November 2017 on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding
Spain’s Support for Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources,

Cogeneration and Waste.”

274 Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 4 28.

25 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (2015INN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for
Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste.

91

b) Article 6(1) ECT establishes a binding rule for the Contracting Parties which affects
to EU Rules on competition: “Each Contracting Party shall work to alleviate
market distortions.” Article 6(1) ECT is not subject to a claim according to Article
26(1). ECT not only allows, but also obliges EU Member States to act according to
applicable EU rules on competition, and their acts are outside the scope of the
investors’ claims, as they are autonomous and primary rules. Any investor should

have been aware of Article 6(1) ECT when investing under ECT provisions.

c

In accordance with Article 10(8) ECT “any dispute concerning subsidies ... shall

be reserved for the supplementary treaty described in paragraph 4.”?"°

279. The Respondent contends that the application of EU law is inevitable, and also that under
Article 26(6) ECT the Tribunal is bound to apply EU law, at least as international law

binding both Parties.7””

b. The Claimants’ Position on the Achmea Judgment

280. On 28 March 2018, the Claimants provided their observations on the Achmea Judgment.

Their position is that the Achmea Judgment is not relevant to the present arbitration

because:
a) “the judgment makes it clear that it applies only to a treaty where
the EU is not itself a Contracting Party, which is not the case of the
ECT;
b) there can be no incompatibility between the ECT (a treaty to which

the EU is a Contracting Party) and EU law. As the RREEF tribunal
correctly determined, should there ever be an inconsistency, the
ECT would prevail;

c) the ECT is binding on the EU and provides for arbitration of disputes
concerning violations of the ECT as a result of EU measures that EU
institutions might adopt. In other words, if a treaty claim can be
brought against the EU under the ECT, and that is by definition not
incompatible with EU law, it follows that the investor-State

27 Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 {ff 30-32.
277 Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 {ff 33-35.

92

arbitration mechanism under the ECT is also not incompatible with
EU law; and

d) unlike the Netherlands-Slovakia BIT, the ECT provides that

investor-State disputes shall be decided in accordance with this

Treaty (the ECT) and public international law, not the law of the

host State (and EU law).”?’8

281. As to the first of these points, the Claimants highlight that in the Achmea Judgment the
ECJ stated that the “competence of the EU in the field of international relations and its
capacity to conclude international agreements necessarily entail the power to submit to
the decisions of a court which is created or designated by such agreements as regards the

interpretation and application of their provisions ... >”

282. As to the second point, the Claimants refer to the Electrabel case and the conclusion there
that “it would have made no sense for the European Union to promote and subscribe to
the ECT if that had meant entering into obligations inconsistent with EU law”, and also
refer to Article 216(2) TFEU which provides that: “Agreements concluded by the [EU]

are binding on the institutions of the [EU] and on its Member States.”?°*°

283. As to the third point, the Claimants contend that the ECT, through Article 26, expressly
grants the investor a right of action, through international arbitration, against the
offending Contracting Party, including the EU. It follows that this cannot, by definition,
be contrary to EU law, and hence the investor-State arbitration mechanism under the ECT

(to which the EU is party) cannot be deemed incompatible with EU law.

284. As to the final point, the Claimants say that the investor-State arbitration mechanism
under Article 26 ECT is not open to claims for breaches of EU law by a Contracting Party

and, moreover, the Tribunal is not being called upon to apply EU law in any shape or

 

278 Claimants’ Submission on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 {{8 (footnotes omitted).

sion on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 10, referring to Achmea Judgment 57.

280 Claimants’ Submission on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 { 10, referring to RL-0002, Electrabel, Decision
on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, [ 3.31.

  

279 Claimants’ Submi

 

93

285.

286.

form as the claims are based on the ECT and customary international law, not EU law, as

was also confirmed in RREEF, Eiser and Novenergia.?*!

The Claimants also say that there are a number of shortcomings in the Achmea Judgment,
including in the untenable distinction drawn between commercial arbitration (said by the
ECJ to originate in the freely expressed wishes of the parties) and investment arbitration
(said to derive from a Treaty by which Member States agree to remove from the
jurisdiction of their own courts disputes which may concern the interpretation or

application of EU law).?°?

Finally, the Claimants are dismissive of the further matters introduced by the Respondent
in its submission. They say that Article 6(1) is being raised by the Respondent for the
first time, 10 months after the close of the hearing, and that Article 10(8) has no relevance
to Achmea. As to the Respondent’s assertion that the claim concerns compensation
derived from a tariff scheme that the EC has qualified as State aid, the Claimants say that
the EC expressly confirmed that it did not address the remuneration under RD 661/2007
and its compatibility with the EU rules on State aid.”*? This is the position that had
already been set out by the Claimants in their submission of 26 January 2018, Claimants’

Reply to Respondent’s Comments on the EC’s Decision SA.40348 (20151NN).?*4

(4) The European Commission’s Updated Amicus Curiae Submission

281 C]

 

On 13 July 2018, the EC filed (with permission) an update of its written submission in
the light of the Judgment in Achmea. ** The starting point for the EC’s consideration is
that EU law forms part of the public international law order, and of the “rules and

principles of international law” pursuant to Article 26(6) ECT, for the purposes of this

mants’ Submi

28? Claimants’ Submi
283 Claimants’ Submi

n on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 {{ 14.
n on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 {ff 15 -19.
sion on the Achmea Judgment, 28 March 2018 {{{[ 20-21.

 

  

284 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (2015INN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for
Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste.

285

Update of Written Submission in the Light of the Judgment of the European Court of Justice in Achmea, 13 July

2018 (the “EC’s Updated Submission”).

94

proceeding. The EC also explains that the ECT is part of EU law because the EU is Party
286

to it.
288. The EC says that the key steps of the reasoning in the Achmea Judgment apply so far as
concerns the ECT: EU law is applicable to the dispute; an investment treaty tribunal
within Article 26 ECT is not a national court or tribunal within Article 267 TFEU; there
is no complete review of an award by a national court or a tribunal of a Member State.
This conclusion is not undermined by paragraph 57 of the Achmea Judgment concerning
treaties to which the EU is a party, including because the autonomy of EU law and its

legal order is not respected by Article 26 ECT.?*”

289. The EC’s position is that the Achmea Judgment applies to all pending investment
arbitration cases, and the award in the Masdar case is criticised for treating the Judgment
as confined to bilateral treaties. It is hence stated that EU law precludes the interpretation

of Article 26 of the ECT put forward by the Claimants in this case.**
290. According to the EC:

“the ECT does not apply at all in the inter se relationship between EU
Member States. Rather, the ECT created international obligations only
between third countries and the competent subject of international law of
the area of Union law. Second, and in the alternative, the Commission takes
the view that even if the ECT did create certain inter se obligations between
the EU Member States, quod non, those obligations would not comprise the
provisions of the ECT on investment protection (Chapter IIT) and dispute
settlement (Article 26 ECT) as both the substantive competence for
protection of investments by EU investors in other EU Member States,
including in the field of energy, and the jurisdictional competence for those
disputes have been transferred to the Union. In consequence, Spain (and the
Union) has made an offer for arbitration only to investors from Contracting
Parties that are not Member States.””8°

   

s Updated Submissi
287 EC’s Updated Sub
288 EC’s Updated Submission fff 26-32.
28° EC’s Updated Submission 34.

  
 

95

291.

294.

The EC also contends that, under Article 30(4)(a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties (the “VCLT” or “Vienna Convention”),”” the ECT only applies to the extent
that its provisions are compatible with those of later treaties. The provisions of the ECT
on dispute settlement (Article 26 ECT), when applied between two Member States, are
not compatible with EU law as it results from later treaties. Hence, pursuant to Article
30(4)(a) VCLT, such provisions are not applicable. The EC’s position is that this
conclusion is not undermined by Article 16 ECT, inter alia because it is overridden by

the general principle of primacy and Article 351 TFEU (a contrario).”*!

The EC says that, should this Tribunal have any doubts as to the position, it should refer
the matter to the ECJ through a juge d’appui.?**

The EC also addresses the issue of State aid. Its position is that the measures contested
by the Claimants constitute State aid in the sense of Article 107(1) TFEU, and that Spain
has notified the disputed measures to the Commission on the basis of Article 108(3)
TFEU. It is said that the EC had set out in its decision that “investors could not entertain
any legitimate expectations that the initial support scheme would remain unchanged, not
least because that initial support scheme (which was replaced and superseded by the
amended support scheme) constituted unlawful State aid (it had not been notified to and

approved by the European Commission).”?%

The Respondent’s Position on the EC’s Updated Submission

On 25 July 2018, the Respondent filed written comments on the EC’s Updated
Submission. It saw the EC’s interpretation of the Achmea Judgment as confirming that
the Tribunal “lacks jurisdiction to hear the present intra-EU dispute that not only
concerns the fundamental freedoms of the EU but also a key institution of EU Law: State
Aid.” The Respondent drew the Tribunal’s attention to a communication from the EC to

the European Parliament and Council regarding “Protection of intra-EU investment”

2 CL-0004, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1155 United Nations Treaty Series, 331, 23 May 1969 (entry
into force 27 January 1980) (hereinafter “Vienna Convention”).

281 EC’s Updated Submission fff 44-46.
282 EC’s Updated Submission ff 47-48.
283 EC’s Updated Submission ff 49 and 50-55.

96

published on 20 July 2018, and also to a statement of the German Federal Government
to the German Parliament dated 30 April 2018 to the effect that the admissibility of
arbitral proceedings under the ECT must be newly assessed in the light of the Achmea
Judgment, and stating that: “The Federal Government thus believes that the legal
principle from the Achmea judgment by the CJEU is also claimed for the validity of the

Energy Charter Treaty.”?*

b. The Claimants’ Position on the EC’s Updated Submission

295. On 6 August 2018, the Claimants filed their written comments on the EC’s Updated
Submission. The Claimants take issue with the points made by the EC and, in making the
argument that nothing in the Achmea Judgment can invalidate Article 26 ECT, contend
inter alia that “Germany’s opinion on the ECT is clearly not authoritative of the objective
meaning of the ECT (not least since it is also a respondent to ECT claims).” They also
contend that should there be a conflict between the ECT and the EU Treaties (quod non),
then the ECT prevails, including by virtue of Article 16 ECT, while as to Article 30(4)(a)
VCLT, the ECT and the EU Treaties cover different subject matters and the ECT is lex
posterior with respect to the EU Treaties. They also say that the EU treaties also confirm
that the ECT prevails as Article 216(2) TFEU provides that agreements concluded by the
EU are binding on institutions of the EU and on its Member States, and they say that
Article 351 TFEU is of no application since the ECT was entered into after accession to
the EU Treaties. The Claimants also reject the suggestion that the Tribunal refer the issue
to the ECJ via a juge d’appui, and reiterate that the EC Decision on State aid has no

relevance to the jurisdiction and the merits of the present case.?°>

(5) The Declarations of 15-16 January 2019
296. On 15 January 2019, a Declaration was made by twenty-two EU Member States entitled
“Declaration of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States on the

legal consequences of the judgment of the Court of Justice in Achmea and on Investment

24 Resp. Comments on the EC’s Updated Amicus Brief, 25 July 2018.
285 Cl. Comments on the EC’s Updated Amicus Brief, 6 August 2018.

97

Protection in the European Union” (“the Declaration of 15 January 2019”). This

Declaration refers to the ruling of the ECJ in the Achmea Judgment, stating:

“Member States are bound to draw all necessary consequences from that
judgment pursuant to their obligations under Union law.

Union law takes precedence over bilateral investment treaties concluded
between Member States. As a consequence, all investor-State arbitration
clauses contained in bilateral investment treaties concluded between
Member States are contrary to Union law and thus inapplicable. They do
not produce effects including as regards provisions that provide for
extended protection of investments made prior to termination for a further
period of time (so called sunset or grandfathering clauses). An arbitral
tribunal established on the basis of investor-State arbitration clauses lacks
jurisdiction, due to a lack of a valid offer to arbitrate by the Member State
party to the underlying bilateral investment Treaty.

Furthermore, international agreements concluded by the Union, including
the Energy Charter Treaty, are an integral part of the EU legal order and
must therefore be compatible with the Treaties. Arbitral tribunals have
interpreted the Energy Charter Treaty as also containing an investor-State
arbitration clause applicable between Member States. Interpreted in such a
manner, that clause would be incompatible with the Treaties and thus would
have to be disapplied.”

297. Pursuant to the Declaration of 15 January 2019, the signatory Member States then declare

inter alia that:

“1. By the present declaration, Member States inform investment arbitration
tribunals about the legal consequences of the Achmea judgment, as set out
in this declaration, in all pending intra-EU investment arbitration
proceedings brought either under bilateral investment treaties concluded
between Member States or under the Energy Charter Treaty.

2. In cooperation with a defending Member State, the Member State, in
which an investor that has brought such an action is established, will take
the necessary measures to inform the investment arbitration tribunals
concerned of those consequences. Similarly, defending Member States will
request the courts, including in any third country, which are to decide in
proceedings relating to an intra-EU investment arbitration award, to set
these awards aside or not to enforce them due to a lack of valid consent.”

298. On 25 January 2019, the Respondent sought permission for admission of the Declaration

of 15 January 2019 onto the record of this arbitration. The Claimants objected to this

98

299.

300.

301.

302.

request on 30 January 2019 stating however that, if the Tribunal were minded to admit
the Declaration of 15 January 2019, two further Declarations of 16 January 2019 should
be admitted, namely the Declaration of Finland, Luxembourg, Malta, Slovenia and
Sweden (“the Declaration of Five Member States”) and the Declaration of Hungary

(“Hungary’s Declaration”).

According to the Declaration of Five Member States, the Achmea Judgment is silent on
the subject of the arbitration provision in the ECT. It is also noted that various tribunals
have decided that such provision is applicable as between EU Member States, and that
this interpretation is currently contested before a national court in a Member State (in the

Novenergia II case). It is then said:

“Against this background, the Member States underline the importance of
allowing for due process and consider that it would be inappropriate, in the
absence of a specific judgment on this matter, to express views as regards
the compatibility with Union law of the intra-EU application of the Energy
Charter Treaty.”

It is said in Hungary’s Declaration that —

“... in Hungary’s view, the Achmea judgment concerns only the intra-EU
bilateral investment treaties. The Achmea judgment is silent on the investor-
state arbitration clause in the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”) and it does
not concern any pending or prospective arbitration proceedings initiated
under the ECT.

Against this background, Hungary underlines the importance of allowing
for due process and considers that it is inappropriate for a Member State to
express its view as regards the compatibility with Union law of the intra-
EU application of the ECT. The ongoing and future applicability of the ECT
in intra-EU relations requires further discussion and individual agreement
amongst the Member States.”

The Tribunal decided that all three Declarations should be admitted onto the record, and
invited brief submissions from the Parties.
The Respondent’s Position on the 2019 Declarations

On 12 February 2019, the Respondent filed its written comments. The Respondent’s

position is that:

99

“... by means of the Declaration [of 15 January 2019] the signatory Member
States inform the arbitral investment community that an arbitral tribunal
established on the basis of investor-State arbitration clauses such as Article
26 of the ECT lacks jurisdiction when the dispute is intra-EU. Such lack of
jurisdiction is due to the fact that the Member States never interpreted
Article 26 of the ECT as a valid offer to arbitrate between EU Members
because such consent to arbitration would be opposed to EU law. The
Kingdom of Spain considers that the Declaration holds paramount
relevance to this case because it is a definite and distinct demonstration of
the will of the States that signed the ECT as to how Article 26 of the ECT
should be interpreted in relation to EU Law.”?°°

303. The Respondent says that the Tribunal can and should interpret the ECT in harmony with
EU law, and that the primacy of EU law prevents the ECT from incorporating an offer to
arbitrate intra-EU disputes. It also contends that the Declaration of 15 January constitutes
a “subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty
or the application of its provisions” for the purposes of Article 31(3)(a) VCLT or, if not,
at least subsequent “practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the

agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation” within Article 31(3)(b) VCLT.?"”

304. The Respondent also says that if the Tribunal is not convinced that a harmonious
interpretation of Article 26 with EU law is possible, then EU law prevails as lex posterior
consistent with Articles 30(3) and (5) VCLT or by way of a special conflicts rule through
the primacy of EU law that applies regardless of the VCLT (which rule is in turn lex
posterior).?°* As to the Declaration of the Five Member States, the Respondent says that
this does not express a view opposed to the Declaration of 15 January 2019, and it

emphasises that the latter has been signed both by Germany and itself, stating:

“Any theoretical discussion about the legal characterization of the
Declaration cannot change the nature and the binding nature of the
commitments it encloses for both Spain and Germany. In order to comply
with EU Law and respect its international commitments as expressed in the
Declaration, Spain has no option but to respectfully insist on the objection
to the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal. The fact that both the host State
and the Respondent State have signed the Declaration makes it ever more

286 Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019, 8.

287 Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 4 9-15.
288 Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 ff 14-17.

100

305.

306.

307.

clear, that Article 26 of the ECT does not comprise an intra-EU arbitration
clause.”?°?
Finally, the Respondent suggests that the Tribunal request Germany to submit a
communication to the Tribunal regarding the legal consequences of the Achmea

Judgment for these proceedings.*”

The Claimants’ Position on the 2019 Declarations

On 19 February 2019, the Claimants filed their written comments on the 2019
Declarations. Their position is that the Declaration of 15 January 2019 distinguishes
between bilateral investment treaties and the ECT, and contend that “there is no
agreement among EU Member States (including between the 22 signatories to the
Declaration) regarding the consequences of Achmea for the ECT or whether EU law has
precedence over the ECT.”**! Thus the Claimants emphasise that, as follows from the
different approaches in the different declarations, “Member States do not agree on the
compatibility of the ECT with EU law. Therefore, contrary to Spain’s suggestion, the EU
Member States’ original intention cannot have been to exclude the intra-EU application

of Article 26 of the ECT.” 3

The Claimants also challenge the Respondent’s invocation of Article 31(3)(a) and (b)
VCLT, contending that the Declaration of 15 January 2019 does not establish an
agreement for the purposes of either provision, characterising it as a political statement
that does not set out how the ECT is to be interpreted. Further, it is said that it is clearly
not the case that all parties to the ECT have been involved in any interpretation, and also
that “on any view, the Declaration can have no bearing on the Tribunal's jurisdiction
since it postdates the commencement of the present proceeding. It is an accepted
principle of international law that jurisdiction is determined by reference to the date on

which the proceedings are instituted.”*°?

2 Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 {ff 19-20.

300 Resp, Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 21.

301 Cl. Comments on the Declarations of the EU Member States, 19 February 2019 ff 2-4.
302 C]. Comments on the Declarations of the EU Member States, 19 February 2019 7.

303 Cl. Comments on the Declarations of the EU Member States, 19 February 2019 ff 10-12.

101

308. In addition to addressing briefly the Respondent’s arguments that EU law prevails,
including by rejecting the argument that EU law is /ex posterior, the Claimants state that
Germany should not be allowed to intervene. It is said that Germany’s view on the legal
consequences of the Achmea Judgment is not relevant for this arbitration, and that
“Germany's intervention in this proceeding is not contemplated by the ICSID Convention
nor the ECT, and it would be incompatible with the objective of depoliticising investor-

State disputes.”>°*

(6) The Tribunal’s Analysis

309. The Tribunal has reviewed the Parties’ arguments with extreme care, and likewise the
position of the EC in its two submissions. It has also studied the positions of the EU

Member States as expressed in the three Declarations of 15-16 January 2019.

a. The law applicable to the intra-EU objection

310. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal derives from Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and
Article 26 ECT. No particular issues arise under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention save
for the question of whether there is indeed consent to arbitration under Article 26 ECT.
It follows from the fact that this is an ICSID arbitration that the Tribunal is not concerned
with the application of a curial law (unlike in the Achmea case, for example), which might

bring into play EU law as a matter of that curial law.

311. Article 26 ECT, and all other provisions of the ECT, are to be interpreted and applied in

accordance with the VCLT, to which both Spain and Germany are parties.

312. The Respondent places particular weight on Article 26(6) ECT in the context of its intra-
EU objection. This provides:

“A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and principles of
international law.”

304 Cl. Comments on the Declarations of the EU Member States, 19 February 2019 ff 14-18.

102

313. According to the Respondent: “It is precisely Article 26(6) ECT that prevents an intra-
EU investor from bringing arbitration proceedings against an EU Member State for
reasons related to its investment. Admitting this possibility would be contrary to EU law,
which is applicable international law.” The argument is that, to the extent that the ECT
is incompatible with EU law, the latter prevails as a matter of the EU Treaties, whilst
Article 344 TFEU means that Spain cannot submit to arbitration any matters concerning

the EU internal market in electricity (i.e. matters raised by the current claim).*°

314. Certainly, it is correct that the EU Treaties, i.e. the Treaty on the European Union
(“TEU”) and the TFEU are instruments established in, and constitute one part of the
broad corpus of, international law. That however does not mean that the entirety of EU
law is to be regarded as international law as the Respondent appears to suggest. Insofar
as a given rule of EU law is established by a treaty, then it exists in and is governed by
international law, but there are also rules of EU law that operate only within the internal

legal order of the EU.*°°

315. | However, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent's position that Article 26(6) ECT
applies as a choice of law provision with respect to the ascertainment of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. As noted by the tribunal in the Vattenfall case, the “dispute” with which
Article 26(6) is concerned is the “dispute” as further identified in Article 26(1), ie. a
dispute concerning an alleged breach of an obligation under Part III.*°” It follows that

Article 26(6) is concerned with the law applicable to the merits of the dispute, and in this

305 Resp. C-Mem. {{J] 84-86.

306 CL-0193, Vattenfall AB and others v Federal Republic of Germany, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/12, Decision on the
Achmea Issue, 31 August 2018 (hereinafter “Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue”), { 146: “It would be more
exact to say that the corpus of EU law derives from treaties that are themselves a part of, and governed by, international
law, and contains other rules that are applicable on the plane of international law, while also containing rules that
operate only within the internal legal order of the EU and, at least arguably, are not a part of international law; ... .”
Cf. RL-0002, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, { 4.120.

307 CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue, {9 114-121.

103

respect is functionally equivalent to Article 42(1) ICSID Convention.*”* Article 27(3)(g)

ECT is understood to be to the same effect.*°

316. The Tribunal sees nothing shocking in the above.*!° To the contrary, it considers that it
would be unusual for an international law tribunal, in considering whether it has
jurisdiction, to be mandated to apply law beyond the treaty being the source of its
jurisdiction together with secondary rules of international law going to matters such as
interpretation and any specific law that arises in the application of a jurisdictional
requirement.*!' Thus, this Tribunal is plainly mandated to determine, for example,
whether an Investor is “organised in accordance with the law applicable in [the]
Contracting Party” as per Article 1(7) ECT), or to consider other sources of international
law to the extent provided for in application of the VCLT, such as under Articles 30 or
31(3)(c) VCLT. If primary rules of international law exterior to the ECT were intended
to be applied in considering the existence of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction without the
framing devices provided by the VCLT, the Tribunal would have expected to see
unambiguous wording to that effect, not least because otherwise the Tribunal would be
left without established and generally applicable international law rules as to the inter-

relationship between any competing primary rules as to jurisdiction.*!”

317. On this basis, if EU law is indeed to prevail, this must follow from the wording of the

ECT as interpreted and applied in accordance with the VCLT, and the Respondent has

308 CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue, {ff 117-119 referring to Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary. See also, as to Article 42(1) ICSID Convention, CL-0180, Ambiente Ufficio S.p.A. and others v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/9, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 8 February 2013, 1 236-
241.

309 ‘The Tribunal has considered whether the reference in Article 26(6) to the law to be applied by a “tribunal
established under paragraph (4) assists it, but considers that this is neutral: read in context, this may be understood
as a reference to a tribunal i in with the jurisdicti i of Article 26(4) and the
preceding provisions that it refers back to, i.e. a tribunal as to which the various jurisdictional requirements have been
met; but it could also be understood as a reference to a tribunal that has been constituted and is considering its
jurisdiction.

310 Cf. Resp. Comments on the Vattenfall Decision and the EC’s Communication, 9 October 2018 {ff 7-13.

3! As an example of the distinction between primary and secondary rules of international law, see RL-0078, Draft
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, with commentaries 2001, General Commentary
IM 1-4.

312 Cf, for example the rules on successive treaties provided for in Articles 30 and 59 VCLT or Article 31(3)(c) as to
“taking into account” — as opposed to applying — “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.”

104

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

made certain arguments based on the interpretation of Article 26, as well as on the impact
of Articles 30 and 59 VCLT, as considered in sub-sections (i)-(iii) below. The Tribunal

considers that these arguments fail.

Even if the Respondent were correct that Article 26(6) mandated the application of EU
law (to the extent that it qualifies as international law) to the issue of the existence and
scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the intra-EU objection would still fail. This follows
from the reasoning in section (c) below, where the Tribunal considers the Respondent’ s
arguments deriving from EU law to the effect that Spain has no obligations under Part III
ECT and/or consent to arbitration under Article 26 ECT does not apply with respect to

intra-EU disputes.

Interpretation and application of Article 26(1) ECT pursuant to the VCLT
As follows from the above, the Tribunal approaches the Respondent’s contentions from
its position as an arbitral tribunal that, insofar as it has jurisdiction, derives that
jurisdiction from Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 26 ECT, i.e. two treaties

that fall to be interpreted and applied as a matter of international law.

(i) Article 26(1): the Respondent’s arguments with respect to the “Area” and Article
1(3) ECT

Pursuant to Article 26(1) ECT:

“Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another
Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of the
former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former
under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably.”

Pursuant to Article 1(2) ECT:

““Contracting Party’ means a state or Regional Economic Integration
Organization which has consented to be bound by this Treaty and for which
the Treaty is in force.”

The Regional Economic Integration Organization (REIO) is defined in Article 1(3) as

meaning —

105

323.

324.

325.

326.

.. an organization constituted by states to which they have transferred
competence over certain matters a number of which are governed by this
Treaty, including the authority to take decisions binding on them in respect
of those matters.”

By reference to the ordinary meaning of the words of Article 1(2) ECT, the Respondent

is “a state ... which has consented to be bound by this Treaty and for which the Treaty is

in force”, and so is Germany. Applying the definitions at Article 1(6) and 1(7) ECT, the

Claimants are Investors of another Contracting Party, i.e. Germany, and they have made

Investments in Spain.

There is a question nonetheless as to whether it is correct to regard those Investments as
qualifying for the purposes of Article 26(1) i.e. as Investments “in the Area of the former
[Contracting Party].” This is because, as is common ground, the EU is a REIO that has
consented to be bound by the ECT and for which the ECT is in force, ie. it is a
Contracting Party for the purposes of Article 1(2), which also has a defined Area under
Article 1(10) ECT. Given that both Spain and Germany are EU Member States, the
question is therefore whether the Claimants do indeed have Investments in the Area of

another Contracting Party.

Article 1(10) establishes a definition of “Area” both with respect to a State and a REIO,

as follows:

“*Area’ means with respect to a state that is a Contracting Party:

(a) the territory under its sovereignty, it being understood that territory
includes land, internal waters and the territorial sea; and

(b) subject to and in accordance with the international law of the sea: the
sea, sea-bed and its subsoil with regard to which that Contracting Party
exercises sovereign rights and jurisdiction.

With respect to a Regional Economic Integration Organization which is a
Contracting Party, Area means the Areas of the member states of such
Organization, under the provisions contained in the agreement establishing that
Organization.”

Thus, with respect to the EU, as a Contracting Party to the ECT, the defined Area is the

Areas of its Member States “under the provisions contained in the agreement

106

establishing [the EU].” This definition is predicated on individual States that are

Contracting Parties having their own Areas.

327. | Applying these definitions in the interpretation and application of Article 26(1), Spain is
a Contracting Party, the Claimants are Investors of another Contracting Party i.e.
Germany, and their Investment is “in the Area of the former” Contracting Party, i.e.
Spain. There is nothing in Articles 1(2), 1(10) or 26(1) to suggest that, where both
Contacting Parties are within the Area of the EU, they are either to be regarded as ceasing
to have their own Areas as States and Contracting Parties to the ECT or that the relevant

Area becomes the Area of the EU (and exclusively so).

328. Of course, if the dispute were with the EU as the relevant Contracting Party, then the
Area for the purposes of Article 26(1) would be the Area of the EU as defined by Article
1(10). But the current claim has not been brought against the EU, and the Tribunal sees
nothing in Article 26(1) that would lead it to conclude that, because the relevant Area in
that provision could in an appropriate case be the Area of the EU, Spain should cease to
have its own independent Area as defined by Article 1(10) in the circumstances of the

current dispute.

329. There is likewise nothing in Articles 26(1) or 26(3) to suggest that Spain (or any other
EU Member State) as the Contracting Party was limiting the consent to arbitrate to
Investors from non-EU States; and although it follows from Article 1(3) that EU Member
States “have transferred competence over certain matters”, there is no language in
Articles 1 or 26 or elsewhere in the ECT?" that suggests that such matters are engaged
with the effect of disapplying Article 26 (or the substantive protections of ECT, Part
m.3!4

330. Further, as the Claimants contend, had the EU or the EU Member States wished to deny
access to arbitration in the case of an intra-EU dispute, one would expect to see some

form of disconnection clause or declaration of competencies that would allow the

313 This includes Article 36(7) ECT to which the Respondent refers.
314 See, to similar effect, the analysis of the tribunal in CL-0187, Blusun, {{{ 280-282, with which the Tribunal agrees.

 

107

Tribunal to disregard Article 26 and/or conclude that EU Member States were not

competent to accept obligations under Part III.3!5

331. As noted by the Claimants, through Article 27(2) of the 1988 Council of Europe/OECD
Convention on Mutual Assistance in Tax Matters, it was established that:
“Notwithstanding the rules of the present Convention, those Parties which are members
of the European Economic Community shall apply in their mutual relations the common
rules in force in that Community.”>"© There is no equivalent to such provision in the ECT.
As the Claimants also point out, in concluding the Final Act of the European Energy
Charter Conference, there was a decision on a conflicts rule ensuring the prevailing effect
of the Svalbard Treaty and expressly disapplying Article 16 ECT.*"” Again, there is no
equivalent that the Respondent has pointed to. The EU did make a statement pursuant to
Article 26(3)(b)(ii) ECT on its “policies, practices and conditions with regard to disputes
between an investor and a Contracting Party and their submission to international
arbitration or conciliation”, but again this contains no indication that Article 26 would
not apply so far as concerns intra-EU disputes,*'* as would have been expected had that

then been the EU’s understanding or intention.

332. These factors militate strongly against the Respondent’s position — and that of the EC -
that because Spain and Germany were already members of the EU at the time of their
ratification of the ECT they thereby lacked competence to accept obligations under Part

III ECT (including Article 16).°!°

315 Cl. Reply 99 137-146.

316 Cl. Reply { 138, referring to CL-0116, 1988 Council of Europe/OECD Convention on Mutual Administrative
tance in Tax Matters, Article 27, quoted in Fragmentation of International Law: difficulties arising from the
diversification and expansion of international law, Report of the Study Group of the International Law Commission,
finalised by M Koskenniemi, International Law Commission, fifty-eight session, Geneva,1 May-9 June and 3 July-11
August 2006, Document A/CN.4/L.682, 13 April 2006.

317 Cl. Reply { 143, referring to CL-0007, Energy Charter Secretariat, “Decision of the Energy Charter Conference,
Subject: Road Map for the Modernization of the Energy Process”, Energy Charter Secretariat, 24 November 2010.

 

+18 Statement submitted by the European Communities to the Secretariat of the Energy Charter pursuant to Article
26(3)(b)(ii) of the Energy Charter Treaty.
319 Cf. Resp. Rej. {| 73-74 and 105, referring to Costa v ENEL. See also, Resp. C-Mem. J 61.

108

333. | Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s contentions based on the Area and

Atticle 1(3) ECT.
(ii) The Respondent’s arguments with respect to object and purpose and Article 25 ECT

334, The Respondent emphasises the purpose of the ECT, through the reference in Article 2
ECT to the Energy Charter, as being to “promote East-West industrial cooperation
through the establishment of legal safeguards in areas such as investment, transit and
trade.” It is suggested that it would be quite wrong to assume that the EU and its Member
States wished through the ECT “to cover an area, that of intra-EU investments, which
had been totally covered — and in a far superior manner — for years by EU law” which,

moreover, would mean “taking competences away from the ECJ.” *°°

335. It is of course correct that Article 26, as with all other provisions of the ECT, must be
interpreted in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms, in their
context and in the light of the ECT’s object and purpose, as required by Article 31(1)
VCLT (and customary international law). However, the Tribunal sees nothing in either
the ECT or Titles I and II of the Energy Charter to suggest that one purpose of the ECT
was to establish a system of protection for non-EU investors whilst excluding from the
ambit of protection EU investors in EU Member States, and nor does it accept that the
object and purpose of the ECT more generally is consistent with or points to such a result.
Still less does it see any expression of any purpose to distinguish between intra-EU and
other investments that calls into question the ordinary meaning of Articles 26(1) and (3),
and likewise so far as concerns the provisions of Part III ECT and its application to EU

Member States.

336. The Respondent also contends that the ECT itself recognises through its Article 25 the
principle of primacy of EU law.*?! The Tribunal does not accept this. Article 25 ECT is
concerned with most favoured nation treatment, and merely establishes that a Contracting

Party that is a party to an Economic Integration Agreement (EIA) is not required, by

320 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 94-97; RL-0006, ECT, Article I and Preface.
321 Resp. Rej. {91 93 and 114.

109

means of most favoured nation treatment, to extend “any preferential treatment
applicable between the parties to that EIA” to another Contracting Party that is not a
party to that EIA. It says nothing about the primacy of EU law and recognises no principle
in that respect. The same applies with respect to the declaration concerning Article 25

made by the EU and its Member States.*?
(iti) The Respondent’s arguments with respect to Articles 30, 31(3)(c) and 59 VCLT

337. The Respondent contends that EU law prevails by virtue of Articles 30 and 59 VCLT.33
Article 30 VCLT provides:

“1. ... the rights and obligations of States Parties to successive treaties
relating to the same subject matter shall be determined in accordance with
the following paragraphs.

2.When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered
as incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other
treaty prevail.

3.When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty
but the earlier treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under
article 59, the earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are
compatible with those of the later treaty.

4.When the parties to the later treaty do not include all the parties to the
earlier one:

(a) as between States Parties to both treaties the same rule applies
as in paragraph 3;

(b) as between a State party to both treaties and a State party to only
one of the treaties, the treaty to which both States are parties governs
their mutual rights and obligations.

5.Paragraph 4 is without prejudice to article 41, or to any question of the
termination or suspension of the operation of a treaty under article 60 or to
any question of responsibility which may arise for a State from the
conclusion or application of a treaty the provisions of which are

22 Cf, Resp. Rej. 93.
3 Resp, Rej. {1 94-96, Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 14.

110

incompatible with its obligations towards another State under another
treaty.”
338. As follows from Article 30(2) VCLT, Article 30 is a default rule, and it cannot be applied
without consideration of a specific provision in a treaty dealing with the issue of prior or

subsequent treaties.

339. So far as concerns the ECT, Article 16 (“Relation to other agreements”) establishes a

tule of non-derogation in favour of the Investor and Investment as follows:

“Where two or more Contracting Parties have entered into a prior
international agreement, or enter into a subsequent international agreement,
whose terms in either case concern the subject matter of Part III or V of this
Treaty,

(1) nothing in Part III or V of this Treaty shall be construed to
derogate from any provision of such terms of the other agreement or
from any right to dispute resolution with respect thereto under that
agreement; and

(2) nothing in such terms of the other agreement shall be construed
to derogate from any provision of Part III or V of this Treaty or from
any right to dispute resolution with respect thereto under this Treaty,

where any such provision is more favourable to the Investor or
Investment.”
340. If it is assumed in the Respondent’s favour that the TFEU (or the TEU) constitutes a
“subsequent international agreement, whose terms ... concern the subject matter of Part
III or V of this Treaty”, then the Respondent and the EU nonetheless remain bound as
Contracting Parties to the ECT in accordance with Article 16, i.e. nothing in the terms of
the TFEU (or the TEU) can be construed to derogate from the provisions of Part III or
Part V or from any right to dispute resolution with respect thereto. The Tribunal accepts
that the provisions of Part III and Part V that are relied on in the context of the current
claim are correctly seen as “more favourable to the Investor or Investment” such that

Article 16 is engaged.**+

4 Cf, Resp. Rej. {{ 100.

111

341. Although the Tribunal does not rule out that Article 16 ECT could be displaced by
express language in a subsequent treaty, (i) this would have to be in a provision agreed
to by all Contracting Parties to the ECT,*?5 and (ii) even if it were somehow otherwise,
the Tribunal has seen no provision that suggests any such intention. Further, although the
TFEU was concluded subsequent to the ECT, the rules that Articles 267 and 344 TFEU
establish existed in treaties prior to the ECT such that, if there had been any intention to
attempt to displace Article 16 ECT, there is all the more reason to expect that this would

have been through express language, whether in the TFEU or elsewhere.

342. It follows that Article 16 applies, and even if Articles 267 and 344 TFEU are seen as
concerning the subject matter of Parts III or V (which the Tribunal does not accept), there
is no basis on which to have recourse to the rule in Article 30(4)(a) VCLT or any other
of the rules of Article 30, and there is no basis for saying that Articles 267 and 344 TFEU
or any other provisions of the TFEU or TEU prevail over Parts III or V ECT. (This is
subject to the Respondent’s position that Spain and Germany lacked competence to
undertake any obligations in Part III ECT including Article 16, which is considered

further below.)

343. — Article 59 VCLT establishes rules in relation to the termination or suspension of the
operation of a treaty implied by the conclusion of a later treaty. It establishes under
Article 59(1) two limbs where termination or suspension of the earlier treaty may be
implied “ifall the parties to it conclude a later treaty relating to the same subject matter.”
This has not happened. The EU Treaties are concluded by only certain of the parties to
the ECT. Nor have Spain and Germany made a notification of suspension to the other
ECT parties as would be required under Article 65(1) WCLT (the Declaration of 15
January 2019 cannot be construed as such a notification: it says nothing about suspension
of the ECT, is addressed to investment arbitration tribunals as opposed to the Contracting
Parties of the ECT, and does not purport to meet the requirements of Article 65(1)
VCLT).

5 Cf, Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 ff 16-17.

112

344. The Respondent has made a belated reference to Article 31(3)(c) WCLT, and is critical
of the conclusion of the Vattenfall tribunal to the effect that EU law is not to be taken
into account under Article 31(3)(c) to interpret Article 26 ECT in the way that was sought
by the EC in the Vattenfall case, but no argument is put forward to support the

Respondent’s criticism.*?°

345. The Tribunal agrees with the Vattenfall tribunal that relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties are to be taken into account under Article
31(3)(c) VCLT, which does not imply that there is to be a re-writing of a provision such
as Article 26 ECT so as to arrive at an interpretation that is both contrary to the ordinary
meaning of its terms and has the result that the same provision has different meanings for
different parties to the same treaty.*?7 Moreover, as discussed further below, the Tribunal
does not consider that there is any relevant rule of international law that has been

identified to it on the basis of the Achmea Judgment or elsewhere.?*
(iv) Conclusion: pacta sunt servanda

346. The Tribunal therefore does not see any sound basis within the ECT, or by application of

the VCLT, for the Respondent’s contention that EU law prevails.

347. As follows from the principle of pacta sunt servanda referred to by the tribunal in the
RREEF case, the provisions of Part III ECT to which Spain and Germany have subscribed
must be taken as binding given the absence of any qualification or reservation by these

two States or by the EU. Thus, the RREEF tribunal noted that:

“*’.. when the very essence of a treaty to which the EU is a party is at issue,
... then precisely because the EU is a party to the treaty a formal warning
that EU law would prevail over the treaty, such as that contained in a
disconnection clause, would have been required under international law.

26 Resp. Comments on the Vartenfall Decision and the EC’s Communication, 9 October 2018 4 15; cf.
CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue, {ff 151-165.

27 CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue, {ff 154-158; cf. Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12
February 2019 9.

8 See also, CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue {| 159-164.

113

This follows from the basic public international law principle of pacta sunt
servanda. If one or more parties to a treaty wish to exclude the application
of that treaty in certain respect or circumstances, they must either make a
reservation (excluded in the present case by Article 46 of the ECT) or
include an unequivocal disconnection clause in the treaty itself ... .”??°

348. The position was also expressed by the tribunal in the Blusun case as follows, in

reasoning with which this Tribunal agrees:

“Pursuant to Article 6 of the VCLT, every State possesses capacity to
conclude treaties and is bound by those obligations pursuant to the principle
of pacta sunt servanda. No limitation on the competence of the EU Member
States was communicated at the time that the ECT was signed. Article 46
of the VCLT provides that a State may not invoke provisions of its internal
law regarding competence to conclude treaties to invalidate a treaty unless
it was a manifest violation of a rule of fundamental importance. While EU
law operates on both an internal and international plane, a similar principle
must apply. Even if, as a matter of EC law, the EC has exclusive competence
over matters of internal investment, the fact is that Member States to the EU
signed the ECT without qualification or reservation. The inter se obligations
in the ECT are not somehow invalid or inapplicable because of an allocation
of competence that the EC says can be inferred from a set of EU laws and
regulations dealing with investment.”?°°

  

349. The Tribunal accordingly rejects the Respondent’s arguments to the effect that Article
26 does not establish jurisdiction with respect to intra-EU cases and likewise that Spain
and Germany have no obligations under Part III with respect to intra-EU investments due

to a lack of competence.

350. The Tribunal gets to this result on the basis that its mandate, in considering its
jurisdiction, does not extend to the application of EU law. If that were wrong however,
whether because the Tribunal is incorrect in its analysis of Article 26(6) ECT or

otherwise, the Tribunal would still get to the same result through application of EU law.

29 CL-0134, RREEF, Decision on Jurisdiction, Wf 84-85.
380 CL-0187, Blusun, 1 283.

114

c. The Respondent’s argument that EU law applies and prevails

351. The Respondent’s position is that: “The EU is an economic integration area which
includes as part of its regulations on the Internal Market an integral system to promote
and protect intra-EU investments, which prevails over the provisions of the ECT.”>*" Its
argument, as developed by reference to Articles 267 and 344 TFEU and by reference to
the Achmea Judgment, is that the Tribunal accordingly lacks jurisdiction in respect of an
intra-EU dispute concerning the EU internal market in electricity (i.e. matters raised by

the current claim).***

352. Pursuant to Article 267 TFEU:

“The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction to give
preliminary rulings concerning:

(a) the interpretation of the Treaties;

(b) the validity and interpretation of acts of the institutions, bodies, offices
or agencies of the Union;

Where such a question is raised before any court or tribunal of a Member
State, that court or tribunal may, if it considers that a decision on the
question is necessary to enable it to give judgment, request the Court to give
a ruling thereon.

Where any such question is raised in a case pending before a court or
tribunal of a Member State against whose decisions there is no judicial
remedy under national law, that court or tribunal shall bring the matter
before the Court.

If such a question is raised in a case pending before a court or tribunal of a
Member State with regard to a person in custody, the Court of Justice of the
European Union shall act with the minimum of delay.”

353. Pursuant to Article 344 TFEU:
“Member States undertake not to submit a dispute concerning the

interpretation or application of the Treaties to any method of settlement
other than those provided for therein.”

331 Resp. C-Mem. 66.
332 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 66-74 and 84-86; Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018.

115

356.

(i) The claim is for breach of the ECT, not EU law

As to the potential application of Articles 267 and 344 TFEU, the Tribunal considers that
the claim has been brought for and concerns breach of the ECT, not EU law. It also
considers that the Claimants are correct to say that the ECT grants investors rights that
are additional to any other rights provided by the internal market and that there is no
inconsistency between EU law and the ECT. Thus, it considers that the position is as

described as follows in the Charanne and Eiser cases —

“This case does not entail any assessment with regards to the validity of

community acts or decisions adopted by European Union organs.

Additionally, it does not concern in any way allegations by the European

Union that EU law has been violated, nor claims against such organization.

In this arbitration there is not an argument according to which the content

of the disputed provisions [...] is contrary to EU law.”
It does not follow from the mere fact that there is an EU internal market in electricity
with EU Directives on renewable energy that there is any incompatibility with the ECT
or the application of the ECT in this case.*** Indeed, as identified by the tribunal in the
Electrabel case, the genesis of the ECT is inconsistent with any incompatibility: “it would
have made no sense for the European Union to promote and subscribe to the ECT if that

had meant entering into obligations inconsistent with EU law.”?*°

The Tribunal notes the Respondent’s position that the dispute affects essential elements

of EU law including State aid,**° as is supported by the views expressed in these
proceedings by the EC,**” and as has been developed in the Respondent’s submissions
including its Comments on the EC’s Decision of 10 November 2017 on the State Aid

SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for Electricity Generation

333 CL-0170, EISER Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.A.R.L v Kingdom of Spain, Award, 4
May 2017, (hereinafter “Eiser”), 199, referring to CL-0094, Charanne, { 448.

34 Cf, Resp. C-Mem. 66-70.

35 RL-0002, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, {{ 4.133-4.134.

336 Resp, Rej. { 78; Resp. oral opening at Day 1/270-271.

337 EC’s Updated Submission ff 49 and 50-55.

116

from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste.*** However, the Tribunal

agrees with the position of the Claimants, in particular to the effect that:

a) The EC investigation concerned the new regime introduced in 2013-2014, not the

Special Regime on which the Claimants say they relied to invest;

b) There is no evidence that the Disputed Measures were motivated by State aid
concerns, as the relevant preambles do not mention State aid.>?
357. Indeed, as appears from section 2.1 of the EC’s Decision of November 2017, the scheme
notified by Spain to the EC was that introduced by RDL 9/2013 and subsequent
measures, not “the premium economic scheme” of RD 661/2007. The EC later stated in

its Decision that:

“As Spain has decided to replace the premium economic scheme with the
notified aid measures it is not relevant for the scope of this decision to assess
whether the originally foreseen payments under the previous schemes
would have been compatible or not.”*#°

358. Thus, notwithstanding the position of the Respondent that the EC’s Decision of
November 2017 is binding, the Tribunal does not see how that Decision is of assistance
to the Respondent’s case on the intra-EU objection. No determination is made there with
respect to the measures at issue in this case. As a matter of EU law, it appears that only
the operative part of the Decision is binding,*“! and the operative part is merely to the
effect that the new regime was in breach of Article 108(3) TFEU (Spain started

implementing the scheme and before a Commission decision), but otherwise the EC had

338 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for
Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste. See also, Resp. Comments on the
EC’s Updated Amicus Brief, 25 July 2018.

339 Cl. Reply §{] 489-491; Claimants oral opening at Day 1/215.

+490 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (20151NN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for
Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste {| 156.

+1 Claimants’ Reply of 26 January 2018, {[ 3, referring to Joined Cases T-443/08 and T-455/08, Freistaat Sachsen and
Land Sachsen-Anhalt J 223, where it is stated: “In addition, only the operative part of an act is capable of producing
binding legal effects (see, to that effect, Case 5/95 P TWD v Commission [1997] ECR 1-2549, paragraph 21, and
Case T-251/00 Lagardére and Canal v Commission [2002] ECR II-4825, paragraph 6.”

 
   

117

360.

361.

decided “not to raise objections to the aid on the grounds that it is compatible with the

internal market pursuant to Article 107(3)(c) TFEU.>?

The Tribunal sees this as a matter solely for the EC and for the Respondent. No part of
the Claimants’ claim concerns the issue of whether the new regime concerns unlawful
State aid. It is not because the regime has been found to be lawful under Article 107(3)(c)
TFEU (albeit also unlawful under Article 108(3) TFEU) that it cannot also, and quite
independently, be in breach of the ECT.

In addition, the fact that a subsidy to the RE sector may be a form of State aid does not
mean that the current case requires the application of EU law concerning State aid; it
does not. Likewise, the obligation of Contracting Parties under ECT Article 6(1) “to
alleviate market distortions and barriers to competition in Economic Activity in the
Energy Sector’, and the consideration given by Article 10(8) ECT to “programmes under
which a Contracting Party provides grants or other financial assistance, or enters into
contracts, for energy technology research and development’, do not impact in any way

on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this case.*47

Nor, as follows from what it has already said, does the Tribunal accept that it lacks
jurisdiction over acts of Spain said to be in breach of Part III ECT by virtue of the
contention of the Respondent (and the view expressed by the EC) that the applicable
investment protection law to intra-EU investments is EU law, in particular the rules of
free movement of capital and freedom of establishment, and that pursuant to Article 3(2)
TFEU, EU Member States lack the competence to conclude bilateral or multilateral
agreements concerning protection of investments.*“* The Tribunal considers that the
protections provided for in Part III are consistent with EU rules such as on free movement
of capital and freedom of establishment, but different. There is nothing in the ECT that

suggests that the EU saw the Part III protections as falling within an area of its exclusive

32 RL-0089, EC’s Decision on the State Aid SA.40348 (2015INN) proceeding regarding Spain’s Support for
Electricity Generation from Renewable Energy Sources, Cogeneration and Waste, section 5 “Conclusion”. See also
RL-0089, {| 89 with respect to Art. 108(3) TFEU.

33 Cf, Resp. Comments on Achmea, 22 March 2018 9 30-32.
4 The European Commission’s Amicus Curiae Brief 5.

118

competence and, even if Article 3(2) TFEU were engaged, it has not been demonstrated
to the Tribunal how or why this would override the jurisdiction that is established by the
plain wording of Article 26 ECT and the unalterable fact that Spain is a party to the ECT
(including Parts III and V) and bound by the principle of pacta sunt servanda as much as

any other Contracting Party, including the EU. *°
(ii) The impact, if any, of the Achmea Judgment

362. According to the Achmea Judgment, Articles 267 and 344 TFEU are brought into play
where, through a BIT, EU Member States establish a mechanism for settling disputes
between an investor and a Member State which could prevent those disputes from being
resolved in a manner that ensures the full effectiveness of EU law, even though they

might not concern the interpretation or application of that law.*4°

363. The Claimants contend that the reasoning and outcome of the Achmea Judgment can be
distinguished for a number of reasons, including in particular that the Achmea Judgment
is predicated on the EU not being a party to the BIT then at issue, whereas the EU is a
Contracting Party to the ECT and is bound by its provisions including Article 26 ECT.
Notwithstanding the position of the Respondent, and that of the large majority of EU
Member States as expressed in the Declaration of 15 January 2019, the Tribunal can only
agree with the Claimants on this point, and it does not consider that the impact of Articles
267 and 344 TFEU is to deprive it of jurisdiction (even assuming, which it does not
accept, that these provisions fall to be applied under Article 26(6) to the question of

whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction or not).

364. — First, as already noted, the Tribunal does not consider that it has to determine any issues

of EU law to resolve the current dispute, so Articles 267 and 344 are not implicated.**”

§5 See, CL-0193, Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue { 131 and CL-0187, Blusun, { 283.
46 RL-0090, Achmea Judgment 56.
¥ See, to similar effect, CL-0170, Eiser, | 204.

119

365. Second, although in the Achmea Judgment the potential for the application of EU law

348,

appears to have been sufficient,”"” it also appears to have been fundamental to the

reasoning that the EU itself was not a party to the relevant investment treaty. The ECJ

thus held:

“Tt is true that, according to settled case-law of the Court, an international
agreement providing for the establishment of a court responsible for the
interpretation of its provisions and whose decisions are binding on the
institutions, including the Court of Justice, is not in principle incompatible
with EU law. The competence of the EU in the field of international
relations and its capacity to conclude international agreements necessarily
entail the power to submit to the decisions of a court which is created or
designated by such agreements as regards the interpretation and application
of their provisions, provided that the autonomy of the EU and its legal order
is respected (see, to that effect, Opinion 1/91 (EEA Agreement — I) of
14 December 1991, EU:C:1991:490, paragraphs 40 and 70; Opinion 1/09
(Agreement creating a unified patent litigation system) of 8 March 2011,
EU:C:2011:123, paragraphs 74 and 76; and Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the
EU to the ECHR) of 18 December 2014, EU:C:2014:2454, paragraphs 182
and 183).

In the present case, however, apart from the fact that the disputes falling
within the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal referred to in Article 8 of the
BIT may relate to the interpretation both of that agreement and of EU law,
the possibility of submitting those disputes to a body which is not part of
the judicial system of the EU is provided for by an agreement which was
concluded not by the EU but by Member States.”*4?

366. Here, by contrast, the relevant treaty i.e. the ECT — including its Article 26 — was
concluded by the EU and is binding on the EU and its institutions, including as follows
from Article 216(2) TFEU. It would appear from the Achmea Judgment that such an
agreement “is not in principle incompatible with EU law.” Indeed, the EU has — without
any reservation — exposed itself to the possibility of a claim being brought against it under
Article 26 ECT, with the possibility that a Tribunal might apply EU law to the merits of
a given dispute (to the extent that EU law qualifies as international law under Article

26(6)). Given that the EU has accepted this possibility, the Tribunal cannot see how

48 RL-0090, Achmea Judgment ff 40-42.
4 RL-0090, Achmea Judgment ff 57-58.

120

Article 26 could suddenly have an adverse effect on the autonomy of EU law where a

claim was brought against a Member State as opposed to against the EU.

367. The Tribunal notes that, through the Declaration of 15 January 2019, some 22 EU

Member States have expressed their position that —

“... international agreements concluded by the Union, including the Energy
Charter Treaty, are an integral part of the EU legal order and must therefore
be compatible with the Treaties. Arbitral tribunals have interpreted the
Energy Charter Treaty as also containing an investor-State arbitration
clause applicable between Member States. Interpreted in such a manner,
that clause would be incompatible with the Treaties and thus would have to
be disapplied.”
368. The Respondent has put this forward as an “authentic interpretation”, invoking Article

31(3)(a) VCLT and, in the alternative, Article 31(3)(b) VCLT.**°

369. As an initial point, it is not clear to the Tribunal that the Declaration of 15 January 2019
contains an interpretation of Article 26 ECT. As appears in the passage quoted above,
there is a statement on the status of the ECT, and the conclusion that the interpretations
made by arbitral tribunals of Article 26 leads to an incompatibility such that the provision
would have to be disapplied. This appears to be a statement as to how Article 26 ECT is
received and applied (or disapplied) in EU law as opposed to an interpretation of that

provision.
370. As to Article 31(3) VCLT, this provides in relevant part that:

“There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes
the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation; ...”

371. As follows from Article 31(3)(a), it would not matter whether the Declaration of 15

January 2019 constituted a subsequent agreement regarding the interpretation of the ECT

380 Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 ff 9-15.

121

or rather its application. However, it is plain that Article 31(3)(a) does not apply as the
Declaration sets out the agreed position of only certain of the ECT Contracting Parties,
whilst among the EU Member States as a whole (being ECT Contracting Parties) there is
disagreement.**! The Tribunal does not know the position of the ECT Contracting Parties
that are not EU Member States, but the materials before it are to the effect that even among
the EU Member States there is no common understanding sufficient for the purposes of

Article 31(3)(a) to be found reflected in the Declaration of 15 January 2019.

372. As aresult of the same factors, the Tribunal is unable to find that the Declaration of 15
January 2019 establishes or reflects subsequent practice in the application of the ECT
“which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation” within
Article 31(3)(b) VCLT. The Tribunal would certainly accept that the subsequent practice
for the purposes of Article 31(3)(b) need not be of all treaty parties, but it cannot agree
with the Respondent’s position that the only relevant States are Spain and Germany.*>
All ECT Contracting Parties have an interest in the interpretation of Article 26 ECT,
which after all binds them all. On the Respondent’s approach, it would be possible to have
different interpretations of Article 26 dependent on the identity of the host State and
investor State in any given case, which would be neither coherent nor workable. On the
materials before it, the Tribunal sees that one State (Hungary) positively disagrees with
the position stated in the Declaration of 15 January 2019, five States are expressly
withholding their view, whilst the views of ECT Contracting Parties that are not EU
Member States are unknown but cannot be taken as either acquiescent to the Declaration

of 15 January 2019 or irrelevant.***

35! See also, the Commentary p. 29, {4 to the ILC “Draft conclusions on subsequent agreements and subsequent
practice in relation to the interpretation of treaties”, A/73/10, where ted that: “The term ‘the parties’ indicates
that such an agreement must be reached between all the parties to the treaty.” As footnoted in Resp. Comments on
the Declaration, 12 February 2019, http://legal.un.org/ilc/reports/2018/english/a_73_10_advance.pdf. Cf. Resp.
Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 { 11.

352

 

 

Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 {{ 12.

353 See also, Conclusion 10 of the ILC “Draft conclusions on subsequent agreements and subsequent practice in
relation to the interpretation of treaties”, A/73/10, including the Commentary thereto, including at J 3, where it is
stated that: “Conflicting positions regarding interpretation expressed by different parties to a treaty preclude the
existence of an agreement. This has been confirmed, inter alia, by the Arbitral Tribunal in the case of German External
Debts, which held that a ‘tacit subsequent understanding’ could not be derived from a number of communications by

122

d.

373.

Conclusion re the intra-EU objection

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s intra-EU objection. It
also rejects the suggestion that, should this Tribunal have any doubts as to the position, it
should refer the matter to the ECJ through a juge d’appui.*** The Tribunal does not see
how it could do this without the consent of the Parties before it (which has not been given),
and considers that the Tribunal cannot lose sight of the fact that it has been constituted
under Article 26 ECT to decide the case before it, and has no general powers of delegation

whether under the ECT or the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules.

Finally, the Tribunal is naturally concerned that its award should be capable of
enforcement, and notes the statement in the Declaration of 15 January 2019 that
“defending Member States will request the courts, including in any third country, which
are to decide in proceedings relating to an intra-EU investment arbitration award, to set
these awards aside or not to enforce them due to a lack of valid consent.” However, the
issue of recognition and enforcement are ultimately a matter for the courts of concerned
ICSID Contracting States in accordance with Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, and
the Tribunal cannot determine its jurisdiction by reference to how differing Contracting

States may understand and apply their obligations under Article 54.

D. THE TAX OBJECTION

)

a.

375.

The Parties’ Positions

The Respondent’s Position
The Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the claims of breach
of Article 10(1) ECT with respect to the two Taxation Measures introduced by Law

15/2012 of 27 December 2012 (“Law 15/2012”): (i) the Tax on the Value of the
Production of Electrical Energy (“TVPEE”’), and (ii) the Levy on the use of mainland

administering agencies since one of those agencies, the Bank of England, had expressed a divergent position.”
http://legal.un.org/ilc/reports/201 8/english/a_73_10_advance.pdf.

354 EC’s Updated Submission {| 47-48. The Tribunal has also considered and rejected the Respondent's suggestion
that Germany be invited to intervene regarding the legal consequences of the Achmea Judgment for these proceedings:
Resp. Comments on the Declaration, 12 February 2019 { 21.

123

376.

waters for the production of electrical energy (“Water Levy”).*> Its position is that the
TVPEE and the Water Levy are correctly regarded as taxes as a matter of Spanish and
also international law (by reference to tests set out in EnCana v Ecuador, Duke Energy v

Ecuador and Burlington Resources Inv. v Republic of Ecuador).*°°

According to the Respondent, it has not consented to submit this issue to arbitration given
that, pursuant to Article 21 ECT, Article 10(1) ECT does not generate obligations
regarding taxation measures of Contracting Parties. It contends that Article 21(7) ECT
provides that for the purposes of Article 21, ‘Taxation Measure’ includes any provisions
relating to taxes of the domestic law of the Contracting Party. Therefore, both the TVPEE
and the Water Levy constitute Taxation Measures for the purposes of the ECT. The
Respondent relies inter alia on the award in Isolux Netherlands BV v Spain in support of

its objection.*°”

The Respondent further submits that, even if the Tribunal considers that the foregoing is
not sufficient and that some additional analysis is necessary in terms of examining the
economic effects of these taxes, the TVPEE and the Water Levy are, in any case, bona
fide Taxation Measures.*°* It says that the TVPEE applies to all energy production
facilities, both ordinary and renewable, and that renewables generators are not entitled to
preferential treatment giving them tax benefits not accorded to others. In the case of the
Water Levy, it applies to all hydro plants. Further, the taxes do not discriminate against
RE producers (because, according to the Claimants, these cannot shift the burden to
consumers), nor is it a disguised tariff cut, as the cost of the tax is remunerated to these

producers through their remuneration under the post-2014 regulatory regime.

In support of its arguments that the TVPEE and the Water Levy are bona fide tax

measures of general application the Respondent contends that the focus should be on the

355 Resp. C-Mem. { 6; R-0030, Law No. 15/2012, of 27 December 2012, regarding fiscal measures for energy
sustainability, Articles 4 and 29.

356 Resp. C-Mem. {{{] 168-207 and 222-245.

357 Resp. C-Mem. {| 6, Resp. Skeleton {ff 8-10.

358 See ¢.g., Resp. Skeleton { 9; Respondent’s oral opening at Day 1/6-17.

124

379.

380.

381.

legal operation and not the economic effect of a measures, citing the award in Encana
Corporation v Ecuador.*® It is also said that the European Commission has confirmed

the legality of the TVPEE under European Law.

The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that Article 21 ECT applies only to bona fide Taxation Measures.
They say that the Respondent cannot avoid liability by framing a measure as a tax and
that the mere labelling of the measures as taxes does not automatically mean that the
carve-out of Article 21 of the ECT applies.* Therefore, the Tribunal only needs to
decide whether the TVPEE and the Water Levy are more consistent with bona fide taxes
or measures implemented under the guise of taxation as part of a scheme to deprive the
Claimants of the rights they were granted under the Special Regime.**! The Claimants
contend, based on the findings of the Yukos tribunal that “there is prima facie evidence
that the 7% levy and the Water Levy are arbitrary and discriminatory and that the
Tribunal must draw inferences in favour of the Claimants, in the same way that the

tribunal did in Yukos.>

The Claimants argue that the most obvious evidence that the TVPEE and the Water Levy
were not bona fide measures is that the money raised by these taxes went from the
electricity producers to the State budget only to be returned in the same amount to the
electricity system. The intermediate step via the State budget was so that the measures

could be labelled as a tax and not a tariff cut. 3

Further, the Claimants submit that numerous other factors support their position: (i) the
Minister for Energy stated that the Respondent applied the taxes as a way to reduce the

premium for RE installations;*™ (ii) the taxes are discriminatory and contrary to its

3° RL-0027, Encana Corporation v Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3481, Award, 3 February 2006.
36 Cl, Reply #9 152-160; Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/244-246.

361 Cl, Reply (¥{ 147 and 167.

382 Cl. Reply { 171.

363 Cl, Reply 173; C-0019, Law 15/2012 of 27 December 2012, Additional provision two.

364 Cl, Skeleton { 9; C-0108, Patricia Carmona & Javier Mesones, Interview with the Minister of Industry, La Gaceta,
14 October 2012.

125

382.

383.

environmental protection purpose because (a) the TVPEE discriminates against RE
installations as opposed to conventional generators, which could pass some of the
additional cost imposed by the TVPEE to the end consumers, and (b) the Water Levy
targeted the cleanest form of clean electricity for the alleged purpose of protecting the
environment when the funds collected were intended to cover the Respondent’s Tariff
Deficit;>® and (iii) the taxes were two of other measures implemented by the Respondent
as part of a scheme to deprive the Claimants of their rights under the Special Regime.*®
In this last respect, consistent with Quasar de Valors v Russia, the Tribunal must engage
in a comprehensive factual assessment and, likewise with respect to RosInvest v Russia,
consider the Respondent’s measures in their totality including as to the cumulative effect

on the Claimants.**”

As to their discriminatory nature, the Claimants say that the two measures are unrelated
to their purported rationale to benefit the environment. To the contrary, while introducing
Law 15/2012 with a preamble referring to support to the environment and the
environmental policy of the EU, the measures constitute a cut to the FIT, which had been
specifically designed to increase investment in the RE sector in Spain. The Regulatory
Dossier*®* prepared in connection with adoption of the Law shows that Spain did not
consider these effects. The Law actually has the opposite effect and the law maker does
not address this and nor does it envisage alternatives, showing that Spain’s true purpose

was not to introduce an environmental measure but to implement a disguised tariff cut.*”

Finally, the Claimants argue that the Respondent’s characterisation of the TVPEE and
the Water Levy as a tax under its internal law is not determinative as to whether the

taxation carve-out of Article 21 ECT applies.*”” The TVPEE and the Water Levy were

365 Cl. Reply (Vf 185-186; Cl. Skeleton | 10.

366 Cl. Reply { 209.

361 CL-0128, Renta 4 8.V.S.A, Ahorro Corporacion Emergentes F.1., Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A., Orgor de Valores
SICAV S.A., GBI 9000 SICAV S.A., ALOS 34 S.L v The Russian Federation, SCC No. 24/2007, Award, 20 July 2012,
4G 181 and 184-185.

368 C0226, Regulatory Dossier, Law 15/2012, tax measures for energy sustainability, Memoria p. 13.

3 Cl. Reply #4 192-206.

3 Cl, Reply (¥f 221 and 228.

126

intentionally framed as taxes under Spanish law to breach the Respondent’s
commitments to the Claimants without incurring liability under the ECT. Even if these
taxes could fall within the definition of taxes in international law or EU Law, this does
not mean that the measures are bona fide because they were used as a backdoor tariff cut

targeting RE installations.*”!

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

384. Pursuant to Article 21(1) and (7) ECT, in relevant part:

(1) “Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this Treaty shall
create rights or impose obligations with respect to Taxation Measures of
the Contracting Parties. In the event of any inconsistency between this
Article and any other provision of the Treaty, this Article shall prevail to
the extent of the inconsistency.

(7) For the purposes of this Article:
(a) The term ‘Taxation Measure’ includes:

(i) any provision relating to taxes of the domestic law of the
Contracting Party or of a political subdivision thereof or a local
authority therein; and

(ii) any provision relating to taxes of any convention for the avoidance
of double taxation or of any other international agreement or
arrangement by which the Contracting Party is bound.

(b) There shall be regarded as taxes on income or on capital all taxes

imposed on total income, on total capital or on elements of income or

of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation of property, taxes

on estates, inheritances and gifts, or substantially similar taxes, taxes on

the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as

taxes on capital appreciation.”

385. Ona plain reading of the wording of Articles 4-11 and 29 of Law 15/2012, the TVPEE
and the Water Levy appear to fall within the broad definition of Taxation Measures at

Article 21(7), being in each case a “provision relating to taxes of the domestic law of the

31 Cl. Reply (¥ 222-227.

127

Contracting Party.” The Spanish Constitutional Court, in a judgment dated 6 November
2014, ruled on the constitutionality of the TVPEE,*”” and the Tribunal has no basis for
considering it anything other than a valid tax as a matter of Spanish law. The same
conclusion applies so far as concerns the Water Levy. Indeed, this appears to be largely
accepted by the Claimants which, as noted above, contend that the Respondent’s
characterisation of a given measure as a tax within its domestic law cannot be

determinative for the purposes of Article 21.

386. The Tribunal also accepts the Respondent’s position that the TVPEE and the Water Levy
would fall within the descriptions of taxation measures or matters of taxation as contained
in cases such as EnCana v Ecuador and Burlington v Ecuador, i.e. these are measures
established by law, imposing an obligation on a class of people to pay money to the State
for public purposes. Again, this was not seriously challenged by the Claimants (subject
to their point that the money is paid straight back from the State budget to the SES), and

they portrayed these submissions of the Respondent as irrelevant.*”*

387. Instead, the Claimants have portrayed the key issue for the Tribunal as being to determine
whether the TVPEE and the Water Levy are bona fide taxes or, on the contrary, measures
implemented under the guise of taxation: if they are the latter, they cannot be Taxation

Measures for the purposes of the Article 21 exclusion.*”+

388. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ position on the correct interpretation of Taxation
Measures under Article 21 is not as clear cut as might at first sight appear. Through
Articles 21(3) and (5), the ECT Parties included specific adaptations or exceptions to the
exclusion effected by Article 21(1) with respect to Articles 10(2) and (7) and Article 13
(expropriation), and yet there is no equivalent with respect to Article 10(1). It could
readily be said that Article 21(1) establishes a general exclusion for the defined Taxation

Measures, subject only to certain specified exceptions dealing (inter alia) with arbitrary

72 Resp. C-Mem. {| 179-181, referring to R-0043, Judgment 183/2014 of 6 November 2014 issued by the
Constitutional Court Plenary in appeal number 1780-2013 with regard to articles 4, 5 and 8 of Law No. 15/2012 (and
other regulations).

373 Cl. Reply §¥f 223-225.
374 Cl. Reply 9 147, 221 and 228.

128

or discriminatory conduct in limited scenarios such as expropriation, and that if the ECT
Parties had wished to make an exception for Article 10(1) with respect to Taxation
Measures that were alleged not to be bona fide (which could have the effect of allowing
a multiplicity of claims wherever investors were dissatisfied with Taxation Measures),

they would have done so.*”>

389. However, as was also concluded by the tribunal in Eiser with respect to the TVPEE,*”°
the Tribunal does not consider that it needs to decide the issue of whether Article 21(1)
only excludes bona fide Taxation Measures. It considers that the Claimants have not
established, whether prima facie or otherwise,*”” that the TVPEE and the Water Levy
were made in bad faith and were “part of a scheme to deprive the Claimants of the rights

they were granted under RD 661/2007.”>"8

390. | The Claimants’ position is that the TVPEE and the Water Levy are disguised tariff cuts.
Yet this alone would not be sufficient for their case as the measures have been formulated
in domestic legislation as “taxes”, a designation that the Claimants have been unable
successfully to challenge by reference to domestic law or to criteria suggested in other
investment treaty cases, so the Claimants’ attempts at re-characterisation alone could not
result in the TVPEE and the Water Levy falling outside the broad definition of
“provision{[s] relating to taxes of the domestic law of the Contracting Party.” Hence, the
Claimants’ case goes further, and it is said that Spain was looking to “circumvent the
stabilisation provision in RD 661/2007” in circumstances where it “was fully aware that
adverse changes to existing investments made under RD 661/2007 had provoked claims
from foreign investors enforcing their rights under the ECT’, that Spain had retained

legal advice and would have been aware of the Article 21 exclusion, such that: “The

315 Cf. Cl. Reply 49] 159 and 215, referring to CL-0124, Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v The Russian
Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227, Final Award of 18 July 2014 {fj 1407 and 1433. It is noted that the alleged facts
that the tribunal was considering in Yukos are in no way analogous to those alleged in these proceedings.

9 CL-0170, Eiser, | 269.
577 Cf. Cl. Reply 171.
58 Cl. Reply (4 169 and 184.

129

inference must be that the 7% Levy and the Water Levy were framed as taxes with the

purpose of avoiding liability for breaching investors’ rights under the ECT.”>”

391. In circumstances where, just seven months later, Spain did replace the remuneration
regime of RD 661/2007 through the adoption of RDL 9/2013 (in plain breach of Article
10(1) on the Claimants’ case), this series of contentions is far from convincing, including
because, on the Claimants’ approach, the Respondent in drawing up Law 15/2012 would
presumably also have been advised of the requirements of good faith performance of its
ECT obligations and the risk of ECT claims if it failed to act in good faith. Further,
although the TVPEE appears to have been expected to have a greater impact on the RE
sector, it nonetheless was a tax imposed on the Ordinary Regime also, and the Claimants’
evidence does not demonstrate that the TVPEE was designed to target RE installations
as opposed to being a measure that was expected to have a greater impact on such
installations.**° As to the Water Levy, the Claimants may consider that “it makes no sense
that a law ostensibly designed for the improvement of the environment would introduce
a tax solely on the use of water for the purpose of generating electricity and nothing

else” ,*8! but this does not come close to pointing to, let alone establishing, bad faith.

392. There is no witness or documentary evidence to support a finding that the TVPEE and/or
‘Water Levy were disguised as taxes with a view to defeating potential ECT claims.
Moreover, the decisions of the Spanish Supreme Court on changes to the Special Regime

would have encouraged the Respondent to consider that there was no “stabilisation
provision” in RD 661/2007 (see Section IV.D above), and it has not been demonstrated
that the Respondent considered that a tariff cut would have been a breach of the ECT
(whereas it is implicit in the Claimants’ contentions that the Respondent must have
believed this). The Claimants rely on an October 2012 statement by the former Minister
of Energy that: “We could have opted for a reduction in premiums but we opted for the

fiscal measures. There were distinct alternatives on the table ... .”*** But this does not

59 Cl. Reply {¥ 181-183.
380 Cf, Cl. Reply {if 197-200.
381 Cf. Cl. Reply 205.

382 Cl. Reply 180; C-0108, Patricia Carmona & Javier Mesones, Interview with the Minister of Industry, La Gaceta,
14 October 2012.

130

393.

come close to evidencing bad faith: there is no suggestion here that the Minister
considered that a reduction in payments would not have been permissible under the ECT,
while the open reference to the reduction in premiums is inconsistent with there being a

motive to dissimulate.

The Tribunal concludes that the case that the TVPEE and/or Water Levy were not bona
fide Taxation Measures has not been made out, and that Article 21(1) ECT applies. It
follows that Article 10(1) does not impose any obligations with respect to the TVPEE
and/or Water Levy, and that therefore there is no basis for any Article 10(1) claim in

relation thereto.

VI. LIABILITY

394.

395.

383

 

The Claimants submit that the Respondent has, through the acts and omissions of its
organs as well as agencies and entities under its direction and control, taken various
wrongful measures in breach of Article 10(1) ECT that have caused substantial losses
to the Claimants’ investments in Spain. These allegedly wrongful acts include but are
not limited to RDL 2/2013, RDL 9/2013, Law 24/2013, RD 413/2014 and the June 2014
Order (the “Disputed Measures”).***

The Claimants’ case is that the Respondent has breached Article 10(1) of the ECT by:

1) _ failing to create and maintain “stable, equitable, favourable and transparent”

investment conditions;

2) failing to afford the Claimants “fair and equitable” treatment, by (a) frustrating
RWE’s legitimate expectations, (b) acting non-transparently, and/or (c)

employing unreasonable, arbitrary and disproportionate measures;

1. Mem. { 425. The Disputed Measures as defined in the Claimants’ Memorial include Law 15/2012. Given that

the Tribunal has found that it lacks jurisdiction over the claims with respect to Law 15/2012, the Tribunal has excluded
this from the definition.

131

3) impairing the investments through “unreasonable or discriminatory measures”;

and

4) failing to observe obligations entered into with RWE or its investments

(violation of the Umbrella Clause).*8+

A. APPLICABLE LAW

396. Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law
as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the
Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international
law as may be applicable.”

397. ECT Article 26(6) provides:

“A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and principles of
international law.”>*>

398. As follows from the above, the Tribunal will decide the issues in dispute in accordance
with the ECT and applicable rules and principles of international law. Insofar as
reference to any other source of law is mandated by the ECT or other applicable rules

and principles of international law, the Tribunal will refer to any other such source.

B. ATTRIBUTION AND AUTHORISATION

399, The Claimants submit that the International Law Commission’s 2001 Articles on the
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (the “ILC 2001 Articles”)
are applicable to this case, because the ECT does not contain any specific provisions

dealing with issues of attribution.*®° The Tribunal accepts that, insofar as the ILC 2001

384 Cl. Mem. ] 428; Cl. Skeleton { 48.
385 €.0001, Energy Charter Treaty (hereinafter ECT”), Art. 26(6).

386 Cl. Mem. { 410; CL-0018, International Law Commission's Articles on the Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts, Annex to General Assembly Resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, and corrected by

132

Articles reflect customary international law, they may fall to be applied under ECT

Article 26(6).

400. Pursuant to Articles 4-5 and 8 of the ILC 2001 Articles, Spain is responsible for the acts
or omissions of: its organs, entities or persons exercising elements of governmental

authority, and entities or persons that Spain directs or controls, as follows:
a) Article 4 of the ILC 2001 Articles provides:

“1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State
under international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive,
judicial or any other functions, whatever position it holds in the organization
of the State, and whatever its character as an organ of the central
government or of a territorial unit of the State.

2. An organ includes any person or entity which has that status in
accordance with the internal law of the State.”357

b

Article 5 of the ILC 2001 Articles provides:

“The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under
Article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise
elements of the governmental authority shall be considered an act of the
State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that
capacity in the particular instance.”***

c

Article 8 of the ILC 2001 Articles provides:

“The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of
a State under international law if the person or group of persons is in fact
acting on the instructions of, or under the direction or control of, that State
in carrying out the conduct.”?°?

document A/56/49 (Vol. I) Corr. 4 (2002) (hereinafter the “ILC 2001 Articles”). See also, CL-0019, Siemens A.G. v
The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Award of 6 February 2007 {350 (noting that “[t]he Draft Articles
are currently considered to reflect most accurately customary international law on State responsibility.””)

387 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 4.
388 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 5.
38° CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 8.

133

401. According to the Claimants, in this case, Spain’s organs are: “(i) the executive — i.e. the
Spanish Government (including the Ministry, the Secretary of State for Energy and,
more generally, all present and former Ministers and Deputy Ministers of the Spanish
Government) including, inter alia, those who agreed and published the July 2010
Agreement and who passed Law 15/2012, RDL 2/2013, RDL 9/2013, RD 413/2014 and
the June 2014 Order; and (ii) the legislature ("las Cortes"), comprising the Congress
of Deputies and the Senate, which approved Law 15/2012 and Law 24/2013.”*° It is
plainly correct that Spain’s executive and legislature constitute organs of the State.
Additionally, it is contended that the Instituto para la Diversificacién y Ahorro de la
Energia (the “IDAE”)**! and InvestinSpain*” also qualify as organs of the State, or that
the Respondent is responsible for their conduct on the basis of Article 8 of the ILC 2001
Articles.*°? The Respondent does not challenge these contentions, and the Tribunal
accepts that in general terms the acts of IDAE and InvestinSpain in this case are

attributable to the Respondent.

402. The Claimants also contend that, pursuant to Article 5 of the ILC 2001 Articles, the
Respondent is responsible for the acts or omissions of the CNE — because the CNE is
controlled by the Ministry and empowered to exercise elements of governmental
authority which leads to its conduct being attributable to Spain.**+ The Respondent has

not expressly challenged this, although the specific functions of the CNE must be borne

39 Cl. Mem. 1416.

9! IDAE is a public entity with its own legal personality but it reports directly to the Ministry.

*InvestinSpain is a private company controlled directly by the Spanish Government. It was established by the
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Competitiveness through the Secretariat of State for Trade. The Claimants note
that although InvestinSpain formally has a separate legal personality under Spanish law, this is not conclusive as a
matter of international law given that an entity that has a formal separate personality may still be an organ of a State
in international law. C-0059, InvestinSpain website, “About Us”.
393 Cl. Mem. {ff 417-420. CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 8.

34 Cl. Mem. {ff 421-422. CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 5. The CNE is controlled by the Ministry and has the
power to issue rules that are 2 it can issue for the devel and of royal decrees
and ministerial orders that are published in the Spanish Gazette. It provides recommendations to the Ministry on
regulations and price setting measures. It also issued the monthly liquidations by which Spain's electricity distributors
were to market 5 C-0159,  “P ; CNE website, available at
<www.cne.es/cne/contenido.jsp?id_nodo=3& & & key word=&auditoria=F>.

 

 

 

134

in mind in considering any issue of attribution. The CNE is a regulatory authority, and

its powers at the material times were, so far as is relevant, broadly advisory in nature.*”>

C. ARTICLE 10(1) OF THE ECT: ISSUES OF INTERPRETATION WITH RESPECT TO STABLE
CONDITIONS AND LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS

403. Although there are various different elements to the Claimants’ case on breach of Article
10(1), they have placed the greatest weight on the claims based on alleged legitimate
expectations and an alleged failure to provide stable investment conditions. The
Tribunal considers these elements of the Claimants’ case first, noting that there is some
overlap in the way that these two elements have been formulated and argued by the
Parties, as well as in how the concepts of legitimate expectations and stability have been
analysed in many of the prior cases. As with respect to the issues of jurisdiction, and
with respect to the further issues on liability, the Tribunal has considered not only the
positions of the Parties as summarised below, but also the numerous detailed arguments
made in their written submissions and authorities submitted. To the extent that these
arguments are not referred to expressly, they have been subsumed into the Tribunal’s

analysis.

(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

404. The Claimants’ starting point is that the ECT falls to be interpreted by reference to
Articles 31 and 32 VCLT.*” In particular, the ECT shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning given to its terms in their context and in the light

of the ECT's object and purpose.”

385 As noted in C-0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), p. 30: “The CNE (Comisién Nacional de Energia) was created
by the Hydrocarbons Law (Law 34/1998) and acts as the regulatory entity of the energy sector. The powers of CNE
are limited at present to consultation, participation, inspection, arbitration, and the provision of reports.”

39 Cl. Mem. 1390.

3°7 Cl. Mem. 4392.

135

405. The Claimants describe the ECT as the first multilateral investment treaty that contains
binding provisions on the promotion and protection of investments specifically in relation

to the energy sector,**

and they contend that the ECT provides for a standard of
protection above and beyond the typical investment treaty.*°? They emphasise that energy
investments are different from many other types of investment due to their capital
intensive nature and other factors. Relying for support on Article 2 of the ECT and the
1991 European Energy Charter, the Claimants say that this makes a stable, predictable

and transparent legal and regulatory framework a sine qua non for energy investments.1

406. By reference to the works of Professor Wilde and other sources, the Claimants say that,
under the ECT, a host State enjoys less regulatory freedom than under other investment
treaty regimes, and that various controls are placed on the State within the text of the
ECT. Hence, while the ECT recognises the legislative and regulatory authority of the
Contracting Parties in relation to matters of vital national interests, it also carefully
circumscribes that authority in favour of the investment-related obligations assumed by
those States under the ECT regarding the treatment to be accorded to foreign investors

and investments in the energy sector.*”!

407. It is the Claimants’ position that, as confirmed by the Blusun tribunal,*°? Article 10(1)

ECT establishes in its first sentence a free-standing commitment to ensure regulatory

stability, while any contrary interpretation would defeat the purpose of Article 10(1).4%

388 Cl. Mem. { 393; CL-0005, A. Konoplyanik & T. W. Wiilde, “Energy Charter Treaty and its Role in International
Energy” (2006) 24 Journal of Energy & Natural Resources Law 523, noting on p. 528 that the ECT “can be considered
as the multilateral investment treaty with the widest scope; it is distinct from all other bilateral treaties by the fact that
it is only applicable to energy — defined in a wide way.”

3° Cl. Mem., Section 12, Cl. Skeleton J 50.

400 Cl. Mem. 395-399. Also Cl. Mem. {{ 408, referring to CL-0007, Energy Charter Secretariat, “Decision of the
Energy Charter Conference, Subject: Road Map for the Modernization of the Energy Process”, Energy Charter
Secretariat, 24 November 2010, Area D, p. 6.

401 Cl, Mem. 4 407; Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/171-180.
402 Cl, PHB ¢ 18-19; CL-0187, Blusun, 1 319(1).
463 Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/171-175; Cl. PHB 4 17.

136

408. They also submit that the obligation to provide a stable regulatory framework is an

essential element of the Fair and Equitable Treatment (“FET”) standard,**

especially in
the context of the first sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT.* According to the
Claimants, even if it were found that the first sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT does
not contain a free-standing obligation to ensure regulatory stability, the FET standard

requires a Contracting Party to the ECT to maintain a stable regulatory framework.*°°

409. The Claimants say that investment treaty tribunals have typically looked at a number of
non-cumulative factors in identifying whether there has been a breach of the FET
standard including (i) breach of the investor’s reasonable and legitimate expectations
when the investment was made, (ii) whether the State failed to provide regulatory
stability, (iii) transparency, arbitrary or unreasonable conduct, and (v) whether the State’s
acts were disproportionate.“°’ They emphasise that the FET standard (ECT Article
10(1)), and the national treatment standard (Article 10(7)) are different standards of
investor protection under the ECT, and that it is not permissible under the Vienna

Convention to interpret the ECT as if these separate protections were the same.*°*

410. The Claimants say in particular that a “central feature of the State’s obligation to ensure
FET for investments is the general principle that the State must not frustrate a foreign

investor’s legitimate expectations on which that investor relied at the time it made its

44 CL-0053, Metalclad Corporation v The United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/97/1, Award of 30
August 200099: “Mexico failed to ensure a transparent and predictable framework for Metalclad’s business planning
and investment.” See also, CL-0038, CMS Gas Transmission Company v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/8, Award, 12 May 2005, (hereinafter “CMS, Award”), {| 274: “there can be no doubt...that a stable legal and
business environment is an essential element of fair and equitable treatment.” See also, CL-0025, Enron Creditors
Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v The Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/O1/3, Award, of 22 May 2007 (hereinafter “Enron”), {| 260: the arbitral tribunal considered that the
key element of the FET standard is a stable framework for investment. See also, CL-0039, LG&E Energy Corp.,
LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision
on Liability, 3 October 2006 (hereinafter “LG&E”), I] 124-125 and 131. See also, CL-0037, Occidental Exploration
and Production Company vy The Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, Final Award of 1 July 2004 (hereinafter
“Occidental’), J 183.

405 Cl, Mem. { 474: Cl. Reply 561.

496 Cl. PHB 4 20-21.

497 Cl. Mem. 441.

408 Cl, Reply 1 496.

 

137

investments.”*°? This does not mean that a “host State must freeze its regulatory regime”,

although they say that by entering the ECT “Spain accepted limitations on its power to

alter the regulatory framework applicable to the Claimants’ investments.”*'°

411. A particularly important element of legitimate expectations is said to be “the protection

from State action that threatens the stability of the legal and business framework upon
which an investor reasonably relied on making or maintaining its investments” 3"!
reference being made in this respect to CMS v Argentina, Occidental v Ecuador, LG&E
v Argentina, and PSEG v Turkey.*"? Their case is also that the legal framework of a State
relating to the investment can contribute to the creation of a legitimate expectation on the
investor. Such legal framework “typically consists of legislation and treaties, and

assurances contained in decrees, licences and similar executive assurances or

undertakings.”43

412. The Claimants emphasise that tribunals deciding cases under the ECT have held that

Article 10.1 of the ECT includes the protection of legitimate expectations, including the

Charanne and Eiser awards.*!*

49 Cl. Mem. | 456. See e.g., CL-0034, Saluka Investments B. V. v The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award
isdiction and Merits, 17 March 2006 (hereinafter “Saluka”) | 302; CL-0032, Técnicas Medioambientales

Tecmed S.A. v The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award, 29 May 2003 (hereinafter

“Tecmed”), { 154; and CL-0045, CME Czech Republic B. V. v The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 13

September 2001 {{ 611, finding a breach of the FET standard because of the host State’s “evisceration of the

arrangements in reliance upon which the foreign investor was induced to invest.”

410 Cl, Mem. 457. See also, the Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5, pp. 96-97.

411 Cl, Mem. 4 458.

4!2 Cl, Mem. {¥f 458-460; CL-0038, CMS, Award, | 274; CL-0037, Occidental, | 183; CL-0039, LG&E¥ 131; CL-

0050, PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v The Republic of Turkey, 1CSID

Case No. ARB/02/5, Award, 19 January 2007, (hereinafter “PSEG”), | 250.

413 Cl. Mem. § 462; CL-0031, R. Dolzer, “Fair and Equitable Treatment: Today's Contours” (2014) 12 Santa Clara

Journal of International Law 7, p. 22; CL-0025, Enron, {{f 264-266; CL-0039, LG&E, 99 130 and 133.

414 Cl, PHB 4] 26; CL-0051, Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award,

27 August 2008 (hereinafter “Plama”){ 178; CL-0073, Anatolie Stati, Gabriel Stati, Ascom Group S.A. and Terra Raf

Trans Trading Ltd v Republic of Kazakhstan, SCC Arbitration No. V116/2010, Award, 19 December 2013

(hereinafter, “Anatolie Stati’), | 1087, CL-0182, AES Corporation and Tau Power B.V. v Republic of Kazakhstan,

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/16, Award, 1 November 2013, { 291; CL-0173, Limited Liability Company Amto v Ukraine,

Arbitration No. 080/2005, Final Award, 26 March 2008 {| 99; CL-0094, Charanne, | 514; CL-0170, Eiser {| 382.

  

 

 

 

138

415 C|

416 C|
47 ¢]

413.

414.

415.

1.
1.
1.
1.

The Claimants contend that the appropriate test to evaluate the existence of legitimate
expectations was set out in the Micula case, saying that this concerned a similar factual
matrix of a long-term investment incentive scheme implemented through legislation in
order to induce investment.*!> On the basis of Micula, they say that to establish legitimate
expectations under Article 10.1 of the ECT it must be shown that: “(a) Spain made a
promise or assurance; (b) RWE relied on that promise or assurance as a matter of fact;

and (c) such reliance (and expectation) was reasonable.” The Micula test is said to be

consistent with Spain’s position.*!®

The Claimants also say that the ECT contains no relevant exceptions to Spain’s FET
obligations. The exception contained in Article 10(8) only applies to “energy technology
research and development’, which is not in dispute in this case. Likewise, the carve-out
of Article 9(4) is not applicable as it only relates to obligations on Contracting Parties to
promote conditions enabling access to a Contracting Party’s capital market.*!? The
Claimants note that the exception established by Article 24(2) with respect to measures
“necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health” does not apply to Article
10(1) and other provisions of Part III of the ECT, and say that investor protection was

therefore prioritised over such matters.*!®

The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the main objectives of the ECT are: (i) non-discrimination

and (ii) fostering market-oriented price formation,*!” and not the unconditional protection
of foreign investors through the FET standard or National Treatment.*?° It says that the

protection for investments must be understood in the context of the ECT, and that the

PHB { 32; CL-0052, Micula 668.
PHB {ff 34-35.
Reply If 500-502.

418 Cl, PHB {ff 97-99; Transcript Day 1, pp. 183-189.
419 Resp. C-Mem. ff 848-850; Rej. {if 932 and 936.
420 Resp. Rej. 953.

139

Claimants fail to recognise the true objectives and principles established in the European

Energy Charter:*7!

“to promote the development of an efficient energy market throughout
Europe, and a better functioning global market, in both cases based on the
principle of non-discrimination and on market-oriented price formation,
taking due account of environmental concerns.”

416. In the Respondent’s view, these objectives are inconsistent with maintaining over-
remuneration that distorts the free market.‘ It also refers to a number of cases in support

of the proposition that the FET standard under the ECT requires a balancing exercise
between the investor’s interests and the public interest that guides the State’s action.*74

> 425

417. The Respondent portrays the first sentence of Article 10(1) as “soft law although it

does not dispute the existence of some form of stability obligation arising under Article
10(1) as part of the commitment to accord FET.*”° In this respect, the Respondent refers
to the statement in Plama Consortium v Bulgaria that “stable and equitable conditions
are clearly part of the fair and equitable treatment standard under the ECT’, but

emphasises that this does not mean that the Claimants have the benefit of a stabilisation

clause.*”7

418. According to the Respondent, in the absence of a specific commitment to stability, an

investor cannot have an expectation that a regulatory framework will not change.*?8 For

421 Resp. Rej. 935.
“22 RL-0006, European Energy Charter, Title I “Objectives.” Emphasis added by the Respondent.

23 Resp. Skeleton { 42, referring to RL-0048, Electrabel S.A. v Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/19, Award, 25
November 2015 | 165 (hereinafter “Electrabel, Award”), and other cas

4 Resp. Rej. 935.
+25 Resp. C-Mem. | 852.
26 Eg. Resp. C-Mem. ff 924-934.

+27 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 926-928, referring to RL-0034, Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, (CSID Case
No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008 (hereinafter “Plama”) 173 and also RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, 1]
9,3.29-30.

+28 Resp. C-Mem. { 862; Rej. 1 945.

 

140

this proposition, it relies inter alia on Plama*”? and AES Summit v Hungary.**° According
to the Respondent, while investors may reasonably and legitimately expect a host
Country to provide them with stable conditions for their investment, the doctrine and
cases regarding the stable conditions referred to by the ECT allow the adoption of
reasonable and proportionate macroeconomic control measures by the host State,
provided that they are motivated by a reasonable cause.**! The Respondent maintains
that this interpretation has been established in the same two cases (Plama, ** and AES***)

and also in Mamidoil v Albania,*** and Charanne v Spain. 435

419. The Respondent also submits that, in accordance with the literal wording of Article 10(1)
and the cases that have applied the ECT, it is wrong to say that the ECT standard of
providing stable conditions includes the obligation to establish and maintain a

“predictable” regulatory framework.**°

420. In applying the ECT to the circumstances of the current case, the Respondent relies on

the tribunal’s reasoning in Charanne that:

“To convert a regulatory standard into a specific commitment of the state,
by the limited character of the persons who may be affected, would
constitute an excessive limitation on power of states to regulate the
economy in accordance with the public interest.

 

[...] in the absence of a specific commitment toward stability, an investor
cannot have a legitimate expectation that a regulatory framework such as
that at issue in this arbitration is to not be modified at any time to adapt to
the needs of the market and to the public interest.’*"

2° RL-0034, Plama, 4 219.

80 RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, upheld by the RL-0042, AES Summit Decision of the ad hoc Committee for
Annulment, 29 June 2012 (“AES Summit, Annulment Decision”) { 95. See also, the Respondent’s Comments of 22
March 2018 on RL-0089, Wirtgen.

+1 Resp. C-Mem. ff 926-929.

82 RL-0034, Plama, 219.

83 RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, {| 9.3.29 and 9.3.30.

+4 RL-0046, Mamidoil Jetoil Greek Petroleum Products Societe Anonyme S.A. v The Republic of Albania, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/11/24, Award, 30 March 2015 (hereinafter “Mamidoil”), {{ 617-618.

85 RL-0049, Charanne, p. 499.
436 Resp. Rej. 995.
+37 Resp. Rej. 947; RL-0049- Charanne, {9 493 and 510. Emphasis added by the Respondent.

 

141

421.

422.

42

3.

The Respondent argues that the ECT does not prevent justified macroeconomic control
measures from being adopted,*** and it characterises the Claimants as attempting to use
the ECT as an insurance policy against situations of crisis, such that the Claimants are
even more protected than the national investors of Spain.** It also says that Micula v

Romania is not relevant as it is not an ECT case.*°

The Respondent also emphasises the importance of due diligence in the context of
legitimate expectations, saying that, to establish whether the FET standard was breached,
the Arbitral Tribunal must analyse the knowledge of the investor about the general
regulatory framework at the time of the investment, or rather the aspects that its
knowledge should have covered.**" It says that the cases have established that, at the time

of the investment, the investor must know and understand the regulatory framework, how

it is applied, and how it affects an investment.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

Pursuant to Article 10(1) ECT:

“Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent
conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make Investments
in its Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all
times to Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and
equitable treatment. Such Investments shall also enjoy the most constant
protection and security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management, maintenance,
use, enjoyment or disposal. In no case shall such Investments be accorded
treatment less favourable than that required by international law, including
treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it
has entered into with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor of any
other Contracting Party.”

+38 Resp. C-Mem. ff 863-878.

89 Resp. Rej. 954.

+40 Resp. Rej. 965.

+41 Resp. C-Mem. 890. See also, Resp. PHB 4 31-33.

+2 Resp. C-Mem. | 891; RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, | 7.78; RL-0049, Charanne, If 495 and 505.

142

427.

This provision of course falls to be interpreted in accordance with the rules set out at

Articles 31-32 of the Vienna Convention.

The first sentence of Article 10(1)

The first sentence of Article 10(1) establishes, through the use of the word “shall”, certain
obligations on the Contracting Parties concerned with the conditions for Investors to
make Investments. The formula “make Investments” is defined in Article 1(8) ECT as
“establishing new Investments, acquiring all or part of existing Investments or moving

into different fields of Investment Activity.”

It follows that although the first sentence of Article 10(1) is cast in mandatory terms,
when read in isolation, it is concerned only with the conditions in which the Investment
is made, as opposed to establishing any ongoing obligation of stability. While the
Claimants rely on the Blusun case to support the (correct) proposition that the first
sentence of Article 10(1) is not hortatory in nature,*#* the conclusion of the Blusun

tribunal with respect to this provision was merely as follows:

“The requirement to ‘encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make
Investments in its Area’ is not limited to the initial making of the investment
but includes subsequent extension of the investment as well as changes of
form.
This Tribunal agrees, noting that this conclusion does not suggest that the first sentence
of Article 10(1) is concerned with ongoing protection once the Investment has been made,
other than in the limited sense of where the Investment is being added to or undergoing a

change in form.*4°

8 Cf Cl. PHB 17.
+4 Cl, PHB {ff 18-19; CL-0187, Blusun, { 319(1).
+45 CL-0187, Blusun, { 319(2).

“4 Arbitrator Joubin-Bret clarifies her views that the first sentence of Article 10(1) addresses the conditions in which
an Investment is being made or is in the making, typically covering the pre-establishment period, during which the

State can undergo various types of obligations, ranging from the one at is

ue in the current case to a commitment to

  

provide national and most favoured nation treatment, including during this phase of the investment.

143

428. However, the second sentence of Article 10(1) then provides that: “Such conditions [i.e.
the “stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for Investors of other
Contracting Parties to make Investments in its Area”] shall include a commitment to
accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and
equitable treatment.” It is this second sentence that is concerned with ongoing protection
of the Investment once it has been made (as is the case with the remaining sentences of
Article 10(1)), which is made all the more clear by the use in the second sentence of the

formula “at all times.”

429. Reading the two sentences together, the Tribunal considers that there is an obligation on
the host State to ensure ongoing regulatory stability, but only to the extent that this forms
part of the commitment to accord FET established in the second of the two sentences and,
by that second sentence, embedded into the first. The Tribunal notes that the first sentence
of Article 10(1) establishes an obligation with respect to the Investor, whereas the second
sentence is concerned with treatment of the Investment. However, that does not detract
from its conclusion that, on the facts of this case, the first sentence of Article 10(1) does
not add materially to the protection accorded by the FET standard: insofar as the first
sentence may be relevant to the ongoing treatment of an Investment, it is only to the extent
that an ongoing commitment to FET is embedded by the second sentence of 10.1 into the

first sentence.

430. This interpretation is consistent with the object and purpose of the ECT, considered
further below.
b. The second sentence of Article 10(1): FET

431. Although there is some agreement between the Parties as to the basic elements that may
be engaged by the commitment to accord FET under the second sentence of Article

10(1),*47 there is disagreement as to the precise nature and scope of the elements identified

+47 The Respondent relies upon passages in cases that treat the protection of legitimate expectations and the concept
of stability as elements of the FET standard. E.g. Resp. PHB {| 15 and 31.

144

by the Claimants, including as to (i) protection of the Investor’s reasonable and legitimate

expectations, and (ii) regulatory stability.“*

432. In their respective interpretations of the FET standard under Article 10(1), both Parties
have taken as their starting point, and focused extensively on, the object and purpose of

the ECT.**? Pursuant to Article 2 ECT, headed “Purpose of the Treaty”:

“This Treaty establishes a legal framework in order to promote long-term
cooperation in the energy field, based on complementarities and mutual
benefits, in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Charter.”

433. For further detail on the broad goal of promotion of long-term cooperation in the energy
field, reference must thus be made to the European Energy Charter. This Charter is also
referred to in the Preamble to the ECT, including in the expression of the desire “to place
the commitments contained in that Charter on a secure and binding international legal
basis” and the desire “to establish the structural framework required to implement the

principles enunciated in the European Energy Charter.”
434. The “Objectives” of the European Energy Charter are set out under its Title I. It is stated:

“Within the framework of State sovereignty and sovereign rights over
energy resources and in a spirit of political and economic cooperation, they
undertake to promote the development of an efficient energy market
throughout Europe, and a better functioning global market, in both cases
based on the principle of non-discrimination and on market-oriented price
formation, taking due account of environmental concerns. They are
determined to create a climate favourable to the operation of enterprises and
to the flow of investments and technologies by implementing market
principles in the field of energy.”

435. As to the action to be taken in accordance with those principles, paragraph 2 of Title I
refers to “Cooperation in the energy field’, which is to entail amongst other matters
“formulation of stable and transparent legal frameworks creating conditions for the

development of energy resources.”

+8 Cl. Mem. 1.441.
+9 Cl, Mem. 4{f 393-409; Resp. CM 4 844-878.

145

436.

437.

438.

Title II of the Charter, “Jmplementation”’, lists out the coordinated action to be taken to
achieve the objectives set out under Title I. At paragraph 4, under the heading “Promotion

and protection of investments’, it is stated:

“In order to promote the international flow of investments, the signatories
will at national level provide for a stable, transparent legal framework for
foreign investments, in conformity with the relevant international laws and
rules on investment and trade.

They affirm that it is important for the signatory States to negotiate and
ratify legally binding agreements on promotion and protection of
investments which ensure a high level of legal security and enable the use
of investment risk guarantee schemes.

Moreover, the signatories will guarantee the right to repatriate profits or
other payments relating to an investment and to obtain or use the convertible
currency needed.

They also recognise the importance of the avoidance of double taxation to

foster private investment.”
The Claimants have focused on references in the above to the concepts of stability and
transparency, whilst the Respondent has emphasised the references to the principle of

non-discrimination and market-oriented price formation.

In light of Article 2 ECT, both sets of references are important for the current purposes
of interpretation, but both are far from decisive. The references in Title I to non-
discrimination and market-oriented price formation are not exclusively concerned with
investment, and it is plain from the face of the ECT that its investment provisions,
including Article 10(1), are in no sense confined to establishing protection against
discrimination or focused on protecting market-oriented price formation. As to the
references in Titles I and II to a stable and transparent legal framework, these are focused
on establishment at the national level as opposed to the acceptance of international legal
obligations owed to Investors, whilst the reference in Title II to the legal framework to be
established at the national level is to “conformity with the relevant international laws and

rules on investment and trade.” This raises the question as to what such international laws
and rules are, supporting reference by the interpreter most obviously to customary
international law.

146

439. In the view of the Tribunal, the objects and purposes of the ECT are therefore more
balanced than either Party allows for, and it approaches the interpretation of Article 10(1)
on that basis. The Tribunal notes that, to support their general contentions on the ECT,
both Parties have also referred to the Reader’s Guide to the ECT that has been published
by the ECT Secretariat. This Guide does not purport to offer any definitive interpretation
of the Treaty’s provisions. It is, on its face, a guide, nothing more, and the Tribunal

considers it of little assistance in the current exercise of interpretation.

440. As to the ordinary meaning of the commitment to accord FET under Article 10(1), the
Tribunal considers that reference to dictionary definitions scarcely helps it in interpreting
the formula “fair and equitable.” The terms “fair” and “equitable” are not in any event
particularly difficult to understand as a matter of ordinary meaning: the difficulty, as is
very well-known, is how and where to draw the line between what is fair / unfair,
equitable / inequitable, in particular in the context of a State’s adoption of regulations of
general application. Both Parties have referred to multiple cases in order to assist the
Tribunal in this respect, and the Tribunal has paid particular attention to those cases
concerning specifically Article 10(1) ECT. It is of course the case that the correct
interpretation of any given FET standard will be the result of attention to the specific
wording, in context, and in light of the object and purpose of the given treaty; and hence
the reasoning in awards concerning FET provisions in other treaties may well be of less

persuasive value.

441. Both Parties have referred the Tribunal to the award in the Blusun case,*°° where the
tribunal’s conclusions as to the FET commitment in Article 10(1) and its application in

the context of a State’s regulatory acts were stated as follows:

“... the core commitment is that in the second sentence, expressly included
in the first, ‘to accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other
Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment’ (emphasis added). This
incorporates the fair and equitable treatment standard under customary
international law and as applied by tribunals.

450 Eg, Cl. PHB {J 45-51; Respondent’s Application of 9 March 2018, by which it sought leave to introduce the case
onto the record (Application refused as the case was already on the record).

147

442.

443.

444,

That standard preserves the regulatory authority of the host state to make
and change its laws and regulations to adapt to changing needs, including
fiscal needs, subject to respect for specific commitments made.

 

In the absence of a specific commitment, the state has no obligation to grant
subsidies such as feed-in tariffs, or to maintain them unchanged once
granted. But if they are lawfully granted, and if it becomes necessary to
modify them, this should be done in a manner which is not disproportionate
to the aim of the legislative amendment, and should have due regard to the
reasonable reliance interests of recipients who may have committed
substantial resources on the basis of the earlier regime.”*°!
The Tribunal considers this to be a useful reference point for its own consideration of the
FET standard under Article 10(1), and notes that the Claimants expressly rely on this

paragraph of the Blusun Award.*°?

The conclusion of the Blusun tribunal is that the second sentence of Article 10(1)
incorporates the fair and equitable treatment standard under customary international law.
There is no reference to international law in this second sentence, although the conclusion
that the FET standard was intended to be tied back to customary international law is
consistent with the reference in Title II, paragraph 4, of the European Energy Charter to

“conformity with the relevant international laws and rules on investment.”*?

There is a reference to “international law, including treaty obligations” in the fourth
sentence of Article 10(1), i.e. an important part of the relevant context, and this raises a
question as to whether the inclusion of the FET standard would serve any purpose if all
that was intended was treatment in accordance with customary international law: that
purpose appears to be achieved by the fourth sentence, which requires treatment no less
favourable than international law (including conventional law). At the same time,
however, Article 10(1) contains a number of different concepts that plainly overlap, so

only limited weight can be placed on this line of analysis.

451 CL-0187, Blusun, { 319(3)-(5), footnote omitted.
42. Cl, PHB 149.

453 At CL-0187, Blusun, | 319(3), reference is made to Plama Consortium Limited v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/24. {| 161-173, which is said to be to similar effect. It is not clear to this Tribunal that the award
in Plama supports a reference to customary international law.

148

445. As part of the relevant context, the Tribunal also considers Article 24(2) to be of
importance. The impact of this complex provision is that while, as a general rule, the
provisions of the Treaty do not preclude the adoption or enforcement of measures
“necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health’, the provisions of Part III of

the ECT — which includes Article 10(1) — are not included within that general rule.

446. While the Claimants have made the point that this may seem a very unusual policy

choice,***+

they did not explain and substantiate their position that under the ECT investor
protection was being prioritised over protection of human life etc.4° The Tribunal notes
that the drafters of Article 24(2) appear to have taken Article XX GATT as their starting
point, and the doctrine and cases with respect to Article XX may shed light on the
intention behind Article 24(2). However, the Tribunal was not referred to such materials.
It considers that the limitation of the general exception in Article 24(2) with respect to
human life etc is more readily comprehensible if the ECT Contracting Parties understood
themselves to be adopting a series of confined investment protections in Part III such that,
for example, a regulation adopted to protect human life would not be regarded as unfair
and inequitable unless it was arbitrary or discriminatory or in some other way contrary to

customary international law.

447. This line of analysis can only take matters so far, given that certain aspects of Part III do
go further than the requirements of customary international law, but the Tribunal is of the
view that Article 24(2) ECT militates against any expansive concept of FET standard
under Article 10(1) and supports an interpretative approach that, where a term in Article
10(1) can be seen as referable to customary international law, it is more likely that this is
what the Contracting Parties intended. The formula “fair and equitable treatment” was
not agreed to by the ECT Contracting Parties in a legal vacuum, but against a backdrop
where the formula had been used for many decades as a standard of investment protection
closely tied to customary international law and, consistent with the object and purpose of

the ECT as it appears from Title II, paragraph 4, of the European Energy Charter, the

454 Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/184; Cl. PHB 99.
+55. Cl, PHB 4] 97-99. See also, Claimants’ oral opening, Day 1/183-189.

149

Tribunal considers that the FET standard in Article 10(1) should be approached on that
bas

 

448. As to the regulatory authority of the host State, subject to respect for specific
commitments made, the Tribunal considers that in the usual course it would be neither
unfair nor inequitable within Article 10(1) for regulations to change over the course of a
given Investment as that is merely one expected facet of investment activity. Multiple
tribunals have come to similar conclusions, including those focused on the application of
Article 10(1) ECT in the context of renewable energy cases against the Respondent. As

noted by the tribunal in the Eiser case (a case on which both Parties rely):

“Absent explicit undertakings directly extended to investors and
guaranteeing that States will not change their laws or regulations,
investment treaties do not eliminate States’ right to modify their regulatory
regimes to meet evolving circumstances and public needs. As other
tribunals have observed, ‘[i]n order to adapt to changing economic, political
and legal circumstances the State’s regulatory powers still remain in place’.
‘[T]he fair and equitable treatment standard does not give a right to
regulatory stability per se. The state has a right to regulate, and investors
must expect that the legislation will change, absent a stabilization clause or
other specific assurance giving rise to a legitimate expectation of
stability.””4°°

449. The tribunal in Eiser found, however, that the FET standard in Article 10(1) did offer

protection from certain forms of fundamental regulatory change. It stated:

“... the Respondent’s obligation under the ECT to afford investors fair and
equitable treatment does protect investors from a fundamental change to the
regulatory regime in a manner that does not take account of the
circumstances of existing investments made in reliance on the prior regime.
The ECT did not bar Spain from making appropriate changes to the
regulatory regime of RD 661/2007. Thus, the Tribunal does not accept
Claimants’ contention that RD 661/2007 gave them immutable economic
rights that could not be altered by changes in the regulatory regime.

456 CL-0170, Eiser, | 362, referring in turn to Parkerings-Compagniet AS v Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8,
Award, 11 September 2007 4 332; RL-0035, EDF (Services) Ltd. v Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8
October 2009 (hereinafter “EDF v. Romania”), {ff 217-218; CL-0049, BG Group Ple. v Argentine Republic,
UNCITRAL, Award, 24 December 2007 {{ 298; CL-0052, Micula, | 666.

150

450.

451.

452.

Nevertheless, the ECT did protect Claimants against the total and
unreasonable change that they experienced here.”4°”
A similar conclusion was reached by the tribunal in the Blusun case, in the following

terms:

“.. the fair and equitable treatment standard which, by virtue of the second

sentence, is at the core of the obligation of stability under the first sentence

has a relatively high threshold. The E/ Paso tribunal spoke of ‘a total

alteration of the entire legal setup for foreign investments, and added that

“all the different elements and guarantees just mentioned can be analysed as

a special commitment of Argentina that such a total alteration would not

take place’. The tribunal in LG&E spoke of ‘completely dismantling the

very legal framework constructed to attract investors’. The emphasis is on

the subversion of the legal regime.”*>*
Regardless of the question of whether the second sentence of Article 10(1) is correctly
seen as incorporating the FET standard under customary international law or as
establishing an autonomous standard, the Tribunal agrees with the above approach. To
adapt the formulation from Eiser, absent explicit undertakings directly extended to
investors and guaranteeing that ECT Contracting Parties will not change their laws or
regulations, the second sentence of Article 10(1) does not eliminate the Contracting
Parties’ right to modify their regulatory regimes to meet evolving circumstances and
public needs. However, even absent a showing of specific commitments that the
regulatory regime would not change, a breach of Article 10(1) may be established if there

has been some form of total and unreasonable change to, or subversion of, the legal

regime.

This raises the question of what would qualify for these purposes as a specific

commitment and, more particularly, whether such a commitment could be located in a

457 CL-0170, Eiser, { 363, referred to in the Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/191. According to the Claimants in their
oral opening at Day 1/194, the core of the reasoning of the Eiser tribunal was the wholesale regulatory change and its
retroactive application, as opposed to the impact on the Eiser investment. The Tribunal does not agree with this reading
of the Eiser award. See e.g., the Award at {[ 365 and 382, where there was a strong focus on the impacts of the changes
to Eiser, i.e. the fact that the Eiser investment was being stripped of virtually all its value.

458 CL-0187, Blusun, { 363, referring to CL-0091, El Paso Energy International Co v Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/03/15, Award, 31 October 2011 (hereinafter, “El Paso, Award”). 517; CL-0039, LG&E, { 139.

151

453.

454.

455.

regulation of general application — as opposed to in a commitment made specifically to a

given Investor such as through conclusion of a contract.

Whilst it has been widely recognised that, in assessing whether there has been a breach
of the FET standard under Article 10(1) it is important to consider whether the legitimate
expectations of an Investor have been defeated, there is no consensus as to what kinds of
commitments can give rise to legitimate expectations. In particular, as identified in the
Masdar case, there are differing schools of thought as to whether a commitment given in
general regulations can give rise to a legitimate expectation (in Masdar, the examples
given for two different schools were: Suez v Argentina, the analysis of UNCTAD,*® the
dissents of Professor Tawil in Charanne and Isolux, Electrabel v Hungary (to support the
position that laws and regulations may suffice); El Paso v Argentina, Continental
Casualty v Argentina, Charanne (to support the position that laws and regulations would

not be sufficient).*°°

As to the differing schools, there is much to be said for the approach of the tribunal in the

Electrabel case, where it was held that:

“While specific assurances given by the host State may reinforce the
investor’s expectations, such an assurance is not always indispensable:
MTD v Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Award, 25 May 2004; GAMI
Investments v Mexico. UNCITRAL, Final Award, 15 November 2004; and
SD Myers v Canada, UNCITRAL, Second Partial Award, 21 October 2002.
Specific assurances will simply make a difference in the assessment of the
investor’s knowledge and of the reasonability and legitimacy of its
expectations.””*°!

The attraction of this approach is that the task for a tribunal considering the second
sentence of Article 10(1) is solely to determine whether the State has failed to accord fair
and equitable treatment, and there is therefore a question as to how useful it can be to be
overly proscriptive about the concept and creation of legitimate expectations, a concept

which after all is nowhere mentioned in the Treaty language. As aptly stated in the well-

459 As relied on by the Claimants at e.g. oral opening, Day 1/226.

460 CL-0191, Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Award, 16
May 2018, #91 490-510.

461 CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 7.78.

152

456.

457.

known passage in the Decision of the Annulment Committee in MTD v Chile: “The
obligations of the host State towards foreign investors derive from the terms of the
applicable investment treaty and not from any set of expectations investors may have or

claim to have.”*

The Tribunal notes that in the Jsolux case, relying on the analysis of UNCTAD, it was
considered that legitimate expectations could be generated where either (i) a specific
commitment had been addressed to the investor personally or (ii) rules had been put in
place that were not addressed to a particular investor but had the specific aim of inducing
foreign investment and which were relied on in making the investment.‘ The tribunal in
the Novenergia case also found that there was no requirement of a specific commitment
made to the investor, considering that the relevant question “is whether the statement or
conduct is objectively sufficient to create legitimate expectations in the recipient. Such

conduct or statements can take the form of laws or regulations.”*®*

By contrast, the tribunal in Charanne determined that RD 661/2007 (and RD 1578/2008),
although directed to a limited group of investors, did not thereby become a specific
commitment, losing their general nature. It considered that: “To convert a regulatory
standard into a specific commitment of the state, by the limited character of the persons
who may be affected, would constitute an excessive limitation on power of states to
regulate the economy in accordance with the public interest.”*® This Tribunal agrees at
least to the extent that caution would need to be applied with respect to any analysis that
treated domestic legal acts that are quite different in nature — i.e. (i) specific commitments
made by the host State to an individual investor and (ii) regulations of general nature — as
if they generated the same consequences as a matter of international law. The tribunal in

Charanne went on to consider whether the regulations at issue might nonetheless generate

46 RL-0030, MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Decision
on Annulment, 21 March 2007 (hereinafter, “MTD, Decision on Annulment”) { 67.

463 RL-0088, [solux Infrastructure Netherlands B.V. v Spain, SCC Arbitration No. V2013/153, Award, 17 July 2016
4.775 (hereinafter “Isolux”), referring to UNCTAD, Fair and Equitable Treatment, 2012, p. 69.

464 CL-0190, Novenergia II - Energy & Environment (SCA) (Grand Duchy of Luxembourg), SICAR v Spain, SCC
Arbitration No. 2015/063, Final Award, 15 February 2018 { 547 (footnote omitted).
465 CL-0094/RL-0049,Charanne, { 493.

153

a legitimate expectation that the regime would remain unchanged for the lifetime of the

claimants’ plants, but rejected this on the basis that:

“Admitting the existence of such an expectation would, in effect, be
equivalent to freeze the regulatory framework applicable to eligible plants,
although circumstances may change. Any modification in the amount of the
tariff or any limitation of the number of eligible hours would then constitute
a violation of international law. In practice, the situation would be the same
that if the State had signed a stabilisation clause or adopted a commitment
to not modify the regulatory framework. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot
support such a conclusion. The Claimants have made very clear that they
do not claim to have had the legitimate expectation that the regulatory
framework would remain unchanged.” “°°

458. This Tribunal shares the difficulty in approaching a provision of domestic law of general
application as if had, in substance, the same effect as a contractual stabilisation clause or
some specific commitment to similar effect. It can readily be said that the State could
have, but has not, given an individual commitment of some sort, and that as a matter of
expectations an investor would naturally regard such a commitment as of greater value

than anything in a general regulation.

459. In considering the question of whether domestic laws could generate legitimate
expectations for the purposes of Article 10(1), the tribunal in the Blusun case referred to
Charanne, El Paso v Argentina and Philip Morris v Uruguay in support of its view that
investment treaty tribunals had declined to sanctify laws as promises, and then reasoned

as follows:

“Tt is true that informal representations can present difficulties, which is
why tribunals have increasingly insisted on clarity and the appropriate
authority to give undertakings binding on the state. It is also true that a
representation as to future conduct of the state could be made in the form of
a law, sufficiently clearly expressed. But there is still a clear distinction
between a law, i.e. a norm of greater or lesser generality creating rights and
obligations while it remains in force, and a promise or contractual
commitment. There is a further distinction between contractual
commitments and expectations underlying a given relationship: however
legitimate, the latter are more matters to be taken into account in applying
other norms than they are norms in their own right. International law does

466 CL-0094/RL-0049, Charanne, {ff 503 and 510.

154

460.

461.

462.

not make binding that which was not binding in the first place, nor render
perpetual what was temporary only. ...

In the absence of a specific commitment, the state has no obligation to grant
subsidies such as feed-in tariffs, or to maintain them unchanged once
granted. But if they are lawfully granted, and if it becomes necessary to
modify them, this should be done in a manner which is not disproportionate
to the aim of the legislative amendment, and should have due regard to the
reasonable reliance interests of recipients who may have committed
substantial resources on the basis of the earlier regime. These considerations
apply even more strongly when the context is subsidies or the payment of
special benefits for particular economic sectors.”*°7

The Tribunal finds this approach persuasive in its two key respects.

First, in considering whether a legitimate expectation has been generated that falls for
protection under Article 10(1), a representation in the form of domestic law cannot
correctly be elided with a specific promise or contractual commitment: a law remains a
norm of general application (greater or lesser), and only applies whilst it remains in force.
Further, if the application of the Article 10(1) FET standard turns on a question of whether
legitimate expectations had been defeated, and it were accepted that such expectations
could readily be generated by domestic law, the FET standard would in practical terms
start to approximate an overarching stabilisation clause, elevating each change in a
domestic legal regime to a source of potential breach of international law. The Tribunal
does not consider that this could be the intention of the ECT Contracting Parties, not least
bearing in mind that there is an umbrella clause in Article 10(1), but one that is limited to
“obligations” that have been “entered into” as opposed to “expectations” that have been

“generated.”

Second, however, the absence of a specific commitment does not mean that the fact that
an investor has invested by reference to a given tariff regime ceases to be a relevant factor
in applying the FET standard under Article 10(1). The Tribunal’s task is to assess whether
the Respondent State has acted fairly and equitably, and in considering this one important
tool is an assessment of whether the change to a given tariff regime is disproportionate,

which this Tribunal considers — in the current context — as entailing considerations both

467 CL-0187, Blusun, I 367-372, referring to CL-0091, El Paso, Award, | 517; CL-0039, LG&E, | 139.

155

as to what is necessary and as to the financial burden that is being shifted to those
investors who have committed substantial resources on the basis of the earlier regime. At
the same time, it is important to assess whether the Respondent State took into account
impacts to such investors in its decision-making process. The Tribunal is of the view that
these considerations are of particular importance in the current context, which concerns
changes to the particular benefits of a specific economic regime in which investors
(including foreign investors) were being invited and encouraged to invest through a

number of factors, including a very attractive regime of remuneration.

D. RWE’s CASE ON BREACH OF ARTICLE 10(1) BY REFERENCE TO ALLEGED LEGITIMATE
EXPECTATIONS

463.

Against the backdrop of the above conclusions as to interpretation of relevant aspects of
the FET standard under Article 10(1), the Tribunal turns in this Section to the details of
the Claimants’ case on the existence of legitimate expectations by reference to alleged
guarantees on the part of the Respondent. The Tribunal ultimately concludes (in Section
D(2)(e) below) that no specific commitment was made to the Claimants sufficient to
ground legitimate expectations in this case. Consistent with its position on the
interpretation of Article 10(1) outlined above, Section D goes on to examine the question
of whether there was nonetheless a breach of the FET standard in circumstances where
Investors invested on the basis of a given tariff regime, and the change to that tariff regime
was disproportionate, and/or there was a failure to take into account impacts to such

investors in the host State’s decision-making process (see Section D(2)(f)).
The Parties’ Positions

The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Respondent breached its FET obligations under Article
10(1) of the ECT because the Respondent’s adoption of the Disputed Measures frustrated

the Claimants’ legitimate expectations “with respect to the guarantees offered to

156

465.

466.

467.

investors under the Special Regime that were put in place precisely to attract

investment.”*%

The Claimants say that the “time of investment” for purpose of their legitimate
expectations includes the time of the initial decision to invest in Spain, the subsequent
times that the Claimants increased Investments in Spain, and the Investment decisions
taken pursuant to RD 661/2007’s First Transitory Provision. It is said that this represented
an important decision that concerned all of the Claimants’ Investments made up to that
point in time. Additionally, it is said that the offer in RD 661/2007 was subject to the
oldest plants being upgraded. RWE’s interest in the applicability of RD 661/2007
resulted in RWE deciding to invest in upgrading the plants.4 The Claimants also say
that the position that “the relevant time to consider the legitimate expectations can be
different from the time an investment is made is shared by some scholars and relevant
precedents,”*”°

Charles Arif v Moldova and the Mamidoil v Albania cases.*”!

such as Professor Schreuer and Professor Kribaum, and the Franck

The Claimants contend that their expectations were twofold: “(i) regarding the nature
amount and duration of the FIT offered under the first RD 2918/1998, then RD 436/2004
and finally RD 661/2007 and RD 1611/2010; and (ii) with respect to the stability of the

economic regime.”*”?

As to (i), it is said that RWE —

“expected that because its RE installations complied with all the legal
requirements in each case, they would continue to be subject to the FIT
regime. Therefore:

i. the plants would have a choice between selling electricity at a
Fixed Tariff or at the Premium;

468 CI, Mem. 4 444; Cl. Reply 523.

469 Cl, Mem. 9 453-454.

47 Cl, Mem. 450.

47 Cl, Mem. {{ 450-452; CL-0041, C. Schreuer and U. Kribaum, “At What Time must Legitimate Expectations

Exis

 

* In “Liber Amicorum: Thomas Wilde”, in 9 TDM 1, 2012, p. 269; CL-0026, Mr Franck Charles Arif v The

Republic of Moldova, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, 543; CL-0093, Mamidoil, 707.
4. Cl, Mem. | 464.

157

468.

469.

ii. the FIT or premiums would apply to all of the electricity
produced, without any limitations on production;

ili. the FIT or premiums would apply for the entire operational life
of the RE installations;

iv. the plants would have priority of dispatch under RD 661/2007;
and

v. the FIT would be subject to inflation adjustments in accordance
with the CPI under RD 661/2007.”47
As to (ii), the Claimants “expected that any future changes to the applicable regime in
detriment to the installations would only apply prospectively, i.e. to new installations,
while existing installations would remain unaffected.” According to the Claimants, the
Respondent “explicitly promised that the economic regime for qualifying Special Regime
installations would remain stable under RD 436/2004 and RD 661/2007... [and]
subsequently reiterated this commitment in its July 2010 Agreement with the wind sector,
which was then confirmed in RD 1614/2010.”*"* These commitments were key to the

5

Claimants’ decisions to invest in Spain*”> and were understood as a guarantee by

Spain.*”°

In response to the Respondent’s position that none of RD 436/2004, RD 661/2007, RD-

L 6/2009 and RD 1614/2010 contained a commitment to ‘grandfathering’, the Claimants

say that:477

“(a) The PER 2005-2010 confirmed that ‘Royal Decree 436/2004, on the
Special Regime, explains the law, and establishes an economic regime

guaranteed for the whole life of the facility’.478

473 Cl. Mem. 1 465.

474 Cl. Mem. {{] 466-467; C-0016, RD 436/2004, Article 40(2); C-0017, RD 661/2007, Article 44(3).

475 Biinting Statement {[][ 49-52; and Schiifer Statement { 31.

476 Cl, Skel ] 25, referring to C-0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007; C-0202, Alfonso Olivas La Llana, Wind Energy
in Spain, 2020 Objectives and actions, IDAE — Wind Energy Department and Ministry of Industry, Tourism and
Commerce PowerPoint presentation, Madrid, 7 October 2010, and C-0296, Second Draft of RD 661/2007 of the
Ministry, 19 March 2007.

477 Cl. Reply 1 524.

478 Referring to C-0034, 2005-2010 Renewable Energy Plan, p. 166.

158

(b) The CNE confirmed that RD 661/2007 ‘exempt[ed] existing facilities
from revision every four years because the new incentives that are being put
into place only affect new facilities’. The Ministry equally explained that
‘[t]he subsequent revisions of the tariffs will not affect the installations
which have already been commissioned. This guaranty provides legal
certainty to the producer, ensuring the stability and development of the

sector’ .4”°

 

(c) Spain confirmed in the preamble to RDL 6/2009 that it ‘guarantee[d] the
necessary legal security of those who have made investments’.*®°

(d) Spain stated that RD 1614/2010 was a pact ‘guaranteeing the current
incentives and rates of RD 661/2007 for the facilities in operation’. The
government stated that this ‘assure[d] the invariability of the premium for

wind and solar thermoelectric installations’ .”4*!

0. The Claimants contend that the reasoning of Micula v Romania,**? where the tribunal

“found an implied commitment based on the fact that Romania specifically sought to
induce investment by offering the incentives”, applies to this case.*** It is submitted that,
from 2012, the Respondent frustrated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations and
eventually entirely dismantled the legal and business framework under which the

investments had been made:

“j) First, Spain’s introduction of the 7% levy (Law 15/2012) on production
constitutes a disguised and unjustified cut of the FIT;

ii) Secondly, the Government’s elimination of the Premium (under RDL
2/2013) frustrates the expectations RWE had under the Special Regime;

iii) Thirdly, the Government’s replacement under RDL 2/2013 of the CPI-
linked updating mechanism for the FIT departs from RWE’s expectations
that the FIT would be updated during the life of the plants to reflect
variations of the general CPI; and

479 Referring to C-0239, CNE, “Report 30/2008 regarding the Proposed Royal Decree for Regulating the Economic
Incentives to the Production of Electric Energy for Photovoltaic Installations Not Subject to the Economic Regime
defined by Royal Decree 66 1/2007, of 25 May”, 29 July 2008, p. 20; C-0248, InvestinSpain PowerPoint presentation,
“Legal Framework for Renewable Energies in Spain”, undated, p. 4.

480 Referring to C-0061, RD 6/2009, Preamble.

48! Referring to C-0064, Draft 2010 Decree; C-0268, Memoria Economica for RD 1614/2010, p. 11.

482 CL-0052, Micula.

483

Cl. Reply { 527-528.

159

471.

iv) Finally, in July 2013, with RDL 9/2013 wiping out the entire Special
Regime and in particular the RD 661/2007 economic regime that by then
applied to all of RWE’s installations, and by introducing a substantially less
favourable regime that eliminated the FIT, Spain violated the basic
foundations upon which RWE made each and every one of its
investments.”***
The Claimants say that, in the Micula case, the “termination of a FIT remuneration
scheme resulted in a violation of the FET standard.” The Claimants contend that, in a
way similar to Micula, here: “only a few years after Spain enacted RD 661/2007,
encouraged the Claimants to upgrade the existing installations and confirmed the
stability of the regime through the July 2010 Agreement and RD 1614/2010, Spain
eviscerated all of its key characteristics. It has reneged on its promises, thereby
frustrating the Claimants’ legitimate expectations and upsetting the legal framework it
had previously guaranteed. This behaviour constitutes a breach of its obligation to abide

by the FET standard.”**5
As to the Respondent’s position that the expectations were unreasonable, it is said:

a) The Claimants carried out a careful and thorough analysis of the regulatory
framework prior to its original Investment and updated this,**° while the Claimants’

expectations matched the Respondent’s own understanding.*®”

b) Further, “/berdrola and the RE associations shared RWE’s understanding of the
Special Regime ... . AEE told Spain that the New Regime breached Spain’s
commitments at Article 44.3 of RD 661 and Article 5.3 of RD 1614 by applying a
tariff revision to existing installations. The same goes for Péyry, who advised RWE
that the ‘RD 661/2007 ... (environmental premiums) are guaranteed during the

operating lifetime of the plant.”*** As to the statement made by Osborne Clark on

“84 Cl, Mem. 471.

485 (|

1. Mem. ff 472-473.

+86 Cl, Reply #¥f 514-522; J Cl. Skeleton 66; Navarro Statement {{f{ 38-62; Henderson Statement {ff 23-27 and 38-34.
+87 Cl, Reply {I 531-532; Cl. Skeleton J 66.

+88 C1, Skeleton {[ 67; R-0237, Submissions from the AEE concerning draft Order IET/1045/2014 before the CNMC
dated 26 February 2014, p. 2; C-0103, Poyry July 2007 Report (Wind), p. 2.

160

474,

which the Respondent relies and the decisions of the Spanish Supreme Court, it is
said that the former “is a summary of the 2012 Supreme Court judgment made after
RWE had made its investments. The same applies to most of the Supreme Court
judgments Spain cites; they post-dated RWE’s investments. The remainder did not
indicate that cuts could be made to the guaranteed Special Regime FIT (and

certainly not the Fixed tariff).”*°°

c) The Claimants’ “pre-RD 661 investments were made in reliance on earlier
commitments contained in the Special Regime”, and under the ‘grandfathering’
principle of the Special Regime all those installations were brought “under the

protection of the RD 661 FIT.”*°

In the alternative, the Claimants say that even if their legitimate expectations had been
limited by Spain’s concept of a ‘reasonable return’, the Respondent would still be in
breach of the ECT.*! In such a case, the reasonable return would fall to be calculated at
the time the Claimants made their Investments with the return, by reference to the 2007

CNE report, at between 8.2% and 11.2% after-tax.49?

The Respondent’s Position

According to the Respondent, the Claimants have proven neither the alleged commitment
to ‘grandfathering’ nor that their expectations could hinge on the alleged
‘grandfathering’. Its position is that the Claimants did not request any legal report that
confirmed the alleged ‘grandfathering’, and that they have not produced a legal due
diligence supporting the alleged “expectations about a ‘commitment’ of the Kingdom of

Spain to petrify the regime arising from RD 661/2007 or to maintain or improve it by

+89 Cl, Skeleton J 68; R-0302, Osborne Clarke Publications, Supreme Court Case-Law in the Framework of the
Appeals against Royal Decree 1565/2010, 12 April 2012.

“9 Cl, Skeleton 4 69.

“1 Cl, Reply 1535

42.C], Reply 537; Compass Lexecon, Second Report J 107. See also, CLEX-0036, CNE, Report 3/2007, 14 February
2007 “Informe 3/2007 de la CNE Relativo a la Propuesta de Real Decreto por el que se Regula la Actividad de
Producci6n de Energia Eléctrica en Régimen Especial y de Determinadas Instalaciones de Tecnologias Asimilables
del Régimen Ordinario.” , pp. 54-55.

161

475.

476.

477.

478.

43 Resp.
44 Resp.
485 Resp.
46 Resp.
+97 Resp.

*°8 Resp.

subsequent reforms. That is important because the institution or the concept of
‘grandfathering’ does not exist in Spanish legislation or, as a result, in the regulatory

framework of the SES.”*?

In the context of due diligence, the Respondent highlights an alleged, inexcusable failure
on the part of the Claimants to take into account and configure their expectations by
reference to Spain’s domestic case law, which is the ultimate interpreter of the provisions
establishing the regulatory framework and which, from 2005, has held that the
regulations do not guarantee the indefinite continuance of the formulae used to set

premiums.*”*

Further, and regardless of the issue of due diligence, it is said that the Disputed Measures
do not violate the Claimants’ legitimate expectations because Spain did not make any
specific commitment in favour of the Claimants while, with respect to any changes in the
law of the host State it would have to be shown that expectations were reasonable and

justified, which the Claimants cannot show.*9>

The Respondent argues that it did not make a promise or guarantee to petrify their
framework in favour of the Claimants or its investments, nor did it make a promise of
‘grandfathering’ .*°° According to the Respondent, the absence of such commitments was
corroborated in the Charanne case, which examined the legal framework in Spain for the

electricity sector in 2007 and 2008.*””

The Respondent also says that the Claimants’ expectations were not reasonable on the
basis of the legal framework in force during the 11 years during which the Claimants

invested in Spain.*** It relies on the allegedly contrary expectations of the main RE

C-Mem. {ff 896-898.
C-Mem. {ff 902-903; Resp. Skeleton J] 22-28.

C-Mem. {| 905.

C-Mem. { 907.

C-Mem. {| 908-909; RL-0049, Charanne, {ff 504 to 508.

C-Mem. { 912. The same argument is made with respect to the Claimants’ alternative case based on a

reasonable return of between 8.2% and 11.2% per-tax. Resp. Skeleton { 53.

162

Associations, of RE investors like Iberdrola and of advisors like Poyry.*°? The
Respondent says that any investor knew, or should have known, that the regulatory

framework was based on the following principles:

“(1) ... the principle of regulatory [hierarchy] and the result of legally
stipulated regulation creation procedures.

(2) The regulatory framework is not limited to RD 661/2007 and RD
1614/2010 as claimed by the Claimant. It is configured on the basis of Law
54/1997 and any regulatory standards that have implemented it, as
interpreted by Case-law.

(3) The fundamental principle that RE subsidies are a cost of the SES,
secondary to the principle of economic sustainability of the same.

(4) Right to priority of access and dispatch of electricity production.

(5) That the remuneration of the RE consists of a subsidy which, once added
to the market price, provides RE Plants with reasonable profitability, in the
context of its useful life, according to capital markets, which has a dynamic
and balanced nature within the SES. This return was linked exclusively to
the cost made in the construction and operation of the plants.

(6) That the subsidies were determined according to the evolution of the
demand and other basic economic data, expressed in the Renewable Energy
Plans on the investment and operation costs of standard installations, with
a view to ensuring that these installations are able to reach reasonable
profitability during their useful lives.

(7) That the regulatory changes in the remuneration regime of the RE have
been motivated since 2004 (i) to correct situations of over-remuneration, or
(ii) by the strong variation in the economic data that served as the basis for
the estimation of subsidies.”°°°

479. — It is also said that the Claimants had no, and could have no, expectations on the basis of

documents such as the InvestinSpain presentations.*°!

480. As to the wording of Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007, the Respondent says that this does not

make reference to updates, rewarded hours, the operational life of the plants, priority of

49 Resp. Skeleton {ff 48-49.
50 Resp. C-Mem. § 913.
50 Resp, Rej. | 674.

163

481.

Q)

482.

dispatch, or any other aspect of the Special Regime. The Respondent portrays this
provision as concerned only with specified periodic reviews, not any reviews of the tariff
system. It is contended that the provision does not mention ‘grandfathering’ and does not
guarantee that the tariffs would be kept.*? Further, by reference to the principle of
hierarchy, RD 661/2007 and RD 1614/2011, which developed the mandate under Law
54/1997, could not have contradicted or nullified the provisions of that Law. Therefore,
a diligent investor would have known that RD 661/2007 could not have frozen the
remuneration regime indefinitely, as that would have gone against the principle of
economic sustainability.°° Reliance is placed on the /solux award, where it was held that
the only legitimate expectation of the claimant was to receive a reasonable return for its

investment.>*

The Respondent’s position is thus that “no diligent investor could expect that the Spanish
State would no longer adapt measures to resolve any deficit or economic imbalance that
affected the sustainability of the SES” while, by contrast, the applicable legal framework
“allowed regulatory changes in relation to existing installations, by maintaining the
principle of reasonable profitability at all times within the framework of a sustainable

SES.7505
The Tribunal’s Analysis

a. The significance of the time when the Investments were made

On the Claimants’ case on legitimate expectations, it is for them to show that: “(a) Spain
made a promise or assurance; (b) RWE relied on that promise or assurance as a matter

of fact; and (c) such reliance (and expectation) was reasonable.”>° As follows from this,

502 Resp. C-Mem. 917. Resp. Skeleton 51.

503 Resp. Rej. {i 221-223; R-0003, Law 54/1997, Article 29.

504 Resp. Skeleton { 54, referring to RL-0088, /solux, | 787. See also, the reliance placed by the Respondent in its
Comments of 3 May 2019 on RL-0099, RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European
Infrastructure Two Lux 8.a r.l. v Kingdom of Spain, (CSID Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision on Responsibility and on
the Principles of Quantum, 30 November 2018 (hereinafter “RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the
Principles of Quantum”).

505 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 914-915. Resp. Skeleton ff 29-33.

506 C], PHB {ff 34-35, referring to Micula v Romania.

164

483.

and as is anyway obvious, it is important to identify precisely when a given Investment
was made by the Claimants and what the promises or assurances were that were then
relied upon as a matter of fact. There is nothing in Arif v Moldova or Mamidoil v Albania
or indeed the writings of Professors Schreuer and Kribaum that suggests otherwise.>°”
Further, in any consideration of reasonable reliance, a series of investments cannot be
looked at as a non-dissectible whole, and the Claimants’ reference to expropriation cases,
where it may well be inappropriate to look at individual rights making up the investment
(such as individual intellectual property rights), is inapposite.*°* The question in that
context is whether there has been substantial deprivation, which involves quite different
considerations. The same would apply where, in the jurisdictional context, it may be

appropriate for a tribunal to consider the unity of a given investment.

The issue of timing is important because the Investments were made across a period of
around 12 years in which materially different regulations applied, as well as different
investment conditions. In very broad terms, the Investments were made in three different

periods, i.e. in —

a) The period prior to RD 436/2004, when the Claimants made Investments into the
regime established by RD 2818/1998, which had no equivalent provision to Article
40.3 of RD 436/2004 or Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 (pursuant to which it was
stated that future revisions would not affect plants for which a deed of

commissioning had already been granted);

b) The period of the regime established by RD 436/2004 and then RD 661/2007, but
before further regulations or laws were adopted, starting with RDL 6/2009, in
which Spain sought to modify the RD 661/2007 regime in order to address the tariff

deficit;

507 Cl, Mem. {{| 450-452; CL-0041, C. Schreuer and U. Kribaum, “At What Time must Legitimate Expectations

Exis

 

2” In “Liber Amicorum: Thomas Wilde”, in 9 TDM 1, 2012, p. 269; CL-0026, Mr Franck Charles Arif v The

Republic of Moldova, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013 4 543; CL-0093, Mamidoil, | 707.
508 Cf, Cl. PHB 4 54-56.

165

484.

485.

486.

c) The period post-RDL 6/2009 in which the RD 661/2007 regime was becoming
increasingly subject to modification, but prior to the adoption of the Disputed

Measures.

So far as concerns the alleged legitimate expectations as to the first of these three broad
periods, the issues are more straightforward, and it is convenient to deal with them up

front.

The Claimants’ case is that (i) RD 2818/1998 established a set of incentives for qualifying
Investments, in particular the payment of a premium or a fixed tariff, (ii) that the
regulation expressly confirmed that these incentives would have no temporal limit, and

(iii) the Claimants relied on these incentives in making its Investments.°”

It is correct that the Preamble of RD 2818/98 stated that the incentive it established for
RE facilities “has no time limit as the environmental benefits need to be internalised, and
because of their special characteristics and technological level, their higher costs do not
allow them to compete in the free market.”>!° That was a correct statement so far as
concerns the substantive provisions that then followed. It was not, however, a statement
that the incentives would not change at some point in the future, and it could not be
reasonably relied on as such. Indeed, Article 32 of RD 2818/1998 expressly provided that
there would be a review every four years “with reference to changes to the market price
of electricity in the market, the contribution made by the facilities in supplying demand
and the impact on the technical management of the system.”*'! Unlike RD 436/2004 and
RD 661/2007, there was no wording to the effect that such reviews would only effect

future plants.>!

50 Cl, PHB {ff 15-16, referring in particular to C-0177, RD 2818/1998, preamble.
5! C.0177/R-0098, RD 2818/1998.
511 €.0177/R-0098, RD 2818/1998; Cl. Mem. J 136; Resp. C-Mem. 395.

512

Mr Schiifer, who speaks to the motivating factors of the Claimants with respect to Grisel and Project Aida in his

Statement at { 28 and { 31, does not suggest otherwise and does not point any other relevant factor.

166

487.

488.

489.

 

There are no representations from the Respondent and no other relevant materials that
change these basic facts.>!3 Indeed, the Claimants’ internal documentation and the 2002
Tlex/Péyry report “Projecting Wholesale Electricity Prices in Spain” show that the
Claimants were aware (or at least informed) that there could be unfavourable changes in

the Special regime as it then stood.*'*

In such circumstances, the Tribunal has no difficulty in finding that the only reasonable
expectation was that the regime could readily change, and possibly significantly for the
worse. It makes no difference that, pursuant to the ‘grandfathering’ provisions of the later
regulations, the plants operating under RD 2818/1998 could and did later opt into the RD
436/2004 and (then) RD 661/2007 regimes. Such plants came to have the benefits of
those later regimes, but where an Investment is made by reference to a prior regime, the
relevant expectations — i.e. the expectations at the time the Investments were made —

could only be formed by reference to that prior regime.

It follows that no good claim can be made on the basis of legitimate expectations with

respect to Investments made prior to RD 436/2004, i.e. the following acquisitions:

a) April 2001: acquisition of the Grisel wind farm for approximately EUR 3.5

million.>!

b) May 2002: acquisition of 100% of the share capital of Aersa for EUR 42 million,
and thus interests in the following wind farms: Acampo Armijo (100%); Muel

(77.67%); Puena de la Balsa (81%); Los Labrados (81%); Plana de Zaragoza

f. e.g. Cl. PHB ¥ 16.
514 €.0183, Carlos Solé Martin, Luis J

s Sanchez de Tembleque, “Renewable Energies: The Spanish Case”, CNE

   

Power Point presentation, Cartagena de Indias, 9-13 February 2009 and C-0088, Ilex Energy Consulting Report to
Harpen, Projecting wholesale electricity prices in Spain; Executive Summary, at (ii); and pp. 11-12. See also, Resp.
oral opening at Day 2/125-126.

515. Cl, Mem. 215.

167

490.

491.

(81%); Aldehuelas (20.81%), to which a further 21.97% interest in Aldehuelas was
acquired for EUR 586,363 in December 2003.°!°

c

May 2002: also through the Aersa acquisition, the 100% interest in the
hydroelectric plants Chomba del Plagano, Cepeda and La Mora, and a 60% interest

in the hydroelectric plant Villalgordo.>!”

qd

May 2002: also through the Aersa acquisition, 90% of Prodenergias 2, which
indirectly owned 46.26% of Luna, Juno and Urano (increased to 50% on 1 April
2004).518

It is recalled however that, so far as concerns the above plants, further Investments were
also made after RD 661/2007 came into force (through acquisition of further shares in
those plants and through upgrades certain plants said to have been made in order qualify
under the RD 661/2007 regime).°!” It follows that the finding made in the preceding
paragraph does not apply with respect to the entirety of the Claimants’ Investment in
these plants, and it is emphasised that the finding is made only with respect to the claims

so far as they are dependent on alleged legitimate expectations.

b. The question of whether, as a matter of fact, the Claimants relied on the RD
661/2007 regime in making investments post-2007
The most substantial of the Investments with which this case is concerned — the Urvasco
acquisition (Project Ulysses) through which the Claimants acquired the Bancal, Los
Siglos, Lanternoso, Rio Gallego, Bosque Alto and Plana Maria wind farms for EUR 363.5
million®”° — took place in June 2008. The acquisition followed a change in the group

strategy of the Claimants in 2008, pursuant to which RE came to be seen as a core

516 Cl. Mem. 230. A further 1.77% interest in this plant was acquired on | April 2004 for around EUR 40,000. The
Tribunal sees this as linked to the preceding sales, and in the absence of specific evidence of reliance does not see any
significance to the fact that this sale took place a few days after the adoption of RD 436/2004 on 27 March 2004.

517 Cl, Mem. 9 216-234.

518 Cl, Mem, 4 219. As with the 1.77% interest acquis

  

tion in Aldehuelas on | April 2004, the Tribunal sees this as

linked to the preceding sales, and in the absence of specific evidence of reliance does not see any significance to the
fact that this sale took place a few days after the adoption of RD 436/2004 on 27 March 2004.

5!9 Cl, Mem. 91 453-454.
520 Cl, Mem. 233.

168

business.>! According to the Chief Executive Officer of the Second Claimant, Mr

Biinting:

“As a consequence of the strategic shift in the Group, we decided to invest
in renewable power and heat generation capacity. During the first years, we
had an investment budget of approximately EUR | billion per year and had
to spend it profitably. In this regard, we looked at our portfolio and
identified where we were able to obtain the best growth.

... Spain had defined its regulatory framework, and developed it first in RD
2818/1998, then RD 436/2004 and then RD 661/2007, regulations which
were not only favourable for investments, but each one had even better
conditions than its predecessor, showing a clear commitment to supporting
renewable technology.” >?”

492. Inthe Executive Board decision approving the Urvasco Acquisition, specific mention was

made of RD 661/2007, including as follows under the heading “Tariffs in Spain’:

“The total revenues of Spanish wind parks are from a wholesale power price
portion (pool price) and an additional renewable subsidy ‘premium’.
Currently all of Urvasco’s plants - same for AERSA - operate under the
transitory regime of Royal Decree (RD) 436/2004. However, the revenue
system under the new RD 661/2007, which is expected to be applied from
2013 on, adopts a ‘cap and floor’ system which effectively provides a
guaranteed band of revenues. Revenues can vary within this ‘cap and floor’
mechanism.”°”3

493. After explaining the attractive nature of Spain as a place for RE investment in 2008 by
reference to the Claimants’ prior Investments there, its favourable meteorological

conditions and its EU membership, Mr Biinting continued:

“But all the above would not have been important if no stable and
predictable regime had been offered. Indeed, the most important element in
investing in Spain was the stability of the investment climate, due to the
government’s strong policy in favour of renewables indicated by the
adoption of several attractive regulations that guaranteed stability and
predictability of revenues.

52! Biinting Statement {J 18 and 40.
52? Biinting Statement {J 18-19.
523 €.0091, Circular decision by Executive Board of RWE AG in relation to Project Ulysses, 15 April 2008, p. 6.

169

Spain had declared itself one of the front-runners in RE and had built up a
significant industry in renewables. When investing, we were aware of the
existence of a stable remuneration system which was already announced in
the Law on the Electricity Sector of 1997 and was further reinforced by
subsequent regulation. Overall, strong political, legal and public support
made it highly attractive for us to invest in Spain because of the stability
that such support and legal framework promised.

... As explained, in 2008 there was a change of strategy within the company
pursuant to which the renewables business was considered a core business.
This change in strategy, together with the subcritical size of the existing
business, and, of course, the favourable investment climate I described
above, led us to increase the size of the Spanish business, first through
Project Ulysses.”°**

494. The cross-examination of Mr Biinting, which was focused more on the issue of whether
reliance was reasonable as opposed to whether there was actual reliance, did not
undermine the above extracts from the written evidence. The Tribunal has not seen any
evidence of a detailed consideration of Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 being carried out by
the Claimants and factored into its decision-making process with respect to the Urvasco
acquisition, although it notes that in the June 2008 RWE Fact Book reference is made to
future legislation changes and it is stated that the reviews provided for in RD 661/2007
“will not affect plants which are awarded the start-up certificate before January 1 of the
second year after the year in which the review is carried out.”>*> The emphasis in Mr
Biinting’s evidence was on the offer of a “stable and predictable regime’, as opposed to
a specific understanding of and reliance on individual provisions of RD 661/2007. In the
Tribunal’s view, the evidence shows that the Urvasco acquisition was made by reference

to the RD 661/2007 regime, and that in making the Investment the Claimants placed

524 Biting Statement {J 36-37 and 40. See also, Henderson Statement { 22: “In short, our confidence in a stable and
transparent regulatory regime was the minimum and necessary base point for absolutely everything we did in deciding
to continue to invest in Spain.” As already noted, the Claimants accept that they paid a high price for the Urvasco
acquisition: Biinting Statement {| 63. The Respondent makes the point, by reference to the evidence of Mr Biinting,
that the Claimants were “brownfield” investors, and that it is thus incorrect to portray Spain as benefiting from the
Investment: see, Resp. oral closing at Day 5/170; cf. Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/103. The Tribunal does not
consider this area of disagreement to be of relevance. The Special Regime could have, but did not, distinguish between
investment into new and “brownfield” sites.

525 €.0095, p. 33; Mr Biinting, Day 2/170; Henderson Statement { 25.

 

170

reliance on the stability of the regulatory regime (as opposed to by reference to a specific

understanding of and reliance on individual provisions of RD 661/2007).

495. As to the acquisition on 23 December 2008 of a further 23.75% interest in Aldehuelas for
EUR 12 million,>*® and with respect to the subsequent acquisitions, Mr Biinting explained

in his witness statement:

“From 2008 to 2011, we made a series of acquisitions in Spanish wind farms
in which we already had an ownership interest, either to become the
majority shareholder or to increase our minority share substantially.

Again, the next step in our new strategy of investing in renewables was to
obtain as much control of the existing assets as possible, and to integrate
them completely into our asset management system. It is easier to optimise
a portfolio when you own 100% of the assets and you do not have to observe
minority rights or deal with third parties, something which is time-
consuming and entails some administrative complexity. Furthermore, we
were investing in wind farms where we already had a stake and had
sufficient management expertise. Therefore, these operations entailed a
lower risk from the point of view that we were buying something that we
already knew. On top of this, RD 661/2007 was taken into account in the
evaluation and, again, the investment decisions were based on the crucial
fact that there was a stable and reliable business environment.”*””

 

496. As to this last point, Mr Biinting refers in support to RWE Transaction Approval Request
Forms dated 12 December 2008, 6 April 2009 and 12 July 2010. The Form of 12
December 2008 shows that the economic evaluation for the acquisition was made on the
“assumption” of an “energy price” i.e. “current feed-in-tariff Royal Decree [sic] (RD)
436/2004 until 2012, respectively RD 661/2007 with cap and floor system from 2013”,

and reference is made to “the sustainable commitment of the Spanish Government to the

526 Cl, Mem. 231.

527 Biinting Statement {| 44-45, referring to Transaction Approval Request Forms dated 12 December 2008, 6 April
2009 and 12 July 2010; also Navarro Statement { 36; Henderson Statement {fff 39-43.

171

497.

498.

499.

500.

528,

support of Renewable Energy.”°°> The Form of 6 April 2009 contains a similar reference

to RD 661/2007.°°

As with the Urvasco acquisition, the Tribunal considers that the 2008-2009 acquisitions
were also made by reference to the RD 661/2007 regime, and that the Claimants were
relying on the stability of the regulatory regime. The same conclusion is reached with

respect to the 2009 upgrades to certain of the plants, costing EUR 6.8 million.>*°

As to the transactions in October-December 2010 and February 2011, i.e. the further
interests acquired in Plana de la Balsa, Los Labrados, Plana de Zaragoza, and Muel,>*!
the RWE Transaction Approval Request Form of 12 July 2010 contains an assumption as

follows:

“April 2010 EEO Data. 2010 figure has been corrected as this year has been
fully hedged (as per RWE Innogy Hedging Policy). Regarding Project REA
(realisation assumed in 2014) only adjusted pool price plus reactive
premium assumed (no premium corresponding to RD 661/2007
calculated).”>*?

The Form also contemplates the possibility that Spain would reduce the number of hours

per year for which the premium was payable, although this was considered unlikely.>*7

As of mid-2010, the Claimants also had the benefit of a specific meeting with the Spanish

Government. A minute of this meeting, of 23 June 2010, was taken by the Claimants, and

C-0094, Transaction Approval Request Form for Project Aldea, 1 March 2008, pp. 3-4, introduced in the

Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/137.
529 C-0098, Transaction Approval Request Form for Project Dia, 6 April 2009, p. 7.

530 Cl, Mem. {ff 235-236; Henderson Statement {| 46-49; C-0082, Transaction Approval Request Form for Voltage
ride through, 1 March 2008.

531. Cl. Mem. ff 221 and 223-228.

532 €.0099, Transaction Approval Request Form for Minority Shareholders Buyout, 12 July 2010 (hereinafter
“Transaction Approval Request Form, 12 July 2010”, p. 5.
533 C-0099, Transaction Approval Request Form, 12 July 2010, p. 6 under “risks.”

172

in the absence of any countervailing witness or other evidence from the Respondent, the

Tribunal accepts this as an accurate record.°*4 The minute records in material part:

“RWE Innogy explained its presence in Spain emphasising the substantial
investments made over the last 24 months especially and our vision for
future growth and development in a market which to date we had considered
attractive and stable not the least for its continued support to renewable
energy.

The DG explained that they had been actively working with all associations
within the renewable sector to establish to what extent they could accept
changes to the Tariff regime as their contribution to the Spanish
governments overall efforts to reduce the budget deficit and at this point in
time they believed they had made sufficient progress that an agreement was
imminent and probably would take place within 24 hours, in addition all of
our discussion should be considered confidential give the sensitivity of the
issues and that what we would discuss did not yet reflect final positions.

The DG believed that their legal basis for being able make changes to the
existing renewable tariff regime was article 44 of the Royal Decree
661/2007 which in their mind permitted them to review the level of the
‘premium’ component of the tariff (and interestingly not the fixed tariff) as
and when circumstances justified this change. The circumstances in this
case were the economic backdrop in general but specifically the dramatic
decrease in electricity demand that had taken place over the preceeding 12
months leading to a increased tariff deficit due to the subsidies payable to
renewables bearing in mind that the installed renewable capacity was thus
proportionally greater within the overall sector mix. They explained that the
wind sector was not considered negatively in the sense of receiving
acceptable returns ...

In their opinion such a change would not be considered a retroactive change
and as such perfectly within their powers to implement. Our opinion was
that the renewables sector, including ourselves, were clearly not in
agreement with this and that any change of this type would be considered
retroactive and as such legally challengeable.

The DG then explained that the current position was that those wind assets
that were in the transitory phase between RD436 and RD 661, which

4 Cf. Resp. oral closing at Day 5/195. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants have made a global submission as to the
absence of witnesses on the part of the Respondent from the Ministry and the CNE, and sought an inference that those
responsible in Spain at the Ministry and the CNE were not willing to support the case being put by the Respondent:
Day 1/36-38. Such an inference is not warranted; but where, as here, a record of a meeting is exhibited to the
Claimants’ Memorial, and governmental personnel were present, but there is no evidentiary basis for any challenge to
the accuracy of the record, the Tribunal naturally considers that it must be accepted as accurate.

173

accounts for all the Aersa operational portfolio, would remain on the current
tariff structure and that they would respect the 2013 date for the change
from one regime to the other, in contrary to recent press speculation. They
felt aggrieved that this portion of the sector would not contribute to the
deficit reduction but that was the current status and expected outcome. ...

Those assets currently on the RD 661 tariff regime, or pre-assigned this
regime for the future, would however be subject to a reduction in premium
during 2011 and 2012 of a level to be agreed and in return for this “effort”
the government would agree to guarantee them the return to the current
tariff structure and premium levels in January 2013 and in addition modify
Article 44 of RD 6611 for these assets to the extent that the government
would not be able at any future stage to interfere with the tariff structure.
They believed that the sector was agreeable to this ... The DG also
discussed the concept of putting a limit on operating hours above which the
energy generated by such wind assets would only receive the pool price but
he believed that this may not make sense and as such less likely to be
implemented. ...

As regards the future the DG brought a copy of the recently published Long
term plan to 2020 which they are obliged to submit to Brussels as their
position by the end of the month but as regards the associated tariff regimes
they believed that this would only be discussed as and when the ‘retroactive’
debate had finished and as such clarity should not be expected before the
end of this year. (we will forward a report on the Spanish targets to 2020
next week). The DG did however make the comment that in his opinion the
likely outcome for future wind would be to guarantee a floor and above this
level receive the pool price.”**>

501. According to Mr Henderson, the “meeting confirmed many principles which gave us

comfort”, and he explained:

“One which was clear was that they saw the wind sector as, let’s say, a very
key sector for them. They confirmed that the assets were not
overremunerated in their mind. They confirmed more or less the principles
that would be applied, and I think it was probably a week later that it became
the July agreement, and basically wanted to give us comfort that we
shouldn’t see this as some future risk to our assets, and that they would also
be guaranteeing the premium component of the 661 legislation which they

535 C-0191, Minutes of 23 January 2010 Meeting.

174

believed they had some flexibility in terms of adjustments. So they would
guarantee that that premium would not be adjusted in the future.”>°°

502. It therefore appears that the Claimants were placing some reliance on the meeting and on

the July 2010 “agreement.”>*”

503. In the RWE Transaction Approval Request Forms of 12 July 2010 and 28 September
2010, which concern the next set of acquisitions by the Claimants, the approvals given
are expressly subject to publication of a final tariff agreement by the Respondent. Thus
the Request Form of 12 July 2010 says that approval is sought “subject to publication of
tariff agreement by the Spanish Government” and records that “Final agreement subject
to official approval of regulatory framework.”*** There is however no reference to the
meeting of 23 June 2010.°*? The Request Form of 28 September 2010 likewise refers to
“a revised tariff agreement by the Spanish Government” and says that this “was expected
to confirm no material change to the current valuation” of the assets, i.e. the shares that
were being acquired. Such a change was however contemplated as a possibility,*“° and

the acquisition price and structure were formulated with this in mind. Again, no mention

536 Mr Henderson in re-examination, Day 3/32. See also, the passage quoted in Section IV.A above from Day 3/33.
Also at Day 3/28 he said: “We met with the Government and understood that they believed they had the right to change
the premium, so that was a doubt we had, but clearly this agreement, the July 2010 agreement put to bed, once and for
all, any doubt whatsoever in our mind that the regulation was clear, stable and for the duration of the operating life of
the assets.” See also, Navarro Statement { 69: “In conversation with RWE, Spain made clear that this was a temporary
course of action and that normality would be restored.”

537 €.0063, 2 July 2010 Press Release.

538 €.0099, Transaction Approval Request Form, 12 July 2010, emphasis in original. The acquisition concerns a 19%
share in Zaragoza, a 12.32% share in Muel, and a 10% shareholding in Prodenergias 2.

  

53° €.0099, Transaction Approval Request Form, 12 July 2010, p. 4, it is said: “Under an agreement recently reached
between the Ministry of Industry and the Wind Association, certain wind farms will suffer a reduction in premium
during 2011 and 2012. The wind farms in this TARF are not under a regime where this reduction would apply. This
agreement has been published on the Government web site and has been widely reported in the press, but to avoid any
risk, the final approval of these investments is subject to the official publication of the agreement, expected by the end
of July.”

40 ©.0115, Transactional Approval Request Form, Minority Shareholders Second Tranche, 28 September 2010. Note
in particular on p. 5: “Should the Tariff Agreement prove to be different from the current tariff RD 436/2004, then the
price agreed with CLEAR will need to be adjusted. Although a definition of ‘material’ is needed, a residual risk of
dispute regarding the interpretation remains. Should CLEAR not agree to this new price and do not have funds to
repay, then AERSA will retain 100% of the shares without any further payments. It is considered extremely unlikely
that there would be a change to the decree reducing the current EV by more than 50%.” Also C-0189, Transaction
Approval Request Form for RWE Innogy Project, 28 September 2010.

175

504.

505.

was made of the meeting of 23 June 2010.*4! Under the heading “Strategic evaluation”,
it was however stated that “Spain is one of RWEI’s core markets due to its high wind
speed levels and the continuous Government commitment to the support of renewable
energy.”>?

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal considers that the Claimants did rely on RD
661/2007 in making the Investments of 2010 and early 2011, although on the basis that
there had been changes to the regime and that there might be more. The Request Forms
of 12 July and 28 September 2010 do not suggest material reliance on the meeting of 23
June 2010, and they show that the July 2010 “agreement” was not regarded as fixed
pending its finalisation, which was in the form of regulations i.e. RD 1614/2010.
However, reliance was being placed on the “agreement” and its finalisation in regulations,

with respect to the acquisitions and establishment of the acquisition price.

As to the acquisition on 2 December 2011 of a further 47.50% of the share capital of
Aldehuelas for EUR 25,540,000,°3 no mention is made of RD 661/2007 or RD
1614/2010 in the RWE Transaction Approval Request Form of 22 November 2011 or of
Spain’s commitment to renewable energy.*** Other than the witness evidence, which does
not address this transaction in any detail, there is no evidence of any actual reliance on
RD 661/2007 (or RD 1614/2010) or on the stability of the Special Regime, although the
economic calculations in the Transaction Approval Request Form are based on the
continued payment of a premium. It is plain, by contrast, that the Claimants wished to
become the owner of the Aldehuelas wind farm (the acquisition increased their interest to
95%). In light of the many uncertainties in the regulatory situation as of November 2011,
and in the absence of stronger evidence on reliance, the Tribunal is unable to conclude
that the Claimants made this Investment on the basis that the Special Regime would not

be undergoing some major changes. The same conclusion applies to the Claimants’

 

541 €.0115, Transactional Approval Request Form, Minority Shareholders Second Tranche, 28 September 2010, p. 3.

 

ion concerns a 19% share in La Balsa, a further 10% share in Muel, and a 19% share in Los Labrados.

542 €.0115, Transactional Approval Request Form, Minority Shareholders Second Tranche, 28 September 2010, p. 4.
5 Cl. Mem. 232.
54.0102, Transaction Approval Request Form for Project Aldea II, 22 November 2011.

176

acquisition of a ‘golden share’ with respect to the Muel plant (for EUR 50,000) in
December 2012.°45

506. Finally, as to the issue of the extent to which there was actual reliance on RD 661/2007
in making Investments, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ case is not that it expected
that there would be no changes at all to the RD 661/2007 regime, i.e. petrification.**° In
the words of Mr Biinting: “Of course a revision can change some things, but it should not

change the general value of the regulation to the investor.”>"”

c. Due diligence

507. As was well-expressed in the Electrabel case, to which the Respondent has referred in
the context of due diligence: “Fairness and consistency must be assessed against the
background of information that the investor knew and should reasonably have known at

the time of the investment and of the conduct of the host State.”***

508. The Claimants’ witness statements paint a rather confused picture as to the due diligence
that was carried out. It appears that, although there was undoubtedly due diligence with
respect to the economics of the major acquisitions and matters such as whether good title
was being obtained, the position was different for the regulatory regime and the risk of
changes to the regime. According to the Chief Financial Officer of the Second Claimant,

Mr Navarro:

“From what I remember, we never requested a report from any legal adviser
about risks of changes in the regulatory framework. What we did was due
diligence regarding the main acquisitions and within due diligence there
was of course a legal issue, and it is reasonable to expect that the lawyers,
should there be the risk of a radical change in the regulations, they should
have advised us, and this did not happen.”*?

 

  

545 Cl. Mem. 223.

546 E.9. Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/45; Mr Navarro, Day 2/216.

547 Mr Bunting, day 2/176. See also, the Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/96-97.

548 Resp. PHB {{ 32, referring to CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 7.78.

54 Mr Navarro, Day 2/233, lines 13-21; also p. 195, lines 13-19. See also, Biinting Statement, p. 25 and Day 2/165,
lines 5-6; Mr Navarro, Day 2/195, lines 5-19.

177

509.

510.

S11.

Mr Henderson, who it appears shared the task of following policy and regulatory changes

with Mr Navarro, said:

“With regard to regulatory due diligence, we only tasked external advisers
with providing a legal regime when it was unclear to us. However, when
we had already made investments under a certain set of regulations and
knew how they worked, we did not instruct any external advisers to carry
out regulatory due diligence. From the time I entered the company in 2008,
and indeed well before that time, and up to the end of 2012, the regulatory
regime was very clear and deemed to be stable ... .”**°

In the Tribunal’s view, there was however ample reason for a diligent investor to carry
out specific regulatory due diligence at the time of the Urvasco acquisition in June 2008,
as well to keep this up to date in respect of the regulatory developments that were taking

place,*> !

and the Tribunal rejects the view that it could reasonably be left to the
Claimants’ lawyers to advise without their being tasked with a specific regulatory due
diligence exercise.**? The Urvasco acquisition was a very substantial Investment indeed.
Moreover, it was the first Investment by the Claimants under the new regime established
by RD 661/2007, which had been formulated in the context of considerable industry
controversy and complaint as to the instability of the regime.* Yet no external legal
advice was sought on the regulatory regime (cf. the level of legal due diligence as to the

regulatory regime noted by the tribunal in the Antin case*™*).

It appears from the written and oral evidence that there was some internal due diligence
on the regulatory position, which was the responsibility of the country development team.

However, no specific details or documents were provided, and the specific individual

550 Henderson Statement at J 39; and Day 3/3, lines 4-6, with respect to the joint responsibility of Mr Navarro and Mr
Henderson. See also, the evidence of Mr Biinting, Day 2/166, and the Claimants’ position in its oral opening at Day
1/153-154 to the effect that Osborne Clarke was being relied upon to “provide red flag regulatory advice” but that
“there were no red flags to raise.”

551 Cf, Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/114.

582 Cf, Mr Navarro, Day 2/233; Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/113-116.

553 See e.g., R-0016, APPA Info magazine No. 23, August-December 2006; R-0281, Submission from APPA
concerning the draft RD 66 1/2007; R-0296, AEE Press release on RD 661/2007, 9 May 2007.

554 CL-0192, Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.1 and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V. v Kingdom of
Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31 (hereinafter “Antin”), Award, 15 June 2018, {[ 376-381 and 384.

178

identified by the Claimants’ witnesses was the “business development manager”, who
was not legally qualified.*°> It follows that the Tribunal cannot place material weight on

such internal due diligence.

512. Although, as of the date of the Urvasco acquisition, the Claimants did have the benefit
of the July 2007 Poyry report,*° this was not, and has not been presented as, a legal due
diligence exercise. Moreover, the Claimants’ witnesses did not read this report, and it is
not clear to what extent it was relied on in the acquisition of Urvasco.>°’ It also appears
that, despite the various regulatory changes subsequent to RD 661/2007, RWE
commissioned no further report by Péyry. In this respect, the Respondent has submitted
areport from Péyry dated March 2011 entitled “Current State and Future Trends of Solar
Power in Spain”, commissioned by some other unidentified party.*** The Respondent
relies on this report as showing that Péyry was then saying that there could be further
reductions to remuneration to renewables (not just solar), and the Tribunal considers this

to be a fair portrayal.’

513. It follows from the above that, given the scale of the acquisitions being made and the fact
that there was some plainly visible regulatory instability given RDL 7/2006 and then the
controversial repeal and replacement of RD 436/2004 by RD 661/2007, it must be
regarded as having been incumbent on the Claimants — in the context of the application
of the FET standard under Article 10(1) — to have performed some discrete due diligence

exercise on the applicable law and regulations, and they failed to do this.*°°

555 See, the evidence of Mr Henderson, Day 3/30-31.

556 Cl, Mem., C-0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind).

°57 The Claimants’ witness, Mr Navarro, was aware of but did not read this report, whilst the Claimants’ witness, Mr
Henderson, was not aware of it. See, Day 2/193 and Day 3/25.

558 R.0277, Poyry, Current and Future Trends in the Spanish Solar Sytem, March 2011.

559 Resp. oral opening at Day 2/104; R-0277, Péyry, Current and Future Trends in the Spanish Solar Sytem, March
2011, 5.6.7.2: “Considering the Government behaviour, it is likely that future changes might be implemented if
considered needed. RDL 14/2010 is aimed at tackling the lack of funds in the electricity system, reducing the revenue
of renewable generators as well as introducing additional revenue sources (i.e., grid tolls). We feel that the Government
is in a position to continue with the same energy policy, if considered a requirement, including implementation of
further reductions in remuneration to renewables and non-renewable technologies.”

500 Cf. Cl. PHB 4 88-90.

  

  

179

514. It does not automatically follow that the Claimants’ could not reasonably base their
Investments on RDL 661/2007 and/or RD 1614/2010 or rely on stability in the Special
Regime. However, the Tribunal must bring into account any statements, reports or legal
decisions that would have been considered in a due diligence exercise, in particular the
decisions of the Spanish Supreme Court on which the Respondent has placed great
weight, while the absence of due diligence is consistent with the evidence in sub-section
(b) above which shows that the Claimants’ key Investments were not made by reference

to a specific understanding of and reliance on individual provisions of RD 661/2007.

d. The decisions of the Spanish Supreme Court

515. The principal limb of the Respondent’s argument on due diligence is thus that the
Claimants should have made their investments taking into account the decisions of
Spain’s Supreme Court, including the finding in the judgment of 15 December 2005S that:
“There is no legal obstacle that exists to prevent the Government, in the exercise of the
regulatory powers and of the broad entitlements it has in a strongly regulated issue such
as electricity, from modifying a specific system of remuneration [...].”>°!

516. So far as concerns similar decisions made prior to the Urvasco acquisition of June 2008,
in a further ruling relied on by the Respondent, the Spanish Supreme Court accepted in a
2006 decision the proposition that “electricity producers under the special regime do not
have an ‘unalterable right’ to remain in an unchanged economic regime governing the
collection of premiums. The scheme is, in fact, to encourage the use of renewable energy
through an incentive mechanism, like all of this genre, and cannot be guaranteed to
remain unchanged in the future.”>? The Claimants’ witness, Mr Navarro, was asked
whether he was aware of the existence of Supreme Court rulings from 2006 that

established that the limit for modification of the regulations applying to the RE sector

561 Eg. Resp. Skeleton 23; R-0137, Judgment of the Supreme Court, rec. 52-2011, 15 December 2005. See also, e.g.
Resp. oral opening at Day 1/275-276.

562 R.0138, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 12/2005, reference El Derecho EDJ 2006/282164 (Spanish), 25
October 2006.

180

517.

518.

519.

563

was that of reasonable return in relation to the cost of money in the capital markets, and

he confirmed that he was.*

The Respondent has also referred to two Supreme Court decisions of 2007, dated
respectively 20 March and 9 October 2007, which it says confirm that there was no vested
right to receive a specific subsidy in the future.°™ In the first of these decisions, which
concerned application of the transitional provisions under RD 436/2004, the Supreme

Court stated that:

“Owners of facilities under a Special Regime are not guaranteed the
intangibility of a given benefit or income regime in relation to those
obtained in previous years, nor are they guaranteed the indefinite
permanence of the formulas used to fix premiums. Changes should be made
within the legal limits.”°*

The Tribunal agrees that some review of these decisions should have formed part of a
due diligence exercise prior to the Urvasco acquisition, and it considers that a diligent
Investor must be taken to have known their contents.* It also notes that the CNE appears
to have had these cases in mind when it referred to case law in its February 2007 report.>°”
However, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants’ contention that the Supreme Court’s
findings were not made in a sufficiently analogous context.*® The decisions concerned
the prior regimes and the transitional provisions under RD 436/2004, not a claim by an

operator to the tariff or premium fixed under the RD 436/2004 regime and thus made

with the benefit of Article 40.3 of that Decree.

In a context where there was no basis for the given claimant/operator to refer to Article

40.3 of RD 436/2004 or Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007, the decisions are of limited

Mr Navarro, Day 2/205. Mr Navarro could not recall when he became aware of such rulings, but assumed it was

before meetings that he had in 2010 with the APPA.

54 Resp. CM 4 364, referring to R-0139, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 11-2005 EDJ 2007-18059, 20 March
2007 and R-0140, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 13-2006 EDJ 2007-175313, 9 October, 2007.

565 R-0139, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 11-2005 EDJ 2007-18059, 20 March 2007.
566 Resp. PHB 74.

557 Resp. Rej. | 250; R-0128, CNE Report 3/2007, regarding the proposed Royal Decree, regulating the activity of
electricity production under the special regime and of certain facilities of comparable technology under the ordinary
regime, 14 February 2007.

568 C], Reply {ff 371-374; Cl. PHB {{ 151.

181

significance. The Tribunal does not consider that, as of June 2008, they would have been
taken by a diligent Investor as establishing how these two Decrees would be applied
given the specific wording of Article 40.3 and Article 44.3 (respectively). It follows that
the Tribunal does not consider that these decisions can of themselves negate the
Claimants’ case on reasonable reliance so far as concerns the 2008 Urvasco acquisition
and the Investments made later that year. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal
recognises that it is diverging from the finding made by the Charanne tribunal with
respect to the Supreme Court decisions of 2005-2006.° However, it considers that the
absence in the Supreme Court decisions of consideration of a provision such as Article
40.3 of RD 436/2004 or Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 could reasonably have been

considered material by a diligent Investor making an investment in 2008.

520. There were multiple subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court along similar lines, as a
line of consistent jurisprudence was established on this point. Three Supreme Court
judgments were handed down in December 2009, one of which — Appeal 151/2007 — did
concern an operator seeking to rely on Article 40.3 of RD 436/2004 as a form of

guarantee of non-retroactivity.°”? That position was rejected:

“(...) The argument that the transitional Provision under appeal represents
a weakening of the principle of legal certainty enshrined in Article 9.3 of
the Constitution must be rejected - because it produces, as it is claimed, a
situation of uncertainty in the legal system regarding the regulation of the
activity of electrical energy producers under the special scheme. Hence it
cannot be followed that the said regulation does not meet the requirements
of the principle of legal certainty, which does not include any right
whatsoever to freeze the existing law.”*”!

56 RL-0049, Charanne, 1 507. See also, RL-0088, Isolux, 1790.

57 Resp. CM 4 367-372, referring to R-0002, Judgment of the Supreme Court, rec. 152/2007, reference El Derecho
EDJ 2009/307357, 9 December 2009; and R-0141, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 151/2007 EDJ
2009/307349, 3 December 2009; cf. Cl. Reply {{ 377-379 contesting the relevance of these judgments; and Spain’s
position in response at Resp. Rej. if 244 et seq.

51 R-0141, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 151/2007 EDJ 2009/307349, 3 December 2009, p. 6, unofficial
translation.

182

521. Moreover, the judgment in Appeal 151/2007 was considered in a press release from the
APPA in April 2010,°” an industry association of which the Second Claimant was an
active and participating member, as it was of the AEE.*” The release was referred to in
a report from another industry body, Suelosolar, where the author considered the
Supreme Court cases and noted “that the rulings examined do not deal specifically and
directly with the subject that concerns us, viz. the legality of possible retroactive
regulations that would modify downwards the regulated tariff or the premiums that are
received by renewables installations already in operation”; but then stated: “T highlight
the above because it gives a small hope that the above rulings have not mentioned in
their reasoning the second paragraph of article 44.3 of the Royal Decree 661/2007 ... .”
It was thus the view of the author of this April 2010 report that there was only “small
hope” that the Supreme Court’s line of reasoning would not be applied in a context where

the operator could invoke Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007.

522. Although it is not clear to the Tribunal that the Claimants would have had any sight of
this Suelosolar report, the evidence is sufficient to establish that the December 2009
ruling in Appeal 151/2007 was a matter of concern to the APPA.>”* The Tribunal also
notes that the December 2009 cases and the earlier Supreme Court jurisprudence were
referred to by the AEE in a submission made to the CNE in August 2010 in the context
of the new Royal Decree that was then anticipated.*’> This submission recognised the
Supreme Court’s jurisprudence to the effect that there was no right to an unchanged

regime, subject to the requirement of a reasonable return.°”° Moreover, the judgment of

572 As reflected in a report of Suelosolar, R-0266, Suelo solar, What do judges think of retroactivity premiums for
renewables?, 29 April 2010.

533 See e.g., the evidence of Mr Biinting, Day 2/167, 170; Mr Navarro, Day 2/209. See also, Cl. Skeleton § 25 relying
on the shared understanding of RWE and APPA (in a different context).

574 Cf, Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/127, understating the concern of APPA.

575 R-0287, Observations submitted by the main Spanish Wind Energy Association AEE before the CNE against the
draft of RD 1614/2010; R-0166, Submissions of the AEE before the CNE during the CCE hearing on the proposed
Royal Decree which will regulate and amend certain aspects of the special regime, 30 August 2009 (hereinafter
“AEE’s 30 August 2009 submissions before the CNE”, as referred to in Resp. oral opening at Day 2/85-86 and in
closing at Day 5/188-189.

516 R-0166, AEE’s 30 August 2009 submissions before the CNE, p. 6; Resp. oral closing at Day 5/188-189.

 
 

 

183

December 2009 was picked up and summarised in the wider press.°’7 The Claimants’
representatives attended the meetings of the APPA and the AEE, sharing views with these
Associations,°’® and the Claimants either were or should have been aware of the cases>”?
and the attention these industry bodies were paying to the developing line of

jurisprudence (as well as of the concerns of the APPA and the AEE more generally).

523. In light of the above, in considering the Investments made subsequent to the December
2009 decisions of the Supreme Court, one factor for the Tribunal to consider with respect
to any legitimate expectations is the application of a consistent line of jurisprudence in
the December 2009 ruling in Appeal 151/2007 in a context where the claimant/operator
was relying — without success — on what was characterised as “the guarantee of non-

retroactivity established by Article 40.3 of Royal Decree 436/2004.”>*°

524. There have also been a number of Supreme Court cases that post-date the making of the
Claimants’ Investments. Whilst these could not be factored into the question of
reasonable reliance in the same way, the Tribunal does not accept the Claimants’
contention that they are clearly irrelevant.**! Where, in subsequent judgments, the
Supreme Court has ruled on the meaning of RD 661/2007 including taking into account
its Article 44.3 then, in the Tribunal’s view, careful consideration must be given to what
was decided and on what basis: the Supreme Court is after all fulfilling its function as
the ultimate arbiter in domestic law of the correct interpretation of the provisions of
Spanish law before it, and in the usual course it could readily be argued that provisions
being interpreted in judgments in 2014-2016 must always have meant what the Supreme
Court then decided. There is no case on the Claimants’ part that the judgments of the

Supreme Court are tainted by some denial of justice.***

57 R.0312, Cinco Dias, The Supreme Court allows retroactive change in premiums, 23 April 2010.

58 See e.g., Mr Biinting, Day 2/167, 170; Mr Navarro, Day 2/209.

5” Mr Navarro, Day 2/204-205.

580 R-0141, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 151/2007 EDJ 2009/307349, 3 December 2009, p. 6.
581 Cf. Cl. Reply 381; Cl. PHB 159.

582. Cf, e.g, CL-0129, Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/99/1, Award
of 16 December 2002, 139.

184

525.

526.

The Tribunal is not in strict terms bound by the domestic court’s decisions as to the
meaning and effect of domestic law, and it is of course correct that the question of
whether an act is in conformity with domestic law is quite separate to the question of
conformity with international law.>** But the issue here is rather different. The Claimants
are seeking to establish the existence of legitimate expectations largely by reference to
certain discrete provisions of domestic law. In the usual course, it is the superior courts
of the given jurisdiction that are best qualified to rule on what the meaning and effect of
a provision of domestic law is. In the current case, the issue is whether an alleged
legitimate expectation formulated largely by reference to domestic law was defeated in
circumstances such that there is a breach of Article 10(1) ECT, i.e. a separate issue of
international law. The domestic law only features as a result of the way that the Claimants

have formulated their case, i.e. the specific legitimate expectations they assert.**4

The Claimants have referred to the Perenco award, which usefully summarises the
allocation of competencies between domestic and international tribunals, but in a way
that identifies that matters of domestic law, in this and analogous contexts, are indeed

primarily for the domestic court:

“Turning to the Constitutional Court’s decision, the fact that the Court has
spoken on Law 42’s constitutionality does not of course preclude this
Tribunal from exercising its jurisdiction under the Treaty to consider the
international lawfulness of Law 42. But in applying international law, the
Tribunal does not act as a court of appeal on questions of Ecuadorian law.
This jurisdictional limit is well-established in the jurisprudence. The
Tribunal must recognise the allocation of competencies between
adjudicatory bodies at the national and international levels. An international
tribunal cannot second-guess the court's interpretation and application of
local law. At the same time, under well-established principles of
international law, as codified in Article 3 of the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility, the fact that a law has been declared constitutional by the

583 Cl, PHB if 164-168.
5 The Tribunal notes that the Claimants refer to the practice of other States, and say that this is relevant as an

evidentiary matter, forming part of the factual matrix that informs the investor’

expectations and confirming them to

 

be reasonable: Cl. PHB { 78. At least so far as concerns the facts of this case, the Tribunal sees no merit to this
submission.

185

local courts, even by the highest court of the land, is not dispositive of
whether it was in conformity with international law.”>*>
527. | The Claimants also contend that where both the investor and the host State have the same
understanding of the law at the time of the investment, subsequent court decisions
concerning that law are not relevant.>*° That is to overstate matters, but there is some
force to the point. The Tribunal is seeking (inter alia) to identify whether reliance placed
by the Claimants on RD 661/2007 and the stability of the regime in making its
investments was reasonable, and it naturally follows that particular weight should be

given to what the Spanish Government was saying at the time.

528. Against this backdrop, it is necessary to examine what the Spanish Supreme Court has
found as to the meaning and effect of RD 661/2007, and also what the Government was

saying during the period that Investments were being made.

529. In ajudgment of 1 June 2016, the Supreme Court considered a challenge to RD 413/2014
and Order IET/1045/2014. In rejecting the arguments put before it on legitimate
expectations and legal certainty, the Supreme Court stated that “no provisions of RD

661/2007 ... guaranteed that the regulated tariffs could not be changed.”**7

530. Ina judgment of 12 July 2016, the Supreme Court considered a challenge by the AEE to
RD 413/2014 and Order IET/1045/2014. It again rejected the arguments put before it on
legitimate expectations and legal certainty. The Court held (in a passage repeated from

the judgment of 1 June 2016):

“Nor do we believe that the system in place at that time could alone be
deemed to be a conclusive enough external sign to generate the legitimate
expectation in the appellant; i.e. the rational and well-founded belief that
the electrical power remuneration regime that it produced could not be
altered in the future, as no provision of the RD 661/2007, by which its
facilities were protected, guaranteed that the regulated tariff would not be
subject to change.

585 CL-0183, Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and on Liability, 12
September 2014 583.

586 Cl, PHB { 161.
587 2.0264, Judgment of the Supreme Court, 1264/2016, 1 June 2016, p. 8.

186

In this regard, the jurisprudence of this Court has been constant over the
years on pointing out, in the interpretation and application of the authorising
tules of the legal and economic system applicable to electricity production
using renewable energy sources, which guarantee the right to the reasonable
rate of return on the investments made by the owners of these facilities, but
do not recognise their unalterable right to maintain the remuneration
framework approved by the holder of regulatory power unaltered.

Thus, over ten years ago, this Chamber noted in its ruling of 15 December
2005 (appeal 73/2004), a relapse in proceedings on the legality of Royal
Decree 436/2004, on the methodology for updating and systematisation of
the legal and economic regime of the activity of electricity production under
the special regime, that ‘no legal obstacle exists for the Government, in
exercise of its regulatory power and the broad qualifications it possesses in
a heavily regulated area such as electricity, to modify a particular
remuneration system, provided it remains within the framework established
by the LSE’. And in the same direction, the STS of 25 October 2006 (appeal
12/2005), relapsed into an appeal that contested Royal Decree 2351/2004,
amending the procedure resolving technical restrictions and other
regulations of the electricity market, pointed out that section 30.4 of the
Electricity Sector Act allowed the respective companies to aim for
‘reasonable rates of return with reference to the cost of money in the capital
market’ or ‘a reasonable remuneration for their investments’, without the
analysed remuneration regime, by contrast, ensuring owners of facilities in
special regime ‘the intangibility of a certain level of profits or revenues
relative to those obtained in previous years, nor the indefinite stay of
formulas used to set premiums.’

This jurisprudential line has continued to this day, in rulings of this Court
of 20 March 2007 (appeal 11/2005), 9 December 2009 (appeals 149/2007
and 152/2007), 12 April 2012 (appeal 40/2011), 13 September 2012 (appeal
48/2011), 15 October 2012 (appeal 64/2011), 10 December 2012 (appeal
138/2011), 29 January 2013 (appeal 232/2012), 29 May 2013 (appeal
193/2010) and 16 March 2015 (appeal 118/2013), among others, in which
this Court has insisted, in the face of successive regulatory amendments,
that it was not possible for electricity production facility owners in the
special regime to be granted an ‘unalterable right’ for the future in which
the remuneration framework approved by the owner of regulatory power
remains unchanged, provided that the requirements of the Electricity Sector
Act are respected in terms of reasonable return on investment.”>**

588 R-0336, Judgment of the Supreme Court, 1730/2016.rca 456.2014 AEE, 12 July 2016, p. 11. See also, Resp. oral
closing at Day 5/204.

187

531. It follows that it has been held by the Spanish Supreme Court in plain terms that “no

provision of the RD 661/2007... guaranteed that the regulated tariff would not be subject

to change.” As the Tribunal understands it, this finding is reached through analysing RD

661/2207 in its broader context, i.e. as a Royal Decree that is hierarchically inferior to
Law 54/1997 such that, regardless of the existence of a provision such as Article 44.3,
there may be a change to the tariff regime provided that the overarching principle of

reasonable return in Law 54/1997 is satisfied.

532. With regard, however, to what the Spanish Government was saying at the time that the
Claimants’ Investments were made, the Spanish Ministry of Industry, Tourism and

Commerce stated on 25 May 2007 that:

“The new regulation guarantees an average return of 7% for wind farms and
hydro-electric facilities that opt to transfer their production to distributors
and between 5% and 9% if they participate in the electricity production
market. ... Tariffs will be revised every 4 years, taking into account the
fulfilment of the objectives set out. ... Future adjustments to said tariffs will
not affect installations which are already in operation. This guarantees legal
certainty for the electricity producer and stability for the sector, favouring
development.”>*?

533. In addition, although the Tribunal places less weight on these, the presentations of
InvestinSpain and the CNE also support the contention that Spain understood Article 44.3
as protecting existing plants against any future tariff revisions.*°° The Claimants also rely

on what was said by Spain’s representatives at the meeting of June 2010, although the

589 €.0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007.

5° Cl, Mem. ff 181-185 and Cl. Reply {ff 84-91. See inter alia, C-0059, InvestinSpain website, “About Us”. See also,
C-0030, Manuela Garcfa, “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain”, INTERES InvestinSpain Power Point
presentation, Graz (Austria), 15 November 2007, pp. 4, 15, 18, 19, 32, 40 and 42; C-0060, Manuela Garcia,
“Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain”, InvestinSpain and the Spanish Ministry for Industry, Tourism and
Commerce, November 2008; C-0248, InvestinSpain PowerPoint presentation, “Legal Framework for Renewable
Energies in Spain”, undated, p. 4; C-0133, Luis Jestis SAnchez de Tembleque, “The Regulation of Renewable Energy”,
CNE Power Point presentation, Barcelona, February 2009; C-0183, Carlos Solé Martin, Luis Jestis Sanchez de
Tembleque, “Renewable Energies: The Spanish Case”, CNE Power Point presentation, Cartagena de Indias, 9-13
February 2009.

   

188

534.

535.

536.

position being adopted there was apparently that the premiums could change, but not the
591

fixed tariffs.
In these unusual circumstances, the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to approach
its application of the FET standard on the basis that Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 can only
ever have had the meaning and effect that follows from the recent decisions of the Spanish
Supreme Court, and that such meaning and effect should have been known to a diligent
Investor making Investments in 2008-2012. This is not to cut across the principle of
deference that is reflected in Perenco and various other awards, but merely to recognise
that, in certain situations, what a superior court subsequently says as to the meaning and
effect of domestic law may not establish what a diligent Investor could or should have

concluded at the time of an Investment.

e. Do the Claimants have legitimate expectations based on specific commitments of
the Respondent?
The Claimants’ case is that their legitimate expectations are founded on specific
commitments made in Article 40.3 of RD 436/2004, Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 and
Article 5.3 of RD 1614/2010, which are to be read in conjunction with the provisions in
the Decrees including in particular those establishing the right to receive the regulated
tariff or the premium (and, insofar as concerns Article 5.3 of RD 1614/2010, in
conjunction also with the July 2010 “agreement”).*°? Of particular importance, Article
44.3 of RD 661/2007 provided for a 2010 review “of the tariffs, premiums, supplements

and lower and upper limits defined in this Royal Decree”, and then stated:

“The revisions to the regulated tariff and the upper and lower limits
indicated in this paragraph shall not affect facilities for which the deed of
commissioning shall have been granted prior to 1 January of the second year
following the year in which the revision shall have been performed. . . .”**

As to the interpretation of this provision, and its position within the framework

established by Law 54/1997, the Tribunal considers that RD 661/2007 (just like RD

591 Cl. PHB {{ 162, referring to the evidence of Mr Henderson.
52 See e.g., Cl. PHB J 51.

53 €.0017/R-0101, RD 661/2007, regulating the activity of electricity production under the special regime, 25 May
2007 (published 26 May 2007), pp. 45-46.

189

436/2004 before it) established the specific mechanics of the remuneration under the
Special Regime, in implementation of Article 30.4 of Law 54/1997, which stated that:
“The remuneration arrangements for electric power generation installations operating
under the special regime shall be supplemented by the payment of a premium under
statutory terms set out in regulations ... .”. Thus, whereas Article 30.4 established the
basic principle that the RE producers would receive a reasonable return,°** the
subsequent Royal Decrees including RD 661/2007 constituted the regulatory

implementation of that principle, as indeed appears from the Preamble to RD 661/2007:

“The economic framework established in the present Royal Decree
develops the principles provided in Law 54/1997, of 27 November, on the
Electricity Sector, guaranteeing the owners of facilities under the special
regime a reasonable return on their investments, and the consumers of
electricity an assignment of the costs attributable to the electricity system
which is also reasonable ... .”°°5

537. | While the Respondent is correct to say that Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 does not refer
to “any” revision, it is readily understood as meaning that, once a producer qualified
under the new regime established by RD 661/2007, the revisions would only be in
accordance with Article 44.3. The Tribunal has already considered the import of the
decisions of the Supreme Court, and it sees the above understanding as supported in

general terms by the Ministerial press release that accompanied RD 661/2007.°°°

538. It does not however follow that, for the purposes of legitimate expectations, Article 44.3
is to be considered as a specific commitment. First, the Tribunal has considerable doubts
as to whether Article 44.3 can correctly be interpreted as a form of representation to RE
investors that, come what may, the RD 661/2007 remuneration regime would remain

substantially in place so far as they were concerned.>”” Certainly there is no sufficient

54 R.0003, Law 54/1997, pp. 50-51.

595 C.0017/R-0101, RD 661/2007, regulating the activity of electricity production under the special regime, 25 May
2007 (published 26 May 2007), p. 2.

56.0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007.

597 CL-0187, Blusun, 371: "
sufficiently clearly expressed.”

. arepresentation as to future conduct of the state could be made in the form of a law,

 

190

evidence that the Claimants relied on it as such a representation, and moreover did not
do so following an adequate due diligence exercise (see Section D(2)(b) and (c)
above***). The same points apply with respect to Article 22 of RD 661/2007, on which
the Claimants also placed some (but lesser) weight.*”? Second, and in any event, Article
44.3 was a provision in a regulation of general application that, just as had been the case
with RD 436/2004, was susceptible to change by the State — notwithstanding, in the case
of RD 436/2004, the stability that was to some extent established by its Article 40.3.°°

539. The Claimants made their post-2007 Investments knowing — including through the July

601

2007 Poyry report®” — that, despite its Article 40.3, the regime of remuneration

established by RD 436/2004 had not lasted unchanged for more than around two years,
with a significant change being implemented by RDL 7/2006. This was a matter of well-
voiced concern to the APPA and the AEE.%” Then, through RD 661/2007, the RD
436/2004 regime had been replaced in its entirety.

540. Indeed, following the adoption of RDL 7/2006 and the publication of the draft Decree
that (following amendments) became RD 661/2007, there were various complaints of
damage being done to Spanish Constitutional principles of legal certainty and protection
of legitimate expectations. The CNE, in its report of February 2007, considered these

complaints to be ill-founded, stating:

“As shown both in the scientific doctrine and case law, in a social and
democratic State of Law the principles of legal certainty and protection
legitimate expectations cannot be built on insurmountable obstacles to the
innovation of a body of law, nor can they be used as instruments to petrify

5°8 See also, Resp. oral opening at Day 2/129.

5% See e.g., Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/90 and 93-94.

6 CL-0187, Blusun, J 371; RL-0049, Charanne, {ff 491-494. As to RD 436/2004, Article 40.3, see C-0016/R-0100,
RD/436/2004, establishing the methodology for the updating and systematisation of the legal and economic regime
for electric power production in the special regime, 12 March 2004 (published 27 March 2004): “3. The tariffs,
premiums, incentives and supplements resulting from any of the revisions provided for in tl ection shall apply
solely to the plants that commence operating subsequent to the date of the entry into force referred to in the paragraph
above and shall not have a backdated effect on any previous tariffs and premiums.”

1 ©.0103, Poyry July 2007 Report (Wind), pp. 1-2.

62 See, R-0015, The Controversial Energy Decree-Act, APPA Alegaciones magazine No. 22, May-July 2006; and R-
0016, APPA Info magazine No. 23, August-December 2006; also R-0166, AEE’s 30 August 2009 submissions before
the CNE.

  

 

191

current Law at any moment. In other words, the principle of legal certainty
is not by definition an anti-evolutionary or conservative principle; it does
not mean that legislation is resistant or immune to reform. In this sense,
these principles do not impede dynamic innovation ... . Thus the principles
only require that regulatory innovation —especially if sudden,
unpredictable or unexpected— be carried out with certain guarantees and
caution (sufficient transition periods for adaptation and, where applicable,
compensatory measures) that cushion, moderate and minimise as far as
possible the defrauding of expectations generated by previous
regulations.”

541. Although the CNE was speaking in an advisory role to the Government as opposed to as
a body that could make determinations on the relevant law, in the current context of
whether legitimate expectations were validly formed, the CNE’s publicly-stated view that
there could be regulatory innovation, apparently notwithstanding a provision such as
Article 40.3 of RD 436/2004, is of some importance and is not supportive of the
Claimants’ case. The July 2007 Péyry report, which was of course commissioned by
the Claimants, also envisaged that there could be regulatory change, even though at the

same time it spoke of a guarantee under RD 661/2007.%

542. The Tribunal considers that neither through Article 44.3, nor through any other provision
of RD 661/2007,° nor through any other source, was a specific commitment made to
the Claimants to the effect that the Special Regime remuneration as established by RD
661/2007 would remain substantially unchanged. While the presentations of
InvestinSpain and the CNE that the Claimants now refer to may possibly have been

influential in terms of certain investment decisions made by foreign investors, even if

603 C.0249/R-0128, CNE, Report 3/2007, regarding the proposed Royal Decree, regulating the activity of electricity
production under the special regime and of certain facilities of comparable technology under the ordinary regime, 14
February 2007, p. 18. The case put by the Claimants to the Respondent’s witness, Mr Ayuso, was that a CNE report
was a valuable source for an investor. Mr Ayuso accepted that it was one of the sources an investor would use: see,
Day 3/71.

604 Cf, Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/156-157 (in response to a question from the Tribunal). According to the Resp.
oral closing at Day 5/205-206, the CNE in its March 2012 report would not have been suggesting regulatory revisions
if it had believed that regulations affecting existing installations could not be altered. The Tribunal considers that the
March 2012 report is consistent with its conclusion above as to the 2007 report.

65 C0103, Péyry July 2007 Report (Wind), p. 58, cf. pp. 2 and 81; Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/132; Respondent's
oral closing at Day 5/181.

 

 

66 In their oral opening at Day 1/90 and 93-94, weight was placed on Article 22 as a form of stability commitment.
The Tribunal does not agree with that characterisation.

192

such could amount to specific commitments, there is no suggestion that the Claimants
attended and relied upon any such presentations, and the Tribunal does not see how they
could have generated any expectations.” The existence of a background factual matrix

in which other States have FIT schemes does not detract from this.

543. The same basic point applies with respect to the Ministerial press release of 25 May 2007,

as to which there is no case that this was seen and relied on by the Claimants.%”
Moreover, although the Claimants have emphasised that this press release refers to a
“guarantee”, they have expressly not put their case on the basis of a specific commitment
made in the terms of the press release of 25 May 2007.°!° In these circumstances, the
Tribunal does not consider further whether the press release might be regarded as
separate to and of a different nature to RD 661/2007, such that it might itself qualify as a

form of special commitment.

544. The registration of the plants in which the Claimants have an interest in the RAIPRE does
not alter the above conclusions, and the issuance of a registration certificate to the
operating companies is not, in this Tribunal’s view, to be seen as a form of specific

commitment for the purposes of application of the Article 10(1) FET standard. Consistent

7 See e.g., RL-0089, Wirtgen, | 421. Cf. Cl. Mem. {J 181-185 and Cl. Reply 9] 84-91. See inter alia C-0059,
InvestinSpain website, “About Us”. Also see, C-0030, Manuela Garcia, “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in
Spain”, INTERES InvestinSpain Power Point presentation, Graz (Austria), 15 November 2007, pp. 4, 15, 18, 19, 32,
40 and 42; C-0060, Manuela Gare‘a, “Opportunities in Renewable Energy in Spain”, InvestinSpain and the Spanish
Ministry for Industry, Tourism and Commerce, November 2008; C-0248, InvestinSpain PowerPoint presentation,
“Legal Framework for Renewable Energies in Spain”, undated, p.

C-0133, Luis Jestis Sanchez de Tembleque, “The Regulation of Renewable Energy”, CNE Power Point presentation,
Barcelona, February 2009; C-0183, Carlos Solé Martin, Luis Jestis Sanchez de Tembleque, “Renewable Energies:
The Spanish Case”, CNE Power Point presentation, Cartagena de Indias, 9-13 February 2009. In the Claimants’ oral
opening, it was explained that the Claimants did not attend the InvestinSpain events, which were rel lied on to support

  

 

 

 

the reasonable nature of the Claimants’ s and to the *s und of the regime:
see, at Day 1/103. The Tribunal understands this to be the Claimants’ position with respect to the CNE presentations
also. See also, Resp. oral opening at Day 2/110-111 to the effect that there is no proof that the CNE presentations were

used to attract investors, and that these were not formal CNE reports.

608 Cf. Cl. PHB {| 78 and the emphasis placed by practice in other States with respect to FITs e.g. in Claimants’ oral
opening at Day 1/56-62. While the Tribunal accepts that such could be deemed of limited relevance as part of the
factual matrix, what matters in this case is the Spanish regulatory regime and whether legitimate expectations were
generated by representations or commitments of Spain.

69 €.0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007. Cf. e.g., RL-0089, Wirtgen, 421.

610 Cl. PHB { 69 to the effect that “it would be wrong to impute to RWE the expectation that it would receive the
returns contained in Government statements contemporaneous with RD 661.”

193

545.

with the views expressed in the Charanne case,°!! the Tribunal sees RAIPRE registration
as the completion of the administrative requirements for qualification under the given
Special Regime, not as an independent commitment to a given investor.*!” Registration
in the RAIPRE was compulsory under Article 9.1 of RD 661/2007 and was “to ensure
appropriate monitoring of the special regime and in particular in order to ensure the
management and control of the receipt of the regulated tariffs, the premiums and

supplements”,°' not to establish a specific commitment to pay premiums or tariffs.

The Tribunal also notes the view of the AEE, as set out in in its 2008 Yearbook, that
Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007 did not extend retroactive protection so far as concerns
revisions to premiums and was seriously flawed. Although the AEE could not and was
not purporting to put forward any definitive interpretation, in the context of whether
legitimate expectations were formed, some (if not great) weight attaches to their view, as

follows:

“The new decree also foresees the allocation of remuneration in a long-
lasting manner, for 20 years. However, the system of revisions and updates
set out in this decree, despite restoring the non-retroactivity of
modifications to the regulated tariff and of the upper and lower limits of
remuneration values, excludes premiums and supplements from this
guarantee, as article 44.3 allows for the retroactive application to past and
current investments of new premiums and supplements upon subsequent
modification.

The measure clearly contradicts the allocation of these values over a 20-
year period, rendering the concept of durability completely fictitious,
insofar as subsequent changes to these values have also been planned that,
as a result, would be applied retroactively.”°!*

©! RL-0049, Charanne, 510. Cf. Antin, [J] 551-552, although the Tribunal understands that the analysis of the Antin
tribunal in these paragraphs turns more on “the precision and detail exhibited in the royal decrees, particularly the
contemplation that the treatment would be accorded for a defined period of time” as opposed to the RAIPRE
registrations. The Tribunal also notes the different fact pattern of the Antin case.

612 Cf, Cl. Reply {f 523-532; C-0015, Excerpts of the RAIPRE certificates of the installations.

613 €.0017/R-0101, RD 661/2007, regulating the activity of electricity production under the special regime, 25 May
2007 (published 26 May 2007), p. 16.

614 R-0284, Annual Report of the Spanish Wind Energy Association, 2007; Mr Navarro said he was unaware of this,
Day 2/216-217.

194

546. As to the meeting of 23 June 2010, this is in a different category as it involved statements
being made directly by the Respondent’s officials (the Director General for Energy Policy
and Department Head, Electricity Sector) to the Claimants (including Messrs Henderson

and Navarro). However, the discussions were expressly on the basis that they “did not

reflect final positions”,°'> and the Tribunal sees this meeting as reflecting part of the

discussions in the context of the July 1010 “agreement” that was ultimately to develop
into RD 1614/2010. As appears from their contemporaneous documents, the Claimants
do not appear to have understood that any commitments were being made to them at this
meeting on which they could (or did) reasonably rely.°' Moreover, although certain of
the statements made by the Respondent’s representatives were to the effect that the RD

661/2007 regime would be given full effect in 2013 so far as concerns the Claimants’

617

plants,°’" the Director General also made comments that appear to suggest that there

would be further changes in the long term.°!* Accordingly, the Tribunal does not consider
that specific commitments were made at the meeting of 23 June 2010 that generated

legitimate expectations on the part of the Claimants.

547. As to the July 2010 “agreement” itself,°!? the Claimants say somewhat cautiously that
“RWE had access” to this,° although the Tribunal has seen no agreement as such, but
merely reference to agreement having been reached in the Ministerial press release of 2

July 2010. It appears from the press release that it was always the intention — as in the

615 €.0191, Minutes of 23 January 2010 Meeting.

616 C-0099, Transaction Approval Request Form, 12 July 2010; and C-0115, Transactional Approval Request Form,
Minority Shareholders Second Tranche, 28 September 2010. The Tribunal notes the evidence of Mr Henderson at Day
3/28-33, including to the effect that the meeting gave the Claimants comfort, but this does not change its ssment.
617 ©.0191, Minutes of 23 January 2010 Meeting, p. 1: “The DG then explained that the current position was that those
wind assets that were in the transitory phase between RD436 and RD 661, which accounts for all the Aersa operational
portfolio, would remain on the current tariff structure and that they would respect the 2013 date for the change from
one regime to the other, in contrary to recent press speculation.”

618 €.0191, Minutes of 23 January 2010 Meeting, p. 2: “As regards the future the DG brought a copy of the recently
published Long term plan to 2020 which they are obliged to submit to Brussels as their position by the end of the
month but as regards the associated tariff regimes they believed that this would only be discussed as and when the
‘retroactive’ debate had finished and as such clarity should not be expected before the end of this year. (We will
forward a report on the Spanish targets to 2020 next week). The DG did however make the comment that in his opinion
the likely outcome for future wind would be to guarantee a floor and above this level receive the pool price.”

619 €.0063, 2 July 2010 Press Release.

©20 Cl. Mem. { 201.

 

 

 

195

event transpired — that the contents of the “agreement” would be transferred and
developed in regulations, i.e. RD 1614/2010, and the “agreement” does not appear to have
been treated contemporaneously as giving rise to any independent obligations.®! Further,
although the Claimants have described the “agreement” as a “quid pro quo”, i.e. an agreed
temporary cut to the premium under RD 661/2007 and in operating hours in return for a
guaranteed return to the RD 661/2007 regime from 2013, the Claimants’ plants did not

participate in the “quo” because they were still in transition from the RD 436/2004
regime. It is not just that the Claimants were not party to an actual agreement, but insofar
as an agreed package was being sought in relation to a cut in tariffs, there was no
consensual basis for this so far as concerns the Claimants.°? By reference to the above,
the Tribunal does not consider that the “agreement” gave rise to a specific commitment

generating legitimate expectations so far as the Claimants are concerned.

548. As to RD 1614/2010, the Tribunal does not consider that its Article 5.3 adds materially
to Article 44.3 of RD 661/2007. The Tribunal notes that the Claimants place weight on
documents commenting on the draft of Decree 1614, in particular the Opinion of the
Council of State of 26 November 2010.°% Although this Opinion questions the
appropriateness of the draft Decree, including with respect to the limit being placed on
future revisions by the then draft Article 5.3, the Tribunal does not understand it as saying
that draft Article 5.3 could not be changed by future regulations. Referring to the Supreme
Court judgment of 9 December 2009, the Opinion notes that “the Supreme Court has

expressed its opinion on the lack of any violation of the principles of legal security and

21 Cf, Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/108-109. See also, Resp. oral closing at Day 5/196-197, referring to a series
of AEE and other submissions where reference to and reliance on an agreement (as such) would be expected, but is
not to be found. See e.g., the AEE submission to the CNE of October 2010; R-0166, AEE’s 30 August 2009
submissions before the CNE. The Tribunal considers that, if an agreement giving rise to consensual obligations of
some sort had been concluded, the Claimants would be able to identify where this had been treated as such.

62 See, C-0191, Minutes of 23 January 2010 Meeting, where Spain’s representatives are recorded as stating “that the
current position was that those wind assets that were in the transitory phase between RD 436 and RD 661, which
accounts for all the Aersa operational portfolio, would remain on the current tariff structure and that they would respect
the 2013 date for the change from one regime to the other, in contrary to recent press speculation. They felt aggrieved
that this portion of the sector would not contribute to the deficit reduction but that was the current status and expected

 

 

23 Cf, Claimants’ oral closing at Day 1/109-110, referring to C-0333, Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Tourism,
“Report on the Draft RD 1614/2010”, and emphasising in particular views expressed in the subsequent Council of
State Opinion on the draft considering the comments of the Ministry and others, C-0269, State Council Report on
draft RD 1614/2010, 26 November 2010.

196

549.

non-retroactive effect via legislation that amends the remuneration of facilities under the

special regime”, and refers to “the more than questionable juridical value that... a

 

precept imposing automatic legal restrictions might have in relation to later
revisions of the legislation”. The Tribunal thus does not see the Opinion as supportive of

the Claimants’ case, and notes further that it states:

“Indeed, one of the most persistent needs arising in the regulation of

remuneration for electric power production under the special regime has

been for it to be constantly revised and amended. This has brought about

numerous legislative amendments since the approval of Royal Decree

661/2007, which initially raised doubts over whether they were in keeping

with the principles of art. 9.3 of the Constitution (such problems have

already been referred to in this opinion as well as in the aforementioned

opinion number 2.264/2010). In view of this set of circumstances the idea

that attempts are now being made to exclude such facilities from future

revisions of the remuneration system seems neither appropriate nor

consistent.” 4
The Tribunal concludes from all the above that the FET standard is not to be applied as if
a specific commitment, on which the Claimants could reasonably and actually did rely,
had been made to the Claimants that their plants would always receive substantially the
same remuneration as established by RD 661/2007. As follows from its analysis of the
FET standard under Article 10(1) in Section C above, the Tribunal considers that, even
with respect to those Investments made after RD 436/2004 and RD 661/2007 (cf. Section
D(2)(a) above), the Claimants had no legitimate expectations that the Special Regime
would remain substantially unchanged.°> Likewise, the Claimants’ alternative claim as
to legitimate expectations fails, as this is based on an alleged reasonable return being the
“promised return when RWE invested”, with it being said that: “RWE invested in reliance
on the Special Regime FIT and all of its installations were entitled to the RD 661 FIT

pursuant to Spain’s grandfathering commitments. When enacting RD 661, the CNE

4 €.0269, State Council Report on draft RD 1614/2010, 26 November 2010.

5 Tt follows that the Tribunal does not have to decide whether legitimate expectations could have been generated
specifically with respect to the Investments made subsequent to the December 2009 decisions of the Supreme Court
(cf. Section D(2)(d) above). See, in particular, R-0141, Judgment of the Supreme Court, appeal 151/2007 EDJ
2009/307349, 3 December 2009.

197

considered a return of between 8.2% and 11.2% after tax to be reasonable” .©° In this
Tribunal’s view, there was no such “promised return when RWE invested”, and it does

not see the CNE Report 3/2007 as capable of generating any legitimate expectation to a

 

return of between 8.2% and 11.2% after tax (or indeed to any other return).°”
f. Conclusions as to the Clair ’ case on legiti exp
disproportionality

As follows from the discussion in sub-section (e) above, the Tribunal considers that this
is not a case where specific commitments were made to an investor such as to found
legitimate expectations. However, as identified in Section C above, the absence of a
specific commitment does not mean that the fact that an Investor has invested by
reference to a given tariff regime ceases to be a relevant factor in applying the FET
standard under Article 10(1). In the current context, and against the backdrop of the
matters considered in the preceding sub-sections, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to
assess whether the changes to the tariff regime were disproportionate, and whether the
Respondent gave due consideration to impacts to Investors such as the Claimants in its

decision-making process.°*

As identified and discussed further below, the question of disproportionality in the
current context entails a consideration as to whether the changes were suitable and
necessary to achieve the legislative intent, and whether an excessive financial burden was
shifted to the Claimants who had committed very substantial resources on the basis of

the Special Regime. There is also an initial question as to what, if any, margin of

6 C], Skeleton {[ 71; see also Cl. Reply {| 535-537; Cl. PHB {| 76-77. Cf. e.g. Resp. Skeleton { 53.

7s to the conclusion of the RREEF tribunal with respect to a legitimate expectation to a reasonable return more
generally, this did not become part of the Claimants’ case. They stated that it was an “erroneous conclusion that
Spain’s main commitment towards investors was the guarantee to provide reasonable return. This finding of the
RREEF tribunal is both wrong and contrary to the majority of ECT awards that have found that Spain promised
investors such as the Claimants that it would not alter retroactively the specific tariffs of RD 661 and 1614/2010.”
See Claimant’s Comments of 10 May 2019 on RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles
of Quantum, {{ 2.

©8 The Claimants alleged that the Disputed Measures were disproportionate together with its allegation that the
Disputed Measures were unreasonable. In light of its view on the relevant legal principles as stated in Section C above,
the Tribunal deals with the issue of alleged disproportionality here.

198

appreciation is to be accorded in the consideration of whether the measures adopted by

Spain were necessary / not disproportionate.
(i) Margin of appreciation?

552. The Claimants have stated that although a margin of appreciation analysis could
conceivably apply in general terms when it comes to the reasonableness or
proportionality of Spain’s decision-making,” such an approach should not be adopted
in the ECT context. They rely on the limited nature of the exceptions established by
Article 24 ECT, and contend that the Tribunal must apply a high level of scrutiny, and
must independently and objectively assess Spain’s justifications for the Disputed
Measures. It is also said that a margin of appreciation is only relevant when: “(/) the
regulatory authorities of the State are better placed to rule on matters within their
competence; and (2) the State measures represent the sovereign will of the democratic
Government which should not be lightly interfered with. These issues do not apply
here.” >!

553. The Tribunal has already rejected the Claimants’ interpretation of Article 24 ECT. It
notes that a margin of appreciation has been accorded by various tribunals considering
whether a State’s regulatory measures can be regarded as necessary,*** and likewise so
far as concerns the reasonableness or proportionality of a State’s regulatory measures**?
including in the ECT context. The Tribunal considers that this must be appropriate in

the current legal and factual context, and it does not accept that allowing some margin of

9 Cl, PHB ¥ 112. The Claimants’ case at PHB [| 110-111, by reference to Blusun, is that margin of appreciation
plays no role where an investor has legitimate expectations. Regardless of whether this is correct or not, and consistent
with Blusun, the Tribunal does not consider that the Claimants benefit from legitimate expectations given the absence
of specific commitments.

630 Cl. PHB 4 112-116.

61 Cl. PHB 118.

82 E.g., CL-0084, Continental Casualty Company v The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award, 5
September 2008, (hereinafter “Continental’”) | 181.

3 Cl. PHB { 113, referring to CL-0186, Philip Morris Brand Sarl (Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A.
(Switzerland) and Abal Hermanos S.A. (Uruguay) v Oriental Republic of Uruguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7,
Award, 8 July 2016, (hereinafter “Philip Morris”) 7 399, CL-0178, Chemtura { 123, and CL-0084, Continental,
181.

4 Resp. PHB { 110, referring to RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, 8.35.

199

554.

appreciation would only be suitable in cases involving public health or essential security
interests.°*> A consideration of whether a State’s response to one aspect of an economic
crisis was disproportionate must, in the Tribunal’s view, allow some reasonable margin

of appreciation to the State,°*°

given that the Tribunal is at once in a better position (it
has the benefit of hindsight and of experts suggesting different and arguably better ways
of addressing the Tariff Deficit) and a worse position (its perspective is inevitably far
narrower than that of a State addressing differing aspects of an economic crisis) to assess
what was disproportionate, including in terms of balancing the differing public and
private interests that may be in play. The Tribunal emphasises, as was noted by the
tribunal in Saluka, that the FET standard does not create an “open-ended mandate to

second-guess government decision-making.”**"

(ii) Were the Disputed Measures suitable and necessary to the legislative aim?

In considering an issue of proportionality, it is useful (and usual) to assess whether the
given measure was suitable and necessary to the stated legislative aim.®* Suitability is
generally seen as a relatively undemanding standard and, consistent with the statement in
the Saluka case above, the Tribunal does not see this as requiring more than a relationship
of suitability between the measure and the objective to be achieved. The question of
whether a given measure is necessary is more demanding. Although it will generally be
appropriate to allow some margin of appreciation to the State in this context, the question
of whether a measure is necessary will typically involve some analysis as to whether there
were any less restrictive means reasonably available to the State for meeting the given
objective. If it is established that — even according a margin of appreciation to the State —
less restrictive means were reasonably available, it is difficult to see how the given

measure can be considered necessary.

5 Cf. Cl. PHB ¥ 113, referring to CL-0186, Philip Morris, 1 399, CL-0178, Chemtura, { 123, and CL-0084,
Continental at fn. 266.

636 Cf. Cl. PHB ¥ 118.

7 CL-0034, Saluka, | 284, referring to SD Myers Inc v Canada 261. See also, RL-0089, Wirtgen J 444.

638 At Cl. Mem. { 494 the Claimants state that for a measure to be proportionate it must be necessary to achieve the
goals pursued.

200

555. The Tribunal considers that the broad legislative aim of the Disputed Measures was to
put in place a new regime that addressed the problem of the Tariff Deficit and the

unsustainable electricity sector debt. The Preamble to RDL 9/2013 states:

“_.. for the past decade, the Spanish electricity system has generated a tariff
deficit which, over time, has become structural due to the fact that the real
costs associated with regulated activities and with the operation of the
electricity sector are higher than the revenues collected from the fees set by
the government and paid by consumers.

Between 2004 and 2012, the electricity system's income from consumer
fees has increased by 122%, while the increase in the system's regulated
costs in the same period has been 197 percent. Prominent among the cost
items that have most contributed to such an increase are the special scheme
premiums and the accumulated deficit annual payments, items that have
multiplied by six and nine respectively during the said period.

According to the latest data provided by the National Electricity
Commission, as of 10 May 2013 there is an accumulated debt of 26,062.51
million euros. In addition to the calculation of the electricity system debt,
the Commission notes that from 2003 to 10 May 2013 the amount paid out
to fund the deficit of the electricity system by means of the annual payments
which are included in consumers' access fees, in current prices for each year,
amounts to 11,823 million euros.

These figures testify to the unsustainable nature of the electricity sector debt
and to the need to adopt urgent and immediately-applicable measures that
make it possible to bring such a situation to an end.”°*?

556. The accumulated debt that resulted from the Tariff Deficit — in excess of EUR 26 billion
as at May 2013 — had been growing fast, i.e. by approximately EUR 5 billion in 14
months. Thus, according to the CNE report of 7 March 2012, the system debt then stood
at EUR 21,812 million, with the CNE then considering that the deficit between revenues

and costs of the electrical system had become unsustainable. The CNE stated:

“Significantly, the fundamental problem in the electrical sector is that the
lack of convergence between revenues and costs for activities regulated in
the electrical sector in these last 10 years has created a growing debt in the
electrical system. This imbalance between revenue and costs in the system
is unsustainable due to the impact of the growing debt accumulated on

© €.0024, RDL 9/2013.
© €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 6.

201

557.

access licenses, present and future, for consumers, and the temporal impact
on the indebtedness of the companies that are obligated to finance the
system’s deficit.

... the urgent adoption of regulatory solutions is needed, in the electrical
and natural gas sectors, both, to prevent problems with structural rate
deficits, as well as containing the costs of regulated activities, review their
regulations and promote more efficient and competitive operation of the
markets.”°4

The CNE proposed a number of possible “urgent and necessary” short and medium term
measures, some of which were radical in nature i.e. financing the cost of the special
regime through CO2 auctions and a tax on the sale of petrol and gas, some of which
envisaged relatively minor reductions to the remuneration to RE generators (such as
reductions to the annual increase in accordance with the CPI, reductions impacting solar
thermoelectric plants pre-registered but not yet finally registered in the RAIPRE, and
restrictions on use of fossil fuels in generation of renewable energy to 5%), some of which
envisaged an increase in access tolls.™? The CNE did not propose the replacement of the
Special Regime fixed tariff / premium put in place by RD 661/2007,™ but the Tribunal
sees its report as strong evidence that it was necessary to act in some way to address the

Tariff Deficit.

As noted in Section IV.C above, on 25 June 2012, three months subsequent to this CNE
report, the Spanish Government requested external financial assistance from the EU,
leading on 20 July 2012 to conclusion of the MOU on “Financial Sector Policy

Conditionality”, at paragraph 31 of which it was stated:

“31. Regarding structural reforms, the Spanish authorities are committed to
implement the country-specific recommendations in the context of the
European Semester. These reforms aim at correcting macroeconomic
imbalances, as identified in the in-depth review under the Macroeconomic
Imbalance Procedure (MIP). In particular, these recommendations invite
Spain to: ...

4 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 4.
© €.0163, 2012 CNE Report.

643

See e.g., Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/42.

202

645

559.

560.

561.

6) ... address the electricity tariff deficit in a comprehensive way.”

This was an invitation, not a requirement, but it is nonetheless evidence of the gravity of
the Tariff Deficit problem. Further, although as the Claimants have correctly stated it
would have been irrational to require RE installations to bear the cost of bailing out

Spanish banks,°>

it is plain from the MOU and other sources that as of 2012-2013 Spain
was facing an ongoing financial crisis and that it had become imperative to address the
Tariff Deficit.° The Tribunal does not accept that the Tariff Deficit should be regarded
as a known quantity as of the date of adoption of RD 661/2007, such that Spain should
be regarded as taking on board and accepting all risks with respect to growth in the
Deficit. The Tribunal considers that the subsidies established by RD 661/2007 were
grounded in the macroeconomic data forecast in the 2005 PER,®” and that Spain’s
economy was hit very hard indeed by the global economic crisis of and from 2008, with
the Tariff Deficit increasing as electricity consumption dropped well below what had

been forecast in the 2005 PER.“*®

The Tribunal considers that the Disputed Measures were suitable in terms of addressing
the Tariff Deficit: they were directly aimed at reducing the Deficit and in the event the

Deficit dropped rapidly as a result of their implementation.?

The question of whether the Disputed Measures were necessary is more difficult. The
question is not whether there was a state of necessity precluding wrongfulness,°™ but the
Tribunal does not consider it sufficient that, in 2013, it had become necessary to change
in some way the Special Regime as implemented by RD 661/2007. The focus must be on

the particular measures selected by the Respondent.

4 RL-0067, MOU with the EU.

Cl. PHB { 125.

©46 See e.g., Resp. oral opening at Day 2/22-24.

© Resp. PHB { 116.

© Resp. C-Mem. ff] 594-596; Resp. Rej. If 286-289.

© See e.g., the view of the Claimants’ expert, Dr Garcia of Compass Lexecon, Day 3/158. Lines 11-12.
50 Cf. Cl. Reply #4 506 and 585-587.

203

562. The Claimants contend that other means were available to deal with the Deficit.! As to
this, their experts, Compass Lexecon, identified two combined methods to deal with an
estimated annual Deficit of EUR 3 billion, namely (a) a 3.1% increase in domestic tariffs
and a 2% increase in industrial tariffs, coupled with (b) a 1.4% increase in indirect
taxation, through an increase in VAT or the introduction of a carbon tax on fuels such as
petrol, coal and gas.°? The Tribunal is not persuaded that these means were available
and would have met the desired objective. In this respect, the annual Deficit to be
addressed was not EUR 3 billion, but in excess of EUR 5 billion — the Deficit for 2012
was EUR 5.6 billion and the average of the 5 years prior to 2013 was EUR 5.1 billion.
The lowest annual figure was EUR 3.85 billion, which may indicate that the measures
that had been taken in 2010 had initially had some success.°? The Compass Lexecon
figure of EUR 3 billion is taken on the basis of the figure for 2013, but as RDL 9/2013
was adopted mid-way through 2013, the figure for 2013 as a whole does not appear useful

to the Tribunal. Further:

a) As to the increase in electricity charges, it is not as if the Respondent had not
considered increasing electricity charges. As appears from the extract from the
Preamble of RDL 9/2013 referred to above, the RDL was at least in part predicated
on the fact that increased charges to consumers had not solved the problem. In its
report of 7 March 2012, the CNE considered a scenario where the Tariff Deficit
would be addressed by an increase in access fees, which it considered would mean
a 35.5% increase in 2012 and then further increases in subsequent years (0.6% in
2013 and 6.4% in 2014) and considered that this would be “unsustainable” for
consumers.°* By coupling its other proposed regulatory measures with an increase

in access fees, the increase would be reduced to 15.1% in 2012, a decrease of 4.5%

51 Cl, Mem. 4 494; Cl. Reply 158; Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/148-149.

Report ff 19-21 and section V; Compass Lexecon, Second Report, section V, Day 3/158-163.
Report { 141, Figure 8.

4 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 8.

 

204

in 2013 and then an increase of 2.3% in both 2014 and 2015, which it considered

would be “difficult to sustain for consumers.”

b

As to the suggestion that the Deficit could in part have been addressed by tax
increases, no analysis has been provided as to the broader economic impacts of
using such an increase to address the Tariff Deficit (at a time of extreme economic

056

uncertainty including the potential for a decrease in electricity consumption

caused by the general reduction in disposable income.

563. The Claimants also say that the CNE, in its report of 7 March 2012, provided a
comprehensive range of proposals that would solve the Tariff Deficit, and that these were
simply ignored by the Respondent.®’ This CNE report was the result of a specific
direction from Spain’s Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism to prepare a report on
the measures that could be adopted in the energy sector, with particular regard to the
Tariff Deficit.* The report contained a series of proposals as to short and medium term

measures:

a) Short term: (i) establish new time-frames for the premiums to be received by the
solar thermal power plants registered in the pre-assignment registry, without a final
commissioning certificate; (ii) limitation on the use of fossil fuels with premium
support to 5% of primary energy; (iii) remove the automatic increase in the X factor
of the efficiency in the tariffs and premiums update index (CPI-X); (iv)
standardisation of the premium on the tariff applicable to solar thermal plants to
avoid situations of over-remuneration; (v) partial financing by reference to CO2
auctions; (vi) partial financing by charges to sectors responsible for the

consumption of fossil fuels or alternatively through the General State Budget; (vii)

5 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 9.

56 Cf, Compass Lexecon, Second Report { 199.

7 Cl, Reply | 584.

68 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 1; Resp. C-Mem. [ 628.

205

modulation of the rate of penetration initially expected in the PER in line with the

provisions of RDL 1/2012.°°

b

Medium term: (i) revision of the existing regulation through the establishment of
competitive mechanisms (auctions) and premiums based on cost regulatory
information; (ii) removal of subsidies from the end of the economic life (estimated
useful life) of the plant; (iii) review of the premium’s ceiling and floor, so that when
the market price exceeded the ceiling, the premium was returned as the system net

tax income; (iv) allocation of actual operating costs.°°

564. The Tribunal notes that CNE was not examining the 2012 Deficit, which had increased
to EUR 5.61 billion from the 2011 figure of EUR 3.85 billion (according to Compass
Lexecon’s figures). It is also noted that some of the above would appear to involve

significant changes to — and reduction of — the remuneration established by RD661/2007.

565. | According to the Respondent, it adopted, along with measures related to this arbitration,
“another plurality of measures to increase the income of the System and reduce the costs
thereof’, including reducing costs “in line with the recommendations made by the CNE

on 7 March 2012.” It is said that:

“On the income side, it was agreed to feed the SES with the sums deriving
from the collection of the public revenues referred to in Act 15/2012. This
measure represented an exception to the principle of the self-financing of
the SES, based on the aim of promoting the development of Renewable
Energies.

The measures to increase the revenues of the SES were linked to important
measures to reduce the costs of the SES. Apart from the costs involved in
the premiums on renewables, all the SES costs were reduced, in line with
the recommendations made by the CNE on 7 March 2012, to adapt them to
the new economic scenarios arising from the crisis.

659 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report; Resp. C-Mem. { 632.
66 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report; Resp. C-Mem. { 633.

 

206

In this situation, measures were adopted to reduce the costs of the SES,
about which the Claimants have said nothing. The measures in question did
not exist as far as they were concerned: ... .”°°!

566. The Tribunal accepts that the Respondent did take various measures other than the
Disputed Measures, and the Claimants have failed to establish as incorrect the
Respondent’s contention that SES costs were reduced “in line with the recommendations
made by the CNE on 7 March 2012.” At the hearing, the Claimants’ focus was on the
alternatives put forward by Compass Lexecon, and the Tribunal has already rejected the
case that these were available and would have met the desired objective. The
Claimants have failed to establish that CNE’s recommendations that were not followed
would have met the legislative aim of addressing the problem of the Tariff Deficit and
the unsustainable electricity sector debt. Indeed, if the Claimants had confidence that the
CNE proposals would have worked (without causing significant loss to them and/or other
investors in the RE sector), they would presumably have submitted an expert report to
that effect, as opposed to Compass Lexecon providing their own alternatives to the

Disputed Measures.

567. The Tribunal considers that some margin of appreciation must be accorded to the
Respondent in assessing what measures would successfully address the complex and
acute problem of the Tariff Deficit and the unsustainable electricity sector debt but, even
without such a margin, it does not consider that the Claimants have established that other
less restrictive means were available. In light of the above, the Tribunal considers that

the Claimants have failed to establish that the Disputed Measures were not necessary.
(iti) Disproportionality (sensu stricto)

568. The above conclusion, however, does not mean that the issue of disproportionality
inevitably falls to be decided in the Respondent’s favour. According to the Claimants,
relying chiefly on the Tecmed case, proportionality requires that there be a reasonable

relationship between the burden imposed on the foreign investor and the aim sought to

61 Resp. Rej. {| 566-569, referring to C-Mem. ff 601-612.
662 See e.g., Day 1/221.

207

569.

be realised by a given State measure.%? The Claimants also contend that particular
attention must be paid to the harm to their investments.°™ The Respondent relies on AES

1,565

Summit v Hungary as establishing the applicable tes' including that “there needs to be

an appropriate correlation between the state’s public policy objective and the measure

adopted to achieve it.”°°

The Tribunal notes that the formulation in Tecmed formed part of its consideration of
whether there had been an indirect expropriation, whilst the test relied on from AES
Summit concerns reasonableness, not proportionality (or at least not expressly). In a case
involving the FET standard, the tribunal in EDF v Romania stated as follows with respect
to proportionality:
“As held by other tribunals, in addition to a legitimate aim in the public
interest there must be ‘a reasonable relationship of proportionality between

the means employed and the aim sought to be realized’; that proportionality

would be lacking if the person involved ‘bears an individual and excessive

burden’ ”697

There is considerable scholarly debate as to how, and to what end precisely, a
proportionality test is to be applied. The Tribunal considers that a consideration of
proportionality within the FET standard should take into account the nature of the right
and the specific context. In the current context, where investors including protected
foreign investors such as the Claimants have been generally invited and encouraged to
invest in a particular sector through a particularly attractive tariff regime, the Tribunal
considers that it is appropriate to identify the burden that has been borne by the Claimants
when that regime undergoes radical change, and whether that burden is excessive in

relation to the legitimate aim being pursued through the change. In this respect, the

3 Cl, Mem. 4 492; CL-0032, Tecmed, | 122.

64 CI, Mem. 497.

5 Resp. C-Mem. 984.

666 RL-0039, AES Summit; Award, | 10.3.9.

7 RL-0035, EDF v. Romania, | 293, referring to Azurix Corp. v The Argentine Republic, Award of 14 July 2006 1

311.

208

Tribunal also notes that, in considering the concept of arbitrariness under Article 10(1)

ECT, the Electrabel tribunal stated that:

“The relevance of the proportionality of the measure has been increasingly
addressed by investment tribunals and other international tribunals,
including the ECtHR. The test for proportionality has been developed from
certain municipal administrative laws, and requires the measure to be
suitable to achieve a legitimate policy objective, necessary for that
objective, and not excessive considering the relative weight of each interest
involved.”°%

571. This engages a form of balancing exercise which an international arbitral tribunal will
generally approach with some caution, i.e. a tribunal will have no wish to replace its own
subjective appreciations for those of the State. It may be assisted in this regard by
allowing to the State a margin of appreciation, although the appropriate width of the
margin will also be context specific. In the instant case, where an attractive tariff regime
has been established with the aim of attracting investors into an industry that requires
large up-front investment, and where the State was in 2007 speaking of a “guarantee”
both in the press release announcing the RD 661/2007 regime and in the July 2010
“agreement”, the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to allow a particularly wide

margin.

a. Specific contentions of the Claimants with respect to proportionality
and the Tariff Deficit
572. The Respondent contends that the burden is on the Claimants to show that the Disputed

Measures were disproportionate, and the Tribunal accepts this.°°

573. Within the context of proportionality, the Claimants contend that the FIT for wind and
hydro plants only played a limited role in the accumulation of the Tariff Deficit, that

Spain had caused the Deficit by its failure to increase tolls and charges to cover the true

68 RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, 179.
© Resp. Rej. { 1031.

209

cost of electricity, and that other means were available to deal with the Deficit.©” The

latter contention has already been considered under the topic of suitability and necessity.

574. The Claimants seek to evidence the first contention above by a breakdown of the Deficit
for 2013, which was EUR 3.188 billion, as to which it is said that the extra costs
associated with wind and mini hydro only represented 12% of the regulated costs of the
Electricity System.*”! However, this is of limited evidentiary value given that (i) the
Disputed Measures in RDL 9/2013 were not aimed solely at the wind and mini-hydro
sector while, on Compass Lexecon’s figures, the extra costs of the RE sector as a whole
accounted for 44% of the Deficit for 2013, (ii) RDL 9/2013 was adopted in July 2013,
and it is unclear from Compass Lexecon’s figures whether the impact of the RDL is
reflected in the EUR 3.188 billion figure for 2013. In this respect, as already noted, the
Tariff Deficit for 2012 was EUR 5.609 billion, and that 2012 figure would appear to the
Tribunal to have been a more relevant figure to establish what proportion of the Tariff

Deficit was due to the RE sector when RDL 9/2013 was adopted.

575. The second contention may be correct to a degree, but the Tribunal is not able — and
would have required considerably more in-depth expert evidence — to assess what price
electricity could reasonably have been borne by consumers, including without leading to
other adverse impacts to the Tariff Deficit such as a drop in consumption.*” The
Respondent’s position is that Disputed Measures were imposed on the entire system
while, in the period 2003-2012, electricity prices for consumers increased by 81%, with
the biggest increases in 2008 (10%), 2009 (10.1%) and 2011 (17.7%) with the result that
the price of electricity in Spain is amongst the highest in Europe.°’? These figures were

not challenged.” Further, according to the CNE report of 7 March 2012: “To summarize,

670 Cl, Mem. {| 492 and 494; Cl. Reply (ff 581 ef seq.; also {¥f 594 et seq.; Claimants’ oral opening, Day 1/217-221.
7 Cl, Mem. ff 492 and 494;
©? As to the drop in consumption in the period 2005-2010 compared to that anticipated in the 2005 PER, see, BDO
first report | 143 and Resp. oral opening at Day 2/25.

© Resp. C-Mem. if 285-293; Resp. Rej.{ 950; BDO first report, pp. 105-106 and Resp. oral opening at Day 2/26.
4 The Claimants’ answer in their oral opening, Day 1/220-221, was instead to the effect that electricity in Spain may
be higher than elsewhere (albeit not the highest in Europe) as Spain is very dependent on energy imports, and that
policy choices had been made by Spain with respect to the payment of a premium for renewable energy.

 

‘ompass Report J 144.b.

  

210

6

 

577.

in Spain the end electricity prices of industrial consumers, which have a direct impact
on industrial competitiveness, are at the threshold of the highest prices in Europe. With
regards to the end prices of household-residential consumers, especially of electricity,
the highest positions in the European ranking are recorded (third position excluding

taxes),... 7675

In these circumstances, the Tribunal does not accept that the failure to pass the full cost
of the electricity system on to consumers means that it was disproportionate (or

unreasonable) to adopt the Disputed Measures.

b. The burden falling on the Claimants’ Investments

On the Respondent’s case, the reforms of 2013-2014 maintained the essential elements
of the previous support system for renewable energies, including: (i) access priority, (ii)
dispatch priority, (iii) methodology for setting the subsidies based on installation types
and common standards, (iv) the market price for energy sold, plus a subsidy in order to
achieve reasonable rates of return with reference to the cost of money in the capital

market, recognising that (v) premiums are a cost of the SES and must be sustainable.°”°

The Tribunal accepts that certain important elements of the Special Regime were retained
in some form, including access and dispatch priority and a subsidy element in addition
to market price. However, this fact is not in itself sufficient to answer the question of
disproportionality and, as already identified, it is necessary to pay close attention to the

impact of the Disputed Measures on the Claimants’ plants in terms of lost remuneration.

The Tribunal has been presented with various sets of figures aimed at showing the impact
of the Disputed Measures on the Claimants’ plants in terms of the remuneration that will
actually be received under the new regime, set in opposition to what would have been

received under the RD 661/2007 regime.

R-0131, 2012 CNE Report, p. 17.

66 Eg. Resp. C-Mem. 37; Resp. Rej. | 797 et seq.; Resp. oral opening at Day 1/253, Day 2/35-36.

211

580.

581.

a) The calculations in the second statement of Mr Ayuso, and also one set of
calculations in the second Compass Lexecon report, are made by reference to the
Standard Installations introduced by Order IET 1045/2014 that most closely

approximate the Claimants’ plants.

b

A further set of calculations in the second Compass Lexecon report, and
calculations in the BDO reports, are made by reference to the initial investment in
the actual plants and subsequent capital expenditure, pursuant to data disclosed by

the Claimants in the disclosure phase of the arbitration.©””

According to the figures of Mr Ayuso, five of the Standard Installations approximating
to the Claimants’ plants will still achieve an internal rate of return (IRR) in excess of
10% pre-tax, whilst the remainder will achieve the 7.398% pre-tax provided for in the
Disputed Measures.°’* Further, Mr Ayuso’s evidence is that the Claimants’ wind plants
are more productive by around 15% than the Standard Installations,®” and so will earn

more so far as concerns power sold to the market.

As to the calculations in the second Compass Lexecon report, the summary at Table 4
shows that in the ‘but for’ scenario where the RD 661/2007 regime remains in place, the
Standard Installations approximating to the Claimants’ plants achieve an average 9% IRR
post-tax, whereas in the actual scenario they achieve an average 5.7% IRR (a comparison
is made to percentage figures in the 2007 CNE report that are said to show what would
be reasonable®°). These actual scenario figures, once converted into pre-tax figures, are
very close to the figures of Mr Ayuso.**! It follows that the Parties are in agreement that,
so far as concerns the actual scenario under the Disputed Measures, by reference to the

Standard Installations, and pre-tax:

© Compass Lexecon, Second Report {fff 262-263 and Table 10; BDO second report 240 and Table 13.
8 RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement, Tables 7-8.
© RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement ff] 99-100. According to Compass Lexecon, Second Report | 112, the figure

is 8%.

80 Cf, | 230 above; Compass Lexecon, Second Report § 120.
68! See, the pre-tax figures of Compass Lexecon at CLEX-226, IRR of Standard Plants in But-For and Actual.

212

682

582.

a

Nine of the Claimants’ wind plants will achieve an IRR of approximately 10% or
above (IT-00648: Muel; IT-00651: Grisel I; IT-00652: Acampo Armijo, Bosque
Alto, La Balsa, Los Labrados, Plana Maria, Plana Zaragoza; IT-00653: Rio Gallego

1.982

b) The remaining eleven wind plants (IT-00654: Aldehuelas, Juno, Lanternoso, Luna,
Urano; IT-00655: Grisel II; IT-00656: Rio Gallego II; IT-00657: Bancal I and II,
Siglos I and I) will achieve an IRR of approximately 7.4%.

c) One of the Claimants’ hydro plants will achieve an IRR of approximately 11% (IT-
00751: Villalgordo).

d) The remaining three hydro plants (IT-00673: Chomba; IT-00699: Cepeda; IT-

00701: La Mora) will achieve an IRR of approximately 7.4%.

The Tribunal takes note of these figures, but it considers that the estimated returns that
are more closely based on the actual investment and other costs of the Claimants’ plants
are of more assistance to it. The position of the Respondent’s expert, Mr Pérez from
BDO, was that these were the more useful figures,°*? and the Tribunal agrees. The issue
now being examined is whether the Disputed Measures have had a disproportionate
impact on the individual plants in which the Claimants invested and, in assessing this, it
is appropriate to look at actual impacts (so far as possible) as opposed to the impacts by
reference to a series of Standard Installations that are, after all, merely one facet of the
Disputed Measures. Moreover, it has been the Respondent’s consistent position in this
arbitration that the remuneration regime of plants including the Claimants’ plants was

based on a reasonable return as established by Law 54/1997, while the return figure

The “IT” reference denotes the standard installation most closely approximating the Claimants’ plants.

3 See, at Day 5/35-36:

“Q. ... For your IRR analysis, however, you use what you believe to be the actual investment costs though, isn’t that

right?

A. (By Mr Pérez) (Interpreted) Yes, that’s correct. Because in the end, that’s the return they get, so it’s important to
take into account the overall return they actually do get.”

684 See e.g., Resp. Rej. | 302; R-0003, Law 54/1997, Article 30.4, pp. 50-51, referring to the “remuneration
arrangements for electric power generation installations operating under the special regime.”

213

that it has focused on has always been at or around a 7% return (albeit initially as a post-

tax figure).

583. An attempt at calculating the actual returns was made in the first BDO report on a
“provisional basis’, i.e. estimating the individual plant investment costs, and various
other matters.°*° The BDO figures were “corrected” in the second report of Compass
Lexecon so as to take account of the actual (and higher) investment costs of the plants as
reflected in the financial statements of the various plants, and other factors.°*° Table 10

of the second report of Compass Lexecon is reproduced below.

Table 10: BDO*s Corrected Pre-Tax Returns of the Claimants’ Plants

 

 

 

 

 

But-for Actual But-for Actual
‘uel 1T-00648 19.1% 184% 13.5% 12.3%
Grisel fase! 1T-00651 14.3% 119% 10.8% 78%
AcampoAmijo —_—*IT-00652 28.8% 276% 20.6% 187%
Bosque Alto: 17-00652 25.0% 23.6% 17.3% 15.1%
LaBalsa 1T-00652 15.7% 129% 10.9% 7.3%
Los Labrados: 1T-00652 19.6% 176% 13.8% 11.0%
Plana Zaragoza 1T-00652 22.2% 20.5% 16.2% 13.7%
Plana Maria 1T-00652 176% 15.3% 13.1% 10.0%
Rio Gallego fase! {T-00653 224% 20.1% 16.2% 13.3%
Aldehuelas | 1T-00654 218% 19.0% 22.9% 19.0%
Juno 1T-00654 14.2% 94% 13.8% 88%
Lantemoso 1T-00654 (21.7% 18.3% 16.7% 12.0%
Luna 1T-00654 15.3% 116% 15.2% 11.0%
Urano 1T-00654 89% 32% 9.1% 28%
Grisel fase Il 1T-00655 15.8% 118% 99% 58%
Rio Gallego fase Il (T-00656 179% 150% 127% 97%
Bancal fase | 1T-O0657 92% 83% 47% 44%
Bancal fase I 1T-00657 88% 79% 46% 42%
Siglos fase | 1T-00657 10.0% 87% 5.6% 47%
Siglos fase Il 1T-O0657 98% 85% 5.5% 47%

17.9% 15.1% 14.5% 11.1%
‘Chomba 1T-00673 13.4% 136% 91%
Cepeda 1T-00699 44% 21% -14%
La Mora 1T-00701 -2.0% D4A% 5.0%
Villalgordo 17-00751 214% 204% 17.2%
Hidraulic plants 94% TB% 44%

 

 

 

 

 

‘Source: Correction of BDO’s working papers, Table A (CLEX-235).
Note: Then cas flows are corected the IR of La Moran the Bufo scenario is negate and
undefined. For this plant the table provides an upper bound estimate of the return.

65 BDO first report {{{ 104-111 and Table 4.
66 Compass Lexecon, Second Report {fff 262-263 and Table 10. See also, Mr Perez at Day 5/75-77.

214

584. | The Tribunal considers this comparison of IRR figures as a useful tool in assessing the
impact of the Disputed Measures on the overall profitability of the Claimants’ plants and
the question of the burden that is being imposed as a result of the Disputed Measures.**”
According to Table 10, the overall IRR for the ‘but for’ scenario (wind plants) is 14.5%
pre-tax as compared to an actual scenario of 11.1%. For the hydro plants, the figures are

7.1% and 4.4% respectively.

585. So far as concerns the Claimants’ wind plants, these Compass Lexecon return figures are
in fact slightly higher than those calculated by BDO in their second report®*® (where BDO
accepted some but not all of the corrections of Compass Lexecon®’). According to
BDO’s Table 13, the IRR for the actual scenario (wind plants) is 10.7% pre-tax, and the
BDO figures for the individual wind plants are broadly in line with those of Compass
Lexecon. For the hydro plants, the BDO figure is 7.5%, so again close to the Compass
Lexecon figure. In light of the overall proximity of the two sets of figures, and by
reference to the considerable weight placed by the Respondent specifically on Table 10
of the second report of Compass Lexecon in its oral closing,°” the Tribunal has
determined that it can safely use this Table 10 (and its supporting spreadsheet’) as the

basis for its consideration of this aspect of proportionality.

586. Overall, as appears from Table 10, the Claimants’ wind plants have to bear the burden of

the reduction of the Tariff Deficit to the extent of a reduction in IRR of 3.4% (the figure

687 See also, RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, J 520. The Tribunal
notes that the overall IRR for wind plants, i.e. by far the greater part of the Investments as a whole, is 11.19%, which
compares favourably to the reasonable return figure calculated by the tribunal in the RREEF case: see at {J 568-589.
688 Mr Perez at Day 5/75-77.

68° BDO second report §{f 240-244 and Table 13.

6 See, Mr Fernandez at Day 5/221-222: “And now to conclude, allow me to show you a table, table 10. We have
seen it today during the cross-examination, and why? That was what Mr Santacruz was explaining. These investors
will recoup their costs, investment and operational costs, and they will get a very high rate of return. And now I am
not speaking about standards, no, no standards here, I am speaking of those specific investors and their specific
investments. I am not even talking about BDO calculations, no. You see it on the title, table 10, it says the returns
corrected by Compass Lexecon on the basis of BDO’s calculations, so it’s BDO’s corrected pre-tax returns of the
Claimants’ plants. You have the but-for and the actual, after the measures. So in sum, 14.5% is claimed, and they get
11.1%. Table 10 of Compass Lexecon’s report. And we are told that there is an appropriation. Which one? The
legislator should ensure the necessary adjustments to achieve a level playing field. And neither windfall profits nor
remunerations lower than those in the market can be admitted.”

1 CLEX-0235, Correction of BDO’s working papers, Table A, 22 March 2017.

  

 

 

215

is 2.7% for the hydro plants). However, in examining the issue of proportionality, the
Tribunal considers it necessary to look at the impacts to individual plants, and notes that
this is consistent with the approach of the Respondent in establishing the Special Regime
in Law 54/1997, and in adopting the Disputed Measures, i.e. in the attempt through Order
TET 1045/2014 to secure what the Respondent considers to be a reasonable return by
reference to more than 150 Standard Installations that are intended to approximate to

individual plants.°*

587. As follows from Table 10 of the second report of Compass Lexecon, the majority of the
Claimants’ plants are estimated to achieve an IRR in excess of or around 7.398%, i.e. the
reasonable return figure established by the Disputed Measures with respect to the
Standard Installations. However, certain plants are estimated to achieve significantly
lower returns, namely: Urano (2.8%), Grisel II (5.8%), Bancal I (4.4%), Bancal IT (4.2%),
Siglos I (4.7%) and Siglos II (4.7%), and the hydro plant Cepeda (-1.4%).®? It may be
that, by reference to a hypothetical Standard Installation, these plants would achieve an
IRR in excess of 7.398%, but by reference to actual investment and other costs, and actual
and projected revenues, the evidence is that they will not. Instead, they will receive
considerably less than the return figure that the Respondent itself has considered to be

reasonable and proportionate (by reference to the Standard Installation).

588. | The Tribunal does not consider that it has been established that this result is justified by

reference to plant or other inefficiencies:

2 See also, Resp. PHB {ff 3-5 i.e. the Respondent’s answer to Question | of the Questions put by the Tribunal to the
Parties following the hearing, to the effect that in order to determine a breach of Art. 10(1), the investors must precisely
identify the investments and how they were affected. The Respondent's position was that the Claimants have failed to
do so, and such failure prevents determining if the Respondent has breached Art. 10(1). The Tribunal does not accept
that blanket submission, but does consider that the Respondent is correct that the question of breach (and, if so, any
resulting damages) must be approached by reference to the individual categories of investments identified as well as,
so far as relevant, specific individual investments.

3 The detailed calculations are set out in CLEX-0235, Correction of BDO’s working papers, Table A, 22 March
2017.

  

 
  

216

589.

a) The Respondent contends that the production is very low at the Bancal and Siglos
plants, and that they would not have achieved any better return under the RD

661/2007 regime,°* but that is incorrect as Table 10 demonstrates.

b

A similar point is made in the BDO reports with respect to the Urano plant, and
in the Rejoinder as to the Cepeda hydro plant, which is said to be oversized.°°
However, it has not been established to the Tribunal’s satisfaction that the alleged
plants inefficiencies render proportionate the massive reduction in returns at Urano,

i.e. from 9.1% to 2.8%, and the conversion of Cepeda into a loss-making plant.

Even allowing to the Respondent some margin of appreciation, and recognising the
Respondent’s good faith effort made to replicate the investment costs and performance
of actual plants through the Standard Installations, the Tribunal considers that, in certain
respects, the Claimants are having to bear an excessive burden so far as concerns the
measures adopted to deal with the Tariff Deficit.” Further, while the Tribunal is in no
sense bound by the Respondent’s assessments of what is reasonable or proportionate, the
Tribunal notes that the Respondent itself puts forward the 7.398% return as a return that
is reasonable and proportionate.®® Against a backdrop where the overall impact of the
Disputed Measures is already a very significant reduction in the returns of the Claimants’
plants when looked at as a whole, the Tribunal considers that an excessive and
disproportionate burden is being borne by the Claimants with respect specifically to the
Claimants’ investment in the wind plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and

IL, and the hydro plant Cepeda, in circumstances where the IRR for these plants is now

4 Resp. oral opening at Day 2/49.
5 See, fns. 13-14 of the first BDO report (and in later related footnotes), and fns. 239-240 and 244 of the second BDO

report.

6 Resp. Rej. 837, referring to a 2002 report of Price Waterhouse Coopers, C-0085, Financial Review Due Diligence
Draft Report, for Agrupacié Energias Renovables, S.A., PWC PowerPoint presentation, April 2002. The factors
referred to there include damage from a 2001 storm, and deficient management as of 2002, which are of little

assistance. The report does say that the plant is ov

 

sed.

7 RL-0035, EDF v. Romania, | 293, referring to Azurix Corp. v The Argentine Republic, Award of 14 July 2006 1

311.

8 See e.g., Resp. CM ff 973 and 997; Resp. Re}: 318; Respondent’ s Comments of 3 May 2019 on RL-0099, RREEF,
Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, { 9.

217

estimated at well below what the Respondent itself has decided to be reasonable and

proportionate (albeit by reference to the Standard Installation).

(iv) Was due consideration given to impacts to investors such as the Claimants in its

decision-making process?

590. The Tribunal considers that, in a context such as the present, a relevant factor in assessing
compliance with the FET standard is whether, in its decision-making process, the State
gave due consideration to impacts to investors such as the Claimants. A case that
measures impose a disproportionate burden on investors will naturally be strengthened

where a State fails duly to consider that burden.

591. Although the new regime put in place in 2013-2014 involved a radical change in the way
subsidies for the RE sector were calculated, the Tribunal considers that, from RDL 6/2009
onwards,°”?

to address the growing problem of the Tariff Deficit. As to RDL 9/2013, Article 1

the Respondent was attentive to the need to protect investors in its attempts

offers a demonstration of how consideration was being given to impacts of the changed
regime on existing investors who were to receive the Special Payment to “cover, as
appropriate, the investment costs of a standard installation that cannot be recovered
through the sale of energy, as well as an amount for the operation of the installation to
cover, as the case may be, the difference between exploitation costs and the revenues
obtained from the participation of such a standard installation in the market.” Whether
this new regime in fact led to a disproportionate burden being borne by investors is a
separate issue; for now, the Tribunal is concerned solely with the question of whether due

consideration was being given to investors in the Respondent’s decision-making process.

592. In the context of their arguments on transparency, the Claimants make contentions

relevant to the current question, namely, it is said that:

9 See, C-0061, RDL 6/2009, pp. 3-4. See also, the Memoria Econémica for RDL 6/2009, dated 5 May 2009.
7 C-0024, RDL 9/2013.

218

a) The Disputed Measures came unannounced. The Respondent “misled investors by

holding out that the RD 661 FIT was guaranteed, right up to the abrupt enactment

of the Disputed Measures.”™!

b) There was no consultation or investor participation prior to the introduction of the
Disputed Measures. It is said that: “The February 2012 consultation was carried
out for the March 2012 CNE Report, whose recommendations Spain ignored.”
Further, the Claimants also deny that there was a stakeholder participation in Law
24/2013 and the 2014 Ministerial Order since, in the CNE’s Report of 4 September
2013, it was noted that: “the urgent process relating to the consultation ... does not
guarantee the effective participation of various agents involved.” ? Likewise, it is
said that there is evidence of numerous submissions “strongly objecting to the

unfairness of the New Regime” to which the Respondent did not “provide any

evidence that the New Regime was modified in response to those submissions.”1°

c) The Respondent denied access to its expert reports, and it only later became known
that the BCG report was never prepared while the Roland Berger report was

finished several months after the publication of the June 2014 Order.

593. Against these points, the Respondent contends that it had, from 2006, warned of the need
for action to remedy over-remuneration and to improve the sustainability of the SES and,

since 2009, warned of the need to introduce reforms to tackle the Tariff Deficit.”°> The

701 CI, Reply { 601; Cl. Skeleton {{ 84; Claimants’ oral opening, Day 1/146.

12 ©.0123, CNE Report 18/2013,pp. 4 and 15.

73 Cl. Reply { 602; Cl. Skeleton 85.

™4 Cl. Mem. {] 481 (ii); C-0111, “The Government authorizes cuts to renewables without a technical report’, Press
Release from Expansi6n, 13 March 2015; Cl. Reply { 45; Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/156.

75 Resp. C-Mem. {| 954(1); Resp. Rej.] 1017(a)-(g). See, R-0274, Appearance of the Minister of Industry, Tourism
and Trade before the Senate on 26 October 2006; R-0258, Appearance of the Secretary General for Energy before the
Spanish Senate; R-0101, RD 661/2007, Preamble; R-0259, Appearance of the Secretary General for Energy before
the Spanish Senate; R-0089, Royal Decree-Law 6/2009 (hereinafter “RD-Act 6/2009”), Preamble, 30 April 2009; R-
0090, RD-Act 14/2010; R-0074, Sustainable Economy Act 2/2011, 4 March 2011, Article 79.4 a) and d); R-0278,
Congress of Deputies Journal validation of RD-Act 14/2010; R-0192, Speech by Prime Minister Rajoy, 19 December
2011; R-0092, Royal Decree-Act 13/2012, 30 March 2012, page 8 (hereinafter “RD-Act 13/2012”); R-0121, National
Reform Programme 2012, Government of Spain; R-0174, The Reforms of the Spanish Government: Determination
in the face of the crisis, Secretariat of State for Communication, Ministry of the Presidency, September 2012, Chapter
III, Page 18; R-0122, Spanish Economic Policy Strategy, Assessment and structural reforms over the next six months,
Government of Spain, 27 September 2012, Section C.8, page 70; RL-0067, MOU with the EU.

 

219

Tribunal accepts the basic point: as of 2013-2014, it was plain to all that the Tariff Deficit
was unsustainable, and that the Respondent was engaged on an ongoing basis in seeking
to address it. As follows from sub-section (ii) above, the Tribunal does not accept that
the Respondent ignored the recommendations of the 2012 CNE report, and it is also noted
that the methodology for the calculation of Special Payments adopted in 2013 is in certain
respects notably similar to that proposed by APPA (with Greenpeace) in a draft
Renewable Energies Law of May 2009. Article 23 of this draft Law provided as follows

with respect to the determination of regulated tariffs, premiums and supplements:

“The Government shall set the rate of regulated tariffs, premiums and
supplements, in all cases considering the costs of operation and
maintenance and the investment costs that the owners of the facility may
incur, with an end to ensuring reasonable rates of return with reference to
the cost of money on the capital market. The capital return rate shall be set
at an annual percentage rate equivalent to the previous year's average yield
on 10-year Spanish government bonds, plus a spread of 300 basis points.

For the foregoing purposes, the Government shall estimate the investment
costs associated with the different classes of facilities, distinguished by
technology and size so as to reflect the usual values that such investments
would actually achieve.””°°

594. The Tribunal notes that there appears to have been a lack of consultation with RE
operators in the period immediately prior to RDL 9/2013, but the Tribunal accepts that
the Respondent was bona fide adopting urgent measures” and that the precise economic

regime and the precise amount of the new Special Payment were not then being

796 R-0187, Presentation of the Draft Bill on Renewable Energy by the Association of Renewable Energy Producers
(APPA by its Spanish acronym) and Greenpeace to the Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce, 21 May 2009
(hereinafter “Draft Act presented by APPA-Greenpeace on 21 May 2009”), {J 4 and 5. The Tribunal understands
that this provision was to apply with respect to new plants: see, Article 27(1) of the draft Law and Claimants’ oral
opening at Day 1/209, and oral closing at Day 5/126. However, the document is still of some relevance in considering
the introduction of a methodology based on 10-year Spanish government bonds, plus a spread of 300 basis points,
which the Claimants portray as arbitrary at e.g. Day 5/146.

7 Resp. PHB {{ 146, referring to R-0154, the Ruling from the Constitutional Court in Plenary Session, dated 17
December 2015. In this lengthy and reasoned judgment, the Court rejected the contention that RDL 9/2013 was in
violation of the Spanish Constitution due to the absence of the requisite urgency. Cf. Cl. PHB {| 197-198. The
Tribunal has no sound basis on which to reach a conclusion on urgency different to that of the Constitutional Court,
and rejects the Claimants’ case on absence of the required urgency, as well as any suggestion on the Claimants’ part
that the Respondent's use of the RDL procedure was not bona fide. Cf. Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/166 to the
effect that the Respondent “chose a Royal Decree Law to circumvent any consultations.”

  

220

595.

established (a matter of which the Claimants complain”*). The Respondent did then
receive submissions from the RE Sector in relation to the subsequent CNE report,”” and
then the drafts of RD 413/2014 and Order IET 1045/2014,7!° and the Tribunal accepts
the evidence of Mr Ayuso that “many RE Stakeholders submissions were accepted in the
final definition of the Standard Facilities and Parameters.”"'' He explains that the draft
of the Order was circulated in January 2014, that there was a public consultation process
in which (inter alia) AEE and APPA participated, leading to various changes to the
Order, including with respect to the parameters of the standard installations relevant to

the Claimants’ plants.’!? None of this was challenged on cross-examination.

In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that, in its decision-making process, the Respondent
did — as a matter of the process followed — in general terms give due consideration to
impacts to investors such as the Claimants. However, the Tribunal does take note of the
fact that one expert report commissioned by the Respondent (the BCG report) was never
prepared and one (the Roland Berger report) was finished several months after the

publication of the June 2014 Order. As to this, in the Reply, the Claimants state:

“The absence of any witness from the Ministry also leaves unexplained its
conduct in relation to consultants Roland Berger and the BCG. After
implementing RDL 9/2013, Spain commissioned these two external
consultants to define the economic details of the New Regime. IDAE’s 2013
bid documentation, dated 1 October 2013, which set out the basis on which
those consultants were instructed by the Government, stated that the studies
should ‘evaluate and establish the standards for investment costs and
operation for electricity generation technologies’ (i.e. define the standard
assumptions under the New Regime). Curiously, in its responses to the
Claimants’ document request concerning Roland Berger, Spain claimed
that: ‘the Respondent has explained in its Counter-Memorial that the Final

708 Cl. Mem. 1 59.
209 €-0123, CNE report 18/2013, pp. 12-15.
210 Resp, C-Mem. 1 954(3).

7! Resp. Skeleton {| 61-62; Resp. Rej.{[ 1019; the Respondent points to the following documents as evidence of
participation: Information on the public consultation on regulatory adjustment measures in the energy sector of 2

 

February and 9 March 2012, published on the National Energy Commi

n (CNE), www.cne.es. R- 0194; R-0234,

Submissions from Protermosolar concerning RD 413/2014, 30 July 2013; R-0305, Elecnor financial statements, 31
December 2013, page 90; R-0086 and R-0087, regulatory records of RD 413/2014 of 6 June 2014 and OIET
1045/2014 of 16 June 2014; R-0124, Report of the Council of State dated 6 February 2014, issued in the administrative

appeal relative to the draft Royal Decree 413/2014; RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement {[{] 65 to 84.
72 RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement {ff 65 to 82.

221

Report was received after [it] enacted the Ministerial Order with the
parameters. So, it is no controversial matter that the Respondent did not use
the Roland Berger report in setting the economic parameters of the New
Regime’. In reality, however, the Counter-Memorial omits any mention of
Roland Berger and fails to address the Claimants’ submissions on this issue.
With respect to BCG, in response to the Claimants’ document requests,
Spain noted that ‘the [BCG] contract was terminated prior to the receipt of
BCG’s final report’ for reasons that Spain refused to state and that the
Roland Berger report was finalised after the parameters of the New Regime
were implemented. The Counter-Memorial also ignores this issue. Press
reports indicate that Spain ignored the reports of these consultants because
they did not reflect the cuts to RE incentives that Spain was intent on
making. Once again there is no evidence to contest this and Spain has
simply avoided the issue in its Counter-Memorial.”7!?
596. This description was not challenged by the Respondent in the Rejoinder. It thus appears
that the contract with one expert was terminated for unknown reason, whilst Spain did

not wait for the Berger report before adopting RD 413/2014 and Order IET 1045/2014.

597. While a State is not necessarily obliged to follow or wait for expert advice that it has
commissioned, the Respondent was putting itself into a position where there could be a
greater risk of unintended or disproportionate impacts arising from the adoption of RD

413/2014 and Order IET 1045/2014.
(v) Conclusion on disproportionality

598. On the specific facts of this case, where the background context is formed by general
invitation and encouragement by the Respondent to invest in a particular sector by
reference to benefits including a very favourable remuneration regime (to which must be
added the more specific encouragement in the form of the statements made at the meeting
of 23 June 2010), the Tribunal considers that, consistent with the approach in EDF v
Romania and the Electrabel case, it is important to assess whether the Claimants, in
respect of the plants in which they have invested, bear an individual and excessive burden
relative to the policy objective of the Respondent. In this respect, the Tribunal considers

that it is correctly focused on the burden imposed on the Claimants’ plants by the Disputed

713 Cl. Reply 146.

222

Measures, not on the question of burden more generally, even though the Disputed

Measures plainly have far broader impacts than those before this Tribunal.

599. There are a number of factors which have led the Tribunal to the conclusion that this
burden is excessive and disproportionate so far as concerns the impact to certain of the
Claimants’ Investments, such as to give rise to a breach of the FET standard under Article

10(1).

a) The Claimants’ plants have lost and will lose very considerable revenues as a result
of the Disputed Measures, resulting in very significantly reduced cash flows to the
Claimants. It is common ground that ten of the plants in which the Claimants has
invested now receive no subsidy, while the others are subject to the impact of past
payments being called into account in calculating the entitlement to the Special
Payment. Overall, the Claimants’ plants are impacted by a drop in future revenue
in excess of EUR 400 million, with the Claimants suffering a 54% reduction in
forecasted cash flows from their plants.’'4 These are by any standards very
substantial reductions. These very substantial overall reductions in revenues/cash
flows form a very important backdrop in the current issue of disproportionality.
Moreover, as follows from the various consultations with industry bodies at
different stages (including specifically with the Claimants on 23 June 2010)
including those leading to the July 2010 “agreement” on which the Claimants relied
in making certain Investments, the Respondent was well aware of the serious
impacts that the Disputed Measures would have, including on the Claimants’

plants.

b) Anexamination of the estimated impacts to individual plants shows that a particular
burden falls to be borne by certain of the Claimants’ plants (to the wind plants

Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and the hydro plant Cepeda) which

74 See, Compass Lexecon slide 38, and Dr Spiller at Day 3/190. The figures on this slide (as opposed to their relevance
in the context of the appropriateness or otherwise of a DCF approach to damages) do not appear to have been disputed:
see, Mr Pérez at Day 5/56. See also, Compass Lexecon slide 39 based on Figure 8 of their second report.

223

will achieve a return considerably less than the 7.398% return that the Respondent

itself puts forward as reasonable and proportionate.’'>

c) While that 7.398% return figure is, pursuant to the Disputed Measures, to be
calculated by reference to the Standard Installations, the Tribunal sees that means
of calculation as merely a mechanism for enabling the minimum return figure that
the Respondent itself considers to be reasonable and proportionate, and not as an
indispensable feature of, or qualification to, a proportionate approach. Further,
although the Tribunal has rejected the Claimants’ case that the Disputed Measures
were not necessary, the Tribunal does not accept that the Measures — in particular
RD 413/2014 and Order IET 1045/2014 — could not have been formulated so as to
avoid the actual impacts to individual plants being significantly more severe than
the impacts as legislated for by the Respondent by reference to Standard
Installations. Moreover, by not following or waiting for expert advice that it had
commissioned, the Respondent was putting itself into a position where there could
be a greater risk of unintended or disproportionate impacts arising from the

Disputed Measures.

qd

While the Tribunal is in no sense bound by the Respondent’s assessments of what
is reasonable or proportionate, on the facts of this case, and bearing in mind that it
considers that some margin of appreciation is accorded to the Respondent, the
Tribunal considers that the 7.398% return figure — as estimated by reference to
actual plants as opposed to Standard Installations — is an appropriate minimum
figure to protect against an excessive and disproportionate burden being placed on
investors such as the Claimants with respect to the Respondent’s need to address
the Tariff Deficit. In this respect, the Tribunal notes that a return figure of 7% (albeit
post-tax) has long been associated with the RE tariff regime of the Respondent,

including at a time when the Claimants were making their principal Investments.’!°

115 See e.g., Resp. CM 4¥ 973 and 997; Resp. Rej. 318; Respondent’ s Comments of 3 May 2019 on RL-0099, RREEF,
Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, 9.

76 Cf. Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/121-124. See e.g., the 2005 PER and C-0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007.

224

e) The Tribunal considers excessive and disproportionate the burden on the
Claimants’ Investments to the extent that even the 7.398% pre-tax return figure is

not reached so far as concerns the projected returns of actual plants.

600. On the basis of the evidence before it, the Tribunal considers that, in all the circumstances,
the burden in respect of the wind plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II,
and the hydro plant Cepeda is excessive relative to the policy objective of the Respondent,
i.e. is disproportionate. It finds that it is unfair and inequitable for the adverse impacts to
these specific plants to be borne by the Claimants. To that extent, it finds that there has
been a breach by the Respondent of the FET standard under Article 10(1) through
adoption of the Disputed Measures and in particular RD 413/2014 and Order IET
1045/2014.

E. FAILURE TO CREATE STABLE CONDITIONS
(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

601. According to the Claimants, the adoption of the Disputed Measures “wrongfully
subjected the Claimants’ investments to a ‘roller-coaster’ of changes in the regulatory
framework, by negotiating and agreeing in July 2010 ‘medium-term’ limitations to the
economic conditions of RD 661/2007 (in purported exchange for ‘guaranteeing’ the
tariffs in the long term) then by applying the 7% levy to the Claimants’ investments in
2012, and ultimately by wiping out the Special Regime in its entirety in July 2013.”7'7

They further contend that the New Regime was not fully implemented until June 2014,

which left the entire RE sector in “// months of ‘limbo’ during which it was impossible

to discern the details of the regulatory framework or the remuneration parameters to
which Aersa’s installations would be subject.’ According to the Claimants, this

uncertainty is still prevalent, including with respect to what may happen from 2019.7!8

27 Cl. Mem. | 476; Cl. Reply 552.

218 CI, Reply I 553, 554. Also | 557-558, referring to C-0145, ECOFYS, Task 2 Report, “Design Features of Support
Schemes for Renewable Electricity”, 27 January 2014, p. 24. See also, Cl. PHB ff 204 et seq.

225

Thus they claim that the New Regime does not provide a detailed indication of the criteria
the Government will follow in approving the economic regime for RE installations after
each six-year regulatory period.”'? They say that neither the differential nor the
methodology for calculating the reasonable return are precluded from change, thus, both
may be changed or reduced to zero, and that this is not theoretical, as Spain reduced the

Premium to zero in RDL 2/2013.7°

602. The Claimants’ case is also that, during this transitory regime, Law 24/2013 introduced
further harmful measures. It is said that (i) the distinction between the Ordinary Regime
and the Special Regime announced by RDL 9/2013 formally disappeared; (ii)
conventional and RE generators were put on an equal footing, thereby depriving the RE
installations of the unconditional right of priority of grid access and priority of dispatch
that existed under the previous regime; and (iii) a concept of “reasonable return” was
now to be applied by reference to the entire useful life of the plant, which affected the
future and past income stream of the Claimants plants. Through this last measure, it is
said that “Spain committed a ‘double-whammy’ retroactivity by directly impacting the
past income streams of the plant, effectively altering the rules of the game over the energy
already produced and already sold on the markets by RWE’s plants. It is hard to imagine
conditions less stable ... .”7?! The Claimants also complain that the Respondent retains
discretion to “re-define reasonable return and arrogates itself the right to change the

remuneration regime every six years, even with respect to existing installations.””?

603. — It is said that the Respondent’s case that the New Regime retains the essential features of
the Special Regime — the subsidies and priority of dispatch — is “absurd” because: (i) the

Respondent “wiped out the incentives completely”, and the “fact that some of Claimants’

719 Cl, PHB ¥{ 204.

720 Cl, PHB { 205, referring to Pérez, Day 5, p.14, lines 14 to 18: “Q. So you think they will use 300 basis points? A.
They can, but they would have to examine tl ccording to market conditions at the time. I have no reason to believe
that they would or would not use it, it depends on the circumstances ... .” See further, Cl. PHB {J 207-211.

71 Cl. Reply 9 555-556. C-0025, Law 24/2013, Third Final Provision. See also, Cl. PHB { 176.

72 Cl, Reply { 560. See also, Cl. PHB {{ 204 et seq., arguing that the New Regime does not provide a detailed
indication of the criteria the Government will follow in approving the economic regime for RE installations after each
six-year regulatory period.

 

 

226

installations might (but not necessarily) receive some kind of subsidy under the New
Regime does not demonstrate that the regulatory regime remains the same”,’” while (ii)
there is no priority of dispatch, because the purpose of such priority was to ensure that
RE installations could sell all their electricity irrespective of fluctuation of demand, and
“Spain abandoned this commitment by introducing the Disputed Measures because of a

fall in electricity demand.”*

604. The Claimants emphasise that the Disputed Measures are retroactive in nature,
notwithstanding the Respondent’s arguments to the contrary.’”> They say that the issue
of retroactivity as a matter of Spanish law is “a complete red herring” and submit that,
irrespective of whether the Respondent’s changes to the framework were possible under
Spanish law, the Respondent made a commitment that the Claimants would receive the
Special Regime FIT, the abandonment of which gives rise to liability under the ECT.7”°
As noted above, it is also their position that even under Spanish law, such changes were
impermissibly retroactive,’”’ and they contend that EUR 19.4 million was paid by the ten
plants that do not receive a Special Payment under the new regime in the period between
the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014, and that this sum subsequently

had to be repaid.’

3 Cl. Reply {[ 562, referring to Compass Lexecon, Second Report J 149, and to CL-0052, Micula, {| 687.
™ Cl. Reply 563.
5 Cl, Reply §{f 564-572; See for example, First Compass Report ff 91, 130-32 and 167; C-0145, ECOFYS, “Design
Features of Support Schemes for Renewable Electricity”, 27 January 2014, p. 24; C-0139, Communication from the
European Commission, “Delivering the Internal Electricity Market and Making the Most of Public Intervention”, 7243
final, dated 5 November 2013, p. 15; C-0257, Report from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Renewable energy progress report,
COM(2013) 175 final, 27 March 2013, p. 9. C-0238, Announcement of RD 661/2007, p. 1; C-0288, CNE PowerPoint
presentation, “The Regulation of Renewable Energy”, 25 October 2007, p. 10; C-0241, CNE PowerPoint presentation,
“Renewable Energy Regulation in Spain”, February 2010, p. 10; C-0030, Manuela Garcia, “Opportunities in
Renewable Energy in Spain”, INTERES InvestinSpain Power Point presentation, Graz (Austria), 15 November 2007,
p. 32. See also, Cl. PHB [ 174.
76 Cl, Reply 573. See also, Cl. PHB {ff 177-182.
71 Cl. Reply {573 and 576-578.

. Reply referring to Compass Lexecon, Second Report ; Claimants’ oral opening at Day .
78 Cl, Reply 478 referri Ce Li Second Ri 169; Clai ” oral i Day 1/146.

227

b.

605.

606.

607.

608.

The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that it has ensured stability, contending (i) the Disputed
Measures maintain the essential elements of the Spanish remuneration models in place
since 1997, (ii) it is permitted to adopt reasonable and proportionate macroeconomic
measures based on a public policy, and (iii) the Disputed Measures are not retroactive as

they do not affect acquired rights, but project their effects into the future.’”

The Respondent says that the remuneration model arising from the Spanish regulatory
framework at the time of the Claimants’ investments (between 2001 and 2012) aimed to
guarantee a reasonable rate of return on investments and to prevent over-remunerations
in certain sectors.”*° Specifically, the framework was generally conceived to “ensure that
all investors could recover, by taking a ‘standard installation’ as a reference, (1) the cost
of their investment, (2) the operating costs and (3) obtain a reasonable profitability.””!
Thus, the Respondent says that it granted stable conditions to the Claimants according to
the ECT standard because, after the reform of 2013, “it maintained the essential nature
of the Regulatory Framework in which the Claimants invested’, i.e. it maintained the
subsidies and priority of dispatch, enabling RE investments to recover, in accordance
with the standard installation, investment costs, operations costs, and also reasonable

profits.”

According to the Respondent, the reasons that justified the adoption of the Disputed
Measures “are the same as those which have provoked the regulatory changes since RDL
7/2006: (i) the economic sustainability of the system and (ii) in order to avoid the over-
remuneration of RE Plants obtaining subsides after having reached the ‘level playing

field’ to compete with other Energy producers of the Energy market."

The Respondent says that both were foreseeable to the diligent investor, citing in support

the /solux award where the tribunal held that: “the regulatory framework had already

29 Resp. Skeleton J 55, 58, referring to RL-0088, /solux, 19788 and 823. See also, Resp. PHB ff 134-136.
730 Resp, Rej. 1004.

731 Resp, C-Mem. 4 931.

732 Resp. C-Mem. { 932; Resp. Rej.{{ 1007.

733 Resp, Skeleton 4 56.

228

609.

(2)
610.

611.

been modified several times. The proper RDs 611/2007 and 1565/2008 were no more
than amendments to RD 436/2004. After that, RD 1565/2010 and Royal Decree Law
14/2010 modified the established economic regime in RD 661/2007 for the photovoltaic
sector. All of these regulations issued for the implementation of Law 54/1997, of 27
November 1997, regarding the Electrical Sector (LSE), showed a very unstable character
of a regulatory framework that the government has the power and the duty to adapt to

the economic and technical needs of the moment, within the LSE framework.” ™+

As noted above, the Respondent also contends that the Disputed Measures were not
retroactive under international or Spanish law,”*> in particular because the Claimants
have “never had an ‘acquired right’ to a remuneration in the future, sine die, by means
of a fixed and unchanging FIT, not subject to possible macroeconomic control measures
or reforms of the SES.”"*° It portrays the new regime as preventing “cases of over-
remuneration, which can (i) distort the energy market and (ii) constitute government

subsidies contrary to EU law.”7>7

The Tribunal’s Analysis

As follows from the legal discussion on stability and the FET standard in section C above,
the question for the Tribunal is whether there has been some form of total and

unreasonable change to, or subversion of, the legal regime.

It is recalled that Article 17 of RD 661/2007 accorded a number of rights to producers
under the Special Regime, namely rights of connection and transfer of net production,

the right to sell all or part of net production by way of direct access, priority of access,

™4 Resp. Skeleton 57; RL-0088, Isolux, | 788.

735 Resp. Skeleton {f 58-59, referring to RL-0040, Nations Energy Inc. and others v Republic of Panama, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/19, Award, 24 November 2010, (hereinafter “Nations Energy’){{| 642, 644 and 646; RL-0049,
Charanne ff 546 and 548; RL-0088, Isolux, [| 813-814 and 915; Resp. C-Mem. {9 940, 937 and 947-948, referring
to R-0154, Constitutional Court ruling of 17 December 2015, delivered in an appeal of unconstitutionality No.

5347/2013; R-0156, Judgment of the Constitutional Court of 18 February 2016,

  

issued in the appeal of

unconstitutionality No. 5852/2013; and R-0157, Judgment of the Constitutional Court of 18 February 2016, issued in
the appeal of unconstitutionality No. 6031/2013.

736 Resp. C-Mem. {| 939. See also, Resp. PHB {| 134-136.

737 Resp. Rej. 1013.

229

612.

613.

and finally the right to remuneration in accordance with Article 24(1) i.e. by reference to
a fixed tariff or the premium option. Notwithstanding the Disputed Measures, the
Claimants’ Investments still receive the benefits of connection, transfer, sale and priority
of access. Although the Claimants say that they no longer benefit from priority of
access, ’** this is really a more general complaint about the introduction of the Disputed
Measures being due to a drop in demand. Pursuant to Article 26(2) of Law 24/2013, RE

producers are expressly accorded “priority of grid access and connection.”"°

It follows that the claim in respect of stability must focus on the change in the system of
remuneration, but bearing in mind that other key elements of the prior regime have
remained substantially unchanged. As noted in section D above, although RE producers
are in principle still entitled to a Special Payment, i.e. a subsidy, the method of calculation

of remuneration has changed radically and to the obvious detriment of the Claimants.

The Respondent is correct, however, that the history of the RE regime in Spain has been
one of regulatory change (including with respect to remuneration), with various
important changes taking place prior to the making of the Claimants’ investments.
Further, although the Claimants are correct to contend that the reasonable return that is
provided for under the Disputed Measures may be changed following the scheduled six-
year review,’”° the possibility of further change does not establish the required total and
unreasonable change to, or subversion of, the legal regime (which is not to suggest that
further changes might not, when actualised, lead to separate breaches by the
Respondent).”*! In the Tribunal’s view, the key question in terms of such change or

subversion is whether the Disputed Measures have an impermissibly retroactive effect.

238 Cl. Reply 563.
739 ©0025, Law 24/2013.
740 Cl, PHB ¥f 204-205.

741 Cf, Cl. PHB {[ 210; Resp. PHB {| 180-184. The Tribunal does not consider that it has been established that the
reasonable return will be set at a considerably lower rate in the future. The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent
has put forward the positive results of auctions held in May and July 2017 as evidence of the reasonable nature of the
future periodic revisions: Resp. PHB {{ 173-175. The Claimants contend that such auctions, which concern

investments made from 2017, are irrelevant so far as concern:

 

its Investments, which were made much earlier: Cl.

PHB {[ 218-219. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants’ assessment in this respect.

230

614. As explained by the Claimants:

“... the New Regime sets a cap on the return of 7.398% during the whole
regulatory life of the relevant standard plant. This means that if the
Government considers that a plant has obtained in the past a return higher
than the capped rate, that plant will receive a lower Special Payment (or
none at all) to compensate for the excess and reach the target of a 7.398%
return. Therefore, while the plant does not have to pay back any amounts it
received in the past, they will simply be deducted from present earnings to
make up the difference, which in the end has precisely the same effect.””4
615. The impact of this new methodology has been that ten of the Claimants’ plants now
receive no subsidy at all: Muel, Grisel (phase I), Acampo Armijo, Bosque Alto, Plana de
la Balsa, Los Labrados, Plana Maria, Plana de Zaragoza, Rio Gallego (phase I) and

Villalgordo.”?

616. According to the Respondent, “for a regulation to be retroactive it must affect acquired
rights.”™ Tt says that the awards in Nations Energy v Panama, Charanne, and Isolux,
“have stated that a Law does not have retroactive effect if it does not revoke any rights
acquired by the Investor, being applied to the future.”"** However, the Respondent does
not challenge the Claimants’ broad description (above) of the way that the subsidy under

the new regime is calculated. Its position is that: “The legislator has modified the

 

remuneration regime of the facilities, establishing a Reasonable Return in the useful
activity of the facility as a whole. This remuneration makes it possible to take into account
the remunerations already received from the start of operations at the facility, in order
to calculate the remuneration already received and the subsidies to be received in the
future, in addition to market revenue. This prevents cases of over-remuneration, which
can (i) distort the energy market and (ii) constitute government subsidies contrary to EU

law.””*° Further, in oral evidence, Mr Ayuso accepted that, in calculating whether a given

™ Cl. Mem. { 334, fns. omitted to C-0024, RDL 9/2013, First Additional Provision; C-0025, Law 24/2013, Third
Final Provision; C-0026, RD 413/2014, Article 19; C-0026, RD 413/2014, Annex XIII.

48 First Compass Report, Table 6; Second Compass Report fn. 121.
74 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 940 and 937.

45 Resp. Skeleton [ 59, referring to RL-0040, Nations Energy, {91 642, 644 and 646; RL-0049, Charanne, {ff 546 and
548; RL-0088, Isolux, i 813-814 and 915.

746 Resp, Rej. 1013.

231

617.

618.

619.

plant had reached a reasonable return, or is entitled to a subsidy going forwards, it is
necessary to go back to the year following the date of commissioning of the plant and

bring into account the past expenditures and revenues.”

There is no doubt that this marked a radical change to the way in which the Claimants’
plants were remunerated. However, it appears to the Tribunal that, as a factual matter,
the new regime has a retrospective rather than an impermissible retroactive effect: sums
that were duly received under the RD 661/2007 regime in the period 2007 to July 2013,
and to which the plant owners had an unrestricted entitlement, are now brought back into

account, but there is — at least in theory — no question of repayment of such sums.

The Respondent has contended that the Disputed Measures are not impermissibly
retroactive as a matter of Spanish law, as established by the Spanish courts, “8 but that is
a separate matter. This Tribunal is concerned with the application of Article 10(1) ECT,

and is considering the impact of the new regime in that specific light.

As to Article 10(1), the Tribunal does not see the existence or otherwise of an acquired
right as determinative in this context.”° The issue of whether an investor has acquired a
right as a matter of a given law appears to the Tribunal to be quite separate; although it
might be of particular interest in (say) an expropriation claim, it is not so here.’°°
However, the substance of the complaint is that the Claimants have invested by reference
to basis X and, after a number of years, that has been changed to basis Y which takes into
account the prior payments received. Yet, the Claimants had no legitimate expectation
that basis X would not change, and the Tribunal cannot and does not interpret the

requirement of stability under Article 10(1) as a form of reiteration of the protection that

747 Mr Ayuso, Day 3/49-50.

748 Reg

 

C-Mem. 4 947-948; R-0154, Constitutional Court ruling of 17 December 2015, delivered in an appeal of

unconstitutionality No. 5347/2013; R-0156, Judgment of the Constitutional Court of 18 February 2016, issued in the
appeal of unconstitutionality No. 5852/2013 and R-0157, Judgment of the Constitutional Court of 18 February 2016,
issued in the appeal of unconstitutionality No. 6031/2013. Cf. Cl. Reply {| 573 and 576-578 and PHB {If 177-182.
749 Cf. Resp. C-Mem. 1939.

750 The Parties’ respective positions as to the existence or otherwise of acquired rights as a matter of Spanish law were
spelled out in a response to a question from the Tribunal: Cl. PHB {{] 171-173; Resp. PHB {ff 140-141.

232

620.

621.

may be afforded where there are legitimate expectations.’>! The Tribunal is looking in
this context for total and unreasonable change or subversion and, bearing in mind that
key elements of the prior regime have remained substantially unchanged, the change in
remuneration effected by the New Regime — although undeniably detrimental to the

Claimants — does not qualify as such.

As to the contention that EUR 19.4 million was paid by the ten plants that do not receive
a Special Payment under the new regime in the period between the adoption of RDL
9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014, and that this sum subsequently had to be repaid, the
Tribunal considers this to be of a different order. This contention was made in the Reply

752

and in oral opening and closing,’*~ while the only response has been to accept the

principle that there could be no recovery of sums already paid, as follows:

“Something is forbidden in the international law, that is the idea of claiming
excessive premiums already received. Those cannot be claimed and cannot
be received by law.

If it did happen, then these can be recouped and proceedings may be entered

before the Supreme Court.””*?
The Tribunal does consider that it would be a subversion of the prior legal regime, and
in breach of the FET standard in Article 10(1), for the Respondent to require repayment
of sums already paid, including in the period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and
Order IET 1025/2014. The Claimants say that EUR 19.4 million nonetheless had to be
repaid. That fact has not been challenged. It follows that, subject to verification and
precise quantification of the amount paid, there has been a breach of Article 10(1) ECT,

and the Claimants are entitled to return of all sums repaid.

751 Cf, RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, {ff 326-329. The Tribunal
notes that it differs here from the conclusion reached in RREEF, but it has been unconvinced by the Claimants’
arguments, and is further not convinced as to the relevance of the principle concerning the non-retroactivity of treaties

or the helpfulness of the analogy to the rights of shareholders with respect to paid dividends,

's referred to at ibid. {J

 

326-329. The Tribunal remains of the view that, in light of the way the claim is put, the critical question concerns
legitimate expectations (if any) with respect to how future payments are calculated.

782 Cl, Reply | 478 referring to Compass Lexecon, Second Report | 169; Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/146;
Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/139.

753 Resp, oral opening at Day 2/138.

233

F. THE DISPUTED MEASURES WERE UNREASONABLE
(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

622. The third limb to the Claimants’ case is that the Disputed Measures were unreasonable
and disproportionate.’”** The case on disproportionality has already been considered

above.

623. The Claimants agree with the Respondent that the reasonableness of the Disputed
Measures must be analysed applying a two-element test set out in the AES v Hungary
case, i.e. it is necessary for the State to establish “the existence of a rational policy; and

the reasonableness of the act of the state in relation to the policy."

624. Regarding the first element, the Claimants say that there are a number of difficulties with
the Respondent’s submission that its policy “was to correct the ‘imbalance’ that was
leading to the generation of the so-called tariff deficit, which by law had to be corrected”
to “protect consumers from increases in their electricity bills’, and likewise the
Respondent’s case that these problems had to be “addressed in the context of an economic
crisis and a decline in electricity demand,” as well as commitments the Respondent had

made with other Member States of the EU.”°° Thus the Claimants contend:

a) The Respondent created the Tariff Deficit problem and, consistent with RDL
6/2009, the Tariff Deficit was to be solved by increasing charges for consumers

and not by repealing RD 661/2007.””

b) In regard to the Respondent’s claim that the New Regime was implemented to
protect consumers, the Claimants argue that this did “not require commitments
to RE investors to be abandoned to provide for artificially low tariff to...

consumers”, and they say that Compass Lexecon has shown that there were other

754 Eg. Cl. Reply (1 579 et seq.

785 Cl. Reply 579; RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, {ff 10.3.7 to 10.3.9.
786 Cl. Reply { 581.

757 Cl. Reply 583.

234

measures that could resolve the Tariff Deficit problem: “increasing electricity

prices and without breaching the commitments made to RE installations.”7°*

Additionally, prior to the adoption of the Disputed Measures, the CNE had made
proposals that would solve the Tariff Deficit,”?

the RD 661/2007 FIT, and yet these had simply been ignored.”

which did not include cutting

ce) Regarding the Respondent’s reference to the economic crisis, the Claimants
contend that “Spain appropriated money it had guaranteed to RE installations
so that it could continue to enjoy electricity prices that did not reflect the true
cost of that electricity”, which in the Claimants’ view is not a rational policy
goal, with reference being made to the award of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in
Amoco.”°! Further, the Claimants say that the Respondent is trying to introduce
a necessity defence under Article 25 of the ILC 2001 Articles.” This defence
fails, according to the Claimants, because (i) “abandoning the Special Regime
was not the only way to address the Tariff Deficit problem”,’® and (ii) the
Respondent contributed to the situation of necessity because it “created the

Tariff Deficit.”1™

d) With respect to the dip in electricity demand relied on by the Respondent, the
Claimants say that: “(/) Special Regime installations were protected against
demand risk; (2) Spain reiterated the RD 661/2007 tariff guarantees in 2010
after the dip had occurred; and (3) this was a temporary dip that did not warrant
the abandonment of a regime that was promised for 20 years and beyond.”"

Additionally, the Claimants contend that the Respondent is trying to introduce a

758 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, Section V.

759 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 57.

760 Cl, Reply [ 584.

71 Cl, Reply {| 585; CL-0055, Amoco International Finance Corporation. v The Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran et al., 15 Iran-United States Claims Tribunal 189, Award, 14 July 1987, {| 145.

762 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 25.

763 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, Section V.

764 Cl. Reply 9] 586-587.

765 Cl, Reply 588.

235

force majeure defence under Article 23 of the ILC 2001 Articles, which fails
because: (i) the commentary to Article 23 confirms that economic problems do
not qualify as force majeure,” and (ii) the Respondent “assumed the risk of a

fall in electricity demand.”"™

e) Finally, the Claimants submit that the commitments with other EU States
referred to by the Respondent, are irrelevant as they did not require the

“oband

Respondent to its existing c i s to RE i lati. ” The

Claimants affirm that either way, commitments to others do not allow States to

abandon existing commitments. ’°

625. Regarding the second element of the AES v Hungary case (the reasonableness of the act
of the State), the Claimants submit that the Micula v Romania case has established the

appropriate analysis:

“[F]or a state’s conduct to be reasonable, it is not sufficient that it be related
to a rational policy; it is also necessary that, in the implementation of that
policy, the state’s acts have been appropriately tailored to the pursuit of that
rational policy with due regard for the consequences imposed on
investors.”
626. The Claimants argue that: “Spain provides no support for its proposition that this is not
applicable to the present case, as Micula was not an ECT decision. Spain’s position is

untenable: the ECT provides a higher level of investor protection that the Micula BIT.”"”

627. The Claimants say that the Respondent did not satisfy the above-mentioned test because
the two justifications given by the Respondent for adopting the Disputed Measures
(overcapacity in the sense that there were too many RE plants earning the FIT and the

Tariff Deficit) were the result of the Respondent’s “own regulatory decisions, and the

766 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 23, Commentary 3.
761 Cl, Reply 41 589-591; C-0017, RD 661/207, Article 17.
768 Cl. Reply 592.

79 Cl. Reply 579; CL-0052, Micula, 525.

70 Cl, Skeleton 75.

236

burden of fixing them cannot be attributed to foreign investors protected under the ECT,

such as RWE.”7”'

4)

b)

With respect to the overcapacity in the RE sector, the Claimants argue that this
was a result of the Respondent’s misjudgment to locate sole control over access
to the economic benefits of RD 661/2007 with the Autonomous Communities,
instead of locating sole central control in the Ministry.’”” Thus, “the Autonomous
Communities were willing to accept all qualifying applications, because RE
installations benefited them and their municipalities through the payment of

taxes and by the provision of local employment.”™

With respect to the Tariff Deficit, the Claimants say: “(i) the measures cannot
be said to be reasonably correlated to a rational policy goal; (ii) the Tariff
Deficit was of Spain's own making; and (iii) the measures affected wind and
hydro disproportionately.”’”* In particular, it is said that the Tariff Deficit
existed long before the development of renewables under RD 661/2007, and was
anyway caused by Spain’s failure to increase charges for electricity despite its
own law. Further, there were alternative options that the Respondent could have

adopted that were less harmful to the Claimants’ investments.””>

628. The Claimants also dispute the four points on which the Respondent relies to assert that

the Disputed Measures were reasonable:

4)

™ Cl. Mem. 483.

The Claimants submit that the Respondent’s argument that the reforms affect all
subjects of the electricity system is wrong. The measures were intended to

protect consumers, who have always enjoyed low electricity prices, that were

72 Cl. Mem. 4 484. C-0017, RD 661/2007, Arts. 4 and 10.

1.

1.

73 Cl. Mem. 484.

74 Cl. Mem. 486.
1.

75 Cl. Mem. | 487; Compass Report ff 19 and 147; C-0163, 2012 CNE Report, pp. 16-64.

237

b)

d)

further reduced following the Disputed Measures.’ Ordinary Regimes
installations remained “virtually unaffected’ as opposed to Special Regime

producers such as RWE, while distributors did not suffer any loss.’””

The New Regime “bears almost no relation to the APPA proposal nor was the

New Regime prompted by that proposal.”"*

The Disputed Measures “reduced the equity value of RWE Aersa to zero”,””? so

the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants’ installations continue to receive
reasonable profitability is incorrect. It is said that: “RWE does not receive
anything like the profitability promised at the time it invested or the profitability
considered to be reasonable prior to the introduction of the New Regime.”7*°
Moreover, the New Regime is subject to review in 2019, as to which it is said
that the Respondent’s own witness (Mr Ayuso) has stated that he has no idea

what the Ministry will be doing.”*!

The Disputed Measures have not been accepted “by most domestic and foreign
investors.” On the contrary, they have “provoked hundreds of domestic claims,
provoked a number of State organs to bring a constitutional challenge against
them, and single-handedly made Spain the most sued nation in investor-State
history.” The Disputed Measures have also been subject to “fierce criticisms”

from the IMF, the International Energy Association and the European Union.”*?

76 See, Section 8.1(c) above; C-0259, Press Release from Expansién, “The Government Will Use the First Superavit
in the Electric System since 2000 to Reduce the Electricity Bill”, 20 September 2015; C-0251, “Soria announces a
decrease of 7.5% in the price of electricity during this term”, El Economista, 10 April 2015.

77 Cl. Reply 4 594-595.

78 Cl. Reply 596.

79 Compass Lexecon, Second Report { 134. See, the Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/98.
780 Cl. Reply 597.

%81 See, the Claimants’ oral closing at Day 5/93.

Cl. Reply 598; Compass Lexecon, Second Report fff 92-93 and 174-176.

238

b. The Respondent’s Position

629. The Respondent submits that the Disputed Measures comply with three different tests set
in applicable arbitral precedents that determine whether the FET standard in the ECT has
been infringed or not, i.e. tests established in: (i) EDF v Romania;"* (ii) AES Summit v
4

Hungary;"** and Total v Argentina.” It has dealt with the issues of alleged

unreasonableness, disproportionality and discrimination together. ’°°

630. The Respondent first contends that the Disputed Measures were not discriminatory
(which the Respondent sees as the critical issue engaged by Article 10(1) ECT).’8’
Although the Claimants do not contend that the Disputed Measures were discriminatory
(other than with respect to the TVPEE and the Water Levy), and the Tribunal accepts this
to be the case, the Respondent’s arguments are outlined below as there is some overlap
with the issues as to whether the Measures were reasonable. Thus, it is said by reference
to EDF v Romania and criteria listed by Professor Schreuer that the Disputed Measures

do not constitute:

i A measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any apparent
legitimate purpose: The purpose of the Disputed Measures is legitimate

because they “aim to resolve an unsustainable situation of imbalance, in

 

which the d ic and international economic circumstances had led to a
decrease in demand that required the system to be rebalanced.”
Additionally, they concerned a legitimate aim: “not excessively burdening

consumers to reach this rebalance and avoiding unjustified over-

compensation.” "8

83 RL-0035, EDF v. Romania, { 303.
784 RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, ff 10.3.7 to 10.3.9.

285 Resp. Skeleton | 65; RL-0050, Total S.A. v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on
Liability, 27 December 2010.

286 Eg. Resp. C-Mem. {ff 956 et seq.
787 Resp, Rej.{| 1024-1025, Resp. C-Mem. ff 983.
788 Resp, C-Mem. { 982(a).

239

ii. A measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion, prejudice
or personal preference: The Disputed Measures were implemented
observing the laws and the Spanish Supreme Court case-law, which
guaranteed the principle of reasonable rate of return. Further, the Disputed
Measures apply to all involved in the energy market, so are not

discriminatory against a particular investor.’°°

iii. A measure taken for reasons that are different from those put forward by
the decision maker: The reasons for adopting the Disputed Measures were

already announced in RD-L 6/2009, RD-L 14/2010 and RD 1614/2010.”

iv. A measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure:
The Respondent enacted the Disputed Measures following the procedures
prescribed by law. Further, the Respondent shared the “‘successive drafts of
the measures with the interested parties” and established a procedure for
submitting additional arguments, which were assessed and taken into

account, according to Responder.””!

631. By reference to AES Summit v Hungary, the Respondent submits that the Disputed
Measures are reasonable and compliant with the FET standard of the ECT.”” It refutes
the Claimants’ case that the Micula case is applicable because this does not apply the
ECT “nor takes into account its objectives and principles.”’ Therefore, the applicable
test, according to the AES Summit v Hungary case, is whether (i) there was a rational
policy when adopting the macroeconomic control measures and (ii) the measures were

reasonable and proportionate to the policy.”

789 Resp, C-Mem. { 982(b).

790 Resp, C-Mem. 982 (c).

791 Resp, C-Mem. { 982(d).

782 Resp. C-Mem. 984

793 Resp, Rej. 1027.

794 Resp, Rej. {9 1027-1028 and 1029-1040.

240

632. As to the first of these elements, the Respondent says that the Disputed Measures were
adopted “to correct and prevent, in order to protect consumers, paying investors higher
than reasonable remuneration” which was leading to the Tariff Deficit, which “by law
had to be corrected.” This policy “was valid and met the objective of a public economic
policy.”75

633. The Respondent denies that the Tariff Deficit was attributable to its failure sufficiently
to increase consumer tariffs. The Respondent says that it raised consumer tariffs “by
81% between 2003 and 2012” and that “indefinitely increasing consumer tariffs, as the

Claimant asks, is not a rational policy.”7°

634. Further, the Respondent refutes the Claimants’ assertion that the ILC 2001 Articles apply
to this case. The Respondent says that the Claimants are referring to the 2001 Articles
because they require that a measure adopted by a Government “be the only possibility,

placing the burden of proof on the Government seeking to adopt the measure.” However,
the Claimants are the ones with the burden of proof under Article 10(1) to show that the
Disputed Measures are unreasonable and disproportionate. Additionally, the Claimants
have not “proven the viability of the alternative measures” to the Disputed Measures they

propose. 7”

635. The Respondent says that it has explained the (i) existence of an economic crisis, (ii) the
difficulty of obtaining “international financing, which gave rise to the need to suspend
issues of the Securitisation Fund for the Tariff Deficit between March and November
2012”, and (iii) the bailout of July 2012 which included the signature of the MOU with
the EU”® that imposed on the Respondent “the commitment of adopting numerous
macroeconomic measures in different sectors of the economy?’ which implied a
“structural reform of the SES.” It says that the economic crisis led the Respondent to

adopt a series of macroeconomic measures in various sectors, including the energy sector.

795 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 986 and 993.
796 Resp. Rej. | 1031(1).

797 Resp. Rej. | 1031(2).

788 RL-0067, MOU with the EU.

241

According to the Respondent, the Claimants “say nothing about the reasonableness of
macroeconomic control measures aimed at guaranteeing the economic sustainability of
the SES, in the context of the collapse of the Spanish financial system and when the EU

bailout and the conditions imposed on the Kingdom of Spain are well-known facts.”"

636. The Respondent contends that the second element of the AES Summit v Hungary test
“requires the Government's action to be reasonable, demanding an appropriate
correlation between the objective of the state public policy and the measure taken to

reach said objective.”*

637. The Respondent submits that the Disputed Measures are reasonable because they affect
all the subjects of the SES (consumers and all the operators in the system), deal with the
Tariff Deficit and maintain the reasonable profitability of RE producers. Additionally,
the Respondent submits that the remuneration established in the Disputed Measures

corresponds “‘to the system proposed by the RE Sector’s main Association in 2009.”*°!

638. The Respondent also alleges that the Disputed Measures are proportionate because they
maintain the producers’ reasonable profitability of 7.398%, which could be even “higher
if the standards set for an average facility are surpassed’, and that such rate was even
proposed by APPA in 2009.8? The remuneration scheme established through RD
413/2014 and Order IET/1045/2014 “provides for remuneration for operations in order
to cover all operational costs needed to perform the activity in an efficient and well-

managed manner.”°

639. Further, as to the four points on which the Claimants rely to say that the Disputed

Measures are unreasonable:

7 Resp. Rej. | 1031(3) (incorrectly numbered 4] 406-408).

800 Resp. C-Mem. § 994,

891 Resp, C-Mem. { 995.

82 Resp, C-Mem. {ff 997-998.

83 Resp, C-Mem. 999; R-0115, Order EIT/1045/2014, 16 June 2014, Preamble, section III {if 14 to 21.

242

a) The allegations that the Disputed Measures “have not had a sufficient effect on
consumers and have not affected other producers” \acks proof. On the contrary,
the reform of the SES “was comprehensive in scope, affecting all operators and

after having increased consumer tariffs by 81% between 2003 and 2012.”°°4

b) The allegation that the “method of remuneration proposed by APPA in 2009 is
completely unrelated to the contested remuneration method” is inconsistent with
the fact that “a simple reading of the 2009 APPA proposal is enough” to observe
that the current remuneration framework “conforms to the remuneration model

sought by the RE sector itself.”°°>

ce) The Respondent has presented sufficient evidence proving that the Disputed
Measures have been accepted as reasonable by “international arbitration
tribunals, international institutions, rating agencies and the markets all accept

the adopted measures as reasonable and proportional.”®°>

d) The allegation that “the rate of return received on their plants is unreasonable,
as it is not the rate of return promised” is misconceived as RD 661/2007 “did
not promise to freeze a fixed rate of return during the entire useful life of the
plants.”°7 In addition, under the current remuneration scheme, “the rate of
return obtained by the Claimants’ plants as a group comes to a total weighted
return of 10.6% before tax or 8.27% after tax’,*°® which is higher than the
WACC of the sector,*” higher than the rate of return of other regulated sectors
of the SES,*!° and further reasonable compared with the return levels currently

given by Banks.*!! Moreover, those plants that “no longer receive subsidies are

84 Resp, Rej. | 1033(1), referring to Resp. C-Mem. { 275-306 and 592-608.
85 Resp, Rej. | 1033(2); R-0187, Draft Act presented by APPA-Greenpeace on 21 May 2009, Article 23.4.

806 Resp, Rej. | 1033(3); R-0326, IMF, Document Spain: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2016 Article IV Mission,
13 December 2016”.

807 Resp. Rej. | 1033(4).

808 BDO second report i] 244 and 245.

8 BDO first report J 99.

810 R-0077, Act 24/2013 on the Electricity Sector, 26 December 2013, Tenth Additional Provision.
S11 Resp. Rej. {ff 1034-1037.

243

640.

641.

(2)
642.

812 Resp.

813 Resp.
814 Resp.

going to obtain a rate of return throughout their useful life of between 20.7%

and 7.4% before tax.”*'*

As to Total v Argentina, according to the Respondent, the test from this case allows an
examination of whether the Disputed Measures “respected the minimum protection
standard guaranteed by International Law for long-term investments” by maintaining the
economic balance of the investments allowing the investors to recover “its operational
costs, amortize its investment and obtain a reasonable rate of return during that period
of time.”*" Tt is said that the Claimants have not “challenged the relevance of this test

nor the due fulfilment of all elements of this test.”*\4

The Respondent says that the test has been fulfilled because, as was also confirmed by

B15 «6,

Mr Juan Ram6n Ayuso, the reform implemented by Spain respects the minimum

standard of FET acceptable under international law, by respecting the principle of

economic equilibrium of the investment, thus allowing the investor to recover the full cost

dditi }

of their inves in to a ble rate of return on their

investment amounting to 10.6% before tax or 8.2% after tax.”*'®

The Tribunal’s Analysis

It is common ground between the Parties that conduct that is unreasonable or
discriminatory is prohibited by the FET standard under Article 10(1) ECT, and the
Tribunal is content to proceed on that basis. Further, Article 10(1) separately provides

that:

“...no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal.”

Rej. J 1038.
C-Mem. ff 1004-1006, Resp. Rej. | 1022.
Rej. J 1043.

815 RW-0001, Ayuso First Statement.

816 Resp.

C-Mem. { 1009; Resp. Rej. 1049.

244

643.

644.

645.

646.

647.

The Tribunal accepts that impairment has been established in respect of the enjoyment
of the Claimants’ Investments. There is no claim as to the Disputed Measures being
discriminatory other than with respect to the TVPEE and the Water Levy, and the
Tribunal has already found that it lacks jurisdiction with respect to these. The major issue

concerns whether unreasonableness can be established.

As to unreasonableness, the Tribunal agrees with the Parties that, consistent with the AES
v Hungary case, it needs to consider two factors, i.e. “the existence of a rational policy;
and the reasonableness of the act of the state in relation to the policy.”*"" It is necessary
to determine whether there is “an appropriate correlation between the state’s public
policy objective and the measure adopted to achieve it. This has to do with the nature of

the measure and the way it is implemented.”*'*

As follows from its consideration of the facts in Section D(2)(f) above, the Tribunal
accepts that the Respondent was acting pursuant to a rational policy in adopting the

Disputed Measures.

As to the reasonableness of the Respondent’s acts in relation to the relevant policy, the
principal contentions of the Claimants on the facts have also been considered in Section
D(2)(f) above, albeit in the context of whether the Disputed Measures were necessary

and were not disproportionate, and largely rejected.*!°

The Tribunal considers that some margin of appreciation should be allowed to the
Respondent in implementing its policy to address the Tariff Deficit (see under Section
D(2)(f) above), and it also considers that the threshold in terms of establishing
unreasonableness is a high one, that is frequently assimilated with arbitrariness.*?° In

EDF v Romania, basing itself on the view of Professor Schreuer as to what constituted

87 Cl. Reply 1579; RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, {ff 10.3.7 to 10.3.9.

818 Cl, Reply 1579; RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, {ff 10.3.7 to 10.3.9; RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, | 179.
819 See paras, 554-583 above.

20 See e.g., RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, 1 167 and 179.

245

824

648.

649.

arbitrary conduct, the tribunal proceeded on the basis that there would be unreasonable

or discriminatory conduct where there was -

“a measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any apparent
legitimate purpose;

a measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion, prejudice
or personal preference;

a measure taken for reasons that are different from those put forward by the
decision maker;

a measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure.”*?!

The Tribunal considers this to be appropriate to describe what is required to show
unreasonableness within Article 10(1) ECT although, consistent with the view expressed
by the Electrabel tribunal,®”? it also considers that the consideration of whether an act is

unreasonable under Article 10(1) may engage an issue of disproportionality.

To the extent that the Disputed Measures were disproportionate as identified in Section
D(2)(f) above, the Tribunal considers that these Measures were unreasonable (if not
necessarily arbitrary). The case on unreasonableness is otherwise rejected, and it is
recalled that it has already been found that no specific commitments were made to the
Claimants that the remuneration regime under RD 661/2007 would remain substantially
unchanged. The Tribunal considers that there is no sound basis for the Claimants’
invocation of “the profitability promised at the time it invested or the profitability
considered to be reasonable prior to the introduction of the New Regime.” **> There was

no such promise. +

21 RL-0035, EDF v. Romania, 303.
2 RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, | 179.
3 Cf. Cl. Reply 597.

See paras. 535-549 above. The Tribunal also does not accept the Claimants position as to the rates of return referable

to “the profitability considered to be reasonable prior to the introduction of the New Regime.” On the basis of the
2005 PER and the Ministerial press release of 25 May 2007, the relevant rate of return could only be 7% or the range
5%-9% (after tax). The Tribunal has already rejected the case that the CNE report of March 2007 shows something
different and, in any event, that report preceded the press release of 25 May 2007.

246

650.

As follows from the consideration of the facts in Section D(2) above, none of the factors
on which the Claimants rely lead to the conclusion that the Disputed Measures otherwise
inflicted damage on the investor without serving any apparent legitimate purpose; or were
not based on legal standards but on discretion, prejudice or personal preference; or were
taken for reasons that are different from those put forward by the decision maker; or were

taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure.

G. BREACH OF TRANSPARENCY

652.

(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Respondent’s conduct in dismantling the Special Regime
was a breach of the FET standard which requires that a “State’s conduct toward investors
and its legal environment be transparent (i.e. free from ambiguity and uncertainty).”®?>
Reliance in this respect is placed on Tecmed v Mexico,**® Electrabel v Hungary,®”” and

Plama v Bulgaria.***
The Claimants allege that the Respondent’s conduct was not transparent because:

a) Through RDL 9/2013, the Respondent “not only wiped out the investment regime
for the Claimants’ investment’, but this was followed by the 11-month Transitory
Regime during which the “government gave no indication regarding the precise
remuneration that any qualifying plants would be entitled to”, which prevented RE

installations from forecasting future cash flows.*”?

b

=

RD 413/2014 and the June 2014 Order, which were supposed to “define the precise

economic regime that would apply to qualify

 

ying installations’, did not provide any

“transparent explanation of underlying criteria or calculations behind the Special

5 Cl. Mem. [478 and 481.

26 CL-0032, Tecmed, | 154.

27 CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, 7.79.
8 CL-0051, Plama, | 178.

9 Cl. Mem. 481(i). See also, Cl. PHB 9 199-202.

247

Payment or whether there would be any future updates of the economic regime.
Indeed, Spain has not offered any guidelines whatsoever on many key aspects of
the New Regime.” **° Additionally, Spain denied access to its expert reports and it
only later became known that the BCG report was never prepared while the Roland
Berger report was finished several months after the publication of the June 2014

Order.**!

c) The fact that the Special Payment is calculated by reference to a Standard
Installation, and not an actual plant, creates further uncertainties. By reference to
the Compass Report, it is said that “some parameters of the Standard Installation
will remain constant over time, but the Government retains the discretion to alter
many other parameters for existing plants..., which provides no visibility of the

regime that will apply going forward.”**”

d) Under the New Regime, the Respondent has the right to review the Special Payment
to “make sure that the prevailing yield on ten-year Spanish bonds plus a spread...
continues to apply.” According to the Claimants, the Respondent has not
established a clear methodology for adjusting the Special Payment, “/et alone done

so in a coherent and transparent manner.”**

e) “The New Regime does not provide any clear indication as to the timeframe during
which the remuneration for installed capacity... will apply.” The Claimants argue
that the Respondent could “withdraw this element of the Special Payment before
the end of the estimated useful life of the plants if the Government determines that

the Standard Installation has already earned a ‘reasonable return’.’**4 However,

830 Cl. Mem. ] 481(ii); Compass Report {ff 96, 137-138 and fn, 86.

851 Cl. Mem. {| 481 (ii); C-0111, “The Government authorizes cuts to renewables without a technical report’, Press
Release from Expansién, 13 March 2015.

82 Cl. Mem. | 481 (iii); Compass Report J 96.
3 Cl. Mem. | 481 (iv). See also, Cl. PHB ff 203-211.
84 €.0026, RD 413/2014, Second Additional Provision 5.

248

the Respondent has not established a method for determining when a plant has

earned reasonable profits.**>

653. The Claimants reject the Respondent’s arguments for saying that its conduct was

transparent:

a) As to whether a specific commitment was made, the Claimants reiterate their
arguments as to legitimate expectations, and say that issue of the RAIPRE
certificates specifically confirmed the entitlement of each of RWE’s installations

to the RD 661/2007 FIT.**°

b) The Disputed Measures came unannounced. The Respondent “misled investors by
holding out that the RD 661 FIT was guaranteed, right up to the abrupt enactment
of the Disputed Measures,” through “RD 661; RDL 6/2009; the July 2010
Agreement; and RD 1614."°7

c) There was no consultation or investor participation prior to the introduction of the
Disputed Measures. It is said that: “The February 2012 consultation was carried
out for the March 2012 CNE Report, whose recommendations Spain ignored.”
Further, the Claimants also deny that there was a stakeholder participation in Law
24/2013 and the 2014 Ministerial Order since, in the CNE’s Report of 4 September
2013, it was noted that: “the urgent process relating to the consultation ... does not
guarantee the effective participation of various agents involved.”*** Likewise, it is
said that there is evidence of numerous submissions “strongly objecting to the
unfairness of the New Regime” to which the Respondent did not “provide any

evidence that the New Regime was modified in response to those submissions.”*?

835 Cl. Mem. | 481(v); Compass Report, fn. 242.

836 Cl. Reply #¥ 523-532; C-0015, Excerpts of the RAIPRE certificates of the installations.
837 Cl. Reply 601; Cl. Skeleton | 84.

838 ©.0123, CNE Report 18/2013, pp. 4 and 15.

*9 Cl. Reply {[ 602; Cl. Skeleton [ 85; Cl. PHB {ff 199-202.

 

249

d) The remuneration system under the New Regime is opaque and unpredictable
because the “triennial reviews permit Spain unilaterally to cut RWE’s
remunerations at its discretion.” **° According to the Claimants, the CNE report of
September 2013 demonstrates that the New Regime raised great uncertainties for
RE installations because it was subject to periodic reviews.**! Their case is that the
New Regime is subject to ongoing instability, and that the only stable element in
the New Regime is that the remuneration will be set by reference to the ten-year
Spanish bond and a spread that will change.**? BDO accepted that the reasonable
return could be changed in 2019.8 The Claimants conclude that, from 2019, it
“appears that the reasonable return not only could but in fact will be set

1844

considerably lower than 7.398%.

b. The Respondent’s Position

654. |The Respondent contends that the ECT does not guarantee complete predictability of the
regulatory framework during the validity of an investment unless there is a specific
commitment by the State, and says that the tribunal in AES Summit v Hungary confirms
this.**> It rejects the application of (i) the Tecmed case because the award was “disputed
by the Annulment Committee of the MTD Case”;**° (ii) the Electrabel award because the

claimant made no allegation of transparency;**” and (iii) the Plama award because it

840 Cl. Skeleton J 82.

S41 Cl. Reply {[ 604.

82 Cl, PHB ¥ 207. See also, at Day 5, pp. 93-94, where it is said in the light of the 2019 revision that the New Regime
is arbitrary and unpredictable.

843 Cl. PHB 208, referring to Mitchell, Day 5, p.13, lines 6 to 17.

“4 Cl. PHB ff 210-211. This is said to be apparent from a statement of the Minister of Industry, as follows: “Regarding
the reasonable return, that some parliamentary groups have brought up, it is not the subject of this appearance, but I
can tell you something. You may think that the law should not be applied such as it is and that the remuneration of
regulated activities should not be linked, as it is, to [Spanish] Treasury bonds. That would mean that electricity [prices]
will not be reduced for each and every Spanish consumer by between 5 and 10%. ... On the reasonable return topic, I
have already responded. We are in favour of that producing a substantial discount on the electricity bill for all the
Spanish consumers.” C-0343, Transcript of the Spanish Parliamentary Session No. 13 on Energy, Tourism and Digital
Agenda dated 28 June 2017, pp. 47-48; C-0344, Article in Cinco Dias: “Nadal wants to cut renewables premium by
half”, 26 June 2017.

545 Resp. C-Mem. {{{] 951-952; RL-0039, AES Summit, Award, 9.1.6 and fn. 28.

© Resp. C-Mem. { 951(1); RL-0030, MTD, Decision on Annulment, {{{ 66 and 67.

547 Resp. C-Mem. {1 951(2); RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, J 115.

 

 

 

250

“merely refers this ECT standard to the FET and the stability of the regulatory
29848

framework.
655. According to the Respondent, the following facts prove that the Respondent did not

violate its obligation to promote transparent conditions under Article 10(1) of the ECT:

a) The Respondent never made a commitment to the Claimants to “maintain its

regulatory framework or the regime established in RD 661/2007 unchanged.”*”

b) The Respondent “warned of action to remedy over-remuneration and to improve
the sustainability of the SES” since 2006, and “warned of the need to introduce

reforms to tackle the tariff deficit” since 2009.°°°

c) | The Respondent followed the procedures established by law in adopting the
Disputed Measures without delay and “guaranteeing the participation of the
legitimate stakeholders in the regulatory process.” The Respondent received
submissions from the “RE Sector in relation to the drafts of RD 413/2014 and
Ministry Order 1045/2014 that the Claimant alleges to be unaware of have been
accredited. This contradicts the unfounded claim that the Facilities were in the

“dark” for 11 months asserted by the Claimant.”*°! Further, the Respondent has

shown that the Claimants “could participate in the Regulatory procedure by

submitting pleading in 2012 (before the CNE) and all along 2013 and 2014, before
the CNE and the State Council” and that, as stated by Mr Ayuso, “many of the RE

848 Resp. C-Mem. { 951(3); CL-0051, Plama, J 178.

549 Resp. C-Mem. J 954(1).

850 Resp. C-Mem. {| 954(1); Resp. Rej.] 1017(a)-(g). See, R-0274, Appearance of the Minister of Industry, Tourism
and Trade before the Senate on 26 October 2006; R-0258, Appearance of the General Secretary for Energy before the
Congress of Deputies; R-0101, RD 661/2007, Preamble; R-0259, General Secretariat on Energy before The Senate;
R-0089, RD-Act 6/2009, Preamble; R-0090, RD-Act 14/2010, Preamble; R-0074, Sustainable Economy Act 2/2011,
4 March 2011, Article 79.4 a) and d); R-0278, Congress of Deputies Journal validation of RD-Act 14/2010, 26 January
2011; R-0192, Speech by Prime ~—- Minister ~—- Rajoy, += 19 += December 2011; ~—R-0092,
RD-Act 13/2012, page 8; R-0121, National Reform Programme 2012, Government of Spain; R-0174,The Reforms of
the Spanish Government: Determination in the face of the crisis, Secretariat of State for Communication, Ministry of
the Presidency, September 2012, Chapter III, Page 18; R-0122, Spanish Economic Policy Strategy: Assessment and
structural reforms over the next six months, Government of Spain, 27 September 2012, Section C.8, page 70; RL-
0067, MOU with the EU.

8S! Resp. C-Mem. | 954(3).

251

Stakeholders submissions were accepted in the final definition of the Standard

Facilities and Parameters.”***

d) The Respondent adopted “a predictable and dynamic regulatory system that
continues to guarantee reasonable profitability for the RE projects and the
economic equilibrium of the investment.’ The Respondent says that “the
establishment of regulatory periods offers security to investors and guarantees that
reasonable profitability is maintained, preserving this profitability throughout the
regulatory useful life, along with the recovery of the investment value.”* Further,
Law 24/20135* and RD 413/2014** did contain rules to ensure that investors at all
times receive reasonable profitability on their facilities.*°® It is said that the Law
establishes specific fixed boundaries within which revisions shall be made,
distinguishing between: “(i) The regulated process that shall be followed in order
to review the rate of return and (ii) The objective limits that shall be respected by
the Regulator when making the revision.”*°’ These boundaries are intended to
restrict the discretionary powers of Government. Further, the Law also provides the
procedure of revision with the necessary tools in order to guarantee that the

revisions will allow the plants to maintain a reasonable return.*°*

852 Resp. Skeleton {| 61-62; Resp. Rej.{[ 1019; the Respondent points to the following documents as evidence of
participation: R-0194, Information on the public consultation on regulatory adjustment measures in the energy sector
of 2 February and 9 March 2012, published on the National Energy Commission (CNE), www.cne.es, 17 September
2014; R-0234, Submissions from Protermosolar concerning RD 413/2014, 30 July 2013; R-0305, Elecnor financial
statements, 31 December 2013, page 90; R-0086 and R-0087, full, hyperlinked index of the regulatory records of RD
413/2014 and OIET 1045/2014. These indexes provide online access to the submissions presented by the various
stakeholders and to all processing of these regulatory records, with full transparency;
R-0124, Report of the Council of State dated 6 February 2014, issued in the administrative appeal relative to the draft
Royal Decree 413/2014. The report sets out the processing, with the participation of the whole sector and the restart
of its processing as a result of the proposals admitted; RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement {J 65 to 84.

883 Resp. C-Mem. 4 954(4).

854 R.0077, Act 24/2013 on the Electricity Sector, 26 December 2013, Article 14.4.

855 R.0110, Royal Decree 413/2014, 6 June 2014, Article 20(1).

856 RW-0001, Ayuso First Statement. See also, Resp. PHB J 154 et seq.

857 Resp. PHB | 156. See further, {9 158-172.

858 Resp. PHB {{ 157.

252

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

656. Article 10(1) ECT provides in relevant part:

“Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent
conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to make Investments
in its Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all
times to Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and
equitable treatment.”

657. As to allegations that concern the time when the Investments were actually made, the
obligation of transparency (the encouragement and creation of transparent conditions to
make Investments) is established by the first sentence of Article 10(1). The Claimants’
allegation that the Respondent “misled investors by holding out that the RD 661 FIT was
guaranteed”®*? may be seen as engaging this first sentence of Article 10(1). However,
the Tribunal does not consider that this allegation adds materially to those made
specifically with respect to the Claimants’ alleged legitimate expectations, and rejects it

for the same reasons.

658. The Claimants’ allegations principally concern a failure in transparency in the period
2013-2014 (and a lack of transparency going forward), i.e. some considerable time after
their Investments were made. As to an ongoing obligation of transparency, it follows
from the Tribunal’s conclusions in Section C above with respect to the interplay between
the first two sentences of Article 10(1), this obligation is established but only to the extent
that transparency forms part of the commitment to accord FET established in the second

of the two sentences and, by that second sentence, embedded into the first.

659. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the Plama and Electrabel cases offer little
guidance as to the content of an obligation of transparency under Article 10(1), and notes

the equivocal language used in both cases.

a) According to Plama, “the condition of transparency, stated in the first sentence of

Article 10(1) of the ECT, can be related to the standard of fair and equitable

89 Cl. Reply 601; Cl. Skeleton { 84; Claimants’ oral opening at Day 1/165.

253

treatment. Transparency appears to be a significant element for the protection of
both the legitimate expectations of the Investor and the stability of the legal
framework.”®© The Tribunal has already rejected the Claimants’ case on legitimate
expectations and stability, and the award is otherwise equivocal as to the role played

by transparency under Article 10(1).

b) As to Electrabel, the Respondent is correct to say that the claimant in that case
made no allegation of transparency.**! The tribunal stated in its discussion of
Article 10(1) that: “The reference to transparency can be read to indicate an
obligation to be forthcoming with information about intended changes in policy
and regulations that may significantly affect investments, so that the investor can
adequately plan its investment and, if needed, engage the host State in dialogue
about protecting its legitimate expectations.”*®” Again, this is equivocal and is

linked back to legitimate expectations.

660. As to the well-known passage from Tecmed v Mexico®®

that the Claimants rely on, this
concerns a controversial description of the basic expectations of investors, and the
Tribunal does not consider that Article 10(1) ECT establishes a requirement on a
Contracting State to act in a manner “free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its
relations with the foreign investor.” There is nothing in Article 10(1) or elsewhere in the
ECT to suggest that the Contracting States were willing to accept such an exacting
obligation. While the Tribunal considers that a lack of transparency may constitute a
breach of the FET standard under Article 10(1) independent of any consideration of
legitimate expectations or stability, it also considers that, consistent with its views as to
the standard referable to the concept of unreasonableness under Article 10(1), there is a
high threshold to be met in order to establish a breach. The Tribunal sees no reason why,
and no basis in the ECT to suggest that, a lower threshold would apply in the particular

context of transparency. It also notes that various awards have suggested that there is a

860 CL-0051, Plama, | 178.

861 Resp. C-Mem. { 951(2); RL-0048, Electrabel, Award, 115.

82 CL-0042, Electrabel, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, { 7.79.
863 CL-0032, Tecmed, | 154.

254

need to establish a complete lack of transparency, or some equivalent phraseology, in

order to serve as a foundation for a breach of the FET standard.5™*

661. Turning to the specific allegations made by the Claimants, it may be that RDL 9/2013

was “abruptly enacted” but, as already noted in Section D above, the Respondent was

5

bona fide adopting urgent measures,*® and moreover there had been a public

consultation exercise in the context of the CNE February 2012 report, which stated that
the deficit between revenues and costs of the electrical system had become unsustainable
and that “the urgent adoption of regulatory solutions is needed.”® It is correct that RDL
9/2013 was followed by an 11-month period during which there was uncertainty as to the
precise remuneration that any qualifying plants would be entitled to, which must have
caused difficulties for RE operators.*°’ However, during this period there was the
publication of drafts of the Royal Decree and Order IET 1045/2014, a public
consultation, with responsive changes being made.** The Tribunal does not accept there

was a lack of transparency such as to engage Article 10(1).

662. As to the alleged lack of transparent explanations and guidance in RD 413/2014 and
Order IET 1045/2014,8© the Tribunal has not seen any evidence that indicates an
inadequacy that could engage Article 10(1). As to the fact that the Special Payment is

calculated by reference to a Standard Installation as to which the Government retains the

870

discretion to alter certain parameters,”’’ this appears to the Tribunal to be more a

complaint as to lack of predictability as opposed to lack of transparency.*”! As follows

84 See e.g., the well-known passage concerning Article 1105 NAFTA, but often referred to in other treaty contexts,
in Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, (2004) 11 ICSID Reports 361,
386 Y 98, referred to RL-0030, MTD, Decision on Annulment, {{] 66 and 67.

865 Cf, Cl. PHB 201.
866 €.0163, 2012 CNE Report, p. 6.
867 Cl. Mem. 1 481(i); Cl. PHB 202.

88 RW-0002, Ayuso Second Statement {| 65 to 82; Resp. oral opening at Day 2/140, referring to the July and
December drafts of RD 413/2014 and submissions made with respect to these drafts by APPA, AEE and others.

89 Cl. Mem. ] 481 (ii); Compass Report fff 96, 137-138 and fn, 86.
80 Cl, Mem. 481 (iii); Compass Report J 96; Cl. PHB ff 203-211.

*7 Cl, PHB ff 203-211, making claims in respect of ongoing instability as part of PHB section 7 entitled “Spain’s
reform lacked — and still lacks — transparency.” The claim in respect of ongoing instability has already been considered
in Section E above.

   

255

from the Tribunal’s earlier reasoning, it does not consider that the Claimants have a sound
basis on which to claim that the remuneration regime applicable to their plants may not
change over time. All depends on the nature of that change, and whether it is sufficiently
radical to engage the FET standard under Article 10(1), whether as a matter of
disproportionality, stability or otherwise. In the future, a change may ground a further
claim by the Claimants. But the scope for the exercise of discretion within the Disputed
Measures, albeit a cause for legitimate concern on the part of the Claimants, does not
provide a sound basis for such a claim in anticipation of a change. The same point applies
with respect to the impacts of future reviews of the Special Payment, including the spread
allowed and the applicable timeframe.*’”? In the future, the Claimants may have a valid
ground for complaint, including to the effect that further changes in the system of
remuneration mean that measures of the Respondent have a more disproportionate impact
on their Investments than the Tribunal has identified; but the Tribunal does not consider
that the current scope for future change grounds a claim at this stage. Any future changes
to the remuneration received by the Claimants’ plants may after all be beneficial in whole
or part, not exclusively detrimental as the Claimants now suggest (but has not been
established),*”> and their legality would anyway have to be assessed against the

circumstances then prevailing.

663. As to the allegation that Spain denied access to its expert reports,*”*

this has already been
considered in the context of disproportionality above. If it is assumed that, as the
Claimants suggest, Spain did not abide by the views of these experts because of
disagreement as to the regime that should be implemented, it does not follow there is a
failure of transparency such as to engage Article 10(1). A State is not obliged to follow
or wait for expert advice that it has commissioned, nor to make initial expert views with
which it disagrees public (although that may be desirable). However, even if such a

course of action does not amount to a lack of transparency, the State is, as already noted,

82 Cl, Mem. 4] 481 (iv) and (v).

"3 See e.g., Cl. PHB 49 203-211; cf. Resp. PHB ff 181-184.

*4 Cl, Mem. 4 481 (ii); C-0111, “The Government authorizes cuts to renewables without a technical report’, Press
Release from Expansién, 13 March 2015.

256

exposing itself further to the risk of unintended or disproportionate impacts to protected

investors.

664. As to the complaint that Spain ignored the results of the March 2012 CNE report, the
Tribunal has already found that the Claimants have not established this (see Section D
above). As to their reliance on the CNE report of 4 September 2013,8”> the Tribunal
understands that the reference in that report to the presence of “great uncertainties for its
[the new regime’s] application to the approximately 60,000 existing installations, since
its application depends on a series of standard parameters that will be defined in the
development order of the royal decree” is a function of the fact that the report was made
prior to the adoption of Order IET 1045/2014.” On the same page of this report, the
CNE stated that: “The new methodology could ensure reasonable rates of return as long
as it offers an additional payment to installations during their useful life, which will level
the playing field so that they can participate in the market, allowing them to receive the
signal of the market price without distortions.” It does not appear to the Tribunal to have

been pointing to a defect in RDL 9/2013 irrespective of the Order that was to follow.

665. — It is correct that, in this CNE report, it was noted that “the urgent process relating to the
consultation ... does not guarantee the effective participation of various agents
involved”, but nonetheless both APPA and AEE were able to and did make submissions
to the CNE in the context of this report, and it has not been demonstrated to the Tribunal
that the insufficiencies identified by the CNE were not addressed by the subsequent
consultation that preceded the adoption of RD 413/2014 and Order IET 1045/2014.

666. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds no lack of transparency sufficient to establish a breach

of Article 10(1) ECT.

*5 Cl, Reply {¥ 602 and 604; Cl. Skeleton ff] 82, 85; C-0123, CNE Report 18/2013, pp. 4 and 15.
86 Cf. Cl. Reply { 604.

257

H. VIOLATION OF THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE
(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

667. The Claimants submit that the Respondent violated the umbrella clause established in
Article 10(1) of the ECT. According to the Claimants, “the plain language of the
Umbrella Clause in Article 10(1) of the ECT does not differentiate between contractual
obligations and legislative/regulatory undertakings. In fact ... the expression ‘[a]ny
obligations’ in this Umbrella Clause ‘means not only obligations of a certain type, but

‘any'— that is to say, all — obligations entered into with regard to investments of investors

of the other Contracting Party’.”°"

668. Therefore, the umbrella clause may encompass “obligations specifically entered into vis-
a-vis an investor or its investment may be considered covered by the Umbrella Clause,

regardless of their source (contractual or otherwise), where the host State has

specifically assumed a commitment as an obligor and where there is a clear obligee.”*”

It is said that this was confirmed in Eureko v Poland, Plama v Bulgaria, Enron v

Argentina, LG&E v Argentina, El Paso v Argentina, SGS v Pakistan, Bureau Veritas v

877 Cl. Mem. ff 498-499; CL-0062, Eureko B. V. v The Republic of Poland, Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Merits,
19 August 2005 (hereinafter “Eureko”), | 246. See also, CL-0051, Plama, | 186 (“the wording of this [Umbrella]
clause in Article 10(1) of the ECT is wide in scope since it refers to “any obligation.” An analysis of the ordinary
meaning of the term suggests that it refers to any obligation regardless of its nature, i.e., whether it be contractual or
statutory.”); CL-0061, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Bilateral Investment Treaties in the
Mid-1990s (United Nations Publications, 1998), p. 56; CL-0058, Nuclear Tests (Australia v France), ICJ Rep 1974,
Judgment of 20 December 1974 {] 43 (“It is well recognised that declarations made by way of unilateral acts,
concerning legal or factual situations, may have the effect of creating legal obligations... When it is the intention of
the State making the declaration that it should become bound according to its terms, that intention confers on the
declaration the character of a legal undertaking, the State being thenceforth legally required to follow a course of
conduct consistent with the declaration;” CL-0059, Case concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v
Thailand), ICJ Rep 1961, Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 26 May 1961, p. 17; and CL-0060, Case Concerning
the Frontier Dispute (Burkina Faso v Republic of Mali), \CJ Rep 1986, Judgment of 22 December 1986, p. 554.

88 Cl. Reply 617.

258

Paraguay and Sempra Energy International v Argentina.*” The Claimants say that the

Respondent’s attempts to distinguish such cases “are ... misguided.”**°

669. Further, the Claimants say that the Respondent misrepresents the cases on which it relies
to claim that the umbrella clause only applies within the framework of a contract or
similar bilateral instrument between the State and the investor.**! The Claimants say that
Noble Ventures v Romania is taken out of context because “the case before the Noble
Ventures tribunal was precisely limited to contractual obligations.”**? The SGS v
Pakistan and SGS v Philippines awards are said to “recognise that umbrella clauses may
cover obligations other than those derived from contractual agreements.”** It is also
said that AES Summit v Hungary “made no finding as to the scope of obligations that
would fall within the protection of the Umbrella Clause”, while the Charanne case
“contains no discussion of the Umbrella Clause in the ECT [and] nor did the case involve
a claim for breach of the Umbrella Clause.”*** Finally, the portion of the ECT Reader’s
Guide**> quoted by the Respondent is said to be “an extract from a section dedicated
precisely to investment contracts... It says nothing about the kinds of obligations covered

by Article 10(1) in fine: it certainly does not purport to limit the source of the obligations

covered by this provision only to contractual ones.”**°

* Cl, Mem. 4 499 and 503-508; CL-0062, Eureko, | 246; CL-0051, Plama 4 186; CL-0025, Enron; CL-0039,
LG&E; CL-0065, El Paso Energy International Company v The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/15,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006; CL-0066, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v The Islamic Republic
of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003 (hereinafter “SGS v
Pakistan, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction”), 166; CL-0064, Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation,
Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V. v The Republic of Paraguay, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/9, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction, 29 May 2009; CL-0048, Sempra Energy International v The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007 (hereinafter “Sempra”).

880 Cl, Reply (4 614-615.

881 Cl, Reply ({{ 605 and 608.

882 RL-0026, Noble Ventures, Inc. v The Republic of Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/I1, Award, 12 October 2005
(hereinafter “Noble Ventures”), { 51.

883 CL-0066, SGS v Pakistan, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, | 166; CL-0139, SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v The Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 January
2004 4 121.

84 Cl. Reply | 616.

885 RL-0053, The Energy Charter Treaty: A Reader’s Guide, June 2002, (hereinafter “ECT: A Reader’s Guide”), p.
26.

886 Cl, Reply {{{ 608-613 and 614-616.

  

 

259

670. On this basis, the Claimants submit that:

a) Through RD 661/2007 (Article 44(3)) and RD 1614/2010 (Articles 4 and 5(3))
“Spain expressly recognised the application of the FIT to the RE installations for
the entire operational lifetime of the RE installations and held out to investors that
no review of the tariffs would affect existing installations”,’®’ and that the
Respondent even “made a specific undertaking to the wind producers with the July
2010 Agreement, whereby... the Government agreed to recognise the application
of the RD 661/2007 economic regime and the stabilisation of the FIT.”*** The
Claimants reject the Respondent’s position that the commitments contained in RD
661/2007 and RD 1614/2010 did not apply against new macroeconomic
circumstances or in situations of over-compensation because “there was no ‘over-
compensation’ nor did Spain make any such ex ante finding”, and the reference to
new macroeconomic circumstances is an attempt to raise a force majeure defence,

which fails.5°

b) — Through the registration in the RAIPRE the Respondent “entered into clear
obligations with regard to each of RWE’s investments.” According to the
Claimants, the RAIPRE “is a favourable administrative act that contains an
obligation on the Spanish State that is more binding than an obligation contained
in a bilateral contract between an investor and the State.”*°° The Claimants submit
the RAIPRE was “signed, stamped and issued by Spain to RWE’s installations. It

confirmed on its face the installation’s right to receive the Special Regime FIT.”**'

887 Cl. Mem. { 510.
888 Cl. Mem. 512.
889 Cl. Skeleton { 88.
8 Cl. Reply | 620.

89! Cl. Skeleton J 89. See, C-0015, Excerpts of the RAIPRE certificates of the installations. The RAIPRE certificates
are issued by the Ministry on request. The RAIPRE certificates were issued by the Autonomous Communities to
certify an installation's inscription in the Special Regime.

260

b. The Respondent’s Position

671. The Respondent submits that the umbrella clause claim should be dismissed because
“neither the Claimant as the investor, nor the investment of the Claimant are covered
under the umbrella clause of the ECT, as the Kingdom of Spain has not contracted any
specific commitments, vis-a-vis, with the Claimant or their investment to petrify the RD

661/2007 regime in their favour.”*?

672. According to the Respondent, because the last sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT uses
the term “entered into”, the correct interpretation of the umbrella clause in Article 10(1)
is that it only applies to “specific bilateral obligations assumed by the Government with
respect to an investor through an express, unequivocal and individual commitment for
each investor or investment. This implies the formalisation or signature (entering into) a

contract or equivalent bilateral instrument... .”°°

673. In support of its interpretation, the Respondent cites Noble Ventures v Romania,®*4 SGS

v Philippines,®*> AES Summit v Hungary,®*° as well as to the ECT Readers’ Guide.**”

674. The Respondent says that the cases cited by the Claimants in support of their
interpretation are not applicable. According to the Respondent, (i) the tribunal in Eureko
B.V. v Poland “does not interpret ‘any obligation’ as referring to obligations outside of
those arising from a contract’;®”* (ii) the criterion established in LG&E v Argentina and

Enron v Argentina has been refuted by other awards, such as El Paso v Argentina, which

82 Resp, C-Mem. {| 1039.
*3 Resp, Rej. 1056.
84 Resp, C-Mem. { 1016; RL-0026, Noble Ventures, 1 51.

895 Resp. C-Mem. {] 1017; RL-0024, Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004 {] 166.

86 Resp, C-Mem. { 1021; RL-0039, AES Summit, Award.
87 Resp, C-Mem. {{ 1019; RL-0053, ECT: A Reader’s Guide, p. 26.
®8Resp. C-Mem. { 1029(a); RL-0043, Eureko, 258.

261

675.

(

2

)

decided that there must be an investment agreement for the umbrella clause to apply (as

also decided in CMS v Argentina

899
).

The Respondent says that it has not entered into any obligations with the Claimants for

the purposes of Article 10(1).

4)

b)

RD 661/2007 and RD 1614/2010 are generally applicable and do not apply vis-a-
vis to the Claimants or their investments (as confirmed by the Jsolux award®”’). RD
661/2007 “did not contain specific commitments: (i) neither immutability of the
remuneration regime against new macroeconomic circumstances or in situations
of over-compensation; and (ii) nor immutability of non-economic measures.”?”!
The Charanne award confirmed the “non-existence of a freezing commitment of the

regime of RD 661/2007.”?

Registration of the plants in the RAIPRE is not “a commitment from the
Government to indefinitely maintain a future rate of return for the entire RE
Sector.” The Respondent says that it would be “absurd to suggest that the tens of
thousands of owners and the tens of thousands of facilities registered in the RAIPRE
have a vis-a-vis commitment with the Government.” Additionally, the Charanne
award dismissed the argument that such registration could create the expectations

alleged by the Claimants.°

The Tribunal’s Analysis

676. Pursuant to the final sentence of Article 10(1) ECT:

8 Resp. C-Mem. { 1029(b)-(c); RL-0041, El Paso, Award, | 533; RL-0031, CMS Gas Transmission Company v
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on Annulment, 25 September 2007 (hereinafter “CMS,

 

sion on Annulment”).

9 Resp. Skeleton | 71; RL-0088, /solux, WM 771-772.

901 Resp. Rej. 1070.

92 Resp. Rej. | 1071; RL-0049, Charanne, {9 510 and 511.
903 Resp. Rej.{f| 1074-1076.

262

“Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has entered into
with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting
Party.”

677. The key issue for the Tribunal is whether this protection requires some form of specific
consensual obligation in order to be engaged. The Tribunal considers that it does, as
follows from the ordinary meaning of the words “obligations it has entered into with an
Investor or an Investment ... .’. Although the provision at issue was not identical to
Article 10(1) ECT (it was broader in its terms), the Tribunal is persuaded by the
analysis of the formula “entered into” of the ad hoc Committee in CMS v Argentina, as

follows:

“In speaking of ‘any obligations it may have entered into with regard to
investments’, it seems clear that Article II(2)(c) is concerned with
consensual obligations arising independently of the BIT itself (i.e. under the
law of the host State or possibly under international law). Further they must
be specific obligations concerning the investment. They do not cover
general requirements imposed by the law of the host State.”°”
678. The Tribunal considers that this analysis applies all the more so in the context of the ECT
wording, where the obligation must be “entered into with” as opposed to “entered into
with regard to” an Investor or Investment. This is all the more suggestive of a direct

consensual link.

679. The Claimants have not pointed to any form of consensual obligation that would engage
the Article 10(1) umbrella clause. The provisions of Spanish law that the Claimants rely
on (RD 661/2007, Article 44(3), and RD 1614/2010, Articles 4 and 5(3)) do not qualify
as such, and likewise the RAIPRE certificates of registration for the individual plants.
While these were indeed signed, stamped and issued by Spain to RWE’s installations,
the Respondent is correct in the Tribunal’s view in stating that such certificates did not
constitute a commitment from the Government to maintain indefinitely a future rate of
return. The nature of the legal obligations engaged as a matter of registration in the

RAIPRE is a matter of Spanish law, and the Claimants have failed to establish that, as a

94 Article 1(2)(c) of the Argentina-USA BIT provides that “Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investments.”

°5 RL-0031, CMS, Decision on Annulment, | 95(a).

263

VIL.

680.

matter of such law, consensual obligations were entered into by Spain. The Claimants
also refer to the July 2010 “agreement” but, even assuming in the Claimants’ favour that
this generated consensual obligations that remained valid in 2013-2014 (which the
Tribunal does not accept), the “agreement” was not “entered into with” the Claimants or

their Investments.

Accordingly, this aspect of the claim fails.

REPARATION

A. RESTITUTION

681.

682.

(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants’ primary remedy sought is restitution from Spain by (i) withdrawing all
of the Disputed Measures and (ii) placing the Claimants under the same legal and
regulatory framework that existed pursuant to the Special Regime’s final regulation, RD
661/2007. Additionally, the Respondent must compensate the Claimants for the damages
caused by the change in the regulatory regime. The Claimants reserved their right to value

such losses if the Tribunal decides to order restitution.°”

According to the Claimants, as a result of the Respondent’s breaches of Article 10 of the
ECT, the Claimants are entitled to reparation according to the principles of customary
international law, as codified in the ILC 2001.” The reparation must “as far as possible,
wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which
would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed.”°° The

Claimants submit that, under the principles codified in Articles 1, 28, 34, 35 and 36 of

96 Cl, Mem. 523.

07 Cl. Mem. ff 518-519; CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles and CL-0021, J. Crawford, The International Law
Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility: Introduction, Text and Commentaries (Cambridge University Press,
2002), p. 60.

28 Cl, Mem. 4520, CL-0068, Case Concerning the Factory at Chorz6w (Germany v Poland), PCU Rep, Series A,
No. 17, Judgment of 13 September 1928, (hereinafter “Chorzéw Factory”), p. 47; ILC 2001 Articles, Article 31.

264

683.

b.

the ILC 2001 Articles, Spain is under an obligation to make restitution to, or alternatively,
compensate the Claimants for, its internationally wrongful acts and put the Claimants in
the position they would have been but for Spain’s wrongdoing.*” According to the
Claimants, the Respondent has not objected to the application of the ILC 2001 Articles

and the principles contained in them.?!°

In short, the Claimants seek restitution and, in the alternative (if the Tribunal believes

911)

that restitution is materially impossible or disproportionate the Claimants seek

compensation for the damages caused by the Disputed Measures.?!?

The Respondent’s Position

684. The Respondent denies that the Claimants are entitled to any form of reparation

685.

(restitution or compensation) because (i) the current regulatory regime continues to offer
a reasonable profitability, as has been offered since 1997, and (ii) the Respondent has not

breached the ECT.°!

The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal considers that reparation must be ordered consistent with the basic
proposition that reparation must “as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the
illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if
that act had not been committed.”®'* As this is plainly not an appropriate case for
restitution, the real issue concerns the amount of compensation to be awarded to the
Claimants so as to ensure “full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally
wrongful act’, as per Article 31(1) of the ILC 2001 Articles. Not only has the Tribunal
only found a breach of Article 10(1) ECT by reference to only certain of the Claimants’

plants, even if the breach were as extensive as contended for by the Claimants, restitution

909 Cl, Mem. 522.
9! Cl, Reply { 639.
°1 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 35.

912

Cl. Mem. { 524; CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 36; CL-0050, PSEG, { 282.

913 Resp. C-Mem. fff 1041-1043.
°!4 CL-0068, Chorzéw Factory , p. 47; ILC 2001 Articles, Article 31.

265

would obviously involve a burden to the Respondent out of all proportion to the benefit
to the Claimants deriving from restitution instead of compensation.°!> This case involves
State regulation that is generally applicable across a very important sector in Spain i.e.
the RE sector whereas, by contrast, the Claimants can very readily be afforded full

reparation through compensation.

B. COMPENSATION

)

a.

686.

687.

688.

The Parties’ Positions

The Claimants’ Position

(i) Primary Valuation

The Claimants seek compensation for the damages due to Spain’s breach of Article 10(1)

ECT in the amount of EUR 415.6 million.?'°

The Claimants say that the appropriate standard for compensation for a breach of Article
10(1) ECT is the “fair market value”, specifically the difference in the fair market value
of the investments with and without the Disputed Measures. The Claimants say that a
number of tribunals have accepted that the fair market value is the appropriate standard
of compensation when a treaty is silent on the standard of damages applicable for
breaches other than expropriation.°!” The Claimants also say that the Respondent has not

expressly objected to the fair market value standard.°!®

The Claimants contend that the most appropriate method for calculating the fair market

value, given the facts of the case, is the Discounted Cash Flow (“DCF”) method.?!”

915 CL-0018, ILC 2001 Articles, Article 35(b).
216 Cl, Reply 638.

°17 Cl, Mem. ¥f 525-526; CL-0038, CMS, Award, 191 409-410; CL-0025, Enron, {i 361-363; CL-0048, Sempra, 1
403-404; CL-0035, Azurix Corp v The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/12, Award, 14 July 2006
(hereinafter “Azurix”), | 424; CL-0073, Anatolie Stati, W 1460-1461; CL-0056, Occidental Petroleum Corporation
and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v The Republic of Ecuador, ICSD Case No. ARB/06/11,
Award, 5 October 2012, {{ 708.

218 Cl, Reply { 639.

919 Cl, Mem. $f 539-540; Cl. Reply {Il 659-667.

266

According to the Claimants’ expert, Compass Lexecon, the DCF method is the most

appropriate —

“i) As it is a forward-looking method that assesses value based on
anticipated future cash flows, it is particularly appropriate for the valuation
of renewable energy projects, whose value comes from their expected future
energy production rather than the amount of money historically invested.

ii) It has been supported as the preferred valuation method for revenue
producing assets by leading authors.

iii) It is a widely used method of valuation analysis. The majority of
investors and asset owners alike rely on DCF analyses to decide whether or
not to embark upon a project.

iv) International Organisations, such as the World Bank, support it as a
valid method to estimate fair market value in the context of international
disputes.

v) It is a well-adapted valuation method for companies whose projected
revenues are fully or partly defined by contract, law or regulation, as is the
case of the Claimants’ investments.”°”°

689. The Claimants emphasise that the Tribunal does not need to look at the internal law to
determine the appropriate method for reparation,°”! which is a question to be determined
solely by reference to public international law and the ECT standard of fair market value.
Thus, the views in the Judgment of the Spanish Supreme Court of 24 September 2012°7?

on the DCF method have no bearing on this question.°?*

220 Cl, Mem. 541.

°1 CL-0004, Vienna Convention, Article 27; CL-0018, ILC Articles 2001, Article 32; CL-0066, SGS v Pakistan,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction; CL-0144, Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/05/22, Award, 24 July 2008; CL-0146, ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Company v The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, CSID Case No. ARB/08/2, Award, 18 May 2010; CL-0039, LG&E, { 146; CL-0153,
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v The Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/03/19, and AWG Group Ltd v The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Liability, 30 July
2010; and CL-0143, GAMI Investments, Inc. v The United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 15 November
2004; CL-0131, Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v The Republic of Sri Lanka, (CSD Case No. ARB/87/3, Final
Award, 27 June 1990.

°22 R-0147, Judgment of the Supreme Court of 24 September 2012, Appeal 60/2011, Legal Ground Six.

°3 Cl, Reply { 651.

267

690.

691.

692.

The Claimants also contend that a valuation through an investment-based method,
especially the “regulatory asset base” (RAB) is inappropriate because: (i) there is no
investment-treaty jurisprudence that has adopted the RAB method, (ii) it is inadequate to
value RE installations the value of which is fundamentally dependent on future regulatory
cash flows, and (iii) the RAB method ignores the change in the RE regime in which

Claimants expected a FIT regime for the entire operational life of the RE installations.°”*

Compass Lexecon has carried out the DCF valuation of the Claimants’ assets as of 20
June 2014 comparing the (i) “But-For” scenario and the (ii) “Actual” scenario. The
difference between the two scenarios represents the damages to the Claimants due to the
lost value of the investments as of the date of valuation.°”> The But-For scenario assumes
that the Disputed Measures were never implemented, thus, the Claimants’ installations
continue operating for their entire operating life under the Special Regime of RD
661/2007. The Actual scenario carries out the valuation with the full effect of the

Disputed Measures.°?°

The Claimants contend that the correct date for the calculation of the DCF is as of 20
June 2014 following the “irreversible deprivation” test in cases of indirect expropriation,
which has been adopted by tribunals in cases other than expropriations.°”” According to
the Claimants, in cases where there has been an indirect expropriation resulting from a
series of measures, the appropriate date for determining liability and valuing damages
should be the culmination of all the events rather than the date of the first event.°* It is
said that the correct date for valuation is 20 June 2014 because (i) Spain published Order
TET/1045/2014 finally defining the parameters of the New Regime, (ii) the Transitory
Regime following the coming into force of the New Regime would not allow the

Claimants to value their investments with a reasonable degree of certainty and therefore

°4 CI, Reply 4{ 708-719. Compass Lexecon, Second Report {fff 239-240. See also, Claimants’ oral opening at Day

1/232-234.

Cl. Mem. {| 531.

°26 Cl, Mem. 531.
27 CL-0035, Azurix, I] 417-418.

8 Cl. Mem. { 547; CL-0081, Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena v Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No. ARB/96/1,
Award, February 2000, {| 76.

268

93.C

693.

694.

695.

696.

a valuation carried out during such period would be artificial,’ and (iii) Order
TET/1045/2014 represented the final act of an approximately two-year legislative

backlash against RE which wiped out 56% of the value of the Claimants’ Investments.?*°

Further, Compass Lexecon has followed two approaches when making the DCF analysis:
(i) a free cash flows to firm (“FCFF”) approach, which is the cash flow available to the
company, based on revenues over the life of the project after deducting all operating
expenses, expenditures in working and fixed capital, discounted at a rate that reflects the
cost of raising capital, both equity and debt for a similar company; and (ii) a free cash
flow to equity (“FCFE”) approach, which also deducts all debt interests and net debt
capital payments, discounted at the rate that reflects the cost of raising equity capital for

a similar project.”*!

Under the But-For scenario and the Actual scenario, Compass Lexecon’s valuation
comprises two main elements: (i) the Claimants’ lost cash flows between | January 2013
(when Law 15/2012 entered into force) and 20 June 2014 (“Lest Cash Flows”) and (ii)

the Claimants’ lost future cash flows as at 20 June 2014 (“Lost Value”).°>*

To calculate the Lost Cash Flows, Compass Lexecon compares what the Claimants
would have earned, but for the Disputed Measures, to what the Claimants actually earned
(using actual data) with the Disputed Measures in place. The difference between the two
scenarios amounts to the lost historical cash flows.°* This analysis has the benefit of the

hydro and wind plants’ actual financial and operational data for that period.?**

Compass Lexecon makes assumptions as follows to define the But-For scenario in order

to calculate the Lost Cash Flows:

°29 Navarro Statement {ff 83-84.

230 Cl, Mem. 4 556. Compass Report ff 22, 29-30 and 219.
°§1 Cl, Mem. 4542; Compass Report { 185.

Cl. Mem. {| 533.

1
1

Reply 4 652.
Cl. Mem. 4 559; Cl. Reply { 650; Compass Report J 269.

269

a) The FIT continues under RD 661/2007 in the But-For scenario, whereas in the
Actual scenario, the Premium has been withdrawn. In the Actual scenario, Compass
Lexecon assumes the plants are paid in what they define as the “Second
Regulatory Framework”®* (i.e., on an interim basis from 14 July 2013) until 20

June 2014.°%°
b) The Disputed Measures do not have any effect on the actual MWh of production.**”

ce) In the But-For scenario, there is no imposition of the 7% levy, which does apply in
the Actual scenario (which likely increased the pool price of electricity). Compass

therefore lowers the pool prices by 7% in the But-For scenario to adjust for that
effect.°°8

d) The operating expenses (“OPEX”) are the same in the But-For and Actual scenario,
except for the 7% levy on production for all wind projects and the 7% and 2.2%
levies on the use of mainland waters in the case of hydro plants, which apply only

in the Actual scenario.°”
e) The capital expenditures (““CAPEX”) are the same in both scenarios.**°

697. By reference to the above, Compass Lexecon has calculated the Lost Cash Flows at EUR

8.3 million.**!

°35 Compass Report { 4(a): “The “Second Regulatory Framework,” in force from January 1, 2013 to July 13, 2013,
was implemented through Law 15/2012 of December 27, 2012 (“Law 15/2012”) and Royal Decree Law 2/2013 of
February 1, 2013 (“RDL 2/2013”). It eliminated certain support payment options, modified the annual indexing
mechanism of support payments and introduced a 7.0% levy on power plant revenues and an additional 2.2% levy on
mini-hydro plant revenues, levies which continue to be in force.”

°° Cl. Mem. {| 561(i); Compass Report, Appendix D if 271-272.

°37 Cl, Mem. {| 561 (ii); Compass Report, Appendix D, fn. 268.

938 Cl. Mem. {| 561 (iii); Compass Report, fn. 74 and Appendix D {| 201-201, 274-275 and 280.

°° Cl. Mem. 561 (iv); Compass Report {ff 201-203 and 274-275.

40 Cl, Mem.  561(v); Compass Report J 204, Appendix D § 276.

°#! Cl. Reply | 652; Compass Lexecon, Second Report {{] 244-245. Compass had calculated the Lost Cash Flows in
the Compass Report at EUR 8.5 million, but after having corrected three minor mistakes (i) production for wind plants,
(ii) cost of access charges, and (iii) accumulated net operating losses, resulted in a decrease of the damages (See,.
Compass Lexecon, Second Report {f 243-244).

1.
1.
1.
1.

270

698. To measure the Lost Value as at 20 June 2014, Compass Lexecon forecasts the cash flows

699.

that the wind and hydro assets are expected to generate over time in both the But-For and

Actual scenarios then calculates the difference between them. This difference represents

the impact of the Disputed Measures on the Claimants’ investments.

942

Compass Lexecon calculates the net present value (“NPV”) of the reasonably expected

cash flows of the Claimants’ wind and hydro installations for both the Actual and the

But-For scenarios. Compass has again made two calculations in both scenarios: (i) a Free

Cash Flows to Firm (“FCFF”) calculation® and (ii) a Free Cash Flows to Equity’

(“FCFE”) calculation.” In order to calculate the NP’

4)

b)

It is assumed that the plants operate until the end of their technical life, after which
they would be dismantled, (i) 20 years in the case of wind plants and (ii) 25-40

years in the case of hydro plants, in the Both For and Actual scenario.°“°

In the But For scenario, revenues are calculated as the product of electricity
production (based on Aersa’s latest business plan prior to the Disputed Measures)
and the unitary remuneration. To achieve this, the regulated tariff and the premium
options are projected using the most recent inflation forecast for Spain from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) minus 0.5%, and it is assumed that the plants
will always opt for the alternative which yields the highest expected payment. For
the Actual scenario, Compass Lexecon calculates the revenues as the sum of the
investment payment and the revenues received from the wholesale market as the
plants receive no operating payment. In the Actual scenario, Compass Lexecon has
also considered the “claw-back” payment intended for repayment of the revenues

collected during the Transitory Period in excess of the revenues that the plants were

Cl. Reply 653; Cl. Mem. 563.

°43 Cl. Mem. {| 564. Calculation that measures the value of a business by adding the cash flows that the company
expects to generate in the future, discounted at a rate that reflects the company’s opportunity cost of investing in the
project(s).

°4 Cl. Mem. [ 564.Calculation that measures the cash flows available to the company’s equity holders after deducting
all debt interest and principal payments, discounted at a rate that reflects the cost of raising equity for a similar project.

Cl. Mem. {ff 563-564; Compass Report 185.

°46 Cl, Mem. 565; Compass Report {{{ 43 and 191.

271

d)

e)

A

8)

entitled to under the Third Regulatory Period. As part of the revenues, Compass

Lexecon has also considered the revenues for reactive energy.”

Compass Lexecon has projected spot prices for 2014-2017 in the Actual scenario
using future contracts traded in OMIP, the Iberian Energy Derivatives Exchange.***
Compass then assumes the prices will converge to the variable costs of combined
cycle gas turbine generators in 2025, and that thereafter, prices will grow at the
inflation rate. In the But For scenario, Compass uses the same prices but adjusts the

7% levy.”

Compass Lexecon adopts the inflation forecast of the IMF until 2019. Thereafter,
due to the lack of IMF forecasts after 2019, it adopts the European Central Bank

target inflation rate of 2%.°°°

The OPEX are the same in the But-For and Actual scenarios adjusted pursuant to
inflation, with the exception of the access fee to the grid. In the Actual scenario,
Compass Lexecon has also taken into account the 7% levy on electricity production
for both wind and hydro installations, and the 2.2% levy on the use of mainland

waters in the case of hydro installations.°!

Compass Lexecon uses Aersa’s projections for the CAPEX until 2023. Thereafter,
it maintains CAPEX at a stable level for each project until the end of its useful

life.°

The value of all scheduled debt service is calculated at the company’s cost of debt

of 5.79%. Compass Lexecon also assumes no further issuance of debt.??

°47 Cl, Mem. 4 565; Compass Report {Jf 195-8.

°48 CLEX-104, OMIP. Spanish Electricity Futures as of 20 June 2014.
°° Cl, Mem. 4565; Compass Report, Appendix D 4 279-280.

°50 Cl, Mem. 4565; Compass Report, Appendix E 278.

951 C|

1.
1.
82 Cl.
1.

Mem. 565; Compass Report {{ 202 and 274.
Mem. 4565; Compass Report | 204.

°3 Cl, Mem. 565; Compass Report { 205.

272

700.

701.

702.

h) Income tax of the Claimants’ investments is at 30%, which is the statutory Spanish

income tax rate in force as of the date of valuation.”

i) The rate of return in the actual scenario is the 7.398% rate of return for the first
regulatory period. For the following regulatory periods, Compass Lexecon has used
the one-year average return of the ten-year Spanish sovereign bond of 3.79% plus

300 basis points, which results in a pre-tax rate of return of 6.79%.°°>

Compass Lexecon then calculates the discount factor in the FCFF approach, discounting
the expected free cash flows using the weighted average cost of capital (“WACC’”), a
rate that represents the cost of raising debt and equity in the corresponding industry and

location.°°6

The Capital Asset Pricing Model (“CAPM”)*®” is then used to calculate the cost of
equity. The cost of equity is calculated by using the standard parameters of the risk-free
rate, the "B" (beta), the market risk premium and the country-risk premium:*°* Compass
Lexecon adopts a risk-free rate of 1.61%, a B of 0.76, ° a market-risk premium of

962

5%,°°! and a country risk premium of 2.18%,°°* which are then used in the standard

CAPM equation to derive a discount rate of 7.61%.°

With respect to the cost of debt, Compass Lexecon estimates an industry risk premium

of 2% and uses the same risk-free rate and country-risk premium used to calculate the

°54 CI, Mem. 565; Compass Report { 208.
°55 C], Mem. 4 565; Compass Report, Appendix D 4 287-288.
°56 Cl, Mem. | 566.

°57 CL-0079, M. Kantor, Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standards, Valuation Methods and Expert Evidence

(Kluwer Law International, 2008), p. 163.

°58 Cl, Mem. 9 566-567.

°5 Compass Report, Appendix C 248.

960 Compass Report, Appendix C 251.

261 Cl, Mem. 4 567(i); Compass Report, Appendix C 4 249.

962 Cl, Mem. 4 567(iv); Compass Report, Appendix C 4 259; Compass Report, Appendix C 4 260 and 261.

°63 Compass Report, Appendix C, Table 11.

273

703.

704.

705.

706.

707.

cost of equity, which results in a pre-tax cost of debt of 5.79% or an after-tax cost of debt

4.05% (in Euros).°™*

With respect to the FCFE approach, the discount rate is only represented by the cost of

equity, which is calculated as mentioned above (discount rate of 7.61%).°°

The Claimants further request the Tribunal to grant pre-award and post-award interest.
The Claimants contend that the appropriate benchmark for calculating interest is
contained in Article 13 of the ECT, which provides that interest will be calculated “at a
commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of expropriation until the
date of payment.” The Claimants say that this Article also applies to damages arising out

of breaches of the ECT that do not amount to an expropriation.°

The Claimants submit that both pre-award and post-award interests should be awarded

at a rate of 7.61%, compounded monthly.°°”

In the Memorial, the Claimants submitted that in order to achieve full reparation the
damages should include a gross-up over the amount awarded for taxes, and reserved their
rights to provide a figure for gross-up at a later stage because it was uncertain in which
fiscal year the award would be rendered.°* In the Reply, the Claimants included a tax
gross-up calculation in the amount of EUR 55.9 million or 15.5%. This calculation
assumes: (i) that RWE Aersa is the recipient of any potential compensation; (ii) a
corporate income tax rate of 25%; (iii) that the award is rendered in 2018; and (iv) net

operating losses as of 2018 of EUR 192.1 million.°

In summary, the Claimants contend that their damages are correctly calculated at EUR

267.7 million?” (excluding interest and a tax gross-up) under the Free Cash Flows to the

964 Compass Report, Appendix C { 265.

965

Compass Report, Appendix C 243.

966 Cl, Mem. 571.

267 Cl, Mem. {[ 575-578.

968 Cl, Mem. 579.

969 Cl, Reply | 638, 731-735.

9 Compass Lexecon, Second Report { 44 and Section VL4.

274

708.

709.

710.

711.

Firm (FCFF) approach, or EUR 263.7 million®’! (excluding interest and a tax gross-up)

under the Free Cash Flows to the Equity (RCFE) approach.°””

Compass Lexecon capitalises the damages suffered by the Claimants under the FCFF
approach at the pre-judgment rate of 7.61% to reach a capitalised damages figure of EUR
359.7 million.°”* Further, including the tax gross-up calculation of EUR 55.9 million or

15.5%, the total compensation figure amounts to EUR 415.6 million.°”

The Claimants contend that the damages sought are not speculative because the
Claimants’ expectations were not limited to a reasonable return. Further, even if the
Tribunal finds that they were in fact limited by the concept of reasonable return, the
Claimants have not received (and will not receive) a reasonable return under the New
Regime. Therefore, Spain would still be liable and would have to compensate the

Claimants for the losses suffered.°”°

(ii) Alternative claim by reference to reasonable return

In the alternative that the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ expectations were limited to
areasonable return, the Claimants say that they have still losses, and they have calculated
the fair market value of their investments with and without the Disputed Measures within

the reasonable return paradigm.?”°

For this alternative valuation, Compass Lexecon assumes that the sole entitlement of the
Claimants’ plants is to earn the return that the CNE considered reasonable when Spain

implemented RD 661/2007, that is 8.2%-11.2% after tax.°”’ This return is applied to the

27 Compass Lexecon, Second Report { 45 and Section VL4.

9 Cl, Reply 637.

°73 Compass Lexecon, Second Report | 258.

24 Cl, Reply J 638; Compass Lexecon, Second Report {| 259.
275 Cl, Reply 648.

26 Cl, Reply | 724.

2 Compass Lexecon, Second Report {| 7, 47 and 256.

275

model installations defined under the New Regime that Spain has assigned to the

Claimants’ installations.°”*

712. Compass Lexecon makes this calculation under two approaches: (i) the Alternative FIT

no”?

But-For approacl and (ii) the Alternative Capacity Payment But-For approach,*®° with

a DCF method applied.**!

713. Under the Alternative FIT But-For approach, the losses amount to EUR 320.5 million
under the FCFF approach, and EUR 311.2 million under the FCFE approach.** Under
the Alternative Capacity Payment But-For approach, the losses amount to EUR 261.5
million under the FCFF approach, and EUR 254.7 million under the FCFE approach.°*?

These amounts are net of interest and tax.°*

b. The Respondent’s Position

714. The Respondent submits that the Claimants are not entitled to any form of reparation.
However, the Respondent also submits its own alternative valuations in the event that the
Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction, that Spain breached its obligations under the ECT,

and that the DCF method is appropriate in this case.°*°

715. The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ alleged damages are not subject to
compensation because they are speculative. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’

“approach of distinguishing between ‘historical’ flows and future flows fails to take into

978 Cl. Reply (725.

°79 Compass Lexecon calculates the alternative values of the RD 66 1/2007 Fixed Tariff and Premium that would apply
to the Claimants’ wind and hydro installations from 1 January 2013, based on the concept of “reasonable return.” The
figures for the Fixed Tariff and Premium are fixed so that the “standard plant (as defined by the current regulatory
framework) can achieve the rates of return assessed as reasonable by the CNE in its report 3/2007.” Compass
Lexecon, Second Report { 96.

  

°80 Compass Lexecon calculates the damages assuming that the Government replaced the FIT scheme “with a fixed
annual payment per MW of installed capacity analogous to the fixed investment payment defined under the current
regulatory framework.” Compass Lexecon, Second Report {{ 257(b).

 

°81 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, p. 253.
°82 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, p. 254.
°83 Compass Lexecon, Second Report, p. 255.

°84 CL, Reply | 730; Compass Lexecon, Second Report, pp. 254-255.

°85 Cl, Reply J 1082.

276

716.

717.

718.

719.

account the essential concept of regulatory useful life and omits the joint consideration
of cash flows, past and future, in order to guarantee reasonable profitability on the

investments that were made. As a result, said approach should be fully rejected.”°*°

The Respondent submits that the Claimants base their claim on a comparison between an
Actual and But-For scenario, assuming that the actual scenario is going to be maintained
during the next decade and ignoring the principles of reasonable return. In this sense, the
Claimants try to predict “data like the pool price (dependent on the price of crude oil)
and the demand for energy. It is because of all this that the projection of the existing
parameters is hypothetical and illusory.”°*’ The long-term horizon in which the
calculation is made, and the fact that there is no guarantee that the remuneration scheme

will be petrified as it is, makes the Claimants’ valuations of damages speculative.***

The Respondent relies on the Supreme Court of Spain’s Ruling of 24 September 2012,
Point of Law Six,?*? in which according to the Respondent, the Supreme Court says that
extrapolations to so far a future lack security and therefore the assumptions do not meet
the burden of proof. The Respondent says that Compass Lexecon’s assumptions are such

as the Supreme Court refers to.?”

With respect to the DCF method, the Respondent says that this is not appropriate because
it is also speculative. It is said that both Parties accept that the DCF method is not

appropriate in all cases, as was established in the award in Rusoro v Venezuela.””!

According to the Respondent, Ripinsky°”” has established that the use of DCF could lead

to the overvaluation of financial impacts based on future events when numerous

986 Resp. C-Mem. {fff 1049-1051.

°87 Resp. Rej. 1085.

988 Resp. Rej. | 1086.

°89 R-0147, Judgment of the Supreme Court of 24 September 2012, Legal Ground Six.
99 Resp. Rej. 1089.

%1 Resp. Rej.{1 1091-1093. RL-0074, Rusoro Mining Limited v Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/5, Award,
22 August 2016, { 760.

992

RL-0057, S. Ripinsky & K. Williams, Damages in International Investment Law (British Institute of International

and Comparative Law, 2008) (hereinafter “Ripinsky & Williams”), pp. 200 and 201.

277

720.

721.

assumptions need to be made as to the future.” The Respondent says that there are

various circumstances in this case that makes inappropriate the use of the DCF method:

“(a)The fact that it involves a capital-intensive business, with a significant
asset base. Practically all its costs arise from investing in tangible
infrastructure. There are no relevant intangible assets to analyse.

(b) The high dependency of the cash flows on external, volatile and
unpredictable elements, such as the price of the pool, inter alia.

(c) The long-term nature of the forecasts.

(d) The contradiction between said time horizon and the useful life declared
in some of the plants’ official accounting records, which is shorter.

(e) The disproportion between the alleged investments (and the alleged
assumed risk) and the amount claimed, evidenced by the profitability
obtained.”°**

In light of these circumstances, the Respondent says that the appropriate valuation
methods are based on the cost of assets, examining whether they are recovered and a
reasonable return is obtained.” According to the Respondent, Marboe also stresses the
advantages of methods based on assets, which are less speculative and simpler to apply,
and makes reference to normal profitability and book value as obligatory references,

particularly when the investment is very recent.°”°

The Respondent’s expert, BDO, puts forward the view that “a payment model based on
the regulatory asset base is perfectly valid for remunerating producers of renewable
energies. Thus, the United Kingdom has already considered a payment model based on

RAB within the different alternatives to provide support to renewable energies.”°””

%3 Resp. C-Mem. 1062.

94 Resp. C-Mem. { 1063.

%5 Resp. Rej.| 1096; RL-0057, Ripinsky & Williams, p. 227.

96 Resp. C-Mem. {ff 1066-1067; RL-0058, Irmgard Marboe, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in
International Investment Law (Oxford, Oxford International Arbitration Series, 2009), pp. 267 and 275; BDO second
report {ff 19-22.

°7 BDO second report J 18.

278

722.

723.

724.

The Respondent then submits that the profitability rates obtained by the Claimants’
installations are higher than reference return rates, thereby removing the grounds for
claiming any damages whatsoever with regard to the investments. Additionally, the
Respondent argues that Compass Lexecon’s valuation method should be disregarded

because it provides abnormal results.””* According to BDO:

“the results obtained do not change our conclusions reached in our First
Report which are that the return in the Actual scenario is above the return
demanded by the capital markets and that the return that would have been
achieved in the But-for scenario presented by Compass Lexecon would be
excessive for a business such as the one under analysis.”°””
Also, according to BDO: (i) in a But-For scenario the average profitability rates for the
Claimants’ installations would be 17.9% for the wind farms and 9.4% for the hydro
plants. These profitability rates are disproportionate in relation to the risk profile of the
investments; !0° (ii) in the Actual scenario, BDO calculated the profitability rates at
15.1% for wind power and 7.8% for hydro;!! (iii) BDO calculated the average
profitability rate for the installations obtained over their full useful life, taking July 2013
as the appraisal date, with the wind power installations obtaining 16.0% and the hydro

1002

power installations 8.0%; and (iv) BDO also calculated the rates of return obtained

by the plants after the measures as 10.7% for wind power and 7.5% for hydro, before tax

(average, 10.6% before tax, equivalent to 8.27% after tax). 1003

The Respondent contends on the basis of the above figures that “it is clear that
profitability figures are notably high, especially when compared to rates such as: the
reasonable profitability laid down by the legislation in force at 7.398%, the WACC of
the sector calculated by BDO, at 4.9%; the WACC of the sector in Germany, at 4.6%;

98 Resp. C-Mem. 1071; BDO first report ff 100 et seq.

°° BDO second report J 244.

1000 Resp. C-Mem. J 1072; BDO first report {fff 29-34.

1001 Resp. C-Mem. ¥ 1073; BDO first report 112.

1002 Resp. C-Mem. J 1074; BDO first report {ff 125-128.

1003 Resp. Rej. 1102; BDO second report ff 244-245 and table 13.

279

even the WACC calculated by Compass Lexecon itself, at 6.06%; and, lastly, the interest

on the Spanish 10-year bond, at around 1.8%.” '°*

725. With respect to the claimed 7.61% rate of interest, compounded monthly, the Respondent
says that no justifications are given BDO proposes as “more reasonable” an interest rate
according to the cost of Spain’s public debt, the Spanish 2-year bond, at 0.60%. !° The

1006

Respondent says that Mark Kantor and awards such as in National Grid v

1007 > 1008

Argentina, advocate for a “risk free rate.

726. With respect to the Tax Gross-Up, the Respondent submits that, besides the Claimants
failing to assert in its Memorial “the specific tax (or taxes) that would be applicable; the
Government that would supposedly impose said tax (the home country or the host
country); and, unsurprisingly, even an approximate quantification of the amount of said
tax”, the Tax Gross-Up is unjustified.'°° With respect to the Tax Gross-Up argument
made in Claimants’ Reply, based on corporate tax from RWE Aersa at 25%, the
Respondent states that at “‘no time during the process prior to the Counter-Memorial has
the Claimant’s representation stated that compensation is paid only to the Spanish
company [RWE Aersa]. This was not stated in the Request or in the Memorial on the
Merits.” '°!° Moreover, it is said that the request lacks justification as the Claimants have

not provided any factual or legal background or expert report in substantiation.

727. In addition, the Respondent says that the Tax Gross-Up is inadmissible on the following
grounds: (i) the Tax Gross-Up is vetoed in Article 21 ECT,'°!! which established a Tax

1004 Resp. C-Mem. {{ 1075, BDO second report §{f 52-54.

1905 BDO First Report {{ 263; Resp. Rej.{f 1109-1110.

1006 RL-0076, Mark Kantor, “Valuation for Arbitration: Compensation Standards, Valuation Methods and Expert
Evidence” (Kluwer Law International, 2008), p. 49.

1007 RL-0079, National Grid P.L.C. v Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Award, 3 November 2008, fn. 122.

1008 Resp. Rej.f 1113-1114.

1009 Resp. Rej. {i 1115-1116.

1010 Resp. Rej. 1120.

1011 “Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this Treaty shall create rights or impose obligations with
respect to Taxation Measures of the Contracting Parties. In the event of any inconsistency between this Article and
any other provision of the Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.”

280

728.

729.

f,1012

Gross-Up carve ou and (ii) even if the ECT is considered not to have a Tax Gross-

Up carve-out, for the reasons explained above — the request is essentially speculative,

contingent and uncertain — no Tax Gross-Up should apply. !°'%

Finally, with respect to the Claimants’ alternative FIT valuation, BDO says that Compass
Lexecon has failed to understand the way in which the regulatory framework concerning
the Spanish Electricity Grid works in terms of incentives to renewable energies. It is said
that it is not rational to assume that the alleged reasonable returns in which payments
were calculated under RD 661/2007 would not change during the life of the plants.
Further, the calculation should have taken into account the fact that “the current regime
has a lower risk than the previous one, given that its revenue is linked, on the most part,

to investment.” '0'4

The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Parties’ experts have adopted largely different approaches to the assessment of
damages, leading to radically different outcomes (as indeed is not uncommon in
investment treaty cases). This is not, however, a case where the Tribunal can prefer the
evidence of one expert over another and then select one of two very different damages
figures put forward, at least as a basepoint from which to make its own calculations. The
Tribunal has found a breach of Article 10(1) in this case, but this is a breach so far as

concerns only —

i. the procurement of repayment of any sums already paid to the Claimants in the

period between the adoption of RDL 9/2013 and Order IET 1025/2014;

ii. disproportionality with respect to certain of the Claimants’ plants, i.e. the wind

plants Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and the hydro plant Cepeda;

02 Resp, Rej. $9 1125-1128.

913 Resp, Rej. {if 1129-1135; RL-0083, Abengoa, S.A. and COFIDES, S.A. v United Mexican States, CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/09/2, Award, 18 April 2013. {1 775, 776 and 777.

914 BDO second report fff 95-99.

281

730.

732.

There is no basis for the Tribunal to be looking to establish and pay compensation by
reference to the fair market value of the Claimants’ Investments, which are still held by
the Claimants, and which continue to generate significant revenue for them. Likewise,
the Tribunal sees no basis for compensation by reference to an alleged reasonable return

in the range of 8.2% to 11.2%.

As to breach (i) identified above, the Claimants say that EUR 19.4 million had to be
repaid, which has not been challenged. All that is required is verification and precise

quantification of amounts paid.

As to breach (ii), it is compensation with respect to the breach concerning the
disproportionate impacts to the specific plants that the Tribunal must assess, as opposed
to a breach with respect to the Claimants’ Investments as a whole by reference to the
defeating of legitimate expectations or one of the other bases pursuant to which the
Claimants have formulated their fair market value and (alternative) reasonable return
claims for damages. The evidence, as summarised in Section VI(D)(2) above, in
particular in the form of Table 10 of the second report of Compass Lexecon which the
Tribunal has accepted as reliable, is that certain plants are to achieve significantly lower
returns than the 7.398% pre-tax benchmark that the Tribunal has adopted in its
consideration of disproportionality, namely: Urano (2.8%), Grisel II (5.8%), Bancal I
(4.4%), Bancal II (4.2%), Siglos I (4.7%) and Siglos II (4.7%), and the hydro plant
Cepeda (-1.4%). According to Table 10, but for the Disputed Measures, the IRRs for
these plants would have been: Urano (9.1%), Grisel II (9.9%), Bancal I (4.7%), Bancal
II (4.6%), Siglos I (5.6%) and Siglos II (5.5%), and the hydro plant Cepeda (2.7%).!°!

As noted in the Commentary to Article 31 of the ILC 2001 Articles on State

Responsibility:

“The obligation placed on the responsible State by article 31 is to make ‘full
reparation’ in the Factory at Chorz6w sense. In other words, the responsible
State must endeavour to ‘wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and
re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that

115 The detailed calculations are set out in CLEX-0235, Correction of BDO’s working papers, Table A, 22 March

2017.

282

734.

act had not been committed’ through the provision of one or more of the

forms of reparation set out in chapter II of this part.”
This requires in the first instance identification of the relevant illegal act: here, breach by
the Respondent of Article 10(1) through the disproportionate impact of the Disputed
Measures to the Claimants’ plants as listed above. The task for the Tribunal is to identify
the level of compensation appropriate to wipe out all the consequences of that illegal act,
and to “re-establish” — as opposed to “establish” — the situation which would, in all
probability, have existed if the illegal act had not been committed. Thus, this very well-
known formulation suggests that there is some limit on the extent to which the Tribunal

can calculate damages by reference to a hypothetical scenario.

On the current facts, on the ‘but for’ scenario set out by the Claimants’ experts in their
Table 10, certain of the plants that the Tribunal has identified as impacted to a
disproportionate degree would achieve a return of more than 7.398%, but certain would
achieve less. Against that backdrop, the Tribunal identifies three possible approaches to

establishing the appropriate measure of compensation:

a) The aim of the Disputed Measures may be taken as ensuring that, given the high
investments costs for RE plants compared to other forms of generation, a minimum
return of 7.398% would be achieved (subject to plant or operator inefficiencies),
hence the compensation should aim at realising that minimum return for all the

Claimants’ plants.

b

Damages should be awarded by reference to the ‘but for’ scenario, which can be
seen as a simple and balanced means of compensation in the slightly unusual
circumstances where some plants would have received more, some less, than the
7.398% benchmark which the Tribunal has taken as an indicator of what is / is not

disproportionate.

c

Damages should be awarded by reference to the ‘but for’ scenario, but with a cap

to ensure that there is no recovery beyond the 7.398% benchmark.

283

736.

739,

Approach (a) is problematic in that, with respect to the less profitable plants (Bancal I
and II, Siglos I and II, and Cepeda), the Claimants would in fact be receiving
compensation based on higher returns than if RD 661/2007 had remained in place. In
other words, with respect to these plants, the Claimants would be placed in a situation
better than that which would, in all probability, have existed if the illegal act had not been

committed. Hence this approach is rejected.

As to approach (b), there is no reason why those plants that were apparently not set to
achieve returns as high as 7.398% under RD 661/2007 (Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II,
and Cepeda) should attract compensation beyond what they would have achieved ‘but
for’ the change in the regime. Hence, the difference between the ‘but for’ and the ‘actual’
gives an appropriate measure of compensation. As to the plants that would be
compensated on the basis of ‘but for’ returns of more than 7.398% (Urano and Grisel IT),
there is a question as to whether approach (b) is appropriate — hence the inclusion of
approach (c), pursuant to which these two plants would only get compensation to the
extent that the decrease in profits is below the 7.398% threshold that the Tribunal has

taken as marking what is and is not disproportionate.

In considering which of approaches (b) and (c) is to be preferred, it is useful to consider
the approach to assessment of quantum in the RREEF case. There, the tribunal found

that:

“... the Claimants were not immune from reasonable changes in the regime
applicable to its investment; therefore, it is only to the extent that the
modifications would have exceeded the limits of what is reasonable that
compensation would be due and should be calculated.” !°!

It was further held:

“... the Tribunal considers that, while entitled to compensation for
unreasonable return on their investments — if established -, the Claimants
cannot claim full compensation for the total decrease in their profits as a
result of the adoption of the new regime by the Respondent; they can only

‘016 Cf, RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, | 515. Cf. e.g. Cl. Mem. 191

525-526.

284

740.

TAL.

get compensation to the extent that such decrease is below the threshold of

a reasonable return,” !0!7
In the context of the decisions on liability made in the RREEF case, this reasoning may
appear persuasive. The relevant illegal act was found to be breach of the FET standard
through the defeating of the legitimate expectation to a reasonable return.!°!* In terms of
re-establishing the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if the illegal act
had not been committed, the tribunal is understood to have been assessing compensation
by reference to a pre-existing entitlement under (and a legitimate expectation generated
by) Article 30(4) of Law 54/1997, i.e. to a return that is reasonable with reference to the

cost of money in the capital market. !°!

The question for the Tribunal is whether similar reasoning may be deployed in this case,
i.e. it could be said that the Claimants were not immune from changes in the regime
applicable to their investment that were not disproportionate; therefore, it is only to the
extent that the modifications would have exceeded the limits of what is not
disproportionate that compensation would be due and should be calculated. It is
necessary to ask, of course, whether this approach is consistent with Article 31 of the
ILC 2001 Articles and Factory at Chorzéw. The Tribunal considers this to be the case.
Pursuant to the Tribunal’s conclusions on liability, the Respondent has breached Article
10(1) through adoption of the Disputed Measures and in particular RD 413/2014 and
Order IET 1045/2014 which, as the Claimant has noted, defined the parameters of the

New Regime. !0°

If such parameters had been formulated differently, the
disproportionate impacts could readily have been avoided, notwithstanding the prior
adoption/enactment of RDL 2/2013, RDL 9/2013 and Law 24/2013. In these very
particular circumstances, in terms of re-establishing the situation that would, in all

probability, have existed if the illegal act had not been committed, the Tribunal does not

07 RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, {{ 523.

1018 The tribunal also found that there had been breach on the basis of retroactivity, but this was seen as either subsumed
within the broader damages or

019 RL-0099, RREEF, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, { 523.
1020 Resp. C-Mem. {{ 60.

 

ing separate issues that do not appear relevant for present purposes.

285

consider it appropriate to seek to re-establish the situation as established by RD 661/2007

and the further regulations under the old Special Regime.

742. Thus, by reference to this Tribunal’s finding on liability, the “situation which would, in
all probability, have existed if [the illegal] act had not been committed” is the
replacement of the regime established by RD 661/2007 through the adoption of a regime
largely equivalent to the Disputed Measures that did not however lead to disproportionate
impacts due to different parameters being set. In light of this, the Tribunal considers it

most appropriate to proceed on approach (c) as identified above.

743. In terms of assessing the damages to the Claimants by reference to the cash flows that
they would have been received ‘but for’ the disproportionate impacts of RDL 9/2013 and
Order TET/1045/2014 on the Claimants’ plants as already identified, the Tribunal is
greatly assisted by the detailed spreadsheet that backs up Table 10 to the second report
of Compass Lexecon.!°?! This contains annual revenue and cash flow figures for each

plant up to the end of the relevant period.

744. However, the Tribunal is not in a position to make a final calculation of damages by
reference to this spreadsheet because: (a) Compass Lexecon has excluded the 7% tax cost
in their ‘but for’ cash flow projections from 2013 onwards, whereas this is a matter over
which the Tribunal has held that it has no jurisdiction; (b) the cash flows with respect to
Urano and Grisel II need to be capped by reference to the 7.398% IRR benchmark; and
(c) the appropriate discount rate needs to be applied with respect to cash flows that would
have been received only in the future. As to this, the Tribunal accepts the discount rate

of 7.61% advanced by the Claimants.”

745. Given the figures already contained in the detailed spreadsheet, and the availability to
the Parties of their respective experts, the Tribunal considers that these are matters that
could readily be resolved between the Parties, enabling the Parties to revert to the

Tribunal with an agreed figure. The Tribunal would then proceed to determine the final

101 CLEX-0235, Correction of BDO’s working papers, Table A, 22 March 2017.
102 C]. Mem. | 568; Compass Report, Appendix C, Table 11.

286

damages figures, resolving the issues of interest and the tax gross-up that has been

claimed, as well as costs.

746. Failing agreement reached between the Parties by January 23, 2020, the Tribunal will,
following consultation with the Parties, fix a calendar for further submissions of the
Parties on the damages due to the Claimants in respect of (i) the verification and precise
quantification of those sums repaid with respect to those plants not entitled to any special
payment under the new regime, (ii) Urano, Grisel IT, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and
Cepeda, using as a base Table 10 to the second report of Compass Lexecon and the

spreadsheet that underlies it.
747. Thus, by reference to the agreement of the Parties, or on the basis of further submissions,

the Tribunal will decide on the amount of the compensation due to the Claimants. The

Tribunal reserves its decision concerning interest and tax gross-up, and also on costs.

VIII. DECISION
748. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(1) | That it lacks jurisdiction to hear the claims of breach of Article 10(1) ECT with
respect to the two Taxation Measures introduced by Law 15/2012 of 27 December

2017, but that the jurisdictional objections of the Respondent are otherwise rejected.

(2) | That the Respondent has breached Article 10(1) ECT (i) to the extent that it has
procured repayment by the Claimants of sums previously paid by the Respondent
under the regime in place prior to adoption of the Disputed Measures, and (ii) the
disproportionate nature of the new measures that it has adopted, with specific respect

to Urano, Grisel II, Bancal I and II, Siglos I and II, and Cepeda.
(3) All other claims and requests of the Parties are dismissed.

(4) The Parties are directed to attempt to reach an agreement on the amount of
compensation to be paid by the Respondent to the Claimants in respect of its breaches

of its obligations as identified in paragraph (2), in accordance with the Tribunal’s

287

(5)

(6)

findings. In a first phase, the Parties are invited to agree by January 23, 2020 on a
reasonable schedule within which to attempt to reach agreement. If the Parties are
unable to agree on such a schedule, such will be fixed by the Tribunal through further

directions.

Insofar as the Parties fail to reach an agreement in accordance with (4) above, the
Tribunal will, following consultation with the Parties, fix a calendar for further

submissions of the Parties on the damages due to the Claimants.

The decision on the final determination of the damages due is thus reserved and will
be fixed in the Award, along with the Tribunal’s decisions as to interest, tax and

costs.

288

[Firmado] [Firmado]

 

Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret Mr. Judd L. Kessler
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[Firmado]

Mr. Samuel Wordsworth
President of the Tribunal

289

