 

 

International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe

— Claimant —

vs.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

— Respondent —

Decision on Claimant's Proposal to

Disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini

from the Tribunal
under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention

Unchallenged Members of the Tribunal

The Honorable Charles N. Brower, Co-Arbitrator
Dr. Klaus Sachs, President

Secretary of the Tribunal
Natali Sequeira

Date: February 27, 2013

 

 

- Page | -
ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A. THE PARTIES
I. Claimant
II. Respond

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

C. THE PARTIES’ AND MR. BOTTINI’S POSITIONS....

I. Claimant's Position 4

 

 

 

 

 

1. Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

 

 

 

 

2. Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmi: 6
II. Respondent's Position 6

1. The Applicable Standard 6

2. Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

3. Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. G

 

III. Observations by Mr. Bottini

 

1. Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

 

 

2. Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. G
D. DECISION BY THE UNCHALLENGED ARBITRATORS..... os
I. The Applicable Standard 10

 

 

Il. Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

1. The General Nature of Mr. Bottini's Position.............. .

2. No "Issue Conflict" 16

3. Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmi: 18

E. OPERATIVE PART. 18

 

- Page 2 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

Il.

THE PARTIES
Claimant
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe,
hereinafter referred to as "Claimant",

represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys Freshfields Bruckhaus
Deringer US LLP of 601 Lexington Ave, 31st Floor, New York, NY 10022, United
States of America; Counsel: Alexander A. Yanos, Giorgio F. Mandelli, Daniel Chertudi,
and Becca Everhardt.

Respondent
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
hereinafter referred to as "Respondent",

represented in this arbitration by Dra. Cilia Flores, Attorney General of Venezuela, and
its duly authorized attorneys Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP of 101 Park
Avenue, New York, NY 10178, United States of America and of Rubén Dario 281, Piso
9, Col. Bosque de Chapultepec, 11580 México, D.F., United Mexican States; Counsel:
George Kahale, III, Benard V. Preziosi, Eloy Barbara de Parres, and Gabriela Alvarez
Avila.

Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter each referred to as a "Party" and jointly as the
"Parties".

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 25 May 2012, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
("ICSID" or the "Centre'') received a Request for Arbitration ("Request") filed by
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe against the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela ("Venezuela").

In its Request, Claimant invokes Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the "ICSID
Convention") and the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Government of the French Republic and the Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which entered into force on 15 April 2004.

- Page 3 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

13.

The Centre registered Claimant’s Request for Arbitration on 15 June 2012.

Following appointment by Claimant, Judge Charles N. Brower accepted his
appointment as arbitrator on 4 October 2012. Following appointment by Respondent,
Mr. Gabriel Bottini accepted his appointment as arbitrator on 25 October 2012.

On 29 October 2012, Claimant submitted a proposal to disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini
pursuant to Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules ("Claimant’s Proposal"). The Centre acknowledged receipt of
Claimant’s Proposal on 30 October 2012.

The Parties agreed to appoint Dr. Klaus Michael Sachs as President of the Tribunal. Dr.
Sachs accepted his appointment on 26 November 2012.

In accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal was
constituted on 26 November 2012. As provided for by ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(2), on
the same date the Centre transmitted Claimant’s Proposal to the three members of the
Tribunal.

Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), on 27 November 2012, the proceeding was
suspended until Claimant’s Proposal was decided.

By letter of 28 November 2012, Dr. Sachs and Judge Brower (for the purposes of this
Decision referred to as the ''Arbitral Tribunal") set the following schedule:

"(i) The Respondent shall submit a_ reply to  Claimant’s
disqualification proposal by Friday, December 7, 2012;

(ii) Mr. Gabriel Bottini shall furnish any explanations that he may
wish to provide, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), within
10 days from receipt of Claimants’ submission;

(iii) Both parties are invited to simultaneously file, within 10 days
from the date of any explanations furnished by Mr. Bottini, any
further observations they wish to make in connection with the
disqualification proposal. The parties are requested to submit
this presentation only to the Secretary of the Tribunal on the due
date. The Secretary of the Tribunal will circulate the
submissions upon receipt of both parties’ filings."

The Parties and Mr. Bottini filed their written observations according to the schedule
indicated above.

- Page 4 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

20.

THE PARTIES' AND MR. BOTTINI'S POSITIONS

The background to Claimant's challenge of Mr. Bottini is his employment by the
Argentine Government until 31 December 2012. As of 1 January 2013, Mr. Bottini has
resigned from his position to pursue doctoral studies in the United Kingdom.

Claimant's Position

Claimant submits that as a current employee of the Argentine Government at the point
in time when he was appointed, Mr. Bottini may not be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment and to act impartially in this proceeding.

Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

Claimant is of the view that Mr. Bottini's role as National Director of International
Matters and Disputes for the Office of the Attorney General of Argentina was of a
political nature and that he had specific political duties vis-a-vis the Argentine
Government. In particular, Claimant points out that Argentine Decree 1755/2008
describes the role held by Mr. Bottini as follows:

"Plan and propose a strategy for defending the interests of Argentina
in cases where it is either plaintiff or defendant before the courts or
arbitration, international or foreign."

Claimant suggests that it should give rise to concern that Respondent appointed Mr.
Bottini at a time when he was still employed by the Argentine Government and before
Mr. Bottini had announced that he would leave his position.

While Claimant appreciates that it is appropriate for a party to an ICSID arbitration to
appoint an arbitrator who is capable of understanding and appreciating its position,
Claimant submits that it is untenable to appoint an arbitrator of whom the party knows
that he must agree with its position.

Claimant is concerned that, on the one hand, Mr. Bottini was a government employee
and advocate for Argentina and, as such, had an interest that certain issues were decided
in a way which is favorable to Argentina and, on the other hand, Mr. Bottini now is
supposed to be an arbitrator without any prejudice to the issues which stand to be
decided in this arbitration.

Claimant submits that its concerns as to Mr. Bottini's impartiality and independence are
not alleviated by the fact that Mr. Bottini has taken up studies in the United Kingdom
because

- Page 5 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

1
2

"[blefore and after he moves to Cambridge, Mr. Bottini is, first and
foremost, an advocate for Argentina. nl

Furthermore, Claimant alleges that Mr. Bottini will be influenced by specific duties
with regard to his access to sensitive information, confidentiality and national defense.

Given the above, Claimant submits that there is a manifest danger that Mr. Bottini will
avoid making decisions which would be prejudicial to his positions taken in the cases in
which he was working on Argentina's behalf.

Claimant further points out that, contrary to what the Respondent alleges, it is not
Claimant's case that no public servant can sit as an arbitrator in ICSID proceedings.
Claimant is rather concerned with the fact that Mr. Bottini—at the time of his
appointment—was a public servant whose then current job was to defend Argentine
interests from, in material part, precisely the same or similar issues which will be
relevant to this case. In doing so, Claimant alleges, "Mr. Bottini has acted as a zealous
advocate for the most recalcitrant State party in ICSID history. mn

Claimant argues that situations like the present one are the reason that Article 16 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice ("ICJ") generally prohibits its Judges to
exercise any political or administrative function.

With reference to Mr. Bottini's observations, Claimant states that the reason for
Claimant’s Proposal is not merely a narrow view of the nature of Mr. Bottini's job with
the Argentine Government (i.e. whether it is political or not) but rather the fact that Mr.
Bottini repeatedly pleaded on issues on Argentina’s behalf upon which also this
proceeding will touch. In this context, Claimant refers the Arbitral Tribunal to Republic
of Ghana v. Telekom Malaysia Berhard, Decision of the District Court of the Hague
(Civil Law Section), 18 October 2004. In this decision, the court ruled that Prof.
Emmanuel Gaillard could not simultaneously represent an Italian consortium in its
ICSID arbitration against Morocco and serve as arbitrator in a separate investor-State
arbitration between Telekom Malaysia and Ghana which turned on similar issues.
Claimant suggests that this case is similar to the current case because Mr. Bottini would
be faced with issues of law similar to those which he had to argue for Argentina. In
Claimant's view, Mr. Bottini's resignation from his government position as of 1 January
2013 is insufficient to alleviate the appearance of bias.

Claimant's Final Observations dated 21 December 2012, page 2.
Claimant's Final Observations dated 21 December 2012, page 4.

- Page 6 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

26.

Il.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmino

Claimant further relies on the fact that Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino (Argentina's
former Attorney General and Mr. Bottini's former direct superior) is currently acting as
counsel to Venezuela in the case Flughafen Ziirich A.G. and Gestion e Ingeneria IDC
S.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/19).

Respondent's Position

Respondent maintains that Claimant's Proposal should be rejected and that Claimant
should be required to bear all costs associated with Claimant’s Proposal.

The Applicable Standard

Respondent submits that Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention require arbitrators
to be independent and impartial. The applicable standard for disqualification under the
ICSID Convention is, however, the existence of a "manifest lack" of independence and
impartiality. Respondent is of the view that there is a high burden of proof.

Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

Respondent points out that Argentina and Venezuela (as Respondent) are two different
countries.

Further, Respondent asserts that Mr. Bottini, in his post with the Argentine
Government, did not exercise any political functions, and in any event, he has now left
his position as of 1 January 2013 in order to attend an academic program at Cambridge
University. Generally, Respondent submits that Mr. Bottini's general or specific duties
vis-a-vis the Argentine Government are of no relevance in a case that involves
Venezuela, and not Argentina.

Respondent argues that Claimant's Proposal is paramount to submitting that

(1) _ no public servant can act as an arbitrator in ICSID proceedings even if that public
servant is employed by a State other than the State involved in the proceedings;
and

2) no person who has ever worked for a government can sit as arbitrator in an ICSID
Ps g
proceeding even if such person has left his or her post.

Respondent points out that while Article 16 of the ICJ Statute does require its Judges to
abstain from participating in any national government, the ICSID Convention does not
contain such incompatibility rules. When the ICSID Convention was drafted the drafters

- Page 7 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

were aware of the ICJ Statute and decided—insofar as ICSID is concerned—that
government employees are not as such excluded from acting as arbitrator in ICSID
proceedings.

Respondent has submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal as Exhibit R-1 a list of members of
the ICSID panels of conciliators and arbitrators who held political functions. The list
includes former members of all three branches of government, namely government
officials, judges, as well as members of parliament.

Further, Respondent asserts that Article 16 of the ICJ Statute does not only prevent ICJ
Judges from exercising any political or administrative function, but virtually any other
professional activity. Respondent submits that this provision is interpreted very widely
so as to include and thus declare incompatible, inter alia, any professional occupation,
be it in a commercial concern, in the practice of law, in teaching or in the administration
of a university or faculty of law.

In contrast to the ICJ's rules, international arbitrators frequently engage in some, or
several, of those activities. Applying Article 16 of the ICJ Statute to ICSID by analogy
would result in the disqualification of most arbitrators currently sitting. Respondent
notes that the prohibition of Article 16 of the ICJ Statute does not extend to those within
the ICJ who are most analogous to arbitrators, namely Judges ad hoc.

Respondent submits that in order to understand the background of Article 16 of the ICJ
Statute, one needs to consider the preparatory works of the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice (""PCIJ"), the predecessor of the ICJ. The wording of
Article 16 has not materially changed from the Statute of the PCIJ to the Statute of the
ICI.

A review of the travaux préparatoires reveals, Respondent says, that the main reason
for the inclusion of the incompatibility provision in Article 16 was that serving as a
Judge at the PCIJ would require a full time commitment. Further, the travaux show that
the prohibition was only meant to apply to the simultaneous exercise of the functions.
The prohibitions of Article 16 thus do not constitute reasons which represent lack of
impartiality and independence per se, but only reasons for temporal incompatibility.
The latter can be remedied if the concerned Judge suspends his or her other functions.

Thus, even if one applied Article 16 of the ICJ Statute, Claimant's challenge would be
without merit as Mr. Bottini has left his post with the Argentine Government before the
very first act of office as a member of the present Tribunal.

- Page 8 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

39.

40.

Ill.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

Respondent concludes that there should be no issue with a government appointing an
arbitrator from a different country's government if the other government is not involved
in the same dispute.

Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmino

With regard to Mr. Bottini's connection to Mr. Guglielmino, Respondent submits that it
should be evident that Mr. Bottini's impartiality and independence are not compromised
in any way. The professional relationship with Mr. Guglielmino ended over two years
ago and had nothing to do with the present proceedings.

Observations by Mr. Bottini

Mr. Bottini states that he sees no reason why he should not be able to serve as arbitrator
in this case and act independently and impartially. He states that he has never been
involved in a dispute based on the Agreement between the Government of the French
Republic and the Government of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela on Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments.

Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

Mr. Bottini states that his position with the Argentine Attorney General's Office, which
he left at the end of 2012, was not a political position. Mr. Bottini further states that he
has never exercised any political function or performed any political task for the
Argentine Government, or for any other government.

Mr. Bottini points to the Argentine regulatory framework of national public
employment according to which all public servants, including him, have a public
employment relationship. This framework does not, however, apply to political
appointments, such as the Chief of Staff, the Ministers, the Secretaries and the Under
Secretaries.

With regard to Claimant's reference to Decree 1755/2008, Mr. Bottini explains that his
primary responsibility, according to the Decree's Annex II, was to

"[alssist the Treasury Attorney-General in the planning, organization,
supervision and execution of the strategy of defense of the interests of
the Argentine Republic in cases before judicial or arbitral tribunals,
foreign or international, and participate in the representation and
defense of the Argentine Republic before said tribunals"

and to

- Page 9 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

"[ellaborate opinions on issues of Public and Private International
Law and legal opinions that have to be issued in connection with
foreign debt transactions."

Mr. Bottini states that his post did not involve making any decisions (whether or not
political in nature) but only to advise and assist the Treasury Attorney General in legal
matters.

With regard to confidential information Mr. Bottini submits that he had only access to
information which every lawyer would receive. Furthermore, most of the proceedings in
which Mr. Bottini was involved were not confidential. Mr. Bottini further declares that
he has never worked in national defense.

Mr. Bottini explains that his work for the Argentine Government has always been that
of a lawyer. Apart from Argentina, he has over the last years advised other parties,
including investors and corporations in ICSID, ICC and commercial law cases. Mr.
Bottini intends to continue working as an independent advisor also to States, which
"may include Argentina. ss
the City of Buenos Aires Bar.

Mr. Bottini further intends to remain an active member of

Finally, Mr. Bottini asserts that he has not made any arrangements with the Argentine
Government for his return into government service after the completion of his doctoral
studies. The resignation at the end of 2012 has full effect under Argentine law and he
has neither any obligation nor any rights or privileges with regard to a potential return
into government services. Mr. Bottini assures that he has received no support from the
Argentine Government in connection with his doctoral studies in Cambridge
University.*

Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmino

Mr. Bottini asserts that he has no current professional relationship with Mr.
Guglielmino or any connection with the cases on which Mr. Guglielmino is currently
working. In the last three years since Mr. Guglielmino left his position, Mr. Bottini does
not remember to have seen him more than twice.

* Explanation from Mr. Bottini dated 14 December 2012, p. 2.

* See Letter from Mrs. Alison Hirst, Degree Committee Administrator and External Relations
Administrator, Faculty of Law, University of Cambridge, Explanation from Mr. Bottini dated 14
December 2012, Exh. 1 ("J am writing to confirm that Mr Gabriel Bottini holds an unconditional
offer of admission to the PhD programme in Law at the University of Cambridge from January
2013. Mr Bottini is self-financing and is receiving no funding from the University.").

- Page 10 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

DECISION BY THE UNCHALLENGED ARBITRATORS

The Arbitral Tribunal will first address the applicable standard which needs to be
fulfilled by a challenge in order to be successful (I.). The Arbitral Tribunal will then
turn to the two grounds for challenge, namely Mr. Bottini's former employment with the
Argentine Government (II.) as well as his professional relationship with Mr.
Guglielmino (IIL.).

The Applicable Standard

The starting point in this regard is Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, which reads as

follows:

"A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,
propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV."

Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention in turn provides:

"Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the field of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators."

It follows from the above that, in order to be successful, Claimant’s Proposal must be (i)
based on "facts" which (ii) indicate a "manifest lack of qualifications" pursuant to
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.>

The issue to be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal is therefore whether the facts
submitted by Claimant indicate a manifest lack of Mr. Bottini's capacity to exercise

Universal Compression International Holdings, S.L.U. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil,
Arbitrators) ICSID Case No. ARB/10/9, para. 72; GEMA International, NCT Necotrans, GETMA
International Investissements & NCT Infrastructure & Logistique c. La République de Guinée
(Décision sur la demande en récusation de Monsieur Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitre) ICSID Case
No. ARB/11/29, para. 58; see also Karel Daele, Challenge and Disqualification of Arbitrators in
International Arbitration, p. 218.

- Page 11 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

55.

56.

independent judgment within the meaning of Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention in
the present case.

In this regard, the Arbitral Tribunal observes that, while the English version of Article
14 of the ICSID Convention refers to "independent judgment"®, the Spanish version
requires "imparcialidad de juicio" (impartiality of judgment). Since both versions are
equally authentic,’ it is therefore generally accepted that, under the ICSID Convention,
arbitrators have to be both, impartial and independent.§

Independence is characterized by the absence of external control, in particular of
relations between the arbitrator and a party which may influence the arbitrator’s
decision.” Impartiality, on the other hand, means the absence of bias or predisposition
towards one party and requires that the arbitrator hears the parties without any favor and
bases his or her decision only on factors related to the merits of the case. 10

The French version refers to "indépendance dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions" .

See note subsequent to Article 75 of the ICSID Convention.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on
Second Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, para. 27;
OPIC Karimum Corporation v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14, para. 44; GEMA
International, NCT Necotrans, GETMA International Investissements & NCT Infrastructure &
Logistique c. La République de Guinée (Décision sur la demande en récusation de Monsieur
Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitre) ICSID Case No. ARB/1 1/29, para. 59; Conoco Philipps Company
et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves
Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, para. 54; Alpha Projektholding GmbH v.
Ukraine (Decision on Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator Dr. Yoram Turbowicz)
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16, para. 36; Tidewater Inc. et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator)
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5, para. 37.

Cf. Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on
Second Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/17 and ARB/O3/19, para. 29;
GEMA International, NCT Necotrans, GETMA International Investissements & NCT
Infrastructure & Logistique c. La République de Guinée (Décision sur la demande en récusation de
Monsieur Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitre) ICSID Case No. ARB/11/29, para. 59; Conoco Philipps
Company et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify
L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, para. 54.

Cf. Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on
Second Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, para. 29;
GEMA International, NCT Necotrans, GETMA International Investissements & NCT
Infrastructure & Logistique c. La République de Guinée (Décision sur la demande en récusation de
Monsieur Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitre) ICSID Case No. ARB/11/29, para. 59; Conoco Philipps
Company et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify
L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, para. 54.

- Page 12 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

57.

58.

59.

Another issue for the Arbitral Tribunal is the question when the "Jack of qualities"
(including impartial and independent judgment) becomes "manifest" within the meaning
of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. There seems to be no unequivocal answer.

In several decisions on proposals for disqualification under the ICSID Convention it has
been stated that, because the lack of qualifications pursuant to Article 14(1) of the
ICSID Convention has to be "manifest", Article 57 of the ICSID Convention sets a
relatively high bar for challenging an arbitrator.'! In Suez v. Argentina, the
unchallenged arbitrators stated that, from the perspective of an "informed reasonable
person", facts must be established which "make it obvious and highly probable, not just
possible that [the challenged arbitrator] is a person who may not be relied upon to
exercise independent and impartial judgment." R

However, in other decisions the word "manifest" has been interpreted so as to relate to
the ease with which the alleged risk of lack of independence or impartiality can be
perceived. In EDF International S.A. v. Argentina the unchallenged arbitrators decided
that the challenged arbitrator should have ceased to serve in the proceedings if
"reasonable doubts exist" with regard to whether she could be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment." Referring to the Commentary of Professor Schreuer, they
stated that the word "manifest" in Article 57 of the Convention "relates not to the
seriousness of the allegation, but to the ease with which it may be perceived." i"

" OPIC Karimum Corporation v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to

Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14, para. 45; Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on Second
Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, para. 29; GEMA
International, NCT Necotrans, GETMA International Investissements & NCT Infrastructure &
Logistique c. La République de Guinée (Décision sur la demande en récusation de Monsieur
Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitre) ICSID Case No. ARB/1 1/29, para. 60; Conoco Philipps Company
et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves
Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator) ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, para. 56; see also Reed/Paulsson/Blackaby,
op. cit., p. 134.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on
Second Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, para. 29.
EDF International S.A.; SAUR International S.A.; Leén Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (Challenge Decision Regarding Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler) ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/03, para. 64; see also Compajfifa de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi
Universal v. Argentine Republic (Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Committee)
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, para. 25.

EDF International S.A.; SAUR International S.A.; Leén Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (Challenge Decision Regarding Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler) ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/03, para. 68; Alpha Projektholding GmbH v. Ukraine (Decision on
Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator Dr. Yoram Turbowicz) ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/16, para. 37.

- Page 13 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

60.

Il.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

Hence, there is no clear-cut guideline as to the degree to which the facts invoked by the
challenging party must substantiate the alleged lack of qualification. Irrespective of the
required degree, the body deciding on the proposal must first analyze the facts
submitted by the challenging party and decide whether these facts (in contrast to
speculation and inferences) could lead a reasonable person to conclude that there is a
possibility that the challenged arbitrator is not independent and/or impartial. Only if the
answer is yes, the further question has to be decided of how probable the lack of
independence and impartiality must be.

Mr. Bottini's Position with the Government of Argentina

Claimant's reasons for proposing the disqualification of Mr. Bottini are: First, that Mr.
Bottini's position was a position which was, in fact, political and would disqualify him
as a Judge under the ICJ Statute (1.) and, second, irrespective of whether or not his
position was political in nature, that Mr. Bottini is to be disqualified on the basis of
"issue conflict" because in his previous capacity he has argued from Argentina’s
perspective issues which may arise in this case (2.).

The General Nature of Mr. Bottini's Position

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that under Argentine law, Mr. Bottini's position was not
ranked amongst "political appointments", but amongst positions of public service.
While this point might be an indicator of the nature of his work, the Arbitral Tribunal is
of the view that for the purposes of this Decision, it cannot be decisive on its own.

Assuming, arguendo, that the test of Article 16 of the ICJ Statute could be applied to
ICSID arbitrations, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that Mr. Bottini—while in office—
would indeed have been unsuitable to serve as a Judge at the ICJ.

At the time of the PCIJ, the Court took the view that a function was incompatible with
Article 16 if it was a "function which compelled a person to follow the instructions of
his government, regardless of his personal views." 8
Article 2 of the ICJ Statute requires that the Court be composed of a body of
"independent" Judges. In 1945, the San Francisco Conference described this

'S Andreas Zimmermann et al., The Statute of the International Court of Justice: A Commentary
(2006), at 330.

- Page 14 -
ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

requirement as follows: the Judges "should be not only impartial but also independent

of control by their own countries or the United Nations Organization. vio

66. Shabtai Rosenne explains in his commentary:

"That interpretation does not preclude the nomination or election of a
candidate who, at the time of nomination or election, was in the
service of a government or of an international inter-government
organization — although if no generally recognized ‘cooling off’
period is not introduced, at the least it would be desirable for
candidates in that situation to disengage themselves from their official
activities as soon as their candidatures are established."

67. In 1995, the ICJ adopted a memorandum entitled "Jncompatibilities in the Practice of
the International Court of Justice", which reflects the most recent form of ICJ practice
regarding general incompatibilities. The Memorandum notes that Article 16 prohibits
Judges from exercising any political or administrative function "whether international,
national, or local, whether commercial or otherwise." It further prohibits them from
engaging in any other occupation of a professional nature, including "holding a position
in a commercial concern, engaging in the practice of law, maintaining membership in a
law firm or rendering legal or expert opinions, or holding a permanent teaching or

administrative position in a university. mis

68. In commenting on the Court’s Memorandum, Philippe Couvreur notes:

"(The prohibition applicable to political and administrative functions
in the broad sense (including, since the revision of the PCIJ Statute in
1929, parliamentary and judicial functions and permanent academic
duties) concerns only the exercise_of those functions, which would
place the individual in a position of direct or indirect dependency vis-
a-vis a government. A member of the Court is thus entitled to retain
vested rights acquired in the course of national public service
(different forms of ‘leave’ exist for this purpose). Likewise, while
judges must refrain from participating in any way actively or directly
in national political life (including by publicly expressing political
opinions), it has always been clear that they are entitled to exercise
their rights as citizens in their home countries (in particular, to vote
and even, subject to the foregoing, to hold membership of a political

'6 Shabtai Rosenne, The Law and Practice of the International Court, 1920-2005 (2006), at 359
(2006).

"Ibid. The double negative appearing in the quotation, which is an exact quotation from the book as
published, doubtless should be disregarded.

'8 Zimmermann et al., op. cit., at 332.

- Page 15 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

69.

70.

71.

72.

723.

party). v9 (Emphasis added.)

Against this background it appears that even though Mr. Bottini has stated that his
position was not a political position and that he never exercised any political function or
performed any political task, he in fact would have fallen within the list of incompatible
occupations, as he was:

- "engaging in the practice of law";

- "compelled [...] to follow the instruction of his government regardless of his

personal views";

- "in a position of direct or indirect dependency vis-a-vis" the Argentine
Government; and

- directly responsible to his superior, the Attorney General.

However, this situation changed as of 1 January 2013, when Mr. Bottini left his
position.

As Philippe Couvreur notes, only the simultaneous exercise of the administrative or
political function is incompatible with Article 16 of the ICJ Statute. If the individual
concerned suspends his other functions and takes "leave", he or she can sit as a Judge at
the ICJ. This, of course, must apply a fortiori if the administrative or political function
is not only suspended but, as in our case, given up completely. As Mr. Bottini was not
involved in a single decision in his role as arbitrator from the time of appointment up to
the termination of his position, there should be no concern flowing alone from his
former position.

However, and more generally, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that the ICJ Statute is
only of limited relevance for the present dispute.

As Respondent correctly points out, the position of an ICJ Judge is a full time position
and thus the broad interpretation of the incompatibility rule is understandable. In fact,
applying the ICJ's Memorandum” would disqualify most arbitrators currently sitting in
ICSID cases, and certainly all arbitrators on this Tribunal. This shows that the
occupations included in the Memorandum are not necessarily included only because
they raise doubts with regard to a Judge's impartiality and independence per se, but also
because the ICJ requires that its Judges devote their entire professional time and

Zimmermann et al., op. cit., at 334-335.
?° Cf. paragraph 67 above.

- Page 16 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

attention to the Court. In addition, cases may come to the Court involving any State,
including the ICJ Judges’ own States of nationality.

By contrast, arbitrators sitting in ICSID cases are intended to be appointed ad hoc. It
follows that most will hold a different main occupation.”! Thus a main occupation in
itself cannot establish incompatibility between the main occupation and the role as
arbitrator.

Finally, the Arbitral Tribunal wishes to point out that Claimant's reference to alleged
access to sensitive information, confidentiality and national defense is not supported by
any facts and can thus be no reason for the disqualification of Mr. Bottini.

No "Issue Conflict"

The Arbitral Tribunal thus has to analyze the specific former functions of Mr. Bottini
and whether Claimant has established any manifest danger that Mr. Bottini would not be
able to make an independent and impartial judgment.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that Claimant has not alleged that Mr. Bottini is subject to
any current control by either the Argentine or the Venezuelan Government. Claimant's
concerns are entirely based on the issue of so-called abstract "issue conflict", i.e. on the
assumption that there is a danger that Mr. Bottini will decide a certain issue in favor of
Venezuela because he has argued the same, or similar, issues in favor of Argentina in
the past and potentially in the future, and in doing so, that he will not have sufficient
regard to the merits of this case.

The Arbitral Tribunal does not find that Claimant's arguments support a case of a
"manifest" danger in this regard. Claimant has presented no facts which cast
22 on Mr. Bottini's impartiality and independence, let alone facts
which "make it obvious and highly probable" that Mr. Bottini lacks these qualities.

"reasonable doubt

Mr. Bottini is currently not acting for the Argentine Government, or, to the Arbitral
Tribunal's knowledge, for any government. Nor is the Arbitral Tribunal aware of any
other connections to the Argentine Government.

7! Indeed, a number of ICJ Judges have sat in the past and currently sit as ICSID arbitrators.
» Cf. EDF International $.A.; SAUR International S.A.; Ledn Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v.

23

Argentine Republic (Challenge Decision Regarding Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler) ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/03, para. 64; see also Compajfifa de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi
Universal v. Argentine Republic (Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Committee)
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, para. 25.

Cf. Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. The Argentine Republic (Decision on
Second Proposal for Disqualification) ICSID Cases Nos ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, para. 29.

- Page 17 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

Even if one assumes arguendo that Mr. Bottini did in fact vigorously advocate
Argentina's positions in other investment treaty arbitrations, the Arbitral Tribunal
cannot see why Mr. Bottini would be locked in to the views he presented at the time. It
is at the core of the job description of legal counsel—whether acting in private practice,
in-house for a company, or in government—that they present the views which are
favorable to their instructor and highlight the advantageous facts of their instructor's
case. The fact that a lawyer has taken a certain stance in the past does not necessarily
mean that he will take the same stance in a future case.

There is no indication in the file, or otherwise, why this should be any different for Mr.
Bottini or why he should not be in a position to freely form a view on the merits
presented to him in this arbitration. Absent any specific facts which indicate that Mr.
Bottini is not able to distance himself in a professional manner from the cases in which
he was acting as counsel, Mr. Bottini has the assumption in his favor that he is a legal
professional with the ability to keep a professional distance. The same assumption is
granted in favor of many arbitrators who today sit as arbitrators in ICSID cases but who
started their career as counsel or who still act as counsel in such cases.

The Arbitral Tribunal also notes that Mr. Bottini has stated that he has not only advised
Argentina, but also other parties, including investors.

Further, the present case is distinguishable from the case Republic of Ghana v. Telekom
Malaysia Berhard, Decision of the District Court of the Hague (Civil Law Section), 18
October 2004, on which Claimant relies.

In the cited case, Prof. Gaillard was acting simultaneously as counsel for a party in one
arbitration and as arbitrator in another case. The Arbitral Tribunal agrees that this
constellation can potentially raise doubts as to the impartiality and independence of the
concerned individual in his role as arbitrator. It seems possible that the arbitrator in such
a case could take a certain position on a certain issue, having in mind that if he took a
different position as arbitrator, he could undermine his credibility as counsel as which
he is arguing on the same, or very similar, issue.

However, this case is different. The Arbitral Tribunal has no present information that
Mr. Bottini currently is advocating for or advising Argentina in any way. Doubtless Mr.
Bottini is aware of the obligation of someone in his position to make appropriate
disclosures as needed of any potential conflict of interest, including an issue conflict, for
which process the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration
provide widely accepted guidance.

Recognizing that the present challenge to Mr. Bottini arose due to the unfortunate
timing of his appointment and the disclosure requirement imposed by Rule 6 of the

- Page 18 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

87.

88.

89.

ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal dismisses the Claimant’s Proposal to
disqualify Mr. Bottini on the condition that Mr. Bottini completes, signs, and transmits
to the ICISD Secretary-General a new Declaration under Rule 6 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules within 10 days of the date of this Decision. By signing a new
Declaration, Mr. Bottini will have certified that he “assume[s] a continuing obligation
promptly to notify the Secretary-General of the Centre of any [...] relationship [with the
Parties] or [any other] circumstance [that might cause his reliability for independent
judgment to be questioned by a party] that subsequently arises during this
proceeding. na

Mr. Bottini's Relationship with Mr. Guglielmino

It is undisputed that Mr. Guglielmino has ceased to be Mr. Bottini's superior about three
years ago, and that Mr. Bottini cannot remember having seen him more than twice
since. The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that this is no indication for a possible lack of
impartiality or independence.

OPERATIVE PART

Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini pursuant to Articles 57 and 58 of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules is rejected, on the
condition that Mr. Bottini completes, signs, and transmits to the ICSID Secretary-
General a new Declaration under Rule 6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules within 10 days
of the date of this Decision.

The costs of this challenge proceeding are reserved.

*ICSID Arbitration Rules, Rule 6(2).

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13

[Signed] [Signed]

Dr. Klaus Sachs The Honorable Charles N. Brower

