IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT AND THE UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES 1976

Between:
St. Marys VCNA, LLC

Claimant/Investor
-and—

The Government of Canada
Respondent/Party
(together the “Disputing Parties”)

CONSENT AWARD

Arbitral Tribunal:

Professor Michael Pryles
Professor Richard Stewart
Professor Brigitte Stern

Secretary to the President:
Dr. Chester Brown

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Barry Appleton Ms. Sylvie Tabet
APPLETON & ASSOCIATES, INTERNATIONAL Mr. Christophe Douaire de Bondy
LAWYERS Mr. Pierre-Olivier Savoie
Mr. Adam Douglas
Ms. Yasmin Shaker
TRADE LAW BUREAU
DEPARTMENTS OF JUSTICE AND OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE CANADA

Date of Dispatch to the Disputing Parties: April 12, 2013

The Arbitral Tribunal

Composed as above,

After deliberation

Makes the following CONSENT AWARD:

L

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On May 13, 2011, St Marys VCNA, LLC (the “Claimant”) submitted to the
Government of Canada (the “Respondent”) a Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to
Arbitration under Section B of Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (“NAFTA”).

2. On September 14, 2011, the Claimant served a Notice of Arbitration on the
Respondent. The Claimant took the position that this service was in accordance with
Articles 3 and 18 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”, and Articles 1116 and 1120 of
the NAFTA (the “NOA”). Canada objected to the NOA on the basis that it failed to
respect the timing requirements of NAFTA Article 1120(1).

3. In the NOA, the Claimant sought compensation under NAFTA Chapter Eleven for
damages it alleged arose out of a decision on the part of the Government of Ontario to
adopt a Minister’s Zoning Order and subsequent Declaration of Provincial Interest, in
respect of a site owned by St. Marys Cement Inc. (Canada) (“SMC”) in the vicinity of
Hamilton, Ontario, along with related decisions by relevant provincial and local authorities

(the “Claims”).

4, On December 22, 2011, the Respondent notified the Claimant of its jurisdictional
concerns arising under NAFTA Article 1113(2) (Denial of Benefits), requesting documents
confirming Claimant’s ownership structure, assets, holdings, and business activities in the
United States. The Respondent also notified the United States Department of State that
subject to delivery by the Claimant of satisfactory evidence of its US business activities, it

would deny to the Claimant the benefits of NAFTA Chapter Eleven.

5. Following subsequent exchanges between the Claimant and the Respondent, by a
letter dated March 1, 2012, the Respondent wrote to the Claimant confirming that it was
formally invoking NAFTA Article 1113(2) to deny Chapter Eleven benefits to the
Claimant, and to its alleged investment SMC. That same day, the Respondent wrote to the
United States Department of State setting out its reasons for denying NAFTA Chapter

Eleven benefits to the Claimant and to its purported investment.

6. On July 12, 2012, the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes confirmed the appointment of Professor Michael Pryles as President, completing
the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. Professor Richard Stewart had been appointed by
the Claimant on December 14, 2012, and Professor Brigitte Stern by the Respondent, on
December 22, 2012.

7. On August 27, 2012, the Arbitral Tribunal submitted a draft Procedural Order No. 1
to be discussed at the preliminary meeting of the Disputing Parties to be held on September
10, 2012.

8. On August 31, 2012, at the request of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Respondent filed a

Brief Outline of its Jurisdictional and Substantive Defences.

9. At the meeting of the Disputing Parties and the Tribunal of September 10, 2012,
based upon the parties’ respective submissions, the Tribunal ordered bifurcation of the
arbitration, so that the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections could be addressed on a

preliminary basis.

10. Between September and December 2012, the Claimant and the Respondent
exchanged requests for production of documents relevant to jurisdictional issues only,
further to the provisions of Procedural Order No. 1. On November 16, 2012, the Tribunal
ruled on the Disputing Parties’ respective objections to document production. A follow-up

production occurred on December 14, 2012.

11. In the course of initial document production on October 19, 2012, the Claimant
produced to the Respondent certain documents that it subsequently argued had been

produced in error and should be returned on the basis of privilege. While protecting these

documents under seal, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal establish a process
through which a neutral third party would review these documents and determine whether

they were privileged, or whether in any event the Claimant had waived such privilege.

12. On November 27, 2012, the Tribunal nominated Justice James Spigelman, AC, QC,
to consider the privilege issues raised by the Respondent. By correspondence dated
November 30 and December 3, 2012, the Disputing Parties exchanged views as to the
appropriate procedure for Justice Spigelman’s reference. Based upon the exchanges of the
Disputing Parties, Justice Spigelman established a calendar for briefing of the relevant
issues. In accordance with this calendar, the Respondent and the Claimant exchanged

pleadings on December 7 and 11, 2012, and December 19 and 24, 2012.

13. On December 27, 2012, Justice Spigelman released his Report on Inadvertent
Disclosure of Privileged Documents (the “Report”). The Report concluded that no
privilege attached to 7 out of the 11 documents at issue, and that in any event any privilege
attaching to such documents had been waived. On the same day, the Respondent requested
an order from the Tribunal directing Justice Spigelman to release to it the documents

referenced in the Report.

14, On January 7, 2013, further to a calendar established by the Tribunal, the Claimant
made submissions opposing the release to Canada of the documents referenced in the
Report and requesting that the Tribunal reject the conclusions of the Report. On January
10, 2013, the Respondent replied, opposing the Claimant’s position.

15. | On January 11, 2013, the Disputing Parties wrote to the Tribunal that in light of
discussions between them, they were requesting a temporary suspension of the calendar in

the proceedings.

16. On January 13, 2013, the Tribunal agreed to suspend the proceedings until
February 1, 2013, pending any further notice from the Disputing Parties.

17. On January 29, 2013, the Disputing Parties jointly wrote to the Tribunal requesting

a further extension of the suspension of proceedings, until March 1, 2013.

Il.

18. On February 28, 2013, the Disputing Parties wrote to the Tribunal confirming that
they had signed a Settlement Agreement, and requested that the Tribunal adopt that

agreement in a Consent Award.

THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

. The Disputing Parties provided the Arbitral Tribunal with an original copy of the

executed Settlement Agreement, which was received on February 28, 2013.

. Paragraph 1 of the Settlement Agreement provides that the Claimant “hereby irrevocably

and permanently withdraws its Notices of Intent in respect of the Claims and Notice of
Arbitration in respect of the First Claim severed against the Government of Canada.”
Paragraph 8 further records the Disputing Parties’ agreement to request the incorporation

in full of the Settlement Agreement in the form of a Consent Award:

The Parties agree jointly to submit this Settlement Agreement to the Tribunal
upon its signature and to request the incorporation in full of this Settlement
Agreement in the form of a Consent Award, pursuant to NAFTA Article 1136 and
Article 34(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, to be issued by the Tribunal. The terms
of this Settlement Agreement shall take effect as of the adoption of the Consent
Award.

. The terms of the Settlement Agreement include that Votorantim Group (including the

Claimant and SMC), and its successors and assigns, releases and forever discharges the
Government of Canada from the Claims and related claims as defined therein. The
Votorantim Group further acknowledges that SMVCNA lacks and has always lacked
standing to bring a claim under NAFTA Chapter Eleven in respect of the Claims, and that
no payment has been made to it by the Government of Canada in respect of the Claims or

the Settlement Agreement.

In return for the settlement and waiver of legal action by the Votorantim Group, the
Government of Canada agrees not to pursue any claim against the Votorantim Group for

its costs incurred to date in respect of the Claims.

5. Further, in accordance with NAFTA Annex 1137.4, the Parties agree to the publication of
the Settlement Agreement and the Consent Award. The Votorantim Group also
acknowledges Canada’s right to make public Justice Spigelman’s Report of December
27, 2012, Except for the documents referenced in the Settlement Agreement that are to
be made public, the Confidentiality Order issued by the Tribunal shall continue to be in

full force and effect.

6. The Settlement Agreement takes effect upon it being executed in three original copies in
counterparts, one original for each Disputing Party and one original for the Tribunal, and
following its incorporation into a Consent Award by the Arbitral Tribunal. An original

copy of the Consent Award shall also be provided to the PCA.

Tl. AWARD

7. Having reviewed the Settlement Agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal now, pursuant to
Article 34(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, records the terms of the Settlement Agreement

verbatim as a Consent Award, as follows:

“Settlement Agreement

This Settlement Agreement is made and entered into by and between St. Marys
VCNA, LLC (‘SMVCNA’), a Delaware limited liability company, together
with Votorantim Cement North America Inc. (“VCNA’), an Ontario
corporation, St. Marys Cement Inc. (Canada) (‘SMC’), an Ontario corporation
(collectively, the ‘Votorantim Group’), and Her Majesty the Queen in Right
of Canada (the ‘Government of Canada’). The Votorantim Group and the
Government of Canada are hereinafter referred to collectively as ‘the Parties’.

Whereas, on May 13, 2011 SMVCNA filed Notice of Intent to submit a claim
to arbitration under NAFTA Chapter Eleven, citing inter alia damages it
alleged flowed from an Ontario Minister’s Zoning Order made effective on
April 13, 2010, concerning certain property held by SMVCNA in the vicinity
of Flamborough, Ontario (the ‘First Claim’);

Whereas, on September 14, 2011, SMVCNA purported to file a Notice of
Arbitration under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA, in respect of the First Claim;
Whereas, as of December 22, 2011, the Government of Canada requested that
SMVCNA provide evidence of its business activities in the United States;

Whereas, on March 1, 2012, further to exchanges regarding SMVCNA’s
business activities in the United States, the Government of Canada formally

relied on Article 1113(2) of the NAFTA (Denial of Benefits), to deny the
benefits of Chapter Eleven to SMVCNA and to SMC in respect of the First
Claim;

Whereas on March 23, 2012, SMVCNA purported to file a second Notice of
Intent to submit a claim to arbitration under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA
against the Government of Canada, concerning inter alia the Government of
Canada’s reliance on Article 1113(2) of NAFTA (the ‘Second Claim’);

Whereas on March 30, 2012, SMVCNA filed a Notice of Application for
Judicial Review in the Federal Court of Canada, in respect of the Government
of Canada’s reliance on Article 1113(2) of the NAFTA (the ‘Judicial Review’);

Whereas on April 25, 2012, SMVCNA served the Government of Canada with
a Notice of Discontinuance in the Judicial Review on a without-prejudice
basis;

Whereas, on July 12, 2012, the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes confirmed its appointment of the presiding arbitrator in
respect of the First Claim, thereby completing constitution of the arbitral
tribunal in that matter (the ‘Tribunal’);

Whereas the Government of Canada in its Brief Outline on Jurisdictional and
Substantive Defences dated August 31, 2012, outlined five separate grounds
for the Tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction to hear the First Claim;

Whereas, at a preliminary meeting between SMVCNA, the Government of
Canada and the Tribunal on September 10, 2012, in light of the [disputing]
parties’ respective submissions, the Tribunal ordered bifurcation of the arbitral
proceedings, to allow jurisdictional issues to be dealt with as a preliminary
matter;

Whereas from October to December 2012, SMVCNA and the Government of
Canada exchanged document productions relevant to issues of jurisdiction
only;

Whereas on December 27, 2012, Justice James Spigelman, a neutral referee
appointed by the Tribunal to consider issues regarding certain documents
produced to Canada by SMVCNA and which [SMVCNA] sought returned on
grounds of privilege, released a Decision finding that the documents at issue
were not privileged, and that in any event any potential privilege had been
waived;

Whereas, the Parties wish finally and irrevocably to settle the First Claim and
the Second Claim as well as issues raised in the Judicial Review (collectively,
the ‘Claims’);

Now, therefore, in consideration of the mutual promises, undertakings and
representations contained in this Settlement Agreement, the Parties agree as
follows:

sa

SMVCNA hereby irrevocably and permanently withdraws its Notices of Intent
in respect of the Claims and Notice of Arbitration in respect of the First Claim
served against the Government of Canada.

. The Votorantim Group on their own behalf and on behalf of their successors

and assigns hereby releases and forever discharges the Government of Canada
from the Claims.

. The Votorantim Group hereby acknowledges that SMVCNA lacks and has

always lacked standing to bring a claim under NAFTA Chapter Eleven in
respect of the Claims.

. The Votorantim Group hereby acknowledges Canada’s right to make public

Justice Spigelman’s Decision of December 27, 2012.

Except for the documents expressly referenced herein that will be made
public, the Confidentiality Order issued by the Tribunal shall continue in full
force and effect.

. The Votorantim Group hereby acknowledges that no payment has been made

to it by the Government of Canada in respect of the Claims or in respect of this
Settlement Agreement.

. As consideration for the above-cited final settlement and waiver of any and all

legal action by the Votorantim Group against the Government of Canada in
respect of the Claims and related acknowledgements, the Government of
Canada agrees not to pursue any claim against the Votorantim Group for its
costs incurred to date in respect of the Claims.

. The Parties agree jointly to submit this Settlement Agreement to the Tribunal

upon its signature and to request the incorporation in full of this Settlement
Agreement in the form of a Consent Award, pursuant to NAFTA Article 1136
and Article 34(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, to be issued by the Tribunal. The
terms of this Settlement Agreement shall take effect as of the adoption of the
Consent Award.

. In accordance with NAFTA Annex 1137.4, the Parties agree to the publication

of this Settlement Agreement and the resulting Consent Award.

For the purpose of construction and interpretation of this Settlement Agreement
the entire agreement shall be read and construed as a whole without giving any
specific effect to any article separately.

. This Settlement Agreement shall be executed in three original copies in

counterparts, one original for each Party and one original for the Tribunal.

12. This Settlement Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the Province of Ontario and such rules of international law as
may be applicable.”

*

8. Pursuant to Articles 32, 34, 38 and 39(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal fixes the

costs of arbitration as follows:

a.

As per Articles 38(a) and 39 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the fees of the Tribunal
members amount to USD 1,824,490 (Professor Pryles’ fees total USD 87,890;
Professor Stewart’s fees total USD 34,650; and Professor Stern’s fees total USD
59,950);

. As per Article 38(b) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the travel and other expenses of

the Tribunal members amount to USD 23,854.18 (Professor Pryles’ expenses total
USD 16,431.48; Professor Stewart’s expenses are nil; and Professor Stern’s

expenses total USD 7,422.70);

. As per Article 38(c) of the UNCITRAL Rules, (i) the fees of the Secretary to the

President, Dr. Chester Brown, total USD 11,440 and his expenses are nil; (ii)
Justice Spigelman’s fees amount to USD 12,925 and his expenses are nil; (iii)
PCA fees for administrative support total USD 4,310.43; and (iv) other expenses
include USD 10,607 for court reporting, courier costs of USD 64.05, and bank
charges of USD 73.44;

. There are no expenses to record with respect to Article 38(d) of the UNCITRAL

Rules;

With respect to Article 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal notes that the
costs of the Disputing Parties’ legal representation and assistance are covered by
the terms of the Settlement Agreement and therefore this Tribunal makes no
apportionment of them as between the Disputing Parties for the purposes of
Article 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules;

As per Article 38(f) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal notes that no costs
have been incurred by any appointing authority in this matter, nor by the

Secretary-General of the PCA.

9. As at the date of this Consent Award, the Tribunal fixes the costs of arbitration at
USD 245,764.10.

10. The Tribunal notes that the Disputing Parties paid in USD 130,000 each to establish an
initial deposit of USD 260,000 with the PCA. The unexpended balance of the deposit is
USD 14,236.90. The PCA shall reimburse one-half of this amount, i.e., USD 7,117.95, to
each of the Disputing Parties.

11. The costs of arbitration and the amount to be reimbursed to each Disputing Party may be
slightly adjusted to take into account additional administrative costs such as courier fees

that may be incurred after the adoption of this Consent Award.

12. The Tribunal notes the parties agreement that (i) the PCA is to keep the original report
signed by Justice Spigelman for a period of 5 years and then destroy it; and (ii) the
documents disclosed by the Claimant inadvertently are to be kept by the PCA for a period
of 5 years and then returned to the General Counsel of St Marys Cement.

Done at Toronto, Ontario, Canada on this Igih day of Mae ch
2013,

Kies! Erbe Sten

Professor Richard Stewart Professor Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Nd

Professor Michael Pryles
President of the Tribunal

