International Centre for Settlement

of Investment Disputes

 

SAIPEM S.p.A.

CLAIMANT

THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

AND RECOMMENDATION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Prof. Christoph H. Schreuer, Arbitrator
Sir Philip Otton, Arbitrator
Mrs. Martina Polasek, Secretary to the Arbitral Tribunal

21

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS. 4
FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION ...........sssssssssssesssssssessssssseesnsesseseensseseneneneneeneaes 6
The parties 6
The Claimant 6
The Respondent 6
The project and the dispute 6
The Pipeline Contract 6
The origin of the present dispute 7
The ICC Arbitration 8
Related litigation 13
The BIT 13
PROCEDURAL HISTORY, 14
Initial phase 14
The written phase on jurisdi 16
The hearing on juri 16
PARTIES’ POSITIONS 18

if 's position 18
Bar 's position 19
ANALYSIS 19
Introductory matters 19
The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards ...........:00ccee 20
The law applicable to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction .............:cccecseeeeeee 20
Uncontroversial matters a1
Bangladesh's objections 22

 

3.1
3.2

41
4.2
4.3

5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

6.1
6.2

 

 

 

Law appli to jurisdicti 22
Test for ishing jurisdicti 24
The onus of establishing jurisdiction ...........c.c.ccsccecsscsceeeeesesteseseseseeseseseseseneseseeneneneeeee 24
The relevant standard 24
Jurisdictional objections under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention................ 27
Is the dispute a legal dispute within Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention? ................ 27
Has Saipem made an investment within Article 25 of the ICSID Convention? ............. 28
Does the dispute arise directly out of the investMent?.............c cece eee eeeee teens 31
Jurisdictional objections under the BIT..............cssssessssesesessssesesessssesesesssnesaeseeees 32

 

Has Saipem made an investment within Article 1(1) of the BIT?.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.1.1. The general definition of investment in Article 1(1) of the BIT 0.0... 34
5.1.2 A “credit for sums of money” within Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT............:cceeee 35
Would the facts alleged by Saipem be capable of constituting an expropriation

under Article 5 of the BIT 35
Did Bangladesh consent to ICSID arbitration for claims based on decisions by its

courts? 38
Are Saipem’s treaty claims in reality contract Claims? 00.0.0... eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 39
Are the disputed actions attributable to Bangladesh? .............ccccsessssesesesteteseseeteneneaeee 39
Objections related to the issibility of Saipem’s claim 4
Does the requirement to exhaust local remedies apply here? ............cccsscceeeseeeeeeeees 4
Does Saipem’s claim constitute an abuse Of PrOCeSS?...........sccsseestseeseseseeneseseseeeenenes 42
Costs 44
DECISION ON JURISDICTION 44
DETERMINATION ON PROVISIONAL MEASUREG............:cccsssssessssssseessssseseseseesenes 44
F facts and Saipem’s request 44
F provisi 46
Tribunal’s power to recommend provisional Me@ASUFES............sscssseeeeeeeeseseeees 46
F 46

 

 

Parties’ positions

 

 

 

Tribunal’s deter
Concl
R idation

 

47
48
48
49

Arbitration Rules
BIT

C-Mem.

Contract

Exh. C-

Exh. R-

ICSID

ICSID Convention

IDA

Mem.

RA or Request
Rejoinder J.
Reply J.
Response J.

Tr. J. [I/II] [page:line]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Bilateral investment treaty; specifically “Agreement Between the
Government of the Republic of Italy and the Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh on the Promotion and Protection of Investments”
of 20 March 1990

Bangladesh’s Counter-Memorial on the objections to jurisdiction and the
merits of 14 May 2006

of 14 February 1990

Claimant [Saipem]'s Exhibits

Respondent [Bangladesh]’s Exhibits

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States

International Development Association

Saipem’s Statement of Claim of 20 February 2006

Saipem’s Request for Arbitration of 5 October 2004

Saipem’s Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 14 September 2006
Bangladesh's Reply on Jurisdiction dated 18 August 2006

Saipem’s Reply [Response] on Objections to Jurisdiction of 14 July 2006

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction [day one/day two]

11

1.2

21

FACTS RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION

This chapter summarizes the factual background of this arbitration insofar as it is
necessary to rule on Bangladesh’s objections to jurisdiction.

THE PARTIES
The Claimant

The Claimant, Saipem S.p.A (“Saipem” or the “Claimant”), is a company incorporated
and existing under the laws of Italy. Its principal office is situated at Via Martiri di
Cefalonia, 67, 20097 San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy.

The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by Professors Antonio Crivellaro and
Luca Radicati di Brozolo and Mr. Andrea Carta Mantiglia, BONELLI EREDE PAPPALARDO,
Via Barozzi 1, 20122 Milan, Italy.

The Respondent

The Respondent is the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (“Bangladesh“ or the
“Respondent”).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Messrs. Ajmalul Hossain QC,
Mejbahur Rahman and Syed A Hossain, A. HOSSAIN & ASSOCIATES LAW OFFICES, 3/B
Outer Circular Road, Maghbazar, Dhaka-1217, Bangladesh.

THE PROJECT AND THE DISPUTE
The pipeline contract

The Bangladesh Oil Gas and Mineral Corporation (Petrobangla) is a State entity
established under the Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation Ordinance of
1985 as amended by the Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation Act of 1989.

On 14 February 1990, Saipem and Petrobangla entered into a contract to build a
pipeline of 409 km to carry condensate and gas in various locations of the north east of
Bangladesh (the “Contract”). The contract price amounted to USD 34,796,140 and

6

2.2

BDT 415,664,200. The project was sponsored by the World Bank and financed to a
large extent by the International Development Association (IDA).

Clause 1.2.5 of the Contract afforded Petrobangla the right to retain 10% of each
progress payment due to Saipem as Retention Money up to an amount equivalent to
5% of the total contract price, ie., USD 1,739,807 plus BDT 20,783,210 (the
“Retention Money”). The Retention Money was to be released to Saipem in two
tranches, half of it not later than 30 days from the issuance of the Final Taking Over
Certificate by Petrobangla, and the remaining half not later than 30 days from the
issuance of the Final Acceptance Certificate by Petrobangla.

The same Clause 1.2.5 of the Contract provided that Petrobangla could release the
second half of the Retention Money prior to the Final Acceptance Certificate against a
Warranty Bond of equal value from a bank acceptable to Petrobangla (the “Warranty
Bond’).

The Contract was governed by the laws of Bangladesh and contained the following

arbitration clause:

If any dispute, question or difference should arise between the parties to this
Contract with regard to rights and obligations hereunder which cannot be
settled amicably, such dispute, question or difference shall be finally settled
under the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber
of Commerce by three arbitrators, one to be nominated by each party and
the third arbitrator shall be appointed by the two arbitrators in accordance
with the said Rules and if the arbitrators are unable to do so, the third
arbitrator shall be appointed by the Court of Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce under the said Rules. The venue of the arbitration
shall be Dhaka, Bangladesh. The procedure in arbitration shall be in
English.

(Exh. C-4)

The origin of the present dispute

Pursuant to Article 1.1.14 of the Contract, the project was to be completed by 30 April
1991. It was, however, significantly delayed due to problems with the local population
which rebelled against the project. On 29 May 1991, Saipem and Petrobangla, with the
approval of the World Bank, agreed to extend the completion date by one year, i.e., to
30 April 1992.

2.3

The project was completed and the pipeline taken over by Petrobangla with effect from
14 June 1992. Petrobangla issued the certificate of final taking over on 17 June 1992.
Shortly thereafter, Petrobangla returned the first half of the Retention Money.

The second half of the Retention Money was to be released by Petrobangla against a
warranty bond of the same amount, i.e., USD 869,903.50 and BDT 10,391,605.00.

The warranty bond was provided on behalf of Saipem on 27 June 1992 (warranty Bond
No. PG/USD/12/92 issued by Banque Indosuez; the “Warranty Bond”). Petrobangla
agreed that such bond would be released no later than 30 days from the issuance of
the certificate of final acceptance (see C-Mem, p. 26).

On 18 April 1993, Petrobangla sent an “extend or pay letter” in the following terms:

The validity of the captioned guarantee which was extended by you vide
your letter No. CRDT/AU.-PG-12/92-551/93 dated 04-05-93, will expire on
30-06-93.

We have requested the Contractor to extend the validity of the said
guarantee for further period up to 31-12-93 before its expiry.

If the Contractor does not give any extension of the validity of this guarantee
before its expiry date i.e. 30-06-93, you will treat this letter as our
encashment notice against the subject guarantee and in that event you will
effect payment to us by a Demand-Draft drawn in favour of the Project
Implementation Unit, Petrobangla.

(Exh. R-67)
It is undisputed that Petrobangla did not repay the Retention Money even though the
Warranty Bond had been issued. The parties disagree on whether the letter to “extend
or pay” just quoted constitutes a call on the Warranty Bond and whether Petrobangla
initiated an action to obtain and eventually obtained payment under the Warranty
Bond.

A dispute arose between the parties with respect to Petrobangla’s failure (i) to pay the
additional costs allegedly agreed, together with the extension of time as well as other
compensations and (ii) to return the Warranty Bond and the balance of the Retention
Money.

The ICC Arbitration

According to the dispute resolution procedure set forth in the Contract, Saipem
referred this dispute to ICC arbitration by filing a request for arbitration on 7 June 1993.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

An arbitral tribunal composed of Dr. Werner Melis (Chairman), Prof. Riccardo Luzzatto
and Prof. lan Brownlie, QC, was constituted on 4 May 1994 (the “ICC Arbitral
Tribunal”).

On 27 November 1995, the ICC Arbitral Tribunal issued an award on jurisdiction
dismissing Petrobangla’s challenge to its jurisdiction (Exh. C-7). It then addressed the
merits of the case.

In substance, Saipem claimed compensation in excess of USD 11 million (USD
7,579,445 and BDT 123,350,330) and the return of the Warranty Bond. Petrobangla
opposed these claims and raised several counterclaims in the total amount of USD
10,577,941.98.

After the exchange of the written submissions in the ICC Arbitration, a witness hearing
was held on 22-27 July 1997 in Dhaka. During the hearing, the ICC Arbitral Tribunal
rejected several procedural motions made by Petrobangla, in particular (i) a request to
strike from the record the statement of a witness produced by Saipem who could not
attend the hearing, (ii) a request that all witnesses to be heard during the hearing be
allowed to stay in the hearing room, (iii) a request that a letter from Petrobangla which
was not on record be filed during the cross-examination of a witness, (iv) a request to
strike from the record a "draft aide-mémoire" of the World Bank and certain unilaterally
prepared calculations of costs, and (v) a request for written transcripts to be made of
the tape recordings of the hearing.

In August 1997, Petrobangla wrote to the ICC Arbitral Tribunal to request information
regarding Saipem’s insurance policy and claims. The ICC Arbitral Tribunal issued an
order that Saipem’s refusal to submit the requested documents would be assessed at a
later stage of the proceedings, when appropriate.

On 16 November 1997, Petrobangla filed an action seeking the revocation of the ICC
Arbitral Tribunal's authority in the First Court of the Subordinate Judge of Dhaka (Exh.
R-83)'. The action was based on the arbitrators’ alleged misconduct and breach of the

On 23 June 1999, Saipem filed an application for “rejection of the application” on the merits
(Exh. R-85), which was refused by an order dated 5 September 1999 (Exh. R-87). Saipem did
not appeal from this order in the High Court Division of the Supreme Court.

9

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

parties’ procedural rights when rejecting Petrobangla’s procedural motions during the
hearing of 22-27 July 1997°.

On 17 November 1997, Petrobangla seized the High Court of Dhaka of an application
requesting a decision "to stay all further proceedings of the Arbitration Case No.
7934/CK pending before the arbitral tribunal and/or to restrain the opposite party
and/or the tribunal by and from proceeding further with the said arbitration" (Exh. C-
10.2).

On 24 November 1997, the Supreme Court of Bangladesh issued an injunction
restraining Saipem from proceeding with the ICC Arbitration (Exh. C-10.3)°:

[Saipem] is hereby restrained by an order of ad-interim injunction from
proceeding with the said arbitration case No. 7934CK for a period of 8
(eight) weeks from date.

(Exh. C-10.3, p. 2)

Several other decisions confirmed and maintained the stay of the arbitration, including
a decision of the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh handed
down on 23 March 1998 (Exh. C-10.4).

On 19 September 1999, Saipem filed a written objection to Petrobangla’s action
seeking the revocation of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal's authority (Exh. R-88).

On 5 April 2000, the First Court of the Subordinate Judge of Dhaka issued a decision
revoking the authority of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal on the following grounds:

Petrobangla also sought an interim injunction pending the hearing of its application, which was
dismissed by the Court by an order dated 16 November 1997 (Exh. C-10.1). On 17 November
1997, Petrobangla filed an appeal from this order (Exh. C-10.2). By a judgment dated 2 May
1999, the High Court allowed Petrobangla's appeal, set aside the order dated 16 November
1997 of the lower court, and granted the interim injunction in respect of the proceedings of the
ICC Tribunal (Exh. C-10.5). On 30 June 1999, Saipem appealed from this judgment in the
Appellate Division of the Supreme Court and requested a stay of the operation of the Judgment
of the High Court Division. The Appellate Division granted the stay and extended it by two
separate orders dated 4 and 18 July 1999 until 22 July 1999. After having heard both parties,
on 25 July 1999 the Appellate Division rendered a judgment upholding the High Court decision
of 2 May 1999.

Saipem appealed against the judicial stay of the arbitration on the ground that the Bangladeshi
courts had no jurisdiction to decide on Petrobangla's petition regarding the alleged misconduct
of the proceedings by the arbitrators. Specifically, Saipem submitted that the ICC Arbitration
Rules elected by the parties provided for an exclusive mechanism for disqualification of the
arbitrators and that such an election had to be taken into consideration according to Section V
of the Bangladeshi Arbitration Act of 1940. Pursuant to this provision, "the authority of an
appointed arbitrator is irrevocable except with the leave of the court, unless a contrary intention
is expressed in the arbitration agreement".

10

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

In view of the submission of the lawyers for the parties and perusal of the
documents filed by both sides | hold that the Arbitral Tribunal has conducted
the arbitration proceedings improperly by refusing to determine the question
of the admissibility of evidence and the exclusion of certain documents from
the record as well as by its failure to direct that information regarding
insurance be provided. Moreover, the Tribunal has manifestly been in
disregard of the law and as such the Tribunal committed misconduct.

Therefore, in the above circumstances, it appears to me that there is a
likelihood of miscarriage of justice.

(Exh. C-11, as quoted in Mem., p. 21, para. 92)

It is common ground that Saipem has not appealed this decision.

On 30 April 2001, the ICC Arbitral Tribunal decided to resume the proceedings on the
ground that the challenge or replacement of the arbitrators in an ICC arbitration falls
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the ICC Court and not of the Bangladeshi courts. It
thus held that the revocation of the authority of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal by the
Bangladeshi courts was contrary to the general principles governing international
arbitration (Exh. C-8).

On 9 May 2001, Petrobangla brought an action before the First Court of the
Subordinate Judge of Dhaka to set aside the ICC Arbitral Tribunal’s order of 30 April
resuming the arbitration (Exh. C-12).

On 24 May 2001, Petrobangla filed a request for a declaration that the ICC Arbitration
was unlawful on the ground that the authority of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal was revoked
by the decision of the Subordinate Judge of 5 April 2000. It also applied for an interim
and a permanent injunction. On the same day, the court refused to grant the interim
injunction. On 27 May 2001, Petrobangla filed an appeal before the High Court
Division of the Supreme Court against this refusal. On the same date, the High Court
Division issued an injunction restraining Saipem from pursuing the ICC Arbitration‘.
This decision was confirmed by the High Court Division on 23 October 2001, 16
January 2002 and 15 July 2002.

On 9 May 2003, the ICC Arbitral Tribunal rendered an award holding that Petrobangla
had breached its contractual obligations by not paying the compensation for time
extension and additional works and ordered Petrobangla to pay to Saipem the total
amount of USD 6,148,770.80 plus EUR 110,995.92 (which included the Retention
Money which remained unpaid) plus interest at 3.375% from 7 June 1993. It also
Saipem did not appear before the Court and the case is still pending.

11

35.

36.

ordered Petrobangla to return the Warranty Bond to Saipem (the “ICC Award”; Exh. C-
6).

On 19 July 2003, Petrobangla filed an application before the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh under Sections 42(2) and 43 of the Arbitration Act 2001
to set aside the ICC Award (Exhibit C-13).

On 21 April 2004, the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh denied
Petrobangla’s application to set aside the Award as it was “misconceived and
incompetent inasmuch as there is no Award in the eye of the law, which can be set
aside” (Exh. C-21, p. 11). In the most relevant passage, the High Court Division
decision reads as follows:

[...] On a perusal of materials on record and particularly Annexure-"D" that
is the judgment passed by the learned Subordinate Judge, First Court, in
Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No. 49 of 1997, it appears that the authority
of the Arbitral Tribunal to proceed with the Arbitration Case No.
7934/CK/AER/ACS/MS has been revoked on 5.4.2000. Therefore the
Arbitral Tribunal proceeded with the said arbitration case most illegally and
without jurisdiction after the pronouncement of the judgment of Arbitration
Miscellaneous Case No. 49 of 1997. Moreover, the Arbitral Tribunal was
injuncted upon by the High Court Division not to proceed with the said
arbitration case any further but in spite of that the Tribunal proceeded with
the Arbitration Case and ultimately declared their Award on 9.5.2008. [...]

The applicable law of the agreement was set out in clause 1.1.1a of the
agreement in the following terms: “1.1.1a The contract shall be governed
and construed with reference to the law in force in Bangladesh...”. Thus it is
clear the Bangladesh Court has jurisdiction to entertain a suit/proceeding if
initiated by a party to the Contract. Therefore, the judgment passed by the
First Subordinate Judge in Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No. 49 of 1997
and the injunction order dated 2.5.1999 passed by this Court in the
Miscellaneous Appeal No. 25 of 1997 were binding upon the Arbitral
Tribunal [...]

It is, thus, clear and obvious that the Award dated 9.5.2003 passed by the
Arbitral Tribunal in Arbitration Case No. 7934/CK/AER/ACS/MS is a nullity in
the eye of the law and this Award can not be treated as an Award in the eye
of the law as it is clearly illegal and without jurisdiction inasmuch as the
authority of the Tribunal was revoked as back as on 5.4.2000 by a
competent Court of Bangladesh. [...]

A non-existent award can neither be set aside nor can it be enforced.
(Exh. C-21, p. 11).

2.4

37.

38.

39.

2.5

40.

A.

Related litigation

On 4 October 1992, at the request of a subcontractor of Saipem, a court in Bangladesh
issued an injunction restraining payments by Petrobangla to Saipem. The injunction
was lifted on 31 May 1993.

On 17 June 1993, Saipem obtained an injunction from the courts in Milan prohibiting
Banque Indosuez Italy (the bank which had issued the Warranty Bond) to pay out on
the Warranty Bond to Banque Indosuez Pakistan (the correspondent bank in
Pakistan). This injunction was confirmed on 19 July 1993 and subsequently affirmed
by the Court of Appeal of Milan on 12 August 1993°.

Being exposed to the risk of a call on the Warranty Bond, on 12 February 1994,
Banque Indosuez Pakistan filed an action before the Court of the 4" Sub-Judge of
Dhaka for a declaration that no payment should be made in favor of Petrobangla under
the Warranty Bond until the injunction of the court of Milan was vacated. According to
the Court’s order sheet, a further hearing was set on 4 June 2006. This action was still
pending at the time of the hearing on jurisdiction in this arbitration. Saipem is not a
party to it (Tr. | 53:14-21).

The BIT

The present proceedings are brought on the basis of the "Agreement Between the
Government of the Republic of Italy and the Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh on the Promotion and Protection of Investments" of 20 March 1990 (the
“BIT”), which entered into force on 20 September 1994 (Exh. C-1).

Specifically, Saipem relies upon Article 5 of the BIT, pursuant to which investments
under the Treaty may not be subject to expropriation or measures equivalent to
expropriation without immediate, full, and effective compensation.

The action on the merits, which was initiated to maintain the injunction was still pending at the
time of the hearing on jurisdiction in this arbitration (Tr. Il 63:22-64:3).

13

42.

43.

44.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE

On 5 October 2004, Saipem filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request” or “RA”) with
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the
“Centre”), accompanied by 17 exhibits (Exh. C-1 to 17). In its Request, Saipem
invoked the provisions of the BIT and sought the following relief:

6.1 Claim for Declaratory Decisions
The Claimant requests that the Arbitral Tribunal declare that:

. Bangladesh has expropriated Claimant of its investment without
paying compensation;

. Bangladesh has breached its international obligations under the BIT.
6.2. Monetary Claims

The Claimant requests that the Arbitral Tribunal award it complete
compensation for all the damages and losses it suffered as a result of
Bangladesh's breaches of its obligations.

As the Claimant will substantiate at the proper stage of the proceedings, the
loss suffered by the Claimant amounts to at least US$ 12,500,000.00, plus
interest at the proper rate.

The Claimant also requests that the Arbitral Tribunal order Bangladesh to
return or extinguish the Warranty Bond.

6.3 Interim Relief

In light of Bangladesh's bad faith attempts to draw upon the Warranty Bond,
the Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue a provisional order pursuant to
Article 47 of the Convention ordering Respondent to refrain from pursuing —
and to prevent Petrobangla from pursuing — any payment demand based on
this Bond until the outcome of the present arbitration.

6.4 The Costs of the Present Arbitration

The Claimant requests that the Arbitral Tribunal order Respondent to
reimburse Claimant for all the costs incurred and to be incurred by it in
connection with the present arbitration, including legal fees.

(RA, pp. 27-28, paras. 121-126, footnote omitted)
On 12 October 2004, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “Institution
Rules”), transmitted a copy of the RA to Bangladesh.

After a protracted exchange of correspondence (during which the Claimant filed
additional exhibits to the Request — Exh. C-18 to 21) between the parties and the
Centre, on 27 April 2005, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered Saipem’s

14

45.

46.

47.

48.

Request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention” or “the
Convention”). On the same date, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, the Secretary-
General notified the parties of the registration of the Request and invited them to
proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

The parties agreed on a Tribunal composed of three arbitrators with one arbitrator
each to be appointed by the parties and the presiding arbitrator to be jointly nominated
by the two party-appointed arbitrators. On 27 June 2005, Saipem appointed Prof.
Christoph Schreuer, a national of Austria. On 4 July 2005, Bangladesh appointed Sir
Philip Otton, a national of the United Kingdom. On 21 July 2005, the Secretariat
informed the parties that the co-arbitrators had agreed to appoint Prof. Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler, a national of Switzerland, as the President of the Tribunal.

On 22 August 2005, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of
the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules’),
notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointment and that
the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have
begun on that date. The same letter informed the parties that Mrs. Eloise M. Obadia,
ICSID Counsel, would serve as Secretary to the Tribunal. Mrs. Obadia was
subsequently replaced as the Secretary of the Tribunal by Mrs. Martina Polasek, ICSID
Counsel.

By decision of 11 October 2005, Sir Philip Otton and Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler
dismissed Bangladesh's Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Christoph Schreuer
concluding that the latter met the requirement of independence and impartiality, or, in
the words of Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, that he had the ability to “exercise
independent judgement”.

On 1 December 2005, the Tribunal held a preliminary session in London. At the outset
of the session, the parties expressed agreement that the Tribunal had been duly
constituted (Arbitration Rule 6) and stated that they had no objections in this respect.
The remainder of the procedural issues on the agenda of the session were discussed
and agreed upon, including a procedural calendar. An audio recording of the session
was later distributed to the parties. Minutes were drafted, signed by the President and
the Secretary of the Tribunal, and sent to the parties on 13 January 2006.

15

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

THE WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

In accordance with the timetable agreed upon during the preliminary session, on 20
February 2006, Saipem submitted its Statement of Claim (Mem.) accompanied by two
volumes of exhibits (Exh. C-21 to Exh. C-84). Saipem did not append any witness
statement or expert opinion.

Following a short extension, on 14 May 2006, Bangladesh submitted its Counter-
Memorial on the objections to jurisdiction and the merits (C-Mem.) accompanied by
five volumes of exhibits (Exh. R-1 to R-113) and four witness statements (WS of
Messrs. Mohammed Quamruzzaman, Abdul Monsur Md. Azad, Salahuddin Ahmad
and Abdur Razzaq). Mr. Razzaq’s WS introduced a legal opinion on issues of
Bangladeshi law, which was accompanied by ten annexes.

In accordance with the timetable agreed upon during the preliminary session, on 14
July 2006, Saipem submitted its Response on Objections to Jurisdiction (Response J.)
accompanied by one volume of exhibits (Exhibits C-85 to C-99). Saipem did not
append any witness statement or expert opinion.

On 26 July 2006, the Tribunal held a telephone conference with counsel for the parties
to deal with the organization of the hearing on jurisdiction.

In line with the extension of time allowed by the Tribunal, on 18 August 2006,
Bangladesh submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction (Reply J.)°.

On 14 September 2006, within the extension of time allowed by the Tribunal, Saipem
submitted its Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction (Rejoinder J.) accompanied by
one volume of exhibits (Exhibits C-100 to C-101), without witness statements or expert
opinions.

THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

The Arbitral Tribunal held the hearing on jurisdiction from 21 to 22 September 2006 in
London. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary, the following
persons attended the jurisdictional hearing:

In the cover letter, Bangladesh announced that a Supplemental WS by Mr. Razzaq would be
filed “over the week-end”.

16

56.

57.

58.

59.

(i) | On behalf of Saipem:
. Prof. Antonio Crivellaro, Bonelli Erede Pappalardo
. Prof. Luca Radicati di Brozolo, Bonelli Erede Pappalardo
. Mr. Andrea Carta Mantiglia, Bonelli Erede Pappalardo
. Mr. Alexander Backovic, Bonelli Erede Pappalardo
. Mr. Francesco del Giudice, Saipem
(ii) | On behalf of Bangladesh:
. Mr. Ajmalul Hossain, QC, A Hossain & Associates Law Offices
. Mr. Sameer Sattar, A Hossain & Associates Law Offices
. Mr. Sayed Afzal Hossain, A Hossain & Associates Law Offices
. Mr. Sayed Ahrarul Hossain, A Hossain & Associates Law Offices

During the jurisdictional hearing, the Tribunal heard witness evidence from Messrs.
Abdul Monsour Azad, Salahuddin Ahmad, Abdul Razzaq and Mohammed

Quamruzzaman.

Mr. Hossain presented oral argument on behalf of Bangladesh and Messrs. Crivellaro,
Radicati di Brozolo and Carta Mantiglia addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Saipem.

The jurisdictional hearing was tape-recorded, a verbatim transcript was taken and
delivered to the parties (Tr. J. J.).

It was agreed at the close of the jurisdictional hearing that the Tribunal would issue a
reasoned decision on the preliminary question of jurisdiction. If the decision were
negative, the Tribunal would render an award terminating the arbitration. If the decision
were affirmative, the Tribunal would render a decision asserting jurisdiction and issue
an order with directions for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 41(4).

60.

61.

62.

The Tribunal has deliberated and thoroughly considered the parties’ written

submissions on jurisdiction and the oral arguments presented in the course of the

jurisdictional hearing. In the following sections, it will first summarize the parties’

positions (Ill), analyze them (IV), and then reach a conclusion on jurisdiction (V).

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

SAIPEM’S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Saipem has put forward the following five main

contentions:

(i)

ti)

i)
(iv)

(vi)

Petrobangla has resorted to the local courts which colluded with the State entity
to sabotage the ICC Arbitration and deny the foreign investor’s right to arbitrate
under the Contract and obtain satisfaction of its claims;

By referring to the ICC Arbitration Rules, the parties validly excluded the
authority of the courts of the seat of the arbitration;

The Contract constitutes an investment under the BIT;
Immaterial rights can be subject to expropriation;

Saipem’s right to arbitrate and more specifically its right that disputes with
Petrobangla be settled by arbitration is a contractual right or, in the words of
Article 1(e) of the BIT, a “right accruing by law or by contract” having an
economic value;

The actions of Petrobangla and of the courts of Bangladesh can be attributed to
the Republic of Bangladesh.

On the basis of these contentions, Saipem requests the Tribunal to:

(i) find that the conditions for its jurisdiction in the present case are
satisfied and accordingly reject the Respondent's objections and
declare itself to have jurisdiction in respect of the Claimant's claim;
and

(ii) issue a provisional measure recommending that Bangladesh refrain
from calling on the Warranty Bond and return it to the Claimant
together with the Retention Money without further delay.

18

63.

64.

65.

(Rejoinder, p. 28, para. 107)

BANGLADESH’S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Bangladesh has raised the following five main

arguments:

(i)
ti)

(iii

(iv)

Saipem did not make an investment within the meaning of the BIT;

Since the seat of the ICC Arbitration was Dhaka, the courts of Bangladesh had
jurisdiction to revoke the authority of the ICC Arbitral Tribunal;

In Art. 5(1)(1) of the BIT, Bangladesh has expressly excluded consent in respect
of “judgments or orders issued by Courts or Tribunals having jurisdiction”;

Saipem elected not to lodge an appeal to a higher court. It has thus deprived
Bangladesh of the opportunity to rectify the alleged wrongdoings of its lower
courts in connection with the ICC Arbitration;

By agreeing on ICC Arbitration in Dakha, Saipem accepted any potential failure
to enforce an ICC award in its favour in Bangladesh as a calculated business
risk.

In reliance on these arguments, Bangladesh invites the Tribunal to:

Make findings [...] that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear this case.

If the Tribunal does not wish to go into the evidence on jurisdictional facts at
this stage, it should still decline jurisdiction on the basis that the Claimant
has not discharged its prima facie burden of proof.

Dismiss the claim in its entirety and [...] make a declaration to that effect
and make an award of costs in favour of the Respondent on a full indemnity
basis.

(Reply J., pp. 19-20)

ANALYSIS

INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

Before turning to the issues to be resolved, the Tribunal wishes to address certain

preliminary matters, i.e., the relevance of prior ICSID decisions (a), the law applicable

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (b), and certain uncontroversial matters (c).

19

11

66.

67.

1.2

68.

69.

70.

The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards

In support of their positions, both parties relied on previous ICSID decisions or awards,
either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present case or in
an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by previous decisions’. At the same time, it
is of the opinion that it must pay due consideration to earlier decisions of international
tribunals. It believes that, subject to compelling contrary grounds, it has a duty to adopt
solutions established in a series of consistent cases. It also believes that, subject to
the specifics of a given treaty and of the circumstances of the actual case, it has a duty
to seek to contribute to the harmonious development of investment law and thereby to
meet the legitimate expectations of the community of States and investors towards
certainty of the rule of law®.

The rules governing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

The Tribunals jurisdiction is contingent upon the provisions of the BIT and of the ICSID
Convention. The law applicable to the merits of the dispute does not govern
jurisdiction.

The relevant provision of the ICSID Convention is Article 25(1), which reads as follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

The relevant provision of the BIT is Article 9, which provides for ICSID arbitration in the

following terms:

1. Any disputes arising between a Contracting Party and the investors of the
other, relating to compensation for expropriation, nationalization, requisition

See e.g., AES Corporation v. the Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on

jurisdiction of 13 July 2005, paras. 30-32; available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/
decisions/AES-Argentina_Jurisdiction.pdf.

On the precedential value of ICSID decisions, see Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitral
Precedent: Dream, Necessity or Excuse?, Freshfields lecture 2006, publication forthcoming in
Arbitration International 2007.

20

1.3

71.

72.

73.

74.

or similar measures including disputes relating to the amount of the relevant
payments shall be settled amicably, as far as possible.

2. In the event that such a dispute cannot be settled amicably within six
months of the date of a written application, the investor in question may
submit the dispute, at his discretion for settlement to: [...]

c) the "International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes", for
the application of the arbitration procedures provided by the Washington
Convention of 18th March 1965 on the "Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States", whenever, or as soon as
both Contracting Parties have validly acceded to it.

Uncontroversial matters

There is no dispute as to the competence of this Tribunal to decide on the
jurisdictional challenges brought by Bangladesh pursuant to Article 41 of the ICSID
Convention.

It is further undisputed that four conditions must be met for the Tribunal to uphold
jurisdiction under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, i.e., (i) the dispute must be
between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State, (ii) the
dispute must be a legal dispute (iii) it must arise directly from an investment, and
(iv) the parties must have expressed their consent to ICSID arbitration in writing.

With respect to the first requirement just referred to, the Tribunal notes that, at the
hearing, Bangladesh has abandoned its jurisdictional objection ratione personae
pursuant to which Saipem was not a private investor (Tr. J. Il 31:12-13). The Tribunal
further notes that the parties to the dispute are a State (Bangladesh) and an Italian
company (Saipem), and that both Bangladesh and Italy are Contracting States within
the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. It thus deems the first
requirement met.

With respect to the fourth requirement, Saipem relies upon (i) the consent of
Bangladesh to arbitration contained in the BIT combined with (ii) its own consent
embodied in the Request. According to a now “well established practice, it is clear that
the coincidence of these two forms of consent can constitute ‘consent in writing’ within
the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention [...] if the dispute falls within the

»9

scope of the BIT.”* This is not disputed by Bangladesh.

Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 22 April 2005, para. 108; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/
impregilo-decision.pdf.

21

75.

1.4

76.

77.

78.

Bangladesh’s objections concern the scope of its consent under the BIT as well as the
second and the third requirements referred to above.

Bangladesh’s objections

Bangladesh has objected to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and/or to the
admissibility of Saipem’s claim upon the following main grounds:

(i) | There is no real legal dispute between the parties (Tr. J. Il 23:9-20).
(ii) | Saipem has not made an investment within Article 1(1) of the BIT.

(iii) Bangladesh’s consent to arbitration does not cover disputes arising out of the
acts of its courts pursuant to Article 5(1) of the BIT (Reply J., p. 15, paras. 3.14-
3.16).

(iv) The alleged breaches of the Treaty “have not crossed the necessary threshold
for establishing that the actions were that of the state of Bangladesh in the
exercise of its sovereign authority” (Reply J., p. 16, at para. 31.8).

(v) | Saipem’s claim constitutes an abuse of process (C-Mem para. 4.40 et seq.; Tr. J.
11 34:9 et seq.).

While recognising that there may be an overlap between some of the objections to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and some of the objections to the admissibility of the
claims"°, the Tribunal will distinguish between jurisdictional objections under Article 25
of the ICSID Convention (see below 4), jurisdictional objections under the BIT (see
below 5), and objections to the admissibility of Saipem’s claims (see below 6). As
preliminary matters, the Tribunal will discuss the law applicable to its jurisdiction (see
below 2) and the relevant standard for establishing jurisdiction (see below 3).

LAW APPLICABLE TO JURISDICTION

It is not challenged that the interpretation of the ICSID Convention and of the BIT is
governed by international law (Reply J., p. 12, para. 3.2).

See also Consortium Groupement L.E.S.I. - DIPENTA v. République Algérienne Démocratique
et Populaire, Award of 10 January 2005, p. 12 at para. 2, where the Tribunal stresses that the
distinction has no practical bearing in ICSID proceedings; available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/lesi-sentence-fr.pdf.

22

79.

80.

81.

82.

At the hearing, Bangladesh withdrew the argument that the words “in conformity with
the laws and regulations of the latter” at the end of the first paragraph of Article 1(1) of
the BIT, impose the application of national law. Bangladesh accepts that the words
relate to the mode, not to the definition of the investment (Tr. J. Il 20:1-2)"".

The parties are, however, in disagreement on the question whether the BIT refers to

Bangladeshi law “in respect of the definition and construction of the word ‘investment’
(Reply J., p. 12, paras. 3.2 and 3.4).

According to Bangladesh, the fact that the BIT’s definition of investment uses the word
‘property’ and not ‘assets’ as in other bilateral investment treaties implies a reference
to Bangladeshi law. In support of this assertion, Bangladesh submits that the word
‘property’ was chosen because it is a notion well known in Bangladesh (Reply J., pp.
13-14, para. 3.8), thus suggesting that the word ‘property’ must be interpreted
according to its ordinary meaning in Bangladeshi law. That meaning is allegedly “more

specific and narrower than the word ‘assets’” (Reply J., p. 14, para. 3.9).

The Tribunal notes that Bangladesh has indeed entered into other bilateral investment
treaties in which the definition of ‘investment’ refers to the concept of ‘asset’.
However, in the absence of any indication that the contracting states intended to refer
to ‘property’ as a notion of Bangladeshi law"’, the Tribunal cannot depart from the
general rule that treaties are to be interpreted by reference to international law. It is
thus not prepared to consider that the term “investment” in Article 1(1) of the BIT is
defined according to the law of the host State.

For the sake of completeness, the Tribunal wishes to note that the phrase “in conformity with

the laws and regulations [of the host State]” following the “investment* in Article 1(1) does not
limit the definition of investment under the BIT to investment within the laws and regulations of
Bangladesh. Indeed, as convincingly held by the tribunal in Salini v. Morocco, such a “provision
[i.e., the requirement of conformity with local laws] refers to the validity of the investment and
not to its definition” (Salini. v. Morocco, [supra Fn. 22] para. 46. See also PSEG et al. v. Turkey,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 June 2004, paras. 109, 116-120, available at
http://www. investmentclaims.com/decisions/PSEG-Turkey-Jurisdiction-4Jun2004.pdf; L.E.S.I. -
Dipenta v. Algeria [supra Fn. 10]; Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005,
44 ILM 721 (2005) paras. 126-131; Bayindir v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November
2005, paras. 105-110, available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Bayindir-
Pakistan-Jurisdiction.pdf.

See, in particular, the Bangladesh-UK BIT, the Bangladesh-Japan BIT, and the Belgo-
Luxemburg-Bangladesh BIT mentioned in Mr. Razzaq’s supplemental WS.

See, in a different context, the clear intent of the parties resulting from travaux préparatoires in
Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. El Salvador, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award of 2 August 2006,
paras. 190 et seq; available at __ http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/
InceysaVallisoletana-ElSalvador-Award.pdf.

23

3.1

83.

3.2

84.

85.

86.

TEST FOR ESTABLISHING JURISDICTION
The onus of establishing jurisdiction

In accordance with accepted international practice (and generally also with national
practice), a party bears the burden of proving the facts it asserts. For instance, an
ICSID tribunal held that the Claimant had to satisfy the burden of proof required at the
jurisdictional phase and make a prima facie showing of Treaty breaches".

The relevant standard

In their respective submissions (see in particular Reply J., pp. 8-9), the parties referred
to the decisions in /mpregilo and Bayindir. In particular, reference was made to the
following test stated in Impregilo:

[T]he Tribunal has considered whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant
in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions of
the BIT which have been invoked. '*

The Tribunal agrees with this test, which is in line with the one proposed by Judge
Higgins in her dissenting opinion in Oil Platforms'®. The test strikes a fair balance
between a more demanding standard which would imply examining the merits at the
jurisdictional stage, and a lighter standard which would rest entirely on the Claimant’s
characterization of its claims.

The Tribunal must now determine whether the claims “fall within the scope of the BIT,

17

assuming pro tem that they may be sustained on the facts’ In other words, the

Tribunal should be satisfied that, if the facts alleged by Saipem ultimately prove true,

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 9], para. 79. On the prima facie test for purposes of jurisdiction,
see among others UPS v. Canada, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 November 2002, paras. 33-37;
Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, para. 180, available at
http://www. investmentclaims.com/decisions/Siemens-Argentina-Jurisdiction-3Aug2004-Eng.pdf;
Plama v. Bulgaria [Fn. 11], paras. 118-120, 132; Bayindir v. Pakistan [Fn. 11] paras. 185-200;
EI Paso v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 April 2006, paras. 40-45, 109, available at
http://www. investmentclaims.com/decisions/El_Paso_Energy-Argentina-
Jurisdictional_Decision.pdf; Jan de Nul v. Egypt, Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006, paras.
69-71, available at http://www. investmentclaims.com/decisions/Jan_de_Nul-Egypt-
Jurisdictional_Award.pdf; Telenor v. Hungary, Award, 13 September 2006, paras. 34, 53, 68,
80, available at http:/www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Telenor_Mobile-Hungary-Award-
13-09-06.pdf.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 9], para. 254, emphasis in the original.

Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), |.C.J.
Reports 1996, Il, p. 803, 810, at paras. 16-17.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 9], para. 263.

24

87.

88.

89.

they would be capable of constituting a violation of Article 5 of the BIT. In this respect,
the Tribunal agrees with the observation in United Parcel Service v. Government of
Canada that “the reference to the facts alleged being ‘capable’ of constituting a
violation of the invoked obligations, as opposed to their ‘falling within’ the provisions,
may be of little or no consequence. '®

At the hearing, Bangladesh agreed with this approach:

If we look at paragraph 16 of the rejoinder, it is stated that it is unanimously
recognised that in the jurisdictional phase issues of merits are relevant only
insofar as they are necessary to enable the court or the tribunal to ascertain
whether the claims brought before it fall within its personal subject matter
jurisdiction.

[..-] With respect, we agree. We submit that that is the way that you should
approach your task.

(Tr. J. ll, 7:18-25)

In spite of this statement, Bangladesh submitted that Saipem’s case is not supported
by appropriate evidence nor is it sufficiently defined. Specifically, Bangladesh alleges
that Saipem must establish the following elements: (i) the existence of an investment,
(ii) the occurrence of an act of expropriation, and (iii) the threshold for treaty claims
(Rejoinder J., p. 11). Bangladesh referred to a definition of the Permanent Court of
International Justice (PClJ) and to another one of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) and submitted that the facts relevant to assert jurisdiction must be proven.

In particular, Bangladesh referred to the PClJ decision in Mavromatis'®. It also relied
on the following passages of the ICJ decision between Spain and Canada in the
Fisheries Jurisdiction Case:

There is no doubt that it is for the Applicant, in its Application, to present to
the Court the dispute with which it wishes to seise the Court and to set out
the claims which it is submitting to it. [...]

United Parcel Service v. Government of Canada [NAFTA], Decision on Jurisdiction, 22
November 200, para.36; available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/UPS-
Canada-Jurisdiction-22Nov2002.pdf.

Judgment No. 2 of the PClJ The Mavromatis Palestine Concessions, 30 August 1924, Fifth
(Ordinary) Session, Publications of the Permanent Court of International Justice Series A No. 2;
Collection of Judgments, A.W. Sijthoff's Publishing Company, Leyden, pp. 12-16; also available
at http://www. icj-
cij.org/cijwww/cdecisions/ccpij/serie_A/A_02/06_Mavrommatis_en_Palestine_Arret.pdf. After
having carefully considered this decision, the Tribunal was unable to discern the relevance of
this decision in the present case.

25

90.

91.

In order to identify its task in any proceedings instituted by one State against
another, the Court must begin by examining the Application. However, it
may happen that uncertainties or disagreements arise with regard to the real
subject of the dispute with which the Court has been seised, or to the exact
nature of the claims submitted to it. In such cases the Court cannot be
restricted to a consideration of the terms of the Application alone nor, more
generally, can it regard itself as bound by the claims of the Applicant.

Even in proceedings instituted by Special Agreement, the Court has
determined for itself, having examined all of the relevant instruments, what
was the subject of the dispute brought before it, in circumstances where the
parties could not agree on how it should be characterized [...].

It is for the Court itself, while giving particular attention to the formulation of
the dispute chosen by the Applicant, to determine on an objective basis the
dispute dividing the parties, by examining the position of both Parties [...]

The Court's jurisprudence shows that the Court will not confine itself to the
formulation by the Applicant when determining the subject of the dispute.

The Court will itself determine the real dispute that has been submitted to it
[..-]. It will base itself not only on the Application and final submissions, but
on diplomatic exchanges, public statements and other pertinent evidence

In so doing, the Court will distinguish between the dispute itself and
arguments used by the parties to sustain their respective submissions on
the dispute [...].

The Court points out that the establishment or otherwise of jurisdiction is not
a matter for the parties but for the Court itself. Although a party seeking to
assert a fact must bear the burden of proving it, this has no relevance for the
establishment of the Court's jurisdiction, which is a "question of law to be
resolved in the light of the relevant facts”.

That being so, there is no burden of proof to be discharged in the matter of

jurisdiction. Rather, it is for the Court to determine from all the facts and

taking into account all the arguments advanced by the Parties, "whether the

force of the arguments militating in favour of jurisdiction is preponderant,

and to ‘ascertain whether an intention on the part of the Parties exists to

confer jurisdiction upon it"?°.
The Tribunal fails to see how these decisions could be interpreted as justifying a
different approach than the one referred to above and described by the tribunal in
Impregilo. That said, it is undisputable that the Tribunal determines its jurisdiction

without being bound by the arguments of the parties.

To summarize, the Tribunal’s task is to determine the meaning and scope of the
provisions upon which Saipem relies to assert jurisdiction and to assess whether the
facts alleged by Saipem fall within those provisions or would be capable, if proven, of
constituting breaches of the treaty obligations involved. In performing this task, the
International Court of Justice, Judgment of 4 December 1998, Fisheries Jurisdiction Case
(Spain v. Canada), available at http://www. icj-

cij.org/icjwwwiidocketiec/iecjudgment(s)/iec_ijudgment_ 981204.htm, paras. 29-32 and 37-38,
citations omitted.

26

92.

41

93.

94.

Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning
and scope of the relevant BIT provisions and to the assessment whether the facts
alleged may constitute breaches of these provisions. In doing so, the Tribunal will
assess whether Saipem’s case is reasonably arguable on its face. If the result is
affirmative, jurisdiction will be established, but the existence of breaches will remain to
be litigated on the merits.

JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS UNDER ARTICLE 25(1) OF THE ICSID CONVENTION

With respect to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, Bangladesh objected that there
is no legal dispute (a), that Saipem did not make an investment (b) and that the dispute
does not arise directly out of the investment (c).

Is the dispute a legal dispute under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention?

At the hearing, Bangladesh submitted that the existence of a legal dispute within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention presupposes the “existence of a
cause of action” (Tr. J. Il, 15-17). In the present case, according to Bangladesh, “there
is no valid cause of action because the ingredients of such a cause of action are not
supported by any or any proper evidence [and] are not sufficiently clearly defined in the
formulation of the claim” (Tr. J. Il 22:10-13).

Specifically, Bangladesh referred to the articulation of Saipem’s claim in para. 13 of the
Reply J. as repeated in para. 28 of the Rejoinder J., which reads as follows:

As is clearly set out in the Statement of Claim, the Claimant's claim relates
to the expropriation by Bangladesh of (i) its right to arbitration of its disputes
with Petrobangla; (ii) the right to payment of the amounts due under the
Contract as ascertained in the ICC Award; (iii) the rights arising under the
ICC Award, including the right to obtain its recognition and enforcement in
Bangladesh and abroad; and therefore (iv) the residual value of its
investment in Bangladesh at the time of the ICC Award, consisting of its
credits under the Contract. All these matters are facets of the same issue.
The focus of the Claimant's case is that its right to payment under the
Contract as ascertained by, and incorporated in the ICC Award has been
expropriated by the unlawful decisions of the Bangladeshi courts that
revoked the authority of the ICC arbitrators and declared the ICC Award null
and void, thus precluding its enforcement in Bangladesh or elsewhere. The
net result of all this was, obviously, to deprive the Claimant of the
compensation for [the expropriation of] its investment.

(Rejoinder J., p. 8)

27

95.

96.

97.

4.2

98.

99.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the dispute before it is a legal dispute as it involves a
disagreement about legal rights or obligations. Or, to use the words of the Report of
the Executive Directors of the World Bank on the Convention, the present dispute is
legal in nature because it deals with “the existence or scope of [Claimants’] legal
rights” and with the nature and extent of the relief to be granted to the Claimants as a
result of the Respondent's alleged violation of those legal rights”".

The Tribunal fails to see how the alleged lack of clarity of Saipem’s claim could change
that conclusion. It will examine whether the claim is supported by evidence when
discussing the substantiation of the claim (see below at 5).

The determination whether the rights asserted by Saipem do exist must await the
proceedings on the merits. Subject to determining whether Saipem made an
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which will be
discussed below, the Tribunal holds that the assertion of such rights has given rise toa
legal dispute which falls within the scope of the jurisdiction of the Centre as set forth in
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Has Saipem made an investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention?

In its relevant part, Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he
jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment”.

To determine whether Saipem has made an investment within the meaning of Article
25 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal will apply the well-known criteria developed
by ICSID tribunals in similar cases, which are known as the “Salini test”. According to
such test, the notion of investment implies the presence of the following elements: (a)

a contribution of money or other assets of economic value, (b) a certain duration,

(c) an element of risk, and (d) a contribution to the host State’s development”.

See Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States; International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, 18 March 1965, para. 26; available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/basicdoc/partB-section05.htm#03.

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001, 42 ILM, 2003, passim. The need for the last
element is sometimes put in doubt, (L.E.S./. - DIPENTA v. République Algérienne
Démocratique et Populaire, Decision on jurisdiction of 12 July 2006, para. 72.)

28

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

Referring to several decisions implementing this test*®, Saipem submitted that the
Contract was an investment, since “Saipem invested substantial technical, financial
and human resources in the project, which gave a substantial contribution to
Bangladesh's economic development, and it assumed risks for a significant duration
(the performance phase lasted two and a half years)” (Response J., p. 8, para. 35).

Bangladesh does not dispute the fact that Saipem made a significant contribution in
terms of both technical and human resources. Nor does Bangladesh dispute that these
resources contributed to its economic development. Bangladesh's objection relates to
the duration of the project. While it agrees that two years are generally considered as a
sufficient period of time under the Salini test, Bangladesh insists on the fact that the
period during which works were actually performed was less than one year (Tr. J. Il
84:10 et seq.).

The Tribunal cannot follow this line of argument. Bangladesh did not put forward any
particular reason why the actual duration of the work should be considered as the
applicable criterion, nor did it point to any authority supporting that position. The time of
the project during which the works are interrupted or suspended entails risks that may
even be higher than those incurred while the works are being performed.

As a further line of argument, Bangladesh mainly disputed the existence of an
investment on the ground that throughout the project Saipem never “was a net creditor
vis-a-vis Petrobangla in respect of the Pipeline Contract having actually put its own
money into the project” (C-Mem., p. 61). At the hearing, Bangladesh relied upon the

following dictum of the Tribunal in Soabi v. Senegal”*:

The Tribunal observes finally that the object of the general undertaking was
limited to construction of a building to be paid for by the client as work
progressed and could thus not be said to be an agreement concerning
investments. Disputes arising thereunder could therefore not be investment
disputes, as required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

(quoted in Tr. J. Il 83:18-22 by reference to BISHOP/CRAWFORD/REISMAN, Pp.
368)

Saipem refuted this objection with the argument that “[iJn construction and similar
contracts it is often the case that the foreign investor receives a part of the funds — by

L.E.S.I. - Dipenta v. Algeria [Fn. 10], paras. 13-15 ; Impregilo v. Pakistan [Fn. 9]; Bayindir v.
Pakistan [Fn. 11] paras. 104-138, Jan de Nul N.V. v. Egypt [Fn. 14].

Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels (SOABI) v. Senegal, |CSID Case No. ARB82/1,
Award of 25 February 1988, 2 ICSID Reports 190 at para. 219.

29

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

way of advances or partial payments — from the host State prior to completion of the
project” and that this fact “has never been given any relevance in past case law which
has characterized this type of contract as an investment’. More generally, Saipem
submits that “[t]he source of the funds whereby the investor funded the works is not of
itself relevant” to the Salini test for determining whether there is an investment (see
also Tr. J. 11 59:2-7).

In this debate, the Tribunal identifies two distinct issues, one about the origin of the
funds and one about the commercial risk incurred by the investor.

With respect to the first one, it is true that the host State may impose a requirement
that an amount of capital in foreign currency be imported into the country”®. However,
in the absence of such a requirement, investments made by foreign investors from
local funds or from loans raised in the host State are treated in the same manner as
investments funded with imported capital. In other words, the origin of the funds is
irrelevant. This results from the drafting history of the ICSID Convention and is
confirmed by several arbitral decisions relating to BITs.

During the elaboration of the Convention, an argument was made that the nationality of
the investment was more important than the one of the investor. The Chairman, Dr.
Broches, answered that he did not see how the Convention could make a distinction
based on the origin of funds (History of the Convention, Vol. Il, pp. 261, paras. 397-
398). As a consequence, the idea of looking to the origin of funds was abandoned.

Cases do not consider the origin of the funds either. As an illustration in lieu of several
others®® one may refer to Wena Hotels v. Egypt, where both the Tribunal and the ad
hoc Committee found the alleged origin of the funds from other investors who were not
entitled to benefit from the applicable BIT irrelevant?’.

Bangladesh’s argument appears to refer more to the second issue identified above,
i.e., to the fact that the investor did not incur any commercial risk because it received

See Amco v. Indonesia, Award, 20 November 1984, 1 ICSID Reports 413, paras. 481-489.

See Tradex v. Albania, Award, 29 April 1999, 5 ICSID Reports 70, at paras. 105, 108-111;
Olguin v. Paraguay, Award, 26 July 2001, 6 ICSID Reports 164, at para. 66, Fn. 9. See also
Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, at para. 80, available at
http://www. investmentclaims.com/decisions/Tokios-Ukraine-Jurisdiction-29Apr2004. pdf.

Wena Hotels v. Egypt, Award, 8 December 2000, 41 ILM 896 (2002) at para. 126, Decision on
Annulment, 28 January 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002) at para. 54.

30

110.

11

4.3

112.

113.

114.

an advance payment. The Tribunal cannot agree with this argument. In the present
case, the undisputed stopping of the works which took place in 1991 and the necessity
to renegotiate the completion date constitute examples of inherent risks in long-term
contracts. Moreover, the contractual mechanism providing for Retention Money
created an obvious risk for Saipem, which in fact materialised.

Finally, the Tribunal wishes to emphasize that for the purpose of determining whether
there is an investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, it will consider the
entire operation’®. In the present case, the entire or overall operation includes the
Contract, the construction itself, the Retention Money, the warranty and the related
ICC Arbitration.

. Applying the Salini test to this comprehensive operation, the Tribunal comes to the

conclusion that Saipem has made an investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention.

Does the dispute arise directly out of the investment?

Bangladesh claims that a dispute arising out of the ICC Award is not a dispute arising
directly from the original investment, i.e., from the Contract (Tr. J. Il 28:21-29:2):

any rights arising out of the contractual dispute [...] would not survive an

award. So, if the award is a valid award, those rights would be replaced by

rights arising out of the award itself.
This argument refers to the requirement of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention that
the dispute “aris[e] directly out of an investment”. The Tribunal agrees with Bangladesh
that the rights arising out of the ICC Award arise only indirectly from the investment.
Indeed, the opposite view would mean that the Award itself does constitute an
investment under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which the Tribunal is not
prepared to accept.

However, as already mentioned, the notion of investment pursuant to Article 25 of the
ICSID must be understood as covering all the elements of the operation, that is not
only the ICC Arbitration, but also inter alia the Contract, the construction itself and the
Retention Money (see above No. 110). Hence, in accordance with previous case

See, from the very beginning of ICSID practice, Holiday Inns v. Morocco, Decision of

jurisdiction of 12 May 1974, reported in Pierre Lalive, The First World Bank Arbitration (Holiday
Inns v. Morocco) — Some Legal Problems, British Yearbook of International Law 1980, p. 159.

31

115.

116.

29

law®®, the Tribunal holds that the present dispute arises directly out of the overall
investment.

Finally, the Tribunal notes Bangladesh's point “that Article 26 of the Washington
Convention does not allow that these proceedings be run [...] accept[ing] the findings
from the ICC Tribunal and us[ing] that for [this Tribunal’s] findings” (Tr. Il, 82:15-18). To
the extent that this may be interpreted as a jurisdictional objection, the Tribunal
stresses that it is not requested to “accept and use” the ICC Tribunal’s findings. It is
requested to review whether the ICC Award was frustrated contrary to the protection
provided in the BIT.

JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS UNDER THE BIT

It is undisputed that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the BIT is limited to the scope
of the dispute resolution clause contained in Article 9 of the BIT. Under the heading
“Settlement of Disputes between Investors and the Contracting Parties”, this provision
states:

1. Any disputes arising between a Contracting Party and the investors of
the other, relating to compensation for expropriation, nationalization.
requisition or _similar_measures, including disputes relating to the
amount of the relevant payments shall be settled amicably, as far as
possible.

 

2. In the event that such a dispute cannot be settled amicably within six
months of the date of a written application. The investor in question
may submit the dispute, at his discretion, for settlement to:

a) the Contracting Party’s Court, at all instances, having territorial
jurisdiction;

b) an ad hoc Arbitration Tribunal, in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules of the “UN Commission on International Trade
Law” (UNCITRAL),

c) the “International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes” for the application of the arbitration procedure
provided by the Washington Convention of 18" March 1965 on
the “Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
nationals of other States”, whenever, or as soon as both
Contracting Parties have validly acceded to it.

(Emphasis added)

See, for instance, CSOB v. The Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision on

Jurisdiction of 24 May 1999, ICSID Review 1999, p. 275.

32

117. This provision implicitly refers to Article 5 of the BIT, which speaks of expropriation of
“investments”. Under the heading “Nationalization or Expropriation’, this provision
reads in pertinent part as follows:

1. (1) | The investments to which this Agreement relates shall not be
subject to any measure which might limit permanently or
temporarily their joined rights of ownership, possession, control
or enjoyment, save where specifically provided by law and by
judgments or orders issued by Courts or Tribunals having
jurisdiction.

(2) Investments of investors of one of the Contracting Parties shall
not be directly or indirectly nationalized, expropriated,
requisitioned or subjected to any measures having similar
effects in the territory of the other Contracting Party, except for
public purposes, or national interest, against immediate full and
effective compensation, and on condition that these measures
are taken on a non-discriminatory basis and in conformity with
all legal provisions and procedures.

118. In turn, investments are defined in Article 1(1) of the BIT as follows:

[1.] The term “investment” shall be construed to mean any kind of
property invested before or after the entry into force of this Agreement
by a natural or legal person being a national of one Contracting Party
in the territory of the other in conformity with the laws and regulations
of the latter.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the term "investment"
comprises:

a) movable and immovable property, and any other rights in rem
including, insofar as they may be used for investment
purposes, real guarantees on other property;

b) shares, debentures, equity holdings and any other negotiable
instrument or document of credit, as well as Government and
public securities in general;

c) credit for sums of money or any right for pledges or services
having an economic value connected with investments, as well
as reinvested income as defined in paragraph 5 hereafter; [...]

e) any right of a financial nature accruing by law or by contract
and any licence, concession or franchise issued in accordance
with current provisions governing the exercise of business
activities, including prospecting for, cultivating, extracting and
exploiting natural resources.

5.1 Has Saipem made an investment under Article 1(1) of the BIT?

119. It is common ground between the parties that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is conditioned
upon Saipem having made an investment within the meaning of the BIT (RA, p. 27,
para. 118).

33

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

As already mentioned, the Tribunal is not prepared to consider that the term
‘investment’ in Article 1(1) of the BIT is defined according to the law of the host State
(see above IV, B). Accordingly, the question is whether Saipem made an investment
within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT, without reference to the law of
Bangladesh.

5.1.1 The general definition of investment in Article 1(1) of the BIT

Article 1(1) of the BIT gives a general definition of investment as “any kind of property”.
On its face, this general definition is very broad®”.

In the light of the conclusion reached above according to which Saipem made an
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal fails
to see how the operation at issue could not be considered as a “kind of property”
protected by the BIT.

At the hearing, Bangladesh modified its argumentation on the law governing the term
‘property’ which was referred to earlier (see above No. 81) as follows:

We do not say directly that Bangladesh law must apply to determine the

meaning, we do not say that; but we say you get some help from the fact

that this [i.e. “property”] is a concept well known in Bangladesh and it is
probably the reason why this has happened.

(Tr. J. I 18-22-25) *

The Tribunal is not convinced by this amended argument either. To discard it, it
suffices to imagine that the term ‘property’ (or its translation in Italian) could have a
specific meaning under Italian law. If one were to follow Bangladesh’s approach, this
would lead to a different interpretation and thus a different scope of protection under
the BIT depending on the country in which the investment is made. This cannot be the
meaning of the BIT.

The terms “any kind of property” correspond to “every kind of asset’, which is generally

acknowledged as “[pjossibly the broadest [...] general definition” contained in a BIT(see Noah
RuBINS, International Investment, Political Risk and Dispute Resolution, 2005, p. 291).

In its last written submission, Bangladesh already put forward a similar argument: “the types of
property said to be included in the list must be considered in the light of the word ‘property’
itself” and of its alleged narrow meaning under Bangladeshi law (Reply J., p. 14, para. 3.10).

34

125.

126.

127.

128.

5.2

129.

5.1.2 A “credit for sums of money” within Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT

It is Saipem’s primary case that the Contract is an investment as defined in Article 1(1)
of the BIT and that “the rights accruing from the ICC Award fall squarely within the
notion of ‘credit for sums of money [...] connected with investments’ set out in Article
1(1)(c) of the BIT” (Response J., p. 10, para. 46).

Bangladesh objects that “[t]hese words would normally include bank deposits or book
debts on a running account” (Rejoinder J., p. 14, para. 3.11). This may well be so.
However, in their ordinary meaning, the words ‘credit for sums of money’ also cover
rights under an award ordering a party to pay an amount of money: the prevailing party
undoubtedly has a credit for a sum of money in the amount of the award.

This said, the rights embodied in the ICC Award were not created by the Award, but
arise out of the Contract. The ICC Award crystallized the parties’ rights and obligations
under the original contract. It can thus be left open whether the Award itself qualifies as
an investment, since the contract rights which are crystallized by the Award constitute
an investment within Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT.

Having reached this conclusion, the Tribunal does not need to make a final ruling on
Saipem’s additional argument that the arbitration agreement contained in the Contract
constitutes a “right of a financial nature accruing by law or by contract” within Article
1(1)(e) of the BIT (Tr. J. II 58:20-23).

Are the facts alleged by Saipem capable of constituting an expropriation under
Article 5 of the BIT?

According to Saipem, its case is based on Petrobangla’s alleged unlawful disruption of
the ICC Arbitration, on the alleged interference by the domestic courts with the
Arbitration, and on the de facto annulment of the ICC Award. These acts allegedly
deprived Saipem of the sums awarded to it by the ICC Award, and thus amount to an
illegal expropriation in breach of Article 5 of the BIT (Response J., p. 4, para. 15). At
the hearing, Saipem further submitted that a State’s disavowal of its undertaking to
arbitrate a contractual dispute may have a “confiscatory effect” (Tr. J. Il, 50:16-23°)
and summarized its case as follows:

Referring to the developments in Saipem’s letter to ICSID of 5 April 2005

35

[T]he claims which are brought before the tribunal are a claim for
expropriation in violation of Article 5 of the BIT. It is an expropriation which
has resulted from a complex behaviour of the whole state, which reneged on
its obligations to enforce the arbitration award and to respect the proper
conduct of the arbitration proceedings [...].

(Tr. J. 11 52:12-18)

130. Saipem brings a claim for expropriation and the BIT provides for ICSID jurisdiction in

131.

case of expropriation. Bangladesh does not claim that the ICC Award and/or the rights
determined by the Award are not capable of being expropriated. Rightly so, as it is
widely accepted under general international law that immaterial rights can be the
subject of expropriation. Moreover, as the European Court of Human Rights
unequivocally held, rights under judicial decisions are protected property that can be
the object of an expropriation:

In order to determine whether the applicants had a "possession" for the
purposes of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1), the Court must ascertain
whether judgment no. 13910/79 of the Athens Court of First Instance and
the arbitration award had given rise to a debt in their favour that was
sufficiently established to be enforceable. [...] [T]he arbitration award, which
clearly recognised the State's liability up to a maximum of specified amounts
in three different currencies [...].

According to its wording, the award was final and binding; it did not require
any further enforcement measure and no ordinary or special appeal lay
against it [...]. Under Greek legislation arbitration awards have the force of
final decisions and are deemed to be enforceable. The grounds for
appealing against them are exhaustively listed in Article 897 of the Code of
Civil Procedure [...]; no provision is made for an appeal on the merits.

At the moment when Law no. 1701/1987 was passed the arbitration award
of 27 February 1984 therefore conferred on the applicants a right in the
sums awarded. Admittedly, that right was revocable, since the award could
still be annulled, but the ordinary courts had by then already twice held - at
first instance and on appeal - that there was no ground for such annulment.
Accordingly, in the Court's view, that right constituted a "possession" within
the meaning of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-1)**.

A further question relates not to the object, but to the subject or the author of the
expropriation. Indeed, more often than not the expropriation results from an act of the

See for instance Phillips Petroleum Iran v. Islamic Republic of Iran et National Iranian Oil
Company, Iran-US Claims Tribunal, Case No. 39, Chamber Two, Award No. 425-39-2 of 29
June 1989, Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration, Vol. XVI (1991), pp. 298-321, para. 75.

Stran Greek Refineries and Stratis Andreadis v. Greece — 13427/87 [1994] ECHR 48 (9
December 1994), paras. 59-62, cross-references omitted; also available at
http://worldlii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/1994/48.html. See also Brumarescu v. Romania Source:
Human Rights Case Digest, Volume 10, Numbers 10-12, 1999, pp. 237-241, also available at
http://worldlii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/1999/105.html.

36

132.

133.

executive power. By contrast, Saipem submitted at the hearing that the acts of a court,
i.e. of the judiciary power, can effect an expropriation:

It is undeniable [...] that the interference by a State (including by the action
of its courts) with an arbitration agreement with a foreign national constitutes
a violation of international law. [...] [i]f such interference has the effect of
confiscating the foreign national's investment as it does in the present case,
it also constitutes an expropriation under the BIT and international law.

This is perfectly demonstrated in a very recent publication by Judge
Schwebel dealing with the confiscatory effects of the interference by State
courts with arbitration. Judge Schwebel makes it quite clear that "[t]he
contractual right of an alien to arbitration of disputes arising under a contract
to which it is party is a valuable right, which often is of importance to the
very conclusion of the contract." Therefore, any "[vlitiation of that right"
through court interference "attracts the international responsibility of the
State of which the issuing court is an organ". Judge Schwebel refers to anti-
suit injunctions, but this statement clearly applies more broadly to all court
interference, including that of the Bangladeshi courts in the present case,
the effect of which is obviously identical. Such interference constitutes a
“ground of violation of customary international law", and more specifically of

"the principle that a State is_not entitled to take the property or
Contractual rights of an alien within its jurisdiction by actions that are
arbitrary, tortious and confiscatory" [Emphasis added].

(Saipem’s letter of 24 March 2005 submitted at the hearing, with the

agreement of Bangladesh [Tr. J. Il 88:8-13], as Exh. C-102°°)
Irrespective of whether Judge Schwebel’s opinion can be applied in the present
context, the Tribunal considers that there is no reason why a judicial act could not
result in an expropriation. Nothing in the BIT indicates such a limitation. Moreover,
Bangladesh did not cite any decision supporting the opposite view. Quite to the
contrary, the Tribunal notes that the European Court of Human Rights had no
hesitation to hold that court decisions can amount to an expropriation®®. Indeed, this is
at least implicitly conceded by Bangladesh when it insists on the fact that consent to
jurisdiction over the purported expropriation by acts of the judiciary is excluded by
Article 5.1 of the BIT (Tr. J. Il, 33:6-9; see section 5.3 below).

For these reasons, the Tribunal considers that the facts alleged by Saipem would be
capable of constituting an expropriation under Article 5 of the BIT if they were
established.

Referring to S. M. Schwebel, Anti-Suit Injunctions in International Arbitration: An Overview, in

Anti-Suit Injunctions in International Arbitration (E. Gaillard, editor), IAI (International Arbitration
Institute) Series on International Arbitration, no. 2, Juris Publishing, 2004, p. 13.

Allard v. Sweden, no. 35179/97 (Sect. 4) (bil.), ECHR 2003-VIl — (24.6.03), available at
http://worldlii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/2003/310.html.

37

134.

5.3

135.

136.

137.

138.

For the sake of clarity it should be added that whether or not Petrobangla and the
courts of Bangladesh actually breached the guarantees of the BIT is a question to be
determined with the merits of the dispute. On the merits, Saipem will have to produce
evidence and legal arguments to establish the alleged breach and Bangladesh will
have the right to challenge such evidence and legal arguments.

Did Bangladesh consent to ICSID arbitration for claims based on decisions by
its courts?

Bangladesh further asserts that even if quod non the Contract and the ICC Award were
to qualify as investment, Saipem’s claims would not fall within the scope of
Bangladesh’s consent to ICSID arbitration:

Since Saipem claims that its right to the ICC Award has been affected by
the judicial acts in Bangladesh, as a matter of interpretation of the BIT, such
rights cannot have any protection under Art. 5(1)(1) of the BIT. Bangladesh
has expressly excluded consent in respect of "judgments or orders issued
by Courts or Tribunals having jurisdiction".

(C-Mem, p. 53, para. 4.11)

According to Saipem, interpreting the last phrase of this provision as an exclusion of
the consent to arbitrate with respect to judicial acts would result in negating the
protection which the BIT grants investors. It stresses that “in almost all instances
expropriations occur as a result of actions which directly or indirectly derive from an
action contemplated in a law or a judgment” and that accepting the Respondent's
position would render the State’s actions immune from the rules of the BIT (Rejoinder
J., pp. 21-22, para. 86).

In the Tribunal’s opinion, Article 5(1)(1) in fine, which was quoted above (see above
No. 117) cannot be understood as creating immunity in favour of the judiciary power.
This provision merely affirms the principle that, “in order to escape being considered
an internationally wrongful act, a State measure limiting or excluding an investor's
rights of ownership, control or enjoyment can only be considered legal if it has been
adopted by law or by a judicial decision” (Response J. p. 17, paras. 74-75, see also Tr.
J. Il, 61:10-12).

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal does not have to make a ruling at this stage
on whether in the present instance the courts of Bangladesh “ha[d] jurisdiction” within
the meaning of Article 5(1)(1) in fine of the BIT.

38

5.4

139.

140.

141.

142.

5.5

143.

Are Saipem’s treaty claims in reality contract claims?

In its Counter-Memorial, Bangladesh submitted that Saipem’s “claim is in reality a
contractual claim dressed up as a treaty claim” (C-Mem., p. 14, para. 1.43).

Saipem opposes this submission with the following argument:

The focus of the Claimant's case is that its right to payment under the
Contract as ascertained by, and incorporated in, the ICC Award has been
expropriated by the unlawful decisions of the Bangladeshi courts that
revoked the authority of the ICC arbitrators and declared the ICC Award null
and void, thus precluding its enforcement in Bangladesh or elsewhere. The
net result of all this was, obviously, to deprive the Claimant of the
compensation for its investment.

(Response J., p. 3, para. 13)

In the Tribunal’s view, the essence of Saipem’s case is that the courts of Bangladesh
acted in violation of the New York Convention and in an “illegal, arbitrary and
idiosyncratic” manner amounting to a violation of the protection afforded to foreign
investors under Article 5 of the BIT. Saipem does not request relief under the Contract;
it does not raise contract claims over which the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction.

Whether Saipem’s treaty claim is well-founded is a different issue which will be
decided when dealing with the merits of the dispute. For instance, it is not for the
Tribunal to rule at this stage on Bangladesh’s submission that “the Claimant is in
essence asserting that the Bangladeshi court acted in a way to deny it justice” and that
such a breach of international law presupposes the exhaustion of local remedies
(Reply J., pp. 17-18, para. 12), or on the allegation that the courts of Bangladesh
actually breached the New York Convention or other principles of international law.
These are matters which will have to be reviewed during the merits phase of this
arbitration.

Are the disputed actions attributable to Bangladesh?

Saipem submits that the expropriation was caused by the combined actions of
Petrobangla and the courts of Bangladesh. Bangladesh does not dispute that the
courts are “part of the State” (Tr. J. Il 32:6) and, thus, that their actions are attributable
to Bangladesh. Indeed, this cannot be seriously challenged in light of previous ICSID

39

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

cases*’. Hence, the only disputed question is whether Petrobangla’s acts can be
attributed to Bangladesh.

According to the test set forth above (see above No. 84 et seq.), it is not for the
Tribunal at the jurisdictional stage to examine whether the acts complained of give rise
to the State’s responsibility, except if it were manifest that the entity involved had no
link whatsoever with the State. This is plainly not the case in the present dispute.

In fact, at first sight at least, Petrobangla appears to be part of the State under
Bangladeshi law. Indeed, upon a specific question from the Tribunal at the hearing, Mr.
Razzaq confirmed that “Petrobangla is a statutory public authority” within the meaning
of the Constitution of Bangladesh and is thus “included in the definition of the state, the
same as Parliament” (Tr. J. | 66:19-20 [Razzaq]).

In this context and still at first sight, the Tribunal fails to see the relevance of
Bangladesh’s emphasis on the fact that Petrobangla, as a part of the State, “has its
own legal personality” (Tr. J. | 61:20-21 [Razzaq]) distinct and allegedly independent
from the Government of Bangladesh (Tr. J. I. 60:1 et seq.; 66:20-21 [Razzaq]). In any
event, these circumstances do not imply that Petrobangla has no link whatsoever with
the State.

Similarly, the allegation that Petrobangla’s actions were “not acts of the State in a
sovereign capacity” (Tr. J. Il 31:21-22) and that Petrobangla acted in front of the courts
of Bangladesh “as a contracting party which feared bias of the arbitrators they were
facing at the time” (Tr. J. Il 31:25-32:1) does not make a difference at this jurisdictional
stage.

When assessing the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal will rule on the issue of
attribution under international law, especially by reference to the Articles on State
Responsibility as adopted in 2001 by the International Law Commission and as
commended to the attention of Governments by the UN General Assembly in
Resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001 (the ILC Articles) as a codification of

See, for instance, The Loewen Group Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of
America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of 5 January 2001, paras. 39
et seq., also available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Loewen-US-Jurisdiction-
5Jan2001.pdf; Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID No. ARB(AF)/00/3,
Award of 30 April 2004, available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/WasteMgmt-
Mexico-2-FinalAward-30Apr2004.pdf.

40

149.

6.1

150.

15

customary international law. The Tribunal will in particular consider the following
provisions:

. Art. 4 of the ILC Articles which codifies the well-established rule that the conduct
of any State organ, according to the internal law of the State, shall be considered
an act of that State under international law. This rule addresses the attribution of
acts of so-called de jure organs which are empowered to act for the State within
the limits of their competence.

. Art. 5 of the ILC Articles which goes on to attribute to a State the conduct of a
person or entity which is not a de jure organ but which is empowered by the law
of that State to exercise elements of governmental authority provided that person
or entity is acting in that capacity in the particular instance.

. Art. 8 of the ILC Articles which states that the conduct of a person or group of
persons acting under the instructions of or under the direction or control of the
State shall be considered an act of that State under international law.

At this jurisdictional stage, there is no indication that either the courts of Bangladesh or
Petrobangla could manifestly not qualify as state organs at least de facto.

OBJECTIONS RELATED TO THE ADMISSIBILITY OF SAIPEM’S CLAIM
Does the requirement to exhaust local remedies apply?

It is Bangladesh’s submission that Saipem did not exhaust all the local remedies
available against the court decisions issued in relation to the arbitration, in particular
the decision to revoke the arbitrators’ authority (see in particular Tr. J. Il 32:11 et seq.).
Moreover, Bangladesh submits that there is no evidence before the Tribunal that it
would have been futile for Saipem to take such further judicial steps (Tr. J. Il 32:22 et
seq.).

. To the extent that this submission is regarded as a bar to the admissibility of the claim

and/or to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal (Reply J., para. 3.25), the Tribunal cannot
follow it. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention dispenses with the requirement to exhaust
local remedies. It is true that such requirement does apply to claims based on denial of
justice, but this is not a matter of the claim’s admissibility but a substantive

a

152.

153.

6.2

154.

requirement®®. As a matter of principle, exhaustion of local remedies does not apply in
expropriation law®®. Since Saipem’s claim is brought on the ground of expropriation,
there appears to be no ground to deny jurisdiction for the reason that Saipem did not
exhaust the judicial remedies available in Bangladesh.

That said, it is true that in the present case the alleged expropriating authority is a
judicial body. This raises the question whether an analogy should be made between
expropriation and denial of justice when it comes to exhaustion of local remedies.
Bangladesh actually argues that Saipem “is in essence asserting that the Bangladeshi
courts acted in a way to deny it justice” (Reply J., p. 17, para. 3.21).

Whether the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies may be applicable by
analogy to an expropriation by the acts of a court and whether, in the affirmative, the
available remedies were effective are questions to be addressed with the merits of the
dispute. The relevant test for jurisdictional purposes requires that the facts alleged may
constitute a breach of Article 5 of the BIT. Saipem’s contention that the courts of
Bangladesh expropriated its investment and that the available remedies were futile
meets this test. If they were proven, they may constitute breaches of Article 5 of the
BIT.

Does Saipem’s claim constitute an abuse of process?

Bangladesh’s second objection concerning admissibility is that Saipem’s claim
constitutes an abuse of process as it seeks in substance to “enforce an invalid ICC
award using the ICSID jurisdiction” (Tr. J. Il, 34:17-23). More specifically, according to
Bangladesh:

Saipem is asking the ICSID tribunal to rubberstamp the ICC award, thereby
converting it into an ICSID award, in order to bypass the correct method of
enforcement of an ICC award. Saipem is thereby trying to take advantage
of:

(1) the more favourable means of enforcement of an ICSID award;
(2) trying to have a second attempt at enforcing the ICC award;
(3)

) trying to mutate the Dhaka-ICC arbitration mechanism into a
delocalised one to avoid any potential domestic Bangladesh
annulment proceedings.

Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law, pp. 100 et seq. (2005). See also The
Loewen Group, Inc, and Raymond Loewen v. United States of America, Award, 26 June 2003,
para. 153, 42 ILM 811, 836 (2003).

Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, Award, 16 September 2003, paras. 20.30 and 20.33.

42

155.

156.

157.

158.

It is submitted that this would constitute an abuse of the ICSID Convention,
the Arbitration Act 1940 of Bangladesh and the express will of the parties. In
addition, this would be an abuse of the process of this Tribunal as the
arbitral tribunal's duty is to adjudicate upon all issues before it for itself.

Further, ICSID is not an appeals facility: the appropriate appeals mechanism
against the Bangladesh judgment was an appeal to the next court within the
Bangladesh court hierarchy. This was not done on the express choice and
election of Saipem.

(C-Mem., p. 59, references omitted)

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the present proceedings are not aimed at enforcing an award
which is inexistent according to the courts of Bangladesh. The Tribunal understands
Saipem’s case to claim that Bangladesh has frustrated its rights by unlawfully
interfering in the arbitration process. The fact that the indemnity claimed in this
arbitration matches the amounts awarded in the ICC arbitration at least to some extent,
does not mean in and of itself that this Tribunal would “enforce” the ICC Award in the
event of a treaty breach. To avoid any ambiguity, the Tribunal stresses that Saipem’s
claim does not deal with the courts’ regular exercise of their power to rule over
annulment or setting aside proceedings of an award rendered within their jurisdiction. It
deals with the court's alleged wrongful interference.

Finally, Bangladesh invokes “an abuse of process [...] because this whole claim goes
against party autonomy” (Tr. J. Il, 34:17). In substance, Bangladesh insists that, by
choosing a seat of the arbitration in Dhaka, Saipem has accepted the supervisory
powers of the local courts and thus assumed the risk of such courts interfering. It
argues that a determination by this Tribunal not recognizing the nullity of the ICC
Award would be contrary to party autonomy.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, it is true that the choice of Dhaka as seat of the arbitration
implied the acceptance of the jurisdiction of the local courts in aid and control of the
ICC Arbitration and the acceptance of the related litigation risk (Tr. J. Il 27:18-19). Itis
also true that — contrary to Saipem’s submissions (Tr. J. II, 36:25-37:2) — the latter was
not compelled to accept that risk (Tr. J. Il 76:1 et seq.).

But this is not the question here. By accepting jurisdiction, this Tribunal does not
institute itself as control body over the ICC Arbitration, nor as enforcement court, nor
as supranational appellate body for local court decisions. This Tribunal is a treaty
judge. It is called upon to rule exclusively on treaty breaches, whatever the context in
which such treaty breaches arise.

43

159.

160.

161.

Vi.

162.

163.

Costs

Having concluded that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute, the Tribunal
reserves all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and of the
parties for subsequent determination.

This being said, the Tribunal has taken due note of Bangladesh’s complaint that
Saipem did not provide all the copies of the cited authorities thus creating additional
costs for Bangladesh (Tr. J. Il 1:11 et seq.).

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal:

a) Holds that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the
competence of the Tribunal;

b) Dismisses all of the Respondent's objections to the admissibility of the claims,
the jurisdiction of ICSID, and the competence of this Tribunal;

c) By virtue of Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules will make the necessary order for
the continuation of the proceedings on the merits;

d) Reserves all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and of
the parties for subsequent determination.

DETERMINATION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

RELEVANT FACTS AND SAIPEM’S REQUEST

It is common ground that Petrobangla did not repay the Retention Money after the
issuance of the Warranty Bond.

In the Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, Saipem asked for provisional
measures aiming at restraining Bangladesh and at preventing Petrobangla from
pursuing any payment demand based on the Warranty Bond until the outcome of the
present arbitration (see above No. 62).

44

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

The parties subsequently agreed to the Tribunal’s proposal that a decision be deferred
until after the submission of the Counter-Memorial.

Pointing out that Bangladesh acknowledged that “it should have released the
Retention Money against Receipt of the Bond” (C-Mem., p. 27, para. 33), Saipem
submitted that “the natural follow-up of [this statement] would have been that the
Respondent formally state its intention not to seek payment of, and to return, the Bond
and to return the Retention Money and to take all the necessary steps needed to end
the litigation in Bangladesh and in Italy relating to the Bond”. It then invited Bangladesh
to “provide a formal declaration to this effect by June 30, 2006” (Response J., p. 31,
para. 141). Saipem confirmed by letter of 31 May 2006 that its request for provisional
measures was thus suspended.

During the telephone conference held on 26 July 2006, the parties and the Tribunal
agreed as follows in respect of Saipem’s request for provisional measures:

The parties can further address the question of the Claimant's request for
interim relief in their respective briefs and at the hearing. The Tribunal will
decide this issue after the hearing.

(PO#2, Section VII)

In its Reply on Jurisdiction, Bangladesh submitted inter alia that the Tribunal lacked
jurisdiction to order any interim relief, since the Retention Money and the Warranty
Bond were “contractual breaches not amounting to a BIT claim” (Reply J., p. 19, para.
4.4).

In its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Saipem reiterated the request formulated in the
Request for Arbitration and asked the Tribunal to

issue a provisional measure recommending that Bangladesh refrain from
calling on the Warranty Bond and return it to the Claimant together with the
Retention Money without further delay.

(Rejoinder, p. 28, para. 107(ii))

At the end of the hearing, Saipem amended its original request for provisional
measures as follows:
Claimant respectfully submits the following requests for provisional

measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the
ICSID Rules:

. to recommend that the Respondent cause (i) the return of the Bond to
Claimant for cancellation and (ii) the immediate termination of the

45

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

litigation pending in Bangladesh against former Banque Indosuez; in
the subordinate, to cause the suspension of said litigation and to
prevent or avoid encashment of the Bond by Petrobangla until final
adjudication of these proceedings;

- to recommend that the Respondent cause the Retention Money, in
the amount of USD 869,903 plus Taka 10,391,605 plus interest at the
rate of 3.375% per annum from 17 June 1992 to be paid to Claimant
right away; in the subordinate, to recommend that the Retention
Money be put in an escrow account in the name of ICSID or another
neutral party with instructions that payment thereunder be made upon
issuance of the ICSID award adjudicating in favour of Claimant.

RELEVANT PROVISIONS

Provisional measures are governed by the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration
Rules.

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that
the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which
should be taken to preserve the respective interests of either party.

Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides in relevant part as follows:

(1) At any time during the proceedings a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be
recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to
be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is
requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.

(2) | The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request made
pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) | The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on its own
initiative or recommend measures other than those specified in a
request. It may at any time modify or revoke its recommendations.

TRIBUNAL’S POWER TO RECOMMEND PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Having concluded that it has jurisdiction to hear the present dispute, there can be no
doubt that this Tribunal has the power to recommend provisional measures.

RELEVANT STANDARD

It is generally acknowledged that, by providing that the Tribunal may recommend any
provisional measures “if it considers that the circumstances so require”, Article 47 of

46

175.

176.

177.

the ICSID Convention requires that the requested measure be both necessary and
urgent.

Following Pey Casado, Maffezini and CSOB, the Tribunal considers that under Article
47 of the Convention a tribunal enjoys broad discretion when ruling on provisional
measures, but should not recommend provisional measures lightly and should weigh
the parties’ divergent interests in the light of all the circumstances of the case*°.

PARTIES’ POSITIONS
In support of its request, Saipem puts forward the following main arguments:

(i) By sabotaging the ICC Arbitration and by rendering the ICC Award
unenforceable, Bangladesh has deprived Saipem of its right to the Retention
Money and to the restitution of the Warranty Bond which were both awarded by
the ICC Award.

(ii) | Saipem is thus exposed to the risk of a call under the Bond (which was declared
inadmissible by the ICC Tribunal) which would lead to a further expropriation.

(iii) Bangladesh’s actions in relation to the Bond and to the Retention Money are
therefore in themselves direct breaches of the prohibition on expropriation.

Given that the proceedings in Italy and Bangladesh are still pending, Saipem claims to
face the risk

that if Petrobangla succeeds in the action in Bangladesh, the Bangladesh
bank will have to pay and the Bangladesh bank obviously will ask the Italian

“[...] provisional measures authorized by Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the
Arbitration Rules-provisions which contain no indication or exact statement in this regard-can
be extremely diverse and are left to the appreciation of each Arbitration Tribunal.” Victor Pey
Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile (\CSID Case No. ARB/98/25),
Decision on Provisional Measures (25 September 2001), para. 15, English translation of French
and Spanish originals in 6 ICSID Reports 375 (2004), “The imposition of provisional measures
is an extraordinary measure which should not be granted lightly by the Arbitral Tribunal” and
that the party requesting the measures “has the burden to demonstrate why the Tribunal should
grant its application” (Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7), Decision on Request for Provisional Measures (October 28, 1999), p. 3, para. 10)
and in CSOB that “the provisional measures envisaged under Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention are not exceptional measures in the sense that they require more than a showing
that they are necessary to preserve the rights of the parties” (Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka,
A.S. v. The Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Procedural Order No. 3 (November 5,
1998), p. 2)

47

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

bank to be paid by the Italian bank and the Italian bank will ask Saipem in
the current proceedings already instituted in Italy to be paid the amount of
money.

(Tr. J. 1 62:17-21).

In its Reply on Jurisdiction, Bangladesh submits in substance that its admissions on
the Retention Money and on the Warranty Bond were based on an analysis of the
parties’ obligations under the Contract and have thus no bearing in an action for
violation of the BIT (Reply J., p. 19, para. 19). Moreover, Bangladesh claims that it
never called upon the Warranty Bond.

TRIBUNAL’S DETERMINATION

Bangladesh’s argument that its admissions on the Retention Money have no bearing in
an action for violation of the BIT overlooks the fact that the ICC Award disposed of the
Retention Money and of the Warranty Bond and that the claims in this treaty arbitration
relate at least in part to the ICC Award.

Similarly, Bangladesh’s assertion that Petrobangla never requested the payment of the
Bond is difficult to reconcile with the content of the “extend or pay” letter of 18 April
1993 and with the fact that such a payment remains an issue in the pending litigation in
Bangladesh.

Moreover, at the hearing Saipem convincingly showed that there is a risk that it may be
required to pay to the Italian bank the amount that the Bangladeshi bank may have to
pay to Petrobangla.

Hence, in view of the pending litigation in Bangladesh, the Tribunal considers that
there is both necessity and urgency. This finding is reinforced by the facts that, apart
from denying that it called the Warranty Bond, Bangladesh does not contest Saipem’s
contentions and that there is a risk of irreparable harm if Saipem has to pay the
amount of the Warranty Bond.

CONCLUSION

Considering that under the current circumstances there is a risk that Petrobangla may
draw on the Warranty Bond while keeping the Retention Money, that Bangladesh
admitted that either the Retention Money should have been released or the Warranty

48

184.

185.

Bond returned, and taking into account the parties’ respective interests, the Tribunal is
of the opinion that Bangladesh should take the necessary steps to ensure that
Petrobangla does not proceed to encash the Warranty Bond.

Such a recommendation strikes a fair balance between the parties’ interests. Sailpem
is protected from the risk of being required to effect payment to the Italian bank;
Petrobangla is protected from the risks that are inherent in Saipem’s requests to return
the Warranty Bond for cancellation and to terminate or suspend immediately the
litigation pending in Bangladesh.

By contrast, the Tribunal is of the opinion that Saipem’s second request, i.e. the
request for the return of the Retention Money, must be dismissed. Indeed, it is difficult
to see how an immediate payment is necessary and urgent today. While the Tribunal is
prepared to recommend measures preventing an increase of the harm allegedly
suffered by one of the parties, the Tribunal is not inclined to recommend measures
guaranteeing an award in favour of Saipem. Indeed, as correctly put by Bangladesh,
this could be viewed as a de facto enforcement of part of the ICC Award.

RECOMMENDATION

On the basis of the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal hereby recommends that
Bangladesh take the steps necessary to ensure that Petrobangla refrain from
encashing the Warranty Bond No. PG/USD/12/92 issued by Banque Indosuez.

Done on March 21, 2007,

signed signed

Prof. Christoph Schreuer Sir Philip Otton

signed
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

49

