INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES (ICSID): SALINI
COSTRUTORRI S.P.A AND ITALSTRADE S.P.A V. KINGDOM OF MOROCCO
(DECISION ON JURISDICTION)"

July 23, 2001]
+Cite as 42 ILM 609 (2003)+
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
SALINI COSTRUTTORIS.P.A.

ITALSTRADE S.P.A.
Claimants

ve

KINGDOM OF MOROCCO
Respondent

Case No. ARB/00/4
DECISION ON JURISDICTION
Members of the Tribunal
Maitre Robert Briner, President
Maitre Bernardo Cremades, Arbitrator
Professor Ibrahim Fadlallah, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

For the Claimants For the Respondent
Professor Antonio Crivellaro Mr. Ahmed Zejjari
Bonnelli Erede & Pappalardo Head of the Legal Department, Ministry of Infrastructure
Professor Giorgio Sacerdoti Mr. le Batonnier Mohammed Naciri
Casablanca

Maitre Aurélia Antonietti
Maitre Christian Camboulive
Gide Loyrette & Nouel, Paris

FACTS:

1. A dispute has been referred to the Arbitral Tribunal between the following Italian companies:

This document was reproduced and reformatted from the text provided by the law firm, Shearman & Sterling. Translation
by Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi, Shearman & Sterling.

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 609 (2003)

610 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

- Salini Costruttori S.p.A.
- Italstrade S.p.A.
and the Kingdom of Morocco.

2. The Société Nationale des Autoroutes du Maroc (hereinafter "ADM"), incorporated in 1989 as a limited
liability company, builds, maintains and operates highways and various road-works, in accordance with the
Concession Agreement concluded with the Minister of Infrastructure and Professional & Executive Training, acting
on behalf of the State.

In August 1994, within the context of this Agreement, ADM issued an international invitation to tender for the
construction of a highway joining Rabat to Fés. The above-mentioned Italian companies submitted a joint tender for
the construction of section No. 2 Khémisset-Meknés Ouest (West Meknés), which is approximately 50 kilometres
long. The construction of this section was awarded to the Italian companies for a price of MAD 280,702,166.84 and
JPY 3,122,286,949.50.

The negotiations that followed the award of section No. 2 resulted in the signature of Contract 53/95 on October 17,
1995.

3. The two Claimants created the Groupement d' Entreprises Salini-Italstrade (hereinafter "the Group") for the
performance of the contract giving rise to the present dispute. The Group is not a legal entity. As a result, the Italian
companies take part in the present arbitration as joint Claimants.

4. A provisional Taking Over of the work took place on July 31, 1998.

The works were completed on October 14, 1998. The works therefore took 36 months to complete, 4 months longer
than stipulated in the contract (32 months).

The final Taking Over took place on October 26, 1999.

5. A draft of the final account was sent to the Italian companies by ADM. They signed it on March 26, 1999
(with reservations).

On April 29, 1999, the Italian companies sent ADM's Head Engineer a memorandum setting out the reasons for the
reservations put forward: technical reservations, exceptionally bad weather, project upheaval, modifications
concerning the dimensions of the work, extension of contractual time limits, financial burdens, unforeseeable
fluctuations of the value of the Yen. On September 14, 1999, following the rejection of all of their claims by ADM's
Head Engineer, the Italian companies sent a memorandum relating to the final account to the Minister of
Infrastructure, in accordance with Article 51 of the Cahier des Clauses Administratives Générales [Book of General
Administrative Clauses}. No reply was received from either the Minister of Infrastructure or ADM.

PROCEDURE

6. OnMay 1, 2000, the Italian companies filed a Request for Arbitration against the Kingdom of Morocco with
ICSID. The Secretary-General registered the Request on June 13, 2000.

The Italian companies claimed ITL 132'639'617'409, as compensation for damages suffered.

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 610 (2003)

2003) ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) éll

 

7. The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the Parties’ wishes. The Italian companies appointed
Maitre Bernardo Cremades as arbitrator. The Kingdom of Morocco appointed Professor Ibrahim Fadlallah. These two
arbitrators jointly appointed Maitre Robert Briner as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. The Parties agreed that the
arbitration would take place in Paris.

8. The Kingdom of Morocco raised an objection to jurisdiction in a letter sent to ICSID on July 17, 2000. A
preliminary hearing took place on October 27, 2000 in Paris. The Respondent reiterated its objection to jurisdiction
in its memorial of December 20, 2000, to which the Italian companies had to reply by February 2, 2001 at the latest.
This time limit was extended, at the Claimants’ request, until February 15 of the same year. Consequently, the
President of the Arbitral Tribunal extended the deadlines for the submission of the Parties’ reply and rejoinder. The
Respondent submitted its reply on March 16, 2001 and the Claimants their rejoinder on April 16, 2001. A hearing
dealing exclusively with the questions of the admissibility of the Request and the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction was
held in Paris on May 3, 2001.

LEGAL DISCUSSION

 

9. In their Request for Arbitration, the Itali ies base the jurisdiction of ICSID on Article 8 of the Treaty
between the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco and the Government of the Republic of Italy for the reciprocal
promotion and protection of investments, signed on July 18, 1990, which came into force on January 1, 1992 in favour
of Italian investors, by way of letters exchanged between the Ministers of Foreign Affairs for both Governments, dated
November 26, 1991. The Kingdom of Morocco no longer contests the coming into force of this Bilateral Investment
Treaty for the protection of investments.

In fact, during the hearing on jurisdiction, held on May 3, 2001 in Paris, Counsel for the Kingdom of Morocco
acknowledged that "the Parties agree to consider that, in effect, the exchange of letters authorises the early
implementation of the Treaty —not for prior investments (which the text does not say), but authorises an earlier
coming into force of the Treaty in its totality" (transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction of May 3, 2001, p. 2).

10. The Kingdom of Morocco has raised various objections to the referral of this matter to the Arbitral Tribunal.
It maintains, on the basis of Article 8 of the aforementioned Treaty, that the Request is not admissible because it is
premature (I), that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae (II) and that the Italian
companies have waived all jurisdiction other than that of the administrative courts of Rabat (IIT).

L THE INADMISSIBILITY OF THE REQUEST DUE TO ITS PREMATURE NATURE
A. The claims of the Parties

ll. Inits ials on jurisdi and its oral i the Kingdom of M that the Claimants’
Request was premature under Article 8.2 of the Bilateral Treaty. Essentially, it maintains that this provision required:

- that the grounds for complaint contained in the Request for Arbitration be presented in the form of
a request for amicable settlement addressed to the Kingdom of Morocco at least six months before
the Request for Arbitration was filed;

- that these grounds for complaint constitute violations of the Bilateral Treaty, the arbitration

proceedings provided for under Article 8.2 being inseparable from the other provisions of the said
Treaty.

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 611 (2003)

612 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

12. This second argument concerns the question of the ratione materiae jurisdiction of the Tribunal. As a result,
it will be assessed during the examination of this issue. With regard to the assertion that the Request is premature, the
only pertinent point to ascertain is whether the Italian companies actually made the request for amicable settlement
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 8.

13. Concerning the first argument, the Respondent alleges that the Italian companies' claims were sent to ADM's
Chief Executive Officer (Head Engineer) and the Minister of Infrastructure, in his capacity as ADM's President and
not that of Minister. Thus, these claims could not have been transmitted to the Kingdom of Morocco.

The Italian companies contend that such a request was made and produce the following documents in support of this
assertion:

- memorandum setting out claims relating to the final account, presented to the Minister of
Infrastructure and President of ADM, on September 14, 1999;

- letter sent to the Ambassador of Morocco in Rome, dated April 10, 1998;
- letter sent to the Prime Minister of Morocco, dated May 15, 1998.
B. Decision

14, In light of the documents exchanged between the Parties and their oral presentations, in order to rule on the
premature nature of the Request for Arbitration, the Arbitral Tribunal must determin

 

a) a request for amicable settlement of disputes arising from the contract at issue was submitted to the
Kingdom of Morocco;

b) the request for amicable settlement related to the claims formulated in the Request for Arbitration;
©) a period of at least six months passed between the submission of the two requests.
a) Wasa request of the di ising ii ‘ion with

 

the contract submitted to the Kingdom of Morocco?
15. Article 8 of the Bilateral Treaty provides that:
"1)  Alldisputes or differences, including disputes related to the amount of compensation due in
the event of expropriation, nationalisation, or similar measures, between a Contracting Party and
an investor of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of the said investor on the

territory of the first Contracting Party should, if possible, be resolved amicably.

2) If the disputes cannot be resolved in an amicable manner within six months of the date of the
request, presented in writing, the investor in question may submit the dispute either:

a) to the competent court of the Contracting Party concerned;

b) to an ad hoc tribunal, in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the UN
Commission on International Trade Law;

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 612 (2003)

2003] ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 613

 

c) to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), for the

ication of the arbitratic provided by the i Convention

of March 18, 1965 on the settlement of investment disputes between States and
nationals of other States.

 

3) The two Contracting Parties shall refrain from handling, through diplomatic channels, all
questions pertaining to an arbitration or to pending legal proceedings, as long as these proceedings
have not come to an end and that one of the said Parties has not complied with the judgment of the
arbitral tribunal or the designated ordinary court, within the term for enforcement fixed by the
judgment or to be otherwise established, on the basis of the rules of international or national law
applicable in the case."

 

16. The di dd .d by these provisi those in which i i ily an investor
and a State. The compulsory attempt to come to an amicable settlement imposed by Article 8.2 applies to such parties.
Therefore, the Italian companies, Italian investors, must have tried to reach an amicable settlement with the Kingdom
of Morocco.

17. Itis not disputed that the contract concluded between ADM and the Italian companies is a public procurement
contract.

Article 2.2.1 of the CCAP provides:

"Moreover, the Contractor is subjected to the following general texts which are not contained in the
Project File:

The Cahier des Clauses Administratives Générales (CCAG) to be applied to projects
undertaken on behalf of the Ministry of Public Works and Communications approved by
Royal Decree n° 209-65 of 23 Joumada II 1385 (October 19, 1965) made applicable to
public authorities by Royal Decree n° 151-66 of 29 Safar 1386 (June 18, 1966), except for
derogations expressly stipulated in the present Cahier des Clauses Administrative
Particuliéres [CCAP]."

Article 18, paragraph 1 of the CCAP provides that:

"Incase of disputes between the Owner and the Contractor, recourse shall be made to the procedure
provided for by Articles 50 and 51 of the CCAG."

Article 18 does not create an exception to the CCAG provisions; on the contrary, it explicitly refers to them.

Under the title "Representation of the Owner", Article 23 of the CCAP provides that: "In all the general texts
mentioned in Article 2, the functions are attributed as follows:

- Minister — President

- Head Engineer — Chief Executive Officer"
18. The Kingdom of Morocco rightly emphasises the fact that the CCAP, a contractual document whose purpose
is to govern the relations between ADM and the Italian companies, cannot amount to the attribution of the function
of President of ADM to the Minister. But, it cannot infer that the CCAP has removed the Contractor's claims from

the Minister's control to place them under the distinct control of the President of ADM. The confusion surrounding
the positions held by the Minister, which results from the organisation of structures of implementation put in place

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 613 (2003)

614 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

by the Moroccan Authorities regarding highways, cannot be invoked to uphold the premise that what the Minister was
aware of in one of his capacities, as can be implied from the reference to Article 51 CCAG, was unknown to him in
another capacity.

19. The Tribunal notes that Article 8.2 of the Treaty does not set out any procedure to be followed in relation to
reaching an amicable settlement of the dispute between the two Parties. This Article only fixes a term of six months
during which the Parties should try to resolve their disputes amicably. The mission of this Tribunal is not to set strict
tules that the Parties should have followed; the Tribunal is satisfied to determine if it is possible to deduce from the
entirety of the Parties' actions whether, while respecting the term of six months, the Claimants actually took the
necessary and appropriate steps to contact the relevant authorities in view of reaching a settlement, thereby putting
an end to their dispute.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the various above-mentioned documents constitute a written request aimed
toward the amicable settlement of the dispute and satisfy the requirement set out in the Bilateral Treaty in relation to
the addressee of the request.

b) Did the request try to put an amicable end to the disputes submitted to the
Arbitral Tribunal?

20. The Tribunal considers that the attempt to reach an amicable settlement should essentially include the
existence of grounds for complaint and the desire to resolve these matters out-of-court. It need not be complete or
detailed.

21. The Tribunal considers that the above-mentioned condition is fulfilled in the present case: the various
documents constitute a "written request aimed toward the amicable settlement of the dispute," referring to the grounds
for complaint raised in the current proceedings; furthermore, these documents allowed or, at least, should have
allowed the Kingdom of Morocco to become aware of the dispute and to take the necessary steps to enable the
resolution of the dispute.

c) Was the six-month time limit respected?
22. The Request for Arbitration was submitted on May 4, 2000, 8 months after the transmission of the
memorandum setting out the claims relating to the final account, presented to the Minister of Infrastructure and
President of ADM on September 14, 1999. This last document is the most recent of those considered by this Tribunal

as constituting an attempt to reach an amicable settlement prior to arbitration.

23. In conclusion, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the ground for complaint alleging that the Request for
Arbitration was premature is not founded in light of the requirements of Article 8.2 of the Bilateral Treaty.

t. OBJECTIONS TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
24. The Kingdom of Morocco raised objections as to the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction, founded on the alleged
waiver, from its point of view, by the Italian companies of the option of choosing the forum under Article 8 of the
Bilateral Treaty (1), as well as a lack of jurisdiction ratione personae (2) and ratione materiae (3).
1 The waiver of the option of choosing the forum under Article 8 of the Bilateral Treaty.
25. The Kingdom of Morocco considers that the Italian companies are bound by Article 18 CCAP that refers to

a procedure provided for by Articles 50 and 51 of the CCAG, which gives the courts of Rabat jurisdiction over
disputes arising from the performance of the contract for services.

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 614 (2003)

2003] ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 615

 

26. For their part, the Italian companies maintain that the consent given by the Kingdom of Morocco, and by
themselves, to ICSID jurisdiction by way of the Bilateral Treaty should prevail over the contractual acceptance of
another forum. Thus, submitting the matter to the courts of Rabat would not imply a waiver of ICSID jurisdiction,

i since the abs i referral to the jinistrative courts respects the requirements flowing from
the public nature of th , which calls for the application of the provisions of the Cahier des Clauses
Administratives and, consequently, of Article 52 of the CCAG.

27. Generally, ICSID jurisdiction arises from the consent of the Parties to the dispute; that is to say, a Contracting
State and the national of another Contracting State.

Concerning the formal conditions required in order to have valid consent, Article 25.1 of the Washington Convention
(hereinafter "the Convention") states only one condition: that the consent be given in writing. Regarding the moment
at which consent must be expressed, one may deduce from the Convention that it must have been given prior to the
filing of a request for conciliation or arbitration, since this request must, in order to be registered, state the date and
the nature of the documents relating to the consent of the Parties (G.R. Delaume, Le Centre International pour le
réglement des Différends relatifs aux Investissements (CIRDI), in JDI 1982, p. 775 et seq.).

The consent to which Article 25.1 of the Convention refers may have three sources: a clause contained in a contract
concluded between the State and the investor; national law, usually a Code or an Act on investments; or international
law, by way of a clause contained in a bilateral or multilateral agreement.

Article 8 of the Bilateral Treaty provides that:

"2) Ifthe disputes cannot be resolved in an amicable manner within six months of the date of the
request, presented in writing, the investor in question may submit the dispute either:

a) to the competent court of the Contracting Party concerned;

b) to an ad hoc tribunal, in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the UN
Commission on International Trade Law;

c) to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), for the
application of the arbitration procedures provided by the Washington Convention
of March 18, 1965 on the settlement of investment disputes between States and
nationals of other States."

The necessary and sufficient nature of the consent expressed by means of a forum-selection clause, such as the above-
mentioned clause, was acknowledged in the Asian Agricultural Products Ltd (AAPL) vs. Republic of Sri Lanka award
(Yearbook Commercial Arbitration XVII (1992), p. 103).

In summary, Article 8 paragraph 2(c) constitutes a State's unilateral engagement toward the national State of the
investor to submit itself to ICSID jurisdiction as Respondent against the foreign investor who will have chosen to
submit the case to the Centre.

In light of these considerations, the notification of a Request for Arbitration to ICSID by the Claimants constitutes
valid proof of their consent to the Centre's jurisdiction, among those set forth by Article 8 of the Agreement.

 

As the jurisdiction of the inistrati ‘annot be opted for, th to ICSID jurisdiction described above
shall prevail over the contents of Article 52 of the CCAG, since this Article cannot be taken to be a clause truly

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 615 (2003)

616 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

extending the scope of jurisdiction and covered by the principle of the Parties’ autonomy. Thus, the reasoning
proposed by the Kingdom of Morocco, as expressed in its observations of July 2, 2001, p. 2 et seq., according to
which the Claimants could no longer choose to submit the dispute to ICSID jurisdiction due to their participation in
a dispute-settlement process in accordance with Articles 50 and 51 CCAG, cannot be sustained.

2) Ratione personae jurisdiction
A. The claims of the Parties

28. The Kingdom of Morocco alleges that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks ratione personae jurisdiction because the
action was founded on acts attributed to ADM, which is nota State entity. ADM is a private legal entity, with its own
assets. The fact that the State exercises its rights as shareholder and licensor should not have any effect on the legal
autonomy of ADM. The nature of the p' contract, which follows from any

works contract within the public domain, should have no influence on ADM's nature, nor should the levying of a
special tax, the benefit of which may be granted to public or private legal entities.

29. The Italian companies allege that ADM is a public legal entity, notwithstanding its incorporation as a limited
liability company. The composition of its assets and its Board of Directors at the time of its creation and the direct
involvement of the Minister of inall decisi king relating to th establish the
active participation of the State. The said construction contract is governed by the CCAG, as are all the works carried
out on behalf of the State, and falls under the jurisdiction of the administrative courts, which logically implies that
it is a public procurement contract. ADM is directly or indirectly financed by the Moroccan State. The road network
construction projects are accounted for by the State. Thus, being a public entity bound by a public procurement
contract, all the conditions required to assimilate ADM to the State are satisfied.

 

B. Decision

30. Since the claims of the Italian companies are being directed against the State and are founded on the violation
of the Bilateral Treaty, it is not necessary, in order to determine whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction, to know
whether ADM is a State entity. However, as this issue has been discussed at length by the Parties and may possibly,
as the case may be, have an influence on the merits of the case, the Tribunal considers that it is of use to rule on the
matter in order to satisfy the legitimate expectations of the Parties.

31. Article 25.1 of the Convention provides that:

"The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute [ . . . ], between a Contracting State
(or any it bdivision or agency of a Ce ing State desi to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State... ."

Neither the Convention nor the Bilateral Treaty gives the slightest indication of what should be understood by
"Contracting State". The reference made to "any constituent subdivision" or "agency of a Contracting State" is of no
importance in this regard, because ADM does not fulfil the conditions required by the Washington Convention to be
aparty to th Generally, any company led by the State
or by State institutions, whether it has a legal personality or not, is considered to be a State- owned company. (Various
authors support this definition: L.J. Bouchez, The Prospects for International Arbitration: Disputes Between States
and Private Enterprises: 8 Journal of International Arbitration p. 81-115 (1, 1991). —K.-H. Bockstiegel, Arbitration
and State Enterprises: Survey on the National and International State of Law and Practice: Arbitration International,
vol. I, n° 2, 1985, p. 195-199).

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 616 (2003)

2003] ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 617

 

In order to determine the degree of control and participation of a State in a company, the Tribunal, referring to an
ICSID award rendered in a case between Emilio Agustin Maffezini and the Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7), considers that it must take into account the international rules governing the liability of States. The
assessment of the degree of State control and participation in a company is based on two criteria: the first, structural,
in other words, related to the structure of the company and, in particular, to its shareholders; the other, functional,
related to the objectives of the company in question.

32. From a structural point of view, the Tribunal considers that:

— _ ADMisacommercial company incorporated as a limited liability company, in accordance with the
Act governing limited liability companies of June 2, 1989, registered with the Trade Register since
August 3, 1989, thereby having its own legal personality.

- ADM's share capital is held in the following manner: the Treasury holds a participation of 77.79%;
the participation of public establishments is 10.57%; that of banks and financial institutions is 5.17%;
that of i ies is 3%; that of ‘ial and industrial ies is 2.67%; and lastly,
that of research departments is 0.81%.

 

Thus, the Kingdom of Morocco, through the medium of the Treasury and various public entities, holds at least 89%
of ADM.

- The functioning and management of ADM are governed by Article 20 of its Memorandum and
Articles of Association:

"The company is managed by a Board made up of at least five members and at most
twenty, appointed by the Ordinary General Meeting or co-opted by the Board."

Moreover, Article 35 of the Memorandum and Articles of Association states that:

"General Meetings are made up of all the shareholders, irrespective of the quantity of their
shares, as long as amounts that are due have been fully paid up."

In virtue of what has been set out above, the majority stake of the Moroccan State in ADM's capital significantly
determines the extent of its representation within the General Meeting, and also within the Board of Directors.
Persuasive evidence of this can be found in reading the Minutes of the Board of Directors' Meeting of March 18, 1998
(Exhibit M 43), which lists its members. Among these are notably the Minister of Infrastructure, who is also President
of the company at the same time, the Secretary General of the Ministry of Infrastructure, the Director of Highways
and Road Traffic, the Head of the Moroccan Port Authorities, the President of the Board of the National Bank for
Economic Development, the Director of the Budget, all of whom depend upon the Ministry of Economy and Finance,
etc.

- The majority stake of the Moroccan State in the company's Board of Directors translates into control
de facto of the latter since, in accordance with Article 27 of ADM's Memorandum and Articles of
Association:

“The Board of Directors has widespread powers to act in the name of the Company and to
authorise all acts or transactions in relation to its object, to the sole exclusion of acts
expressly reserved for the General Meeting by the Memorandum and Articles of Association
or by Law."

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’1 Legal Materials 617 (2003)

618 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS. [VoL. 42:

 

- Finally, two other facts reflect the obvious interest that the Moroccan State has in the functioning and
management of ADM. First of all, the Minutes indicate that the post of President of the Board of
Directors should be held by the natural person holding the title of Minister of Infrastructure at that
time. In addition, the Tribunal recalls that in 1995 it was the Minister of Infrastructure and
Professional & Executive Training who, in his capacity as ADM's President, put out the invitation
to tender that gave rise to the signing of the contract at issue in the present arbitration. Secondly, the
Tribunal draws attention to ADM's practice of forwarding a copy of the Minutes of its Board of
Directors’ meetings to the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Morocco, as well as to the Secretariat
of the Government (Exhibit G 14).

Consequently, from a structural point of view, one cannot deny that ADM is an entity controlled and managed by the
Moroccan State through the medium of the Minister of Infrastructure and various public organs.

33. From a functional point of view; in other words, if one now looks to the role and the functions carried out by
ADM:

- In accordance with its Memorandum and Articles of Association, "ADM's main activity is the
construction, maintenance and operation of the highways and communication routes of a large
dimension, granted by the State."

Thus, it is clear that ADM's main object is to accomplish tasks that are under State control (building, managing and
operating of assets falling under the province of the public utilities responding to the structural needs of the Kingdom
of Morocco with regard to infrastructure and efficient communication networks).

34, The administrative nature of the contract and of the laws that govern it corroborate the view of the Tribunal.
The provisions of the CCAG, applicable to public procurement contracts performed on behalf of the Ministry of
Public Works and Communications and approved by two royal decrees, as well as the conditions and methods of
concluding contracts, and also specific provisions related to their control and management, provided for by Royal
Decree n° 2-98-482 of 11 Ramadan 1419, illustrate what has previously been said.

35. Lastly, the Tribunal notes that the fact that a State may act through the medium of a company having its own
legal personality is no longer unusual if one considers the extraordinary expansion of public authority activity. In
order to perform its obligations, and at the same time take into account the sometimes diverging interests that the
private economy protects, the State uses a varied spectrum of modes of organisation, among which are in particular
semi-public companies, similar to ADM, a company mostly held by the State which, considering the size of its
participation (over 80%), directs and manages it. All these factors resolutely imprint a public nature on the said
company.

Thus, since ADM is an entity, from a structural as well as a functional point of view, which is distinguishable from
the State solely on account of its legal personality, the Tribunal, in spite of the observations of July 2, 2001 made by
the Kingdom of Morocco, concludes that the Italian companies have shown that ADM is a State company, acting in
the name of the Kingdom of Morocco.

3) Ratione materiae jurisdiction

A. The claims of the Parties

36. The Kingdom of Morocco submits that the ratione materiae jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal is dependent
on:

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 618 (2003)

2003) ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 619

 

a) the existence of an investment, both within the meaning of the Bilateral Treaty as well as that of the
Washington Convention;

b) _ the existence of claims founded on the violation of the Bilateral Treaty.
a) The notion of investment

37. With regard to the Bilateral Treaty, the Italian companies consider that the contract at issue is an investment
within the meaning of Articles 1(c) and 1(e), which deal with "rights to any contractual benefit having an economic
value" and “any right of an economic nature conferred by law or by contract." The dispute arose out of the non-
performance of the said contract. The contract gives the Claimants a right of an economic nature, the right to damages.

38. The Kingdom of Morocco alleges that, considered in isolation, these provisions dilute the notion of
investment into a broader notion of economic rights. Articles 1(c) and 1(e) should, therefore, be read in conjunction
with paragraph | of Article 1, which refers to the laws and regulations of the host State of the investment. Therefore,
it is Moroccan law that should define the notion of investment.

According to Decree n° 2-98-482 of December 30, 1998, the transaction in question should be characterized as a
contract for services and not as an investment contract.

The Italian companies characterize the said contract as an investment pursuant to the Bilateral Treaty.

They consider that the reference to the laws and regulations of the host State only relate to the means of realising the
i and not to its definition. The notion of i should, therefore, not be limited by reference to the laws
and regulations referred to in Article 1 paragraph 1, but by reference to Article 1(g). This provision requires that the
rights referred to notably in Articles 1(c) and 1(e) should have been the object of contracts approved by the competent
authorities. This condition would seem to be satisfied in the present case. The Kingdom of Morocco contests this.

 

39. With regard to the Washington Convention, the Kingdom of Morocco alleges that the contract in question
does not constitute an investment within the meaning of the said Convention.

40. The Italian companies allege the applicability of the Convention at the same time as the characterization of
the contract at issue as an investment in light of the said Convention.

b) The grounds for the claims
41. The Kingdom of Morocco considers that the grounds for complaint formulated by the Italian companies do
not relate to violations of the Bilateral Treaty, but mere contractual breaches. Moreover, it considers that the
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal could only arise from alleged violations of the Bilateral Treaty, its consent to
ICSID arbitration only having been expressed in the said Treaty.

42. The Italian companies argue that contractual failures as well as violations of the Bilateral Treaty may be
submitted to ICSID arbitration.

B. Decision
a) On the existence of an investment
1) Within the meaning of the Bilateral Treaty
43. The protection of investments is the basis for the option of choosing the forum stipulated in Article 8.2 of the

Bilateral Treaty. This Article, therefore, seeks to define the investments that come under the protection of the Bilateral
Treaty.

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 619 (2003)

620 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

44. However, insofar as the option of jurisdiction has been exercised in favour of ICSID, the rights in dispute
must also constitute an investment pursuant to Article 25 of the Washington Convention. The Arbitral Tribunal,
therefore, is of the opinion that its jurisdiction depends upon the existence of an investment within the meaning of
the Bilateral Treaty as well as that of the Convention, in accordance with the case law.

Various arbitral tribunals have ruled in this manner in rendering awards in cases in which the notion of investment
was at issue (cf: Award of March 9, 1998 in the Fedax N.Y. vs. the Republic of Venezuela case: JDI 1999, p. 294 et
seq.).

45, Article 1 of the Bilateral Treaty provides that:
"Pursuant to the present Agreement,
1. the term "investment" designates all categories of assets invested, after the coming into force
of the present agreement, by a natural or legal person, including the Government of a Contracting
Party, on the territory of the other Contracting Party, in accordance with the laws and regulations

of the aforementioned party. In particular, but in no way exclusively, the term" investment" includes:

a) chattels and real estate, as well as any other property rights such as mortgages,
privileges, pledges, usufructs, related to the investment;

b) shares, securities and bonds or other rights or interests and securities of the State
or public entities;

c) capitalised debts, including reinvested income, as well as rights to any contractual
benefit having an economic value;

d) copyright, trademark, patents, technical methods and other intellectual and
industrial property rights, know-how, commercial secrets, commercial brands and
goodwill;

e) any right of an economic nature conferred by law or by contract, and any licence

or concession granted in compliance with the laws and regulations in force,
including the right of prospecting, extraction and exploitation of natural resources;

fl capital and additional contributions of capital used for the maintenance and/or the
accretion of the investment;

8) the elements mentioned in (c), (d) and (e) above must be the object of contracts
approved by the competent authority."

The Parties, therefore, agreed upon a number of non-exhaustive hypotheses that they considered to be investments.

45. The construction contract creates a right to a “contractual benefit having an economic value" for the
Contractor, mentioned in Article 1(c). The Contractor also benefits from a "right of an economic nature conferred
. by contract" dealt with by Article 1(e). Moreover, the Respondent does not deny that the rights of the
Italian companies are of the same nature as those referred to in (c) and (e) of Article 1.

 

46. The Tribunal cannot follow the Kingdom of Morocco in its view that paragraph | of Article 1 refers to the
law of the host State for the definition of "investment". In focusing on "the categories of invested assets (...) in

 

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 620 (2003)

2003] ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 621

 

accordance with the laws and regulations of the aforementioned party," this provision refers to the validity of the
investment and not to its definition. More specifically, it seeks to prevent the Bilateral Treaty from protecting
investments that should not be protected, particularly because they would be illegal.

Yet, in the present case, the Claimants took part in the tender process in conformity with the legal rules applicable
to invitations to tender. At the end of this procedure, they also won the bid and concluded the corresponding contract
for services in conformity with the laws in force at that time.

Thus, whether one looks to the pre-contractual stage or that corresponding to the performance of the contract for
services, it has never been shown that the Italian companies infringed the laws and regulations of the Kingdom of
Morocco,

47. To be considered as investments, the rights enumerated under letters (c) and (e) "must be the object of
contracts approved by the competent authority" under the terms of Article 1(g).

The Bilateral Treaty does not indicate who the competent authority is, this being likely to vary according to the
contract in question. The competent authority is determined according to the laws and regulations of the State on the
territory of which the investments are made (cf. Article 1, paragraph 1).

48. The Tribunal considers that the contract in question was indeed the object of an authorisation from the
competent authority for the following reasons:

- The allocation of the contract to the Italian companies occurred in accordance with the rules and
procedure fixed by the President of ADM, acting in virtue of the powers conferred on him by the
Board of Directors of this company. As previously mentioned, no infringement of the laws and
regulations of the Kingdom of Morocco has been alleged with regard to this phase. The Tribunal
points out, without having to determine if ADM was or was not a mere entity of the Moroccan State,
that in its capacity of licensor, the Ministry of Infrastructure approved the conclusion of public
procurement contracts by ADM in accordance with the mandatory procedure, which was not alleged
to have been violated.

- The different stages leading to the signature of the construction contract involved various
interventions by the authorities concerned. Thus, the invitation to tender was put out by the Minister
of Infrastructure and Professional & Executive Training, President of ADM; the presentation of the
bid was made to ADM's Chief Executive Officer; the evaluation and awarding of this bid were
carried out by a commission chaired by ADM's Chief Executive Officer and composed of various
public organs; and lastly, it was ADM's Chief Executive Officer, as Owner, who signed the
construction contract for the project at issue.

49. As a result, the Tribunal considers that the condition of Article 1(g) is satisfied. The contract concluded
between ADM and the Italian companies is an investment within the meaning of the Bilateral Treaty. The option of
choosing the forum contained in Article 8.2 could, therefore, be exercised in favour of arbitral proceedings under the
auspices of ICSID.

2) Within the meaning of the Washington Convention
50. ICSID jurisdiction is determined by Article 25 of the Washington Convention which stipulates that:

"The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of relation to an
i between a C ing State (or any il ivision or agency of a Ce i

 

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 621 (2003)

622 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VoL. 42:

 

State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the
Parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre."

51. No definition of investment is given by the Convention. The two Parties recalled that such a definition had
seemed unnecessary to the representatives of the States that negotiated it. Indeed, as indicated in the Report of the
Executive Directors on the Convention:

"No attempt was made to define the term "investment" given the essential requirement of consent by
the parties, and the mechanism through which Contracting States can make known in advance, if they
so desire, the classes of disputes which they would or would not consider submitting to the Centre
(art, 25(4))."

52. The Tribunal notes that there have been almost no cases where the notion of investment within the meaning
of Article 25 of the Convention was raised. However, it would be inaccurate to consider that the requirement that a
dispute be "in direct relation to an investment" is diluted by the consent of the Contracting Parties. To the contrary,
ICSID case law and legal authors agree that the investment requirement must be respected as an objective condition
of the jurisdiction of the Centre (cf. in particular, the commentary by E. Gaillard, in JDI 1999, p. 278 et seg., who
cites the award rendered in 1975 in the Alcoa Minerals vs. Jamaica case as well as several other authors).

The criteria to be used for the definition of an investment pursuant to the Convention would be easier to define if there
were awards denying the Centre's jurisdiction on the basis of the transaction giving rise to the dispute. With the
exception of a decision of the Secretary General of ICSID refusing to register a request for arbitration dealing with
a dispute arising out of a simple sale (/.F.I. Shihata and A.R. Parra, The Experience of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes: ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Law Journal, vol. 14, n° 2, 1999, p. 308.), the
awards at hand only very rarely turned on the notion of investment. Notably, the first decision only came in 1997
(Fedax case, cited above). The criteria for characterization are, therefore, derived from cases in which the transaction
giving rise to the dispute was considered to be an investment without there ever being a real discussion of the issue
in almost all the cases.

The doctrine generally considers that investment infers: contributions, a certain duration of performance of the
contract and a participation in the risks of the transaction (cf. commentary by E. Gaillard, cited above, p. 292). In
reading the Convention's preamble, one may add the contribution to the economic development of the host State of
the investment as an additional condition.

In reality, these various elements may be interdependent. Thus, the risks of the transaction may depend on the
contributions and the duration of performance of the contract. As a result, these various criteria should be assessed
globally even if, for the sake of reasoning, the Tribunal considers them individually here.

53. The contributions made by the Italian companies are set out and assessed in their written submissions. It is
not disputed that they used their know-how, that they provided the necessary equipment and qualified personnel for
the accomplishment of the works, that they set up the production tool on the building site, that they obtained loans
enabling them to finance the purchases necessary to carry out the works and to pay the salaries of the workforce, and
finally that they agreed to the issuing of bank guarantees, in the form of a provisional guarantee fixed at 1.5% of the
total sum of the tender, then, at the end of the tender process, in the form of a definite guarantee fixed at 3% of the
value of the contract in dispute. The Italian companies, therefore, made contributions in money, in kind, and in
industry.

54, Although the total duration for the performance of the contract, in accordance with the CCAP, was fixed at
32 months, this was extended to 36 months. The transaction, therefore, complies with the minimal length of time

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 622 (2003)

2003) ICSID: SALINI ET AL. V. MOROCCO (DECISION ON JURISDICTION) 623

 

upheld by the doctrine, which is from 2 to 5 years (D. Carreau, Th. Flory, P. Juillard, Droit International
Economique: 3” ed., Paris, LGDJ, 1990, p. 558-578. —C. Schreurer, Commentary on the ICSID Convention: ICSID
Review-FILJ, vol. 11, 1996, 2, p. 318-493).

5S. With regard to the risks incurred by the Italian companies, these flow from the nature of the contract at issue.
The Claimants, in their reply memorial on jurisdiction, gave an exhaustive list of the risks taken in the performance
of the said contract. Notably, among others, the risk associated with the prerogatives of the Owner permitting him to
prematurely put an end to the contract, to impose variations within certain limits without changing the manner of
fixing prices; the risk consisting of the potential increase in the cost of labour in case of modification of Moroccan
law; any accident or damage caused to property during the performance of the works; those risks relating to problems
of co-ordination possibly arising from the simultaneous performance of other projects; any unforeseeable incident
that could not be considered as force majeure and which, therefore, would not give rise to a right to compensation;
and finally those risks related to the absence of any compensation in case of increase or decrease in volume of the
work load not exceeding 20% of the total contract price.

56. It does not matter in this respect that these risks were freely taken. It also does not matter that the
remuneration of the Contractor was not linked to the exploitation of the completed work. A construction that stretches
out over many years, for which the total cost cannot be established with certainty in advance, creates an obvious risk
for the Contractor.

357. Lastly, the contribution of the contract to the economic development of the Moroccan State cannot seriously
be questioned. In most countries, the construction of infrastructure falls under the tasks to be carried out by the State
or by other public authorities. It cannot be seriously contested that the highway in question shall serve the public
interest. Finally, the Italian companies were also able to provide the host State of the investment with know-how in
relation to the work to be accomplished.

58. Consequently, the Tribunal considers that the contract concluded between ADM and the Italian companies
constitutes an investment pursuant to Articles 1 and 8 of the Bilateral Treaty concluded between the Kingdom of
Morocco and Italy on July 18, 1990 as well as Article 25 of the Washington Convention.

b) On the grounds for the claims

59. Article 8 of the Bilateral Treaty offers the option of choosing the forum with respect to:

“All disputes or differences, including disputes related to the amount of compensation due in the
event of expropriation, nationalisation, or similar measures, between a Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of the said investor on the territory
of the first Contracting Party..."

The terms of Article 8 are very general. The reference to expropriation and nationalisation measures, which are
matters coming under the unilateral will of a State, cannot be interpreted to exclude a claim based in contract from
the scope of application of this Article.

60. However, the Tribunal considers that its scope of application regarding the nature of disputes is limited as
to the persons concerned. In the case where the State has organised a sector of activity through a distinct legal entity,
be it a State entity, it does not necessarily follow that the State has accepted a priori that the jurisdiction offer
contained in Article 8 should bind it with respect to contractual breaches committed by this entity.

 

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 623 (2003)

624 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [Vot. 42:

 

61. In other words, Article 8 compels the State to respect the jurisdiction offer in relation to violations of the
Bilateral Treaty and any breach of a contract that binds the State directly. The jurisdiction offer contained in Article 8
does not, however, extend to breaches of a contract to which an entity other than the State is a named party.

62. But, this restriction of the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction only applies to claims that are based solely on a
breach of contract.

However, the Arbitral Tribunal retains jurisdiction in relation contract that itute, at the same

time, a violation of the Bilateral Treaty by the State.

The Italian companies have expressly specified in their Request for Arbitration that "the claims submitted to the
present arbitration [ . . . ] also include claims addressed directly to the Government of Morocco and which relate to
the infringement of the Contractor's rights as a foreign investor according to the international regulation of foreign
investments (the so-called "treaty claims")."

63. The claims of the Italian companies, to the extent that they correspond to violations of the Bilateral Treaty,
are included within the ambit of the Arbitral Tribunal's jurisdiction, It will be for the Claimants to establish the merits
of these claims in the subsequent stages of the arbitral proceedings.

64. The Tribunal reserves the question of costs and arbitration fees.

FOR THE ABOVE REASONS

The Tribunal declares that it has jurisdiction over the Italian companies' claims, as they are formulated, but specifies
that it does not have jurisdiction over mere breaches of the contract concluded between the Italian companies and
ADM that do not simultaneously constitute a violation of the Bilateral Treaty.

July 16, 2001

Maitre Robert Briner
Maitre Bernardo Cremades Professor Ibrahim Fadlallah

HeinOnline -- 42 Int’’l Legal Materials 624 (2003)

