Translated by Thames Translation
Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com

Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

Federal Tribunal [Logo]

4P.114/2006/bie

Composition

Parties

Subject-matter

Judgment of 7 September 2006

I. Civil division

Federal Judge Corboz, President,
Federal judges Klett, Rottenberg Liatowitsch, Kiss, Mathys,

Court secretary Widmer.

Czech Republic, acting through the Ministry of Finance,
Letenska 15, CZ-118 10 Prague 1, Appellant,
represented by Prof. Dr. Franz Kellerhals and Dr.

Bernhard Berger, advocate,
P.O. Box 6916, 3001 Bern,

against

Saluka Investments BV,

Locatellikade 1, NL-1076 AZ Amsterdam, Appellee,
represented by attorney Matthias Scherer, Rue de la
Mairie 35, Postfach 6569, 1211 Geneva 6, Arbitral
Tribunal, UNCITRAL, Geneva.

Article 85(c) of the Federal Tribunal Act; Article 190(2)(b)

PILA (International arbitral tribunal; Jurisdiction),

Public law appeal against the partial award of the Geneva
Arbitral Tribunal of 17 March 2006.

0)

2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(BeTRANSLATION
Factual background:

A.

A.a After the communist era, at the beginning of the 1990s, the government of the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic (Czechoslovakia) began to privatise the country’s centralised banking
sector. These efforts were continued by the government of the Czech Republic (Appellant) after the

separation of Czechoslovakia into two independent states on 31 December 1992.

By about 1994, the distinct segments of the formerly centralised banking system which revolved
around the State Bank of Czechoslovakia had separated into four large State-owned commercial
banks which dominated the banking sector in the Czech Republic These so-called “Big Four banks”
(hereinafter also referred to as the “Big Banks’) included Investicni a Postovni banka a.s. (IPB),
Ceska sporitelna, a.s. (CS), Komercni banka, a.s. (KB) and Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s.
(CSOB). The Czech banking sector was administered and regulated by the Czech National Bank
(CNB).

Because of the strategic importance of the Big Four banks, the Czech government retained
significant minority stakes in these institutions as part of the first wave of privatisation in the
economy (the mass privatisation process), which was completed in 1995. Their final privatisation

took place between 1998 and 2001 through the sale of the State’s shares to private investors.

In an agreement dated 8 March 1998, the Czech State, acting through the Czech National
Property Fund (NPF), sold the block of shares it held in IPB (around 36% of the share capital) to
Nomura Europe plc, a company incorporated in Great Britain and belonging to the Japanese
financial group Nomura, which already held a 10% stake in IPB. This transaction completed the

first full privatisation of one of the “Big Four” banks.

Nomura Europe plc sold its stake in IPB on 2 October 1998 and 24 February 2000 in two
tranches to its wholly controlled subsidiary Saluka Investments BV incorporated under Dutch

law (hereinafter “Appellee, Saluka”).

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

A.b The Big Four banks were of comparable strategic importance to the Czech economy as a
whole. However, they all suffered from a high proportion of outstanding debt and non-
performing loans. The main reason for this lay in an overly liberal credit policy in the post-
communist era and inadequate protection of creditors’ rights in the Czech legal system. Without
state aid, this problem, which got worse in 1998, threatened to lead to the collapse of the four

banks. However, they were too large to be allowed to fail.

In 1998 the Czech government therefore changed the policy that it had developed since 1997,
which had been not to provide direct financial aid to the banking sector and instead to tackle the
problem of non-performing loans at the borrowing company level. In 1999 the three big banks,
KB, CS and CSOB, which were in competition with IPB, were granted public support in order to
enable their privatisation. In 1999, this aid amounted to 19% of the Czech Republic’s GDP.
Various statements by the banks, as well as the government and the NPF in April/May 1998,
show that state support to KB, CS and CSOB was given on the basis that they were banks in
which a majority stake was held by the state, while no such assistance was given to IPB as,
following the Nomura investment in March 1998, it was considered a private entity whose fate

was a matter of its private shareholders.

Following growing concern at the CNB about IPB’s banking practices in the course of 1998, and
following information-seeking visits by the CNB to IPB from mid-April 1999 to the end of June
1999, the CNB began regulatory inspections on 30 August 1999, which continued until 5 November
1999. Serious financial deficits and irregularities came to light. Various efforts to reorganize IPB,

including securing state aid and involving a foreign strategic partner, have been unsuccessful.

On 16 June 2000, the CNB placed IPB in administration on the basis of a government decision
made the day before. All the powers of IPB board of directors (management) were assumed by
an administrator. On 19 June 2000, the operational business (going concern) of IPB was sold to
CSOB. In this context, the Ministry of Finance granted CSOB a state guarantee while the CNB
issued CSOB with a declaration of indemnity. These state aids were later approved by the

government and the Czech Competition Authority (OPC). On 16 June 2002, the forced
3

[10]

(11)

[12]

[12.1]

[12.2]

[12.3]

[12.4]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

administration of IPB ended and Nomura resumed control over IPB. On 4 December 2002 the
Czech Republic and the NPF initiated arbitral proceedings against Saluka and Nomura, in which

the arbitral tribunal ordered Nomura to transfer IPB shares to CSOB, which was registered as the

new owner of the shares on 16 February 2004.

After the end of the administration, Nomura made various claims against the Appellant.

A.c On 29 April 1991, Czechoslovakia and the Kingdom of the Netherlands signed an
Investment Protection Agreement (Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic (hereinafter: Investment Protection Agreement (IPA); the Agreement). After
Czechoslovakia separated into two independent states on 31 December 1992, the Appellant
confirmed to the Kingdom of the Netherlands that the Investment Protection Agreement between
itself and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entered into force on 1 October 1992, would

remain in force.
This Agreement contains the following provisions, among others:

Article 3:

“1. Each contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to the investments of
investors of the other contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal thereof by those investors.

2. More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments full security and
protection which in any case shall not be less than that accorded either to investments of its
own investors or to investments of investors of any third State, whichever is more favourable
to the investor concerned.

3. (..).”

Article 5:

“Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly, investors of
the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the following conditions are complied
with:

[12.4.a)]

[12.4.b)]

[12.4.c)]

[12.5]

[12.5.1]

[12.5.2]

[12.5.3]

[12.5.4]
[12.5.5]

[12.5.6]
[12.5.7]

[13]

[14]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

Ty
TRANSLATION

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law;

b) the measures are not discriminatory;

c) The measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of just compensation. (...).”
Article 8 of the Investment Protection Agreement then contains the following arbitration clause for
disputes between one of the contracting states and an investor of the other contracting state:

“J. All disputes between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party

concerning an investment of the latter shall if possible, be settled amicably.

2. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit a dispute referred to in paragraph (1) of
this Article, to an arbitral tribunal, if the dispute has not been settled amicably within a period
of six months from the date either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement.

3. (...) [on the constitution of the arbitral tribunal].
4. (...) [on the constitution of the arbitral tribunal].

5. The arbitration tribunal shall determine its own procedure applying the arbitration rules of
the United Nations Commission for International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

6. (...) [on the legal basis for the decision].

7. The tribunal takes its decision by majority of votes; such decision shall be final and binding
upon the parties to the dispute.”

On 18 July 2001, the Appellee initiated arbitral proceedings against the Appellant based on this
arbitration clause. The Arbitral Tribunal was comprised of Sir Arthur Watts KCMG QC
(Chairman), Peter Behrens and Maitre L. Yves Fortier CC QC. At a procedural session held in
London on 2 November 2, 2001, among other things, Geneva was selected as the place of

arbitration.

In its action in connection with its investment in IPB, the Appellee took the view that the
Appellant’s measures and conduct towards IPB on the one hand (and towards the other three big
banks on the other hand) had violated the Investment Protection Agreement. In particular, the
Appellant allegedly disregarded its duty to treat the Appellee and/or its investment into IPB in a

fair, equitable, and, in particular, non-discriminatory manner (Article 3 of the Agreement).

5

[15]

[16]

17)

[18]

[18.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

Furthermore, the Appellant was said to have unlawfully and without adequate compensation
deprived the Appellee of the true value of its investment (Article 5 of the Agreement). The

Appellee requested the Arbitral Tribunal to establish the relevant Treaty breaches and to order

the Appellant to pay damages and interest.

Shortly before the deadline for the filing of the Claimant’s Memorial, the Appellant objected to
the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction by submitting a “Notice to Dismiss”. In support of this, the
Appellant essentially asserted that the Appellee was not entitled to invoke the arbitration clause
of the Investment Protection Agreement, since it was not a real (bona fide) investor within the

meaning of the Agreement.

By award of 17 March 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal declared that it had jurisdiction to consider the
dispute submitted to it. On the merits, the Arbitral Tribunal found that the Appellant had violated
Article 3.1 of the Investment Protection Agreement in various respects. By contrast, the Arbitral

Tribunal denied a violation of Article 3.2 and Article 5 of the Agreement.

The Arbitral Tribunal deferred to a further, second phase of the arbitration proceedings the issue
of appropriate redress for the established breach of Article 3 of the Agreement, including the
question of the scope of the claim. It further reserved the question of costs until final

consideration could be given to the costs of the arbitration as a whole.
Cc.

The Czech Republic brings a public law appeal against this decision of the Arbitral Tribunal with

the following request for relief:

“A declaration that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to examine the alleged violations of an
investment protection agreement that had taken place before a foreign investor decided to make
an investment, and, in particular, lacks jurisdiction to consider whether the April Decision made
by the Appellant in April and May 1998 and published on 27 May 1998 to offer public support to
the three Czech banks (Ceska sporitelna as, Komercni banka as and Ceskoslovenska obchodni
banka as), constituted a violation vis-a-vis the Appellee of the obligation contained in Article
3(1) of the Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments between the

6

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

23.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic of 29 April 1991 to
afford fair and equitable treatment to the investments of investors.”

The Appellee requests that the public law appeal be declared inadmissible or rejected, and the
award of the Arbitral Tribunal be confirmed. The Arbitral Tribunal waived the opportunity to

comment on the appeal.
D.

By order of 26 May 2006, the President of the First Civil Division of the Federal Court rejected a
request by which the Appellant had requested that the appeal be granted suspensive effect in the
form of an order for the Arbitral Tribunal to stay the arbitral proceedings pending the decision on

the appeal.

The Federal Tribunal takes into account the following:

The contested award is drafted in English. In the Federal Tribunal proceedings, the Appellant uses
German, and the Appellee uses French. In accordance with practice, the judgment is issued in the

language of the Appeal (see Article 37(3) of the Judicial Organisation Act).

The Appellant’s request to join the record of the arbitration proceedings can be dispensed with, since

the arguments put forward by the parties can also be assessed without such record.

3.1 In its appeal, the Appellant requests that it be invited to comment on the answer to the

appeal and any comments by the Arbitral Tribunal once received. By letter dated 4 August 2006,
7

[23.2.1]

[23.2.1.1]

Translated by Thames Translation
Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

it renewed and clarified its request for a second exchange of submissions, requesting the
opportunity to comment on the Appellee’s allegation that the parties to the arbitration agreement
have waived any remedies against the arbitral award within the meaning of Article 192 of the
Federal Act of 18 December 1987 on Private International Law (PILA; SR 291). In its answer to
the appeal, and by letter dated 9 August 2006, the Appellee argues for the rejection of the request

for a second round of submissions, or, in the alternative, that it be permitted a rejoinder.

3.2

3.2.1 In public law appeal proceedings under Article 93(3) of the Judicial Organisation Act, it is
only exceptionally that a second exchange of submissions takes place. A second exchange of
submissions must be based on a valid reason, because an orderly procedure — if it is to be
terminated in a timely manner — must be kept within the framework of legal formalities and
deadlines and does not tolerate an endless exchange of further submissions. Applications and
objections that could have been raised or submitted as part of the appeal subject to a time limit are
inadmissible after the expiry of the time limit for the appeal (BGE 132 I 42 para 3.3.4; 125171
para 1d/aa, including references therein). One reason for ordering a further round of submissions
can be the fact that essential arguments are only put forward in the other party’s comments
(Judgment 4P.207/2002 of 10 December 2002 para 1.1, ASA-Bull. 2003 p 585 et seg, 588
referring to BGE 94 I 659 para 1b p 662 et seq; Judgment 4P.236/2004 of 4 February 2005 para
3).

It is generally up to the parties to judge whether a submission contains new arguments and
whether a reply is required. However, if a reply is already requested in the statement of appeal,
the Appellant is not yet in position to form a view as to whether it would be necessary for it to
take a position on the submissions of the Appellee or of the Arbitral Tribunal. Such a request is
premature, which is why comments are only sent to the Appellant for information, unless they
contain new, legally relevant submissions. If the Appellant considers that it is necessary for it to
take position, this must be submitted to the Federal Tribunal without delay upon receipt of the

submissions (BGE 132 I 42 para 3.3.23.3.4; Judgment 1P.827/2005 of 11 April 2006 para 2).
8

[23.2.2]

[23.2.3]

[23.2.3.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

3.2.2 In the present case, the Appellee’s comments were sent to the Appellant on 5 July 2006,
which made it immediately apparent to the Appellant that its request for a second exchange of
submissions would not be accepted. The Appellant only responded to this despatch by letter dated
4 August 2006. It seems questionable whether it has thereby complied with the requirement to
react without delay and whether — particularly given the requirement of speedy resolution — there
is good reason to afford it the possibility of a reply (see in this regard Judgment 4P.207/2002, op

cit, para 1.1). The question can, however, remain open:

3.2.3 In its appeal, the Appellant did not comment on the question raised in the Appellee’s
submission whether the public law appeal could be inadmissible because the arbitration clause
contained in the Investment Protection Agreement excludes the submission of the arbitral award
to the Federal Tribunal pursuant to Article 192(1) of the PILA. Nonetheless, there was no reason
for the Federal Tribunal to depart from the general rule of a single exchange of submissions laid
down in Article 93(3) of the Judicial Organisation Act and to provide the Appellant with the
answer to the appeal otherwise than purely for information purposes, because the Appellee only
called into question the existence of a merits decision required for the public law appeal, which is
a question of which the Federal Tribunal may take full cognizance ex officio (BGE 130 II 388
para | p 389; 1291 173 para 1 p 174; 129 II 225 para 1 p 227 with references), and which it can
decide in the present case without the need for further enquiry (paragraph 5 below). With a view
to the right to be heard, it does not appear necessary to give the Appellant the opportunity to
comment. According to the Federal Tribunal’s practice, if threshold issues arise, then, given that
such issues are examined ex officio, the Appellant must not address such issues only after the
requirements for a merits examination have been disputed in the answer to the appeal; rather, in
view of Article 93(3) of the Judicial Organisation Act, it must, in good faith address the issues

that it wishes to address in the appeal statement.

Insofar as there are doubts as to whether the arbitration clause contained in Article 8 of the
Investment Protection Agreement excludes any challenge of the arbitral award by way of appeal to
the Federal Tribunal, the Appellant would have had all the reasons to take the initiative to make

any arguments that it wished to make on that issue already in its statement of appeal. After all, this

9

[23.2.4]

[24.1]

[24.1.1]

[24.1.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

issue could not have been lost on the Appellant, particularly given that it had been involved as a
party in the appeal proceedings that had led to the Federal Tribunal judgment published in BGE
131 III 173 and had, at the time, successfully defended the view that the parties had excluded the
appeal to the Federal Tribunal in the arbitration clause in that case. In addition, in paragraph 3 of
the aforementioned (unpublished) judgment, the Federal Tribunal also addressed the question of

ordering a second exchange of submissions with the same reasoning as here.

3.2.4 Based on the above, the request for a further exchange of submissions must be rejected.

4.1 According to Article 85(c) of the Judicial Organisation Act, the Federal Tribunal shall
determine appeals against decisions of arbitral tribunals under Articles 190 et seg of the PILA. The
provisions of Articles 190 et seg of the PILA apply when the seat of the arbitral tribunal is located in
Switzerland and at least one of the parties was domiciled or habitually resident outside Switzerland

at the time when the arbitration agreement was concluded (Article 176(1) of the PILA).

The disputed award was made by an arbitral tribunal seated in Switzerland, that is, by a panel that
was constituted by the parties in place of the state courts that are normally competent for binding
resolution of disputes and that has its seat in Geneva (see BGE 125 I 389 para 4a; L ALIVE/P
OUDRET / R EYMOND, Le droit de I’arbitrage interne et internationale en Suisse, Lausanne
1989, p 26; P OUDRET/B ESSON, Droit comparé de I’arbitrage internationale, Zurich 2002, p
3, para 3;C ORBOZ, Le recours au Tribunal Fédéral en matiére d’ arbitrage international, SJ 2002
II 1 ff., p 3; EHRAT, Basel Commentary, para 9 on Article 176 PILA).

As far as the arbitration agreement is concerned, the special feature of the present case is that the
arbitration is based on Article 8 of the Investment Protection Agreement in force between the
Netherlands and the Czech Republic. Since the Appellee is not a party to that Agreement, Article 8
of the Agreement can hardly be viewed as an arbitration agreement between the parties within the
meaning of Chapter 12 of the PILA. The question then arises what actions, and at what point in
time, can be treated as giving rise to an arbitration agreement with the corresponding content

10

[24.1.3]

[24.2]

[24.2.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

between the parties. One could, for instance, qualify the arbitration clause contained in the
international treaty between the Netherlands and the Czech Republic as an agreement in favour of a
third party and containing an offer made to the investor — in this case, to the Appellee — to conclude
an arbitration agreement, which the investor has accepted by initiating the arbitration proceedings
(see WENGER, Basel Commentary, para 61 on Article 178 PILA;RUEDE/HADENFELDT,
Swiss Arbitration Law, 2nd Ed., Zurich 1993, p 42 para 5; Judgment 1P.113/2000 of 20
September 2000 para 1b).

Ultimately, however, the question of the parties’ acts that might qualify as the conclusion of an
arbitration agreement need not be resolved in this case. The requirement under Article 176(1) of
the PILA that, at the time the arbitration agreement is concluded, there be no legal seat or
habitual residence in Switzerland appears, without more, to have been met regardless of when
this is assumed to have taken place, in any event with respect to the Appellant — who is a foreign

State — and likely also with respect to the Appellee.

4.2 In the so-called “partial award” of 17 March 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal decided on its
jurisdiction to consider the dispute submitted to it. It also decided on the question whether the
Appellant had violated the Investment Protection Agreement between the Netherlands and the
Czech Republic in connection with the Appellee’s investment in IPB, and found that the Appellant
had violated the Agreement by various measures or behaviours. It reserved the determination of the

consequences of such violations for a later decision.

It has thus made a preliminary or interim ruling that does not end the proceedings either in
relation to all claims or in relation to any individual claim. Rather, it has clarified preliminary
questions of a procedural and substantive nature without such clarification terminating the
proceedings in whole or in part in quantitative terms (see i.a. BGE 130 II 76 para 3.1 with
references), given that, insofar as the Appellee had made separate requests for a declaration
regarding the alleged violations of the Investment Protection Agreement before the Arbitral
Tribunal in addition to its request for an award of damages, such requests have no independent
significance in view of the Appellee’s litigation objective of obtaining compensation.

11

[24.2.2]

[24.3]

[24.3.1]

[24.4]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

According to Article 190(3) PILA, preliminary and interim decisions of an international arbitral
tribunal can only be challenged on the grounds stated in paragraphs (2)(a) and (b) of the same
provision. The 17 March 2006 decision of the Arbitral Tribunal can, without more, be challenged
as an interim decision based on the Appellant’s complaint within the meaning of Article
190(2)(b) of the Judicial Organisation Act to the effect that the Arbitral Tribunal has, in part,
wrongly assumed ratione temporis jurisdiction to establish the alleged violations of Article 3 of
the Investment Protection Agreement. On the other hand, the appeal is inadmissible insofar as it
is directed against the finding made in the contested decision that the complainant had violated
Article 3.1 of the Agreement (Article 190(3) PILA; BGE 130 III 755 para 1.2.2 p 761 et seq; 130
III 76 para 4; see also paragraph 6.5.4 below).

4.3 In its appeal, the Appellant only requests a declaration that the Arbitral Tribunal lacked
jurisdiction to examine whether the resolution of the Czech government published on 27 May
1998 to offer public support to three of the “Big Four” Czech banks, but not to IPB, violated the
obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment to foreign investors contained in the Investment

Protection Agreement.

This request for declaratory relief by the Appellant is admissible. Although, as a form of public
law appeal, the arbitration appeal is generally in the nature of a cassation remedy, where the
appeal goes to jurisdiction, the Federal Tribunal can resolve the jurisdictional issue in the
dispositif of its decision on the appeal (BGE 127 III 279 para 1b; 117 II 94 para 4 p 95 et seg with

references).

4.4 If an arbitral award is based on several independent grounds, then, in accordance with
established practice, the Federal Tribunal will only consider a public law appeal against it if all
such grounds are disputed (with sufficient support) (Article 90(1)(b) of the Judicial Organisation
ActBGE 115 II 288 para 4; 113 la 94 para la/bb, each with references; see also judgments
4P.168/2004 of 20 October 2004 para 2.1.1 and 4P.62/2004 of 1 December 2004 para 2.1). To the

extent the disputed judgment finds independent support in the grounds that are not disputed, there

12

[24.4.1]

[24.4.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(UB TRANSLATION
is no legal interest in a judgment with respect to those objections that are supported (BGE 111 II

398 para 2b p. 399 et seq).

The Appellee claims that this appeal does not meet this requirement. The Appellant disputes the
Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to the violation of Article 3 of the Investment
Protection Agreement as determined in the dispositif of the arbitral award (para 51l1c). The
Appellant’s arguments against the assumed jurisdiction, however, are said to address only one
out of a total of three confirmed violations of Article 3 of the Agreement — each based on
different facts — that led to the determination in para 511c of the Arbitral Award. According to
the Appellee, such arguments therefore disregard that the determination in para 51lc of the
Arbitral Award is based on a finding of separate violations. The Appellant is thus said to lack
legal interest in an assessment whether jurisdiction was wrongly assumed with respect only to
one of the established violations of Article 3 of the Agreement, since that would not defeat the

finding laid down in the dispositif that Article 3.1 had been breached.

This objection is unfounded. In its statement of appeal, the Appellant is not seeking the annulment
of the contested decision to the extent it has determined a violation of Article 3.1 of the Agreement.
Rather, it requests, in essence — and, generally, in a manner that is admissible (see paras 4.2/4.3
above) — a determination that the Arbitral Tribunal was not competent to examine whether the
Appellant’s decision published on 27 May 1998 (and thus before the Appellee’s investment in IPB)
to provide public support to CS, KB and CSOB (but not IPB) was contrary to Article 3.1 of the
Investment Protection Agreement, and the tribunal thus lacked jurisdiction to determine a violation
of the Investment Protection Agreement based on that decision. It is true that this does not defeat
the determination in para 511c of the Arbitral Award that the Appellant had violated Article 3 of
the Agreement, since that determination is based on the finding that the Appellant violated the
Agreement in three different respects (Award, paras 498, 499 and 503 et seq), while the
Appellant’s submissions only questions the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction with regard to one of
these findings. Nevertheless, it cannot be argued in the present case that the Appellant lacks legal
interest in establishing that a determination of only one of three violations of the agreement was

made without jurisdiction. The reason is that the purpose of the action brought by the Appellee was

13

[25]

[25.1]

[25.1.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

never to establish a violation of the Investment Protection Agreement as such, as done in para
51lc of the contested interim award, but, rather, to obtain damages. The determination that
Article 3 of the Agreement has been breached — which cannot itself be defeated by the present
Appeal — does not, without more, entail an award of damages. Rather, the Arbitral Tribunal will
have to examine whether the further requirements for this are met, and, if so, to what extent, with
regard to each of the established violations individually, whereby it is possible that some will
lead to damages, whereas others will not. Consequently, the Appellant has an independent
legitimate interest in establishing the absence of jurisdiction on the part of the Arbitral Tribunal
with respect to each violation of Article 3 of the Agreement that it had affirmed, in order to
avoid, in further proceedings, having to rebut the requirements for a damages award at least with

respect to that violation.

The Appellee then argues that Article 8(7) of the Investment Protection Agreement containing
the arbitration agreement excluded a challenge of the arbitral award by way of a public law
appeal to the Federal Tribunal by providing that the Arbitral Tribunal’s award was final and
binding on the parties. In its view, when the arbitration agreement was concluded, the parties
intended to exclude any right to contest the decision in a state court. It was clearly the intent of
the contracting States parties to rule out any interference by a third country in the settlement of a

dispute about compliance of a State party with the international treaty

5.1 If neither party is domiciled or habitually resident in Switzerland, then, according to Article
192(1) of the PILA, they may completely exclude the challenge of the arbitral award by an express
declaration or in a later express written agreement. The exclusion of a challenge is also permissible for

decisions on the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction (BGE 131 III 173 para 4.1 with references).

The requirement that the parties have no territorial ties with Switzerland is not disputed in the
present case. The only issue to be verified is whether the parties have validly waived the

submission of a public law complaint against the arbitral award.

[25.2]

[25.2.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

5.2 According to Article 192(1) PILA, the declaration excluding challenge must be express. The
Federal Tribunal initially demanded that the legal remedies that the parties wish to exclude be
expressly named (BGE 116 II 639 para 2c). However, in a more recent judgment, this
requirement was qualified as too restrictive; accordingly, it is sufficient that the declaration
unambiguously shows the common intent of the parties to make use of the possibility within the
meaning of Article 192(1) of the PILA and to waive the challenge of the international arbitral
award before the Federal Tribunal. Whether or not this is the case must be determined by
interpreting the specific arbitration clause (see BGE 131 III 173 Section 4.2, esp para 4.2.3.1;
confirmed in Judgments 4P.198/2005 of 31 October 2005 para 1.1, ASA-Bull 2006 p 339 et seq,
346 and 4P.98/2005 of 10 November 2005 para 4.1). This jurisprudence has met with undivided
approval among commentators insofar as it requires, for a valid exclusion of the challenge of an
arbitral award by means of a pubic law appeal, that the will of the parties to waive any legal
remedy, or the remedy of the public law appeal, must follow clearly from the arbitration clause,
and does not require the wording of the clause to contain an express reference to the public law
appeal or to the provisions of Article 190 et seq of the PILA (FELIX DASSER, Internationale
Schiedsentscheide ohne Rechtsmittel: Ab jetzt gilt’s ernst [International arbitral awards without
appeal: it’s now serious], Jusletter of 9 May 2005 p 3; FRANCOIS KNOEPFLER/PHILIPPE
SCHWEIZER, Renonciation 4 recourir jugée valable par le Tribunal fédéral, SZTER 2006 pp 148
et seq, 152; PHILIPPE SCHWEIZER, in SZZP 2005 p 202. Kritisch zur Methodik der Auslegung
iiberhaupt und zur Auslegung der Klausel im konkreten Fall [Criticism of interpretation
methodology in general and interpretation of the clause in the specific case]: SEBASTIEN
BESSON, Chronique de jurisprudence étrangére, Revue de I’arbitrage 2005 pp 1071 et seg, 1080
et seg; DASSER , op cit, p 4; FRANCOIS PERRET, ASA Bull. 2005 p 520 et seq, p 521 et seq).

Given the implications of a waiver of legal remedies, the intent to waive must be clearly
expressed. After all, subject to the defendant’s admissible objections in enforcement proceedings,
the parties, by such waiver, deprive themselves of any possibility of having the arbitral award
reviewed and revoked by a State court, even if it suffers from the most serious deficiencies and
violates basic due process (BGE 116 II 639 para 2c; see particularly POUDRET/BESSON, op cit,
para 839 p_ 828; BESSON, op cit, p 1083; BERGER, Internationale

15

[25.2.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(UB TRANSLATION
Wirtschaftsschiedsgerichtsbarkeit [International Commercial Arbitration], Berlin/New York

1992, p 505 et seq).

The ratio legis of Article 192 of the PILA invoked by the Appellee, which is to protect Swiss courts
from dilatory appeals in disputes that have no real relationship with Switzerland (see judgment
4P.198/2005 of 31 October 2005 para 2.2, ASA Bull 2006 p 339 et seg, 346; Explanatory Note on
the PILA, BBI 135/1983 I p 465; SIEHR, Zurich commentary, para | to Article 192 of the PILA;
MICHELE PATOCCHI/CESARE JERMINI, Basel Commentary, para 1 to Article 192 of the
PILA; POUDRET/BESSON, op cit, p 828 para 839; LALIVE/POUDRET/REYMOND, op cit,
para | to Article 192 of the PILA), does not give rise to an interpretation rule according to which

a waiver of a remedy is to be lightly accepted.

[25.3] 5.3 The presently disputed formulation that the arbitral award should be final and binding for the

[25.3.1]

parties to the dispute does not meet the requirement of an express waiver within the meaning of
Article 192 of the PILA (for an account of previous case law, see BGE 131 III 173 para 4.2.1 p
175 et seq):

According to ordinary language use in civil procedure law, the designation of a decision as
“final” does not exclude a further invocation of extraordinary legal remedies, but only the re-
examination of the decision on the merits by way of ordinary legal remedies, such as appeal (see
VOGEL/ SPUHLER, Grundriss des Zivilprozessrechts [Outline of civil procedural law], 8th Ed,
Bern 2006, p 362; HABSCHEID, Schweizerisches Zivilprozess- und Gerichtsorganisationsrecht
[Swiss Civil Procedure and Judicial Organization Law], 2nd Ed, Basel 1990, para 473 et seq;
WALDER - RICHLI, Zivilprozessrecht [Civil Procedure Law], 4th Ed, Zurich 1996, p 250;
FRANK/STRAULI/MESSMER, Kommentar zur ziircherischen _Zivilprozessordnung
[Commentary on the Zurich Civil Procedure Code], 3rd Ed, Zurich 1997, para 8 on Section 190
of the Civil Procedure Code). Thus, Article 190(1) of the PILA provides that a decision of the
Arbitral Tribunal made under the procedure in Articles 176 et seq of the PILA is “final”, yet also
provides in the following two paragraphs 2 and 3 for a possibility of challenging such decision by

way of an extraordinary remedy of public law appeal on the exhaustively listed grounds.

16

[25.3.2]

[25.3.3]

[25.4]

[25.4.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

The situation is similar where the arbitral award is designated as “binding” in an investment
protection agreement. For example, sentence 1 of Article 53 of the multilateral Washington
Convention of 18 March 1965 On the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (SR 0.975.2; hereinafter: the Washington Convention) provides that
arbitral awards made under this Convention shall be binding, and immediately specifies that they
shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this
Convention. Thus, even arbitral awards made under the Washington Convention are subject to the

legal remedies provided for in the Convention despite being designated as binding.

For the present disputed clause to be capable of interpretation as a waiver of any legal remedies
against the arbitral award (i.e. including also the extraordinary legal remedy of the public law
appeal), it would have had to contain an additional sentence making this clear by stating, for

instance, that the parties waived the right of any recourse against the arbitral award.

5.4. The above applies with equal force where the disputed arbitration clause is contained, as in the
present case, in an international treaty that was not originally concluded by the parties to the
dispute. It should be specified that, when interpreting the provision or the Agreement on the
exclusion of legal remedies in such a case, one must apply the principles of international treaty
interpretation — unless the parties to the dispute have made a special individual agreement with
regard to the exclusion of legal remedies which would demonstrate their common — possibly

deviating — intent. However, no such agreement was concluded here.

5.4.1 International treaties must be interpreted based on the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969 (Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, VCLT; SR.
0.111). This Convention entered into force for the Czech Republic on 1 January 1993, i.e. after
the conclusion of the Investment Protection Agreement in question in 1991; it therefore does not
directly apply to that agreement (Article 4 VCLT). However, this does not preclude interpretation
of the treaty based on the general principles laid down in Article 31 et seg of the VCLT since
these essentially codify customary international law and correspond to the practice of the Federal

Tribunal (BGE 122 II 234 para 4c with references). In accordance with Article 31(1) VCLT, a

17

[25.4.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

treaty must be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. According to the
relevant federal jurisprudence, the interpretation of an international treaty must primarily start
from the text of the treaty as understood by the contracting parties with the view to the purpose of
the treaty based on the principle of good faith. If the meaning of the text, as it arises from
common language usage as well as the object and purpose of the treaty, does not appear to be
manifestly absurd, an interpretation that goes beyond the wording — whether expanding or
restricting it — is only possible if, based on the context or the circumstances of the treaty’s
conclusion, it can be concluded with certainty that the contracting States had jointly intended to
deviate from the wording (BGE 127 III 461 para 3; 125 V 503 para 4b; 124 III 382 para 6c p 394,

all with references).

With respect to the scope of the phrase “final and binding” contained in Article 8(7) of the
Investment Agreement, an interpretation in accordance with these rules also does not lead, to a
different result than that set out above (paragraph 5.3). The Appellee is unable to demonstrate that

the clause has the opposite meaning:

[25.4.2.1] 5.4.2.1 First, the Appellee cannot be followed in the argument that it is obvious that the parties to the

Treaty, as sovereign States, intended to rule out any interference by a third State through its courts. It
may well be inferred from the clause that a free examination of the judgment (within the framework
of an ordinary legal remedy) should be excluded and no State court should freely examine how the
Investment Protection Agreement ought to be interpreted. However, it cannot be inferred from this
that the State contracting parties wanted to forego the protection of legal remedies for themselves and
also for their investors if an arbitral award suffered from gross deficiencies. In this respect it must be
taken into account that, as far as apparent, only the laws of Switzerland, Belgium, Sweden, Malaysia
and Tunisia provide for the possibility of waiver that also covers extraordinary legal remedies
(BESSON, op cit, p 1082 para; BERGER, op cit, p 505). No other countries permit a valid agreement
to effect such an exclusion. Had the parties intended to waive extraordinary legal remedies, then, in
order to ensure the effectiveness of such waiver, they would have had to determine for the arbitral
tribunal to have its seat in one of the countries listed. However, this is not the case. Rather, the parties

to the dispute only agreed to Switzerland as the seat of the Arbitral Tribunal after the arbitration
18

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(UB TRANSLATION
proceedings had been initiated (see Article 16 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules), without

specifically referring to the possibility of excluding legal remedies under Swiss law (see para 5.4

above).

[25.4.2.2] 5.4.2.2 It is true that the purpose of an arbitration clause in an Investment Protection Agreement may
include avoiding possible jurisdiction to resolve the dispute on the part of a State party’s domestic
courts, which may have the appearance of greater proximity to one party than to another. Instead,
dispute resolution should be entrusted to a (more neutral) international arbitration tribunal, which
offers a better guarantee for an independent decision based on the rule of law (see GETAZ -KUNZ,
Rechtsmittelverzicht in der internationalen Schiedsgerichtsbarkeit der Schweiz [Waiver of
Recourse in International Arbitration in Switzerland], Diss. Bern 1993, p. 30; see in particular for
agreements with developing countries WANG JING -AN, Internationaler Investitionsschutz
[International Investment Protection], Konstanz 1995, p 153 et seq). That this should also exclude
any intervention by the State in which the arbitral tribunal has its seat does not appear to be
imperative. In this regard, it must be considered that, when determining the place of arbitration in
accordance with Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the parties will rarely agree
for the arbitral tribunal’s seat to be in a treaty Contracting State, instead opting for an arbitral seat
in a neutral third country. If the parties are unable to come to an agreement, the arbitral tribunal
must also select a seat in a neutral country, taking into account the “circumstances of the
arbitration” (see Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules; KARLHEINZ RAUH, Die
Schieds- und Schlichtungsordnungen der UNCITRAL [UNCITRAL Arbitration and Rules], K6In
1983, p 78 et seg; MENNO ADEN, Internationale Handelsschiedsgerichtsbarkeit [International
Commercial Arbitration], 2"! Ed, Munich 2003, para 3 and 4 to Article 16 UNCITRAL p. 612 et
seq).

[25.4.2.3] 5.4.2.3 The Appellee further submits that the Czech Republic had not yet acceded to the
Washington Convention at the time the Investment Protection Agreement was concluded. The
contracting parties therefore could not have provided for dispute resolution under that multilateral
convention at the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) that
would have excluded the involvement of any State court as an authority of review. Nonetheless,
the parties envisaged the dispute resolution in accordance with the Washington Convention as a

19

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(UB TRANSLATION
model that provided for dispute resolution on a purely international level, without any

involvement of State courts.

[25.4.2.3.1] This argument of the Appellee is also to no avail. Even if it were true that the contracting parties
had envisaged dispute resolution under the Washington Convention as a model, that would rather
advocate against concluding that they wished to exclude the possibility of any recourse, given that the
Washington Convention subjects arbitral awards rendered in accordance with the procedure laid
down in that Convention to review proceedings in which an ad hoc committee appointed by the
President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development may annul arbitral awards
on grounds similar to those listed in Article 190(2) PILA (Article 52 and Article 53 first sentence in
conjunction with Articles 2 and 5 of the Washington Convention [see also in this regard
paragraph 5.3 above]). Thus, the Washington Convention too follows the principle that an
extraordinary remedy must be available to correct the gravest defects of an arbitral award, and
does not provide for a waiver thereof. The mere fact that the Washington Convention provides
for a review authority in the form of an international ad hoc committee rather than a State court
does not demonstrate that the parties to the Investment Protection Agreement in question —
assuming that they had indeed had the provision in the Washington Convention in mind as a
model — would necessarily have wished to waive any protection through extraordinary legal
remedies merely in order to exclude any interference by a third country through its courts, which,
in the context of a decision on an extraordinary legal remedy, is only possible to a very limited

extent.

[25.4.2.3.2] _ If the parties to the Investment Protection Agreement had indeed had the Washington Convention
in mind as a model insofar as they were primarily concerned with excluding any interference by a
neutral third country through its courts, it would have made sense for them at least to provide that, in
the event of a possible future accession of Czechoslovakia or the Czech Republic to the Washington
Convention, the dispute would have to be resolved pursuant to that Convention (see in this regard
the rule in Article 9(5) of the Agreement of 12 April 1991 between the Swiss Confederation and the
Republic of Argentina on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments [SR 0.975.215.4],

which provides that disputes can be submitted to an ICSID arbitration tribunal once both contracting

20

[25.4.2.4]

[25.5]

[26.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

parties accede to the Washington Convention). This is all the more so since the law of most states in
which a referenced arbitral tribunal could have its seat according to the agreed rule does not provide

for the possibility of waiving the filing of extraordinary legal remedies against arbitral awards at a

state court (paragraph 5.4.2.1 above).

5.4.2.4 The result of the interpretation is furthermore not affected by the fact that the disputed
Investment Protection Agreement contains a second arbitration clause in Article 10, which uses
the same wording as Article 8(7) to specify that arbitral awards based thereon are final and
binding for the parties to the dispute. Even if it were true, as the Appellee asserts, that the
contracting State parties wanted to exclude any interference by the courts of a third country in
disputes between them as sovereign states, the identically worded clause in Art 8(7) of the

Agreement need not be accorded the same meaning as set out above.

5.5 In summary, it emerges that there is no valid waiver within the meaning of Article 192 of
the right to bring a public law appeal in this case. The Appellee’s objection to that effect is

unfounded.

6.1 The Appellant raises an objection to jurisdiction within the meaning of Article 190(2)(b)
PILA. In support of this objection, the Appellant essentially asserts that the jurisdiction of an
arbitral tribunal in proceedings for the protection of investments under a bilateral investment
protection agreement results exclusively and directly from the agreement in question. For this
reason, the relevant arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction is temporally (ratione temporis) limited to the
assessment of treaty breaches that occurred after the claimant investor made its investment and
thus triggered the applicability of the Investment Protection Agreement between the parties. The
Arbitral Tribunal also recognised this principle in para 244 of its award. Accordingly, an arbitral
tribunal with jurisdiction based on an investment protection agreement lacks jurisdiction to

examine the host State’s domestic law for compliance with that agreement if it had entered into

21

[26.1.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(UB TRANSLATION
force before the relevant international treaty could have effect between the parties, viz. the

investor and the host State.

The objection then goes on to argue that the Appellee first made an investment in IPB on 2
October 1998, thus triggering the application of the Investment Protection Agreement between
the Appellant and itself. Before that date, the shares in question were held by Nomura Europe
plc, which has its registered office in the UK and not in the Netherlands. The Arbitral Tribunal
found that the Investment Protection Agreement between the parties was violated because the
Czech government unreasonably treated IPB differently from the other three big banks in
granting state aid. However, in doing so, it failed to take into account that this allegedly
unreasonable discrimination rested on a practice that was based on government resolution No
369 of 27 May 1998, which predated 2 October 1998 and was thus outside the arbitral
jurisdiction ratione temporis. In other words, the Arbitral Tribunal found that the Investment
Protection Agreement was violated because the Czech Government changed its previous “policy
of non-assistance” by promising state support to three other large Czech banks — but not to IPB —
by its decision of 27 May 1998, i.e. at a time when the Appellee had not yet invested. According
to the Appellant, in examining this alleged violation of the IPA, the Arbitral Tribunal went
beyond the limits of its temporal jurisdiction. Given that the IPA only started to produce effects
between the parties as from 2 October 1998, the Appellant argues that the Arbitral Tribunal only
had the power to consider whether the policy that was made public on 27 May 1998 was changed
unforeseeably to the Appellee’s detriment after it had invested. By contrast, it had no power to
consider whether such policy itself, or its consistent implementation, constituted a breach of the
IPA. According to the Appellant, the Appellee is not entitled to rely on the duty laid down in
Article 3(1) to treat its investment fairly and equitably in relation to the Czech Government’s
change of policy that was already known or should have been known to it at the time of its
investment on 2 October 1998. In the proceedings, neither party raised an objection that the
government’s 27 May 1998 resolution violated Czech law. It can and should not be the case that
a Czech legal provision that was completely legal at the time of its adoption could become an
illegal act under the Investment Protection Agreement through a subsequent unilateral decision

of a foreign party to make an investment, given that the agreement only took effect between the

22

[26.2]

[26.3]

[26.3.1]

[26.3.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

parties as a result of that investment.

6.2 The Federal Supreme Court may freely examine the objection to jurisdiction under Article
190(2)(b) PILA on the law, including preliminary questions of substantive law that are essential for
a decision on jurisdiction (establishing the principle: BGE 117 II 94 para 5a; see also BGE 129 III
727 para 5.2.2; 128 III 50 para 2a p 54; 119 III 380 para 3c p 383, each with references).

6.3 According to the Federal Tribunal’s established case law, questions concerning tribunal
organisation must be resolved as early as possible, before the proceedings can continue (BGE 126 I
203 para 1b p. 205 et seq; 1241255 para 1b/bb p 259; 116 II 80 para 3a p 84, each with references).
According to the requirement of good faith conduct and the prohibition of abuse of rights, which
also apply in procedural law, it is incumbent on the parties to raise objections to the jurisdiction or
the composition of the arbitral tribunal at the earliest possible point in time. Late submissions of a
formal nature that violate these principles may be disregarded by virtue of waiver (BGE 130 III 66
para 4.3 p 75; 1241121 para 2 p 123; 121 130 para 5f p 38).

According to its own submissions, the Appellant first asserted that the investor — i.e. the Appellee
— could not complain about circumstances that already existed at the time of its investment in the
rejoinder of the arbitral proceedings. In doing so, the Appellant did not expressly dispute the
Arbitral Tribunal’s ratione temporis jurisdiction to decide on the dispute submitted to it, but
merely referred to an arbitral award of the NAFTA arbitral tribunal in GAMI Investments v The
Government of the United Mexican States dated 15 November 2004, which addressed related
issues. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore did not explicitly comment on the question of its ratione
temporis jurisdiction in the disputed award, but merely rejected the objection raised by the
Appellant that it lacked jurisdiction to consider the dispute submitted to it ratione materiae and

ratione personae (see Section B above), which the complainant does not here contest.

However, in the present case, the Appellant cannot, in good faith, be criticised for failing to
expressly raise the objection that the Arbitral Tribunal lacked ratione temporis jurisdiction to

consider the dispute submitted to it given that it is not apparent that the Appellee had factually

23

[26.3.3]

[26.4]

[26.4.a]

[26.4.b]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

based its action concerning the discriminatory treatment of its investment on a circumstance
predating 2 October 1998, i.e. the government’s 27 May 1998 decision to support KB, CS and
CSOB, but not IPB. Rather, according to the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal, it merely asserted
that the Czech Republic had violated the principle of fair and equitable treatment under Article
3(1) of the IPA, by responding in a discriminatory manner to the systemic problem of bad loans
in the Czech banking sector, which contributed to serious problems with such loans in the period
1998-2000 by unjustifiably treating IPB differently in the context of support to the banks in
overcoming it. For example, it granted state aid to the other three big banks to the exclusion of
IPB and thus created a situation in which IPB could not possibly have survived, which ultimately
led to the loss of the investment. In view of these submissions of the Appellee, which did not
make any reference to circumstances predating 2 October 1998, there was no reason for the
Appellant to argue expressly that the Arbitral Tribunal was not temporally competent to consider
the claim (see also in this regard BGE 128 III 50 para 2c/aa p 59 above), since it could not be
required to anticipate that the Arbitral Tribunal would establish a breach of the IPA based on

circumstances that had occurred before 2 October 1998.

There is therefore nothing from the perspective of the principle of good faith to prevent the

invocation of an objection to jurisdiction in these proceedings.

6.4 The principle that the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the arbitration clause of an
investment protection agreement is temporally limited to the assessment of treaty breaches that had
taken place after the claimant investor has made its investment and thereby triggered the
applicability of the agreement between the parties, invoked by the Appellant, is undisputed and
expressly recognised by the Appellee. There is thus no need to discuss this in detail. It may be
pointed out in this context that this principle is based on the general principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties that is applicable in international treaty law and is expressed as follows in Article 28 of the

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties:

“Article 28 Non-retroactivity of treaties

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, its provisions do
24

[26.4.1]

[26.5]

[26.5.a]

[26.5.b]

[26.5.1]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

not bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation which ceased to
exist before the date of the entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party.”

Further reference is made in this regard to the recent ECtHR judgment in Blecic v Croatia of 8
March 2006 (RS 59532/00), paras 45-50, 77 ef seq, 83 et seg, in which the court declined
jurisdiction ratione temporis over an alleged violation by the Croatian State on the grounds that it
had taken place before the ECHR entered into force for Croatia (see also ECtHR judgments in
Prince Hans-Adam II of Liechtenstein v Germany of 12 July 2001 para 85, EuaGRZ 2001 p 466 and
Yagiz v Turkey of 8 August 1996 para 28, Recueil CourEDH 1996-III p 966).

6.5 First, it must be pointed out that the Arbitral Tribunal was well aware of the temporal

limitation of its jurisdiction, as follows from the statement in para 244 of its award:

“In reaching that conclusion [that the Tribunal is satisfied that it has jurisdiction to hear the claims
brought before it by the Claimant under the arbitration procedure provided for in Article 8 of the
Treaty], however the Tribunal wishes to emphasise that, in accordance with the Treaty, its
jurisdiction is limited to claims brought by the Claimant, Saluka, in respect of damage suffered by
itself in respect of the investment represented by its holding of IPB shares. It follows, therefore, that
the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in respect of any claims of Nomura, or any claims in respect
of damage suffered by Nomura and not by Saluka, or any claims in respect of damage suffered in
respect of IPB shares before October 1998, when the bulk of those shares became vested in the
Claimant. Although Nomura is not a party to these proceedings, the Tribunal nevertheless has
jurisdiction to consider and make factual findings about the conduct of Nomura in so far as such
findings might be relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of arguments advanced by the Claimant or
the Respondent.” [Emphasis added by the Federal Tribunal].

The Appellant is thus unable to demonstrate, and it is not evident, that the Arbitral Tribunal saw
the alleged violation of Article 3(1) of the IPA in the issuing of the 27 May 1998 decision or
assessed that decision for compatibility with Article 3(1) of the IPA, as the Appellant alleges.

6.5.1 In the arbitration proceedings, the Appellee asserted that the Appellant had breached
Article 3(1) of the IPA by providing a discriminatory response to the systemic bad debt problem
in the Czech banking sector which contributed to serious difficulties in that sector from 1998 to
2000. Thus, in assisting the banks to overcome the problem, it treated IPB differently in an
unreasonable way by excluding IPB from the state assistance that was granted to its competitors,

25

[26.5.2.1]

[26.5.2.2]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

which created a situation in which it was impossible for IPB to survive.

6.5.2

6.5.2.1 In the award under appeal, the Arbitral Tribunal stated that the principle of “fair and
equitable treatment”, as laid down in Article 3(1) of the IPA, was closely tied to the notion of
legitimate expectations, which is the central element of that principle. By promising “fair and
equitable treatment”, the Czech Republic has thus assumed an obligation to treat foreign investors
so as to avoid the frustration of their legitimate expectations which they had taken into account
when making their investments. Such expectations include compliance with the fundamental
principle of non-discrimination. A foreign investor protected by the Treaty may in any case
properly expect that the Czech Republic implements its policies bona fide by conduct that is, as far
as it affects the investors’ investment, reasonably justifiable by public policies and that such
conduct does not manifestly violate the requirements of consistency, transparency, even-

handedness and non-discrimination.

6.5.2.2 In the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal further holds, the Appellant discriminated
against the Appellee or its investment because it treated IPB differently from the other three big
banks without sufficient justification, although all Big Four Banks were in a comparable
situation with regard to the problem of bad loans and in terms of their macroeconomic
significance. The Big Four banks all had large non-performing loan portfolios resulting in
increased provisions and consequently in insufficient regulatory capital. None of the banks was
able to absorb the losses by calling on equity. Their survival was sooner or later seriously
threatened unless the Czech State was willing to provide financial assistance. On the other hand,
due to the macroeconomic significance of the Big Four banks, the Czech State apparently could
not afford to let any one of these banks fail, and did in fact sooner or later provide such
assistance to all of them, including IPB after it had been acquired by CSOB. Given that all the
Big Four banks were in a comparable situation, as far as the Appellee was concerned, Nomura
(and subsequently Saluka) was justified in expecting that the Czech Republic, should it consider

and provide financial assistance to the Big Four banks, would do so in an even-handed and

26

Translated by Thames Translation
Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION
consistent manner so as to include rather than exclude IPB. However, it was frustrated in that
expectation given that, after the bad loans problem became worse, the government provided
CSOB, CS and KB with financial support in order to prepare them for privatisation, while IPB
received no financial support after its privatisation without sufficient justification and it was
only granted greater financial assistance again during the forced administration.

[26.5.2.3]

6.5.2.3 The Arbitral Tribunal did not accept the various reasons which the Appellant raised to
justify the unequal treatment of IPB:

[26.5.2.3.1] According to the Arbitral Tribunal’s account, the Appellant had, in particular, asserted that,
before it invested into IPB, Nomura had been informed by its extensive due diligence of the
government’s plans to give aid to the other three big banks during their privatisation. According
to the Appellant, Nomura therefore voluntarily assumed these risks and these were reflected in
the share purchase price paid. In the Appellant’s view, Nomura (and subsequently the Appellee)
had no reason to expect that the Czech Government would be willing to alleviate IPB’s future

problems by providing State financial assistance.

[26.5.2.3.2] By contrast, on the basis of the available evidence, the Tribunal found that the Government
changed its policy of non-assistance (to any of the banks) only after Nomura had acquired the
shareholding in IPB on 8 March 1998. The earliest hint of such policy change was contained in a
statement of the head of the NPF to the chairmen of the boards of directors of KB, CS and CSOB
dated 21 April 1998 in which he promised the banks that the State, in its capacity as shareholder,
would take such measures during the privatisation period as to ensure that they comply with the

applicable regulatory requirements. Then on 27 May 1998 the government issued the following
resolution (No 369):

[26.5.2.3.2.a] “The Government states that it is aware of its responsibility for the financial stability of the joint-
stock companies CSOB, KB and CS and that it is ready to secure such financial stability until the
completion of the privatisation of those joint-stock companies.”

[26.5.2.3.3] The Arbitral Tribunal held that whatever the scope of Nomura’s due diligence may have been, it

was unlikely that it could lead to a reliable forecast as to which policies future governments would

27

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES

(UB TRANSLATION

adopt should an aggravation of the bad debt problem occur, which is what actually happened after
Nomura had made its investment. Therefore, the Appellee could not be said to have assumed the

tisk of being treated differently when the Czech Government in fact decided to step in with

financial assistance.

[26.5.2.3.4] The Arbitral Tribunal therefore also did not follow the Appellant’s arguments to the effect that

[26.5.3]

[26.5.3.1]

different treatment of IPB was justified — in accordance with the policy pursued by the government
—on the grounds that, unlike the others three big banks, IPD had already been privatised. Among
other things, it stated that the government’s policy of privatising KB, CS and CSOB after they had
been relieved from the bad debt problem (through financial assistance) were perfectly legitimate,
but did not, however, relieve the Appellant from complying with its obligation of non-
discriminatory treatment of IPB. Furthermore, the policy of only granting public assistance to
banks in which the state still held shares with a view to their privatisation was not consistently
implemented. For instance, CSOB had already been privatised at the time the Appellant granted it

financial assistance.

6.5.3 It is clear from the above that the Arbitral Tribunal saw the established violation of Article
3(1) of the IPA not in the 27 May 1998 government resolution, but rather — as asserted by the
Appellee in support of its claim — in the factual exclusion of IPB from public assistance (which had
been discriminatory given the granting of assistance to CSOB, CS and KB) at the time when the
Appellee already held IPB shares.

The Arbitral Tribunal did not regard the 27 May 1998 resolution as a binding legal act whereby
the discriminatory treatment of IPB was already completed, such that the subsequent non-
provision of assistance at the time when the Appellee already held its shares was only a consistent
implementation of that act rather than a new, independent breach. Rather, it saw that decision as a
mere political declaration of intent which, in the tribunal’s opinion, could and should have been
implemented in a non-discriminatory manner, on which Saluka was entitled to rely, at least in the
sense that IPB could also expect appropriate state assistance in the event of serious structural
economic problems jeopardising the continued existence of the Big Four banks the preservation of

which was in general economic interest, if the other three big banks were also supported. Thus, the

28

[26.5.3.2]

[26.5.4]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

basis for the Arbitral Tribunal’s finding that Article 3(1) of the IPA was breached by the unequal
treatment of IPB in the granting of state aid was not a circumstance that had occurred before the
Appellee acquired the shares with the result that the IPA became effective between the parties (i.e.
the 27 May 1998 Resolution), but, rather, circumstances that had occurred at a later stage. The
question whether the 27 May 1998 Resolution was as such compatible with the IPA was not
considered. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot therefore be accused of having exceeded the limits of its

ratione temporis jurisdiction.

The Appellant’s argument is essentially that the Arbitral Tribunal was not entitled to treat the
factual withholding of support from IPB at the time after the Appellee had invested into it as
conduct contrary to the treaty, given that, after the 27 May 1998 resolution, the Appellee (which
the Arbitral Tribunal, in this regard, unacceptably equates with Nomura) could no longer
reasonably expect that IPB would receive state aid in future if its existence were threatened.
However, the question whether, despite the publication of the 27 May 1998 government
resolution the Appellee could legitimately expect that IPB would receive public support like the
other three big banks if its non-performing loans problems got worse, and whether the Czech
government’s contrary conduct after the acquisition of the shares by the Appellee therefore
amounts to a violation of Article 3(1) of the IPA, concerns the substantive assessment made by
the Arbitral Tribunal on the merits, which cannot be challenged in the context of the public law
appeal against the present interim award in the first place (see above para 4.2). The Appellant’s
arguments therefore appear to be an attempt, under the guise of a jurisdictional objection, to
submit to the Federal Tribunal’s full review the merits of the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision,
although this is only available in appeals against a final award (see references in para 4.2 above)

and only for violations of substantive public order (Article 190(2)(e) PILA).

6.5.4 As explained in para 6.5.3 above, in its award, the Arbitral Tribunal implicitly rejected the
argument that the discrimination against IPB was completed with the 27 May 1998 Government
Resolution and the later factual withholding of state aid to the bank was nothing more than
consistent implementation of that resolution which the Appellee had to reckon with and which
therefore did not constitute an IPA breach. For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that

this does not represent a substantive preliminary question that is decisive for the decision on the
29

[26.5.4.1]

[26.5.4.2]

[26.5.4.3]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

Arbitral Tribunal’s ratione temporis jurisdiction of the kind that the Federal Tribunal must fully
review in the context of a jurisdictional objection (see para 6.2 above; on the other hand, see also
judgment of the European Court of Human Rights of 8 March 2006 paras 83 ef seq, where, as
part of the ratione temporis jurisdictional inquiry, it had to be decided what State act — and
therefore at what point in time — constituted the Convention breach [termination of a rental

agreement] alleged as the basis for the complaint).

The decisive element of the jurisdictional inquiry is the basis of the claim, i.e. the factual
circumstances from which the claimant seeks to derive its claims (see, in this regard, judgment of
the Federal Tribunal 4P.289/1998 of 23 March 1999, para Sa and b with reference to BGE 119 II
66 para 2 p. 68 et seq; see also BGE 131 III 153 para 5.1; 129 III 80 para 2.2 in fine; 122 III 249
para 3b/bb).

In the present case, the Appellee did not in its action claim that the 27 May 1998 resolution was
contrary to Article 3.1 IPA. Rather, it based its claim on the Appellant’s practice with respect to
support as such, and it is not disputed that the Arbitral Tribunal had the ratione temporis
jurisdiction to review such practice for compliance with the IPA. In this respect, the Arbitral
Tribunal’s ratione temporis jurisdiction was never challenged. As mentioned above (para 6.4), the
parties to the present proceedings also agree with the principle that the Arbitral Tribunal was
temporally competent to consider claims arising from alleged breaches of the international treaty,
insofar as these were justified by a factual circumstance that had occurred after the Respondent had
made its investment and therefore after the Investment Protection Agreement took effect as between

the parties.

When the Arbitral Tribunal came to the conclusion that the disputed support practice as such —
irrespective of the 27 May 1998 resolution — violated the right to fair and equitable treatment of
the Appellee’s investment in accordance with Article 3.1 of the IPA, it has made a pure merits
determination on the asserted basis of the claim. It did not thereby decide on any preliminary
substantive question decisive for its ratione temporis jurisdiction. Had it been in agreement with
the Appellant that the Czech government’s support practice did not, as such, constitute a

violation of IPA in view of the 27 May 1998 resolution, it would not by that reason have been

30

[26.6]

[27]

[28]

[28.1]

[28.2]

[28.3]

[28.4]

Translated by Thames Translation

Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

mereanes

TRANSLATION

required to make an award declining jurisdiction; rather, it would then have to render a decision
rejecting the Appellee’s request for a declaration to the contrary. This also appears to have been
the Appellant’s view during the arbitration, since it did not expressly complain therein that the
Arbitral Tribunal lacked temporal jurisdiction to consider the matter submitted to it (see para 6.3

above).

6.6 The complaint that the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its temporal jurisdiction in the contested

award, insofar as admissible, thus emerges as unfounded.

The public law appeal is rejected insofar as admissible. The unsuccessful Appellant shall bear the
costs and expenses of the proceedings (Articles 156(1) and 159(2) of the Judicial Organisation
Act).

Accordingly, the Federal Tribunal holds as follows:

1.

The public law complaint shall be dismissed to the extent admissible.
2.

The Appellant shall pay the court fee of CHF 100,000.

3.

The Appellant shall compensate the Appellee for the Federal Proceedings in the amount of CHF
150,000.--.

4.

This judgment shall be communicated in writing to the parties and to the UNCITRAL Arbitral

Tribunal, Geneva.

Translated by Thames Translation
Email: gluce @thamestranslation.com
Web site: https://www.thamestranslation.com

THAMES
(ee TRANSL ATION

Lausanne, 7 September 2006

On behalf of the I. Civil Division
of the Swiss Federal Tribunal

President Court Secretary

[signature] [signature]

[Stamp:] Swiss Federal Tribunal

