PCA Case No. 2013-13

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF
THE LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC CONCERNING THE
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS DATED 31
JANUARY 1993 AND THE 2010 UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

 

- between -

SANUM INVESTMENTS LIMITED

“Claimant”

- and -

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

(“Respondent,” and together with Claimant, the Parties”)

 

AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:
Professor Bernard Hanotiau
Professor Brigitte Stern
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda (Presiding Arbitrator)

Registry:
The Permanent Court of Arbitration

Tribunal Secretary:
Ms. Sarah Grimmer

13 December 2013

VI.

Vil.

 

TABLE OF CONTEN

   

 

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRE TATIVES.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 5

 

RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS.
SUMMARIES OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

 

 

 

A. WHETHER THE CLAIMANT IS COVERED BY THE BIT
1. Whether the BIT extends to the Macao SAR.......

(a) The *s Position. 13

(b)The Claimant’s P.

B. WHETHER SANUM QUALIFIES AS AN INVESTOR UNDER THE TREATY

 

 

ion. 23

  

 

 

 

 

1. Whether the Claimant is established under the municipal laws of the PRC 2,
(a) The ’s Position. 3
(b)The Claimant’s Position. 33

2. Whether the Claimant is an “economic entity”

(a) The ’s Position. 34
(b)The Claimant’s Position. 36

 

 

C. | WHETHER SANUM BRINGS INVESTMENT-RELATED CLAIMS UNDER THE BIT .....

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)The ’s Position 38
(b)The Claimant’s Position 40
D. WHETHER LAOS CONSENTED TO THE ARBITRATION OF THE CLAIMANT’S
CLAIMS UNDER THE BIT Al
1. Article 8 of the BIT Al
(a)The ’s Position Al
(b)The Claimant’s Position A5
2. Article 3(2) of the BIT ..

 

(a) The ’s Pos 49
(b)The Claimant’s P.

E. | WHETHER LIS PENDENS AND THE DOCTRINE AGAINS
BAR THE CLAIMS OF THE CLAIMANT

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

(a) The ’s Position 3
(b)The Claimant’s Position. 5
RELIEF REQUESTED

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALY:

 

 

A. APPLICABLE LAW

 

 

B. WHETHER THE CLAIMANT IS COVERED BY THE TREATY

PCA 109262 1

 

1. Whether the Treaty extends to the Macao SAR...

(a) The theoretical analysis of the relevance of the 1999 Notification to the
Secretary-General of the UN...

(b)The relevance of Article 29 of the VCLT and Article 15 of the VCST.....
(c) The Tribunal’s analysis of the concrete situation of the PRC/Laos BIT.....

 
 
 
  

2. Whether Sanum qualifies as an investor under the Treaty .....
(a) Whether Claimant is established under the municipal laws of the PRC.

(b) Whether Sanum qualifies as an “economic entity” within the meaning of
the Treaty? 81

 

3. Whether the Claimant has made an investment in Lao:

 

4. Whether Laos Consented to Arbitrate Sanum’s Claims under the Treaty...

(a) Whether the Respondent has consented to arbitrate Sanum’s claims
under Article 8 of the Treaty......

 

(b) Whether the Respondent has consented to arbitrate Sanum’s claims

 

 

 

under Article 3(2) 90
5. Whether the Doctrines of Lis Pendens and Against the Abuse of Process
Bar the Claims of the Claimant 94
VIII. COSTS 96
IX. DECISION 97

PCA 109262

 

THE PARTIES AND THEIR REPRES

 

TATIVES

The Claimant is Sanum Investments Limited (“Sanum” or “Claimant”), an entity incorporated
in the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”)
(“Macao SAR” or “Macao”). The Claimant is represented by Mr. David W. Rivkin and Ms.
Catherine M. Amirfar (Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, New York); Mr. Christopher K. Tahbaz
(Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, Hong Kong); and Mr. Todd Weiler (Barrister & Solicitor,

London, Ontario, Canada).

The Respondent is the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (“Laos” or
“Respondent”). The Respondent is represented by the Laos Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr.
David Branson (King Branson LLC, Washington, D.C.), Ms. Jane Willems, Ms. Teresa Cheng
S.C. (De Voeux Chambers, Hong Kong), Professor George A. Bermann (Columbia University
School of Law, New York) and L.S. Horizon (Vientiane).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Claimant commenced these proceedings by a Notice of Arbitration (“Notice”) dated
14 August 2013 pursuant to the Agreement between the Government of the People’s Republic
of China and the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 31 January 1993 (“PRC/Laos

Treaty”, “BIT”, “Treaty”).!
On 8 May 2013, the Tribunal and the Parties attended a first procedural conference in London.

On 21 May 2013, after consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.
1, which designated: (a) Singapore as the place of arbitration; (b) the Permanent Court of
Arbitration (“PCA”) as Registry; and (c) the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as the
applicable procedural rules. Procedural Order No. 1 also set forth the timetable of the

proceedings.
On 7 June 2013, the Claimant filed an Amended Notice of Arbitration (“Amended Notice’).

On 9 August 2013, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction with exhibits RE-O1 to
RE-18 and legal authorities RA-01 to RA-25.

PRC/Laos Treaty (Ex. D to Claimant's Amended Notice of Arbitration).

PCA 109262 3

On | October 2013, the Claimant filed its Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction with
(a) witness statements of Mr. John Baldwin, Mr. Clay Crawford, Mr. Richard A. Pipes; (b)
expert reports of Mr. Joseph P. Kalt, Ph.D. (with Appendices A to C) and the Innovation Group
(with Appendices A to G); (c) exhibits C-1 to C-421; and (d) legal authorities CLA-1 to CLA-
118.

On 8 October 2013, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing telephone conference call with the Parties.

On 11 October 2013, the Presiding Arbitrator issued Procedural Order No. 2 on behalf of the

Tribunal.

On 17 October 2013, the Respondent submitted its Reply in Support of its Objection to
Jurisdiction with exhibits RE-19 to RE-23 and legal authorities RA-27 to RA-34.

On 31 October 2013, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction accompanied by exhibit

C-422 and legal authorities CLA-119 to CLA-125.

On 6 November 2013, a hearing on jurisdiction was held in Singapore (“Hearing on
Jurisdiction”).? The attendees for the Claimant were Mr. John Baldwin, Mr. Shawn Scott, Mr.
David Rivkin, Ms. Catherine M. Amirfar, Ms. Samantha J. Rowe, Dr. Todd Weiler, and Ms.
Swee Yen Koh. The attendees for the Respondent were Ms. Jane Willems, Mr. David Branson,
Mr. Werner Tsu, Mr. Kongphanh Santivong, Prof. Dr. Bountiem Phissamay, Mr. Ket Kiettisak,
Mr. Khampheth Viraphondet, Mr. Sith Siripraphanh, Mr. Outakeo Keodouangsingh and Mr.

Phoukong Sisoulath.

At the conclusion of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal requested the Parties to file
further submissions on (a) the respective roles, if any, of Article 29 of the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (“WCLT”) and Article 15 of the 1978 Convention on the
Succession of States in Respect of Treaties (“WCST”), in relation to the application or non-
application of the PRC/Laos Treaty to the Macao SAR; and (b) an analysis of the texts of the
PRC/Portugal, PRC/Netherlands, Macao/Portugal, Macao/Netherlands bilateral investment
treaties to determine whether there exists any relationship between the treaties entered into by

Macao and those entered into by the PRC?

In advance of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Parties provided the Tribunal with an agreed core hearing
bundle of exhibits and legal authorities.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 175-176; Agreement between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Macao
SAR of the PRC on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, signed 22 May 2008

PCA 109262 4

Il.

On 15 November 2013, the Respondent submitted its Post-Hearing Submission in Support of its
Objection to Jurisdiction accompanied by Tables | to 4 and exhibits RE-24 to RE-46 and legal
authorities RA-35 to RA-53 (“Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission”), and the Claimant
submitted its Response to the Tribunal’s Questions on Jurisdiction accompanied by legal

authorities CLA-126 to CLA-150 (“Claimant’s Response”).

Following several e-mails from the Parties on 17 and 18 November 2013, on behalf of the
Tribunal, the Presiding Arbitrator directed the Parties to refrain from providing additional

submissions unless invited to do so by the Tribunal.

In Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal undertook to its decision on jurisdiction in a brief
statement to the Parties indicating whether the jurisdictional objections were upheld or denied as
soon as possible and not later than 15 December 2013. Such statement was to be followed by a
fully reasoned decision of the Tribunal. This Award on Jurisdiction constitutes the fully

reasoned decision of the Tribunal and thus obviates the need for a brief statement.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Prior to 1999, Macao was considered a “Chinese territory” over which Portugal exercised
administrative power.* After the handover of Macao by Portugal in 1999, the PRC resumed
sovereignty over Macao and established it as a special administrative region (“SAR”) under
Article 31 of the Constitution of the PRC and the Basic Law of the Macao SAR (“Macao SAR

Basic Law”).>

On 13 December 1999, the PRC filed a Notification regarding the Macao SAR with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations (“UN”) (“1999 Notification”)° that is recorded in a

 

6

(“Macao/Netherlands BIT”) (CLA-128); Agreement between the Portuguese Republic and the SAR of
Macao of the PRC Regarding the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed 17 May
2000 (“Macao/Portugal BIT”) (CLA-129); Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Government of the PRC and the Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, signed 26 November 2001 (“PRC/Netherlands BIT”) (CLA-130); Agreement between the
Portuguese Republic and the PRC on the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,
signed 10 December 2005 (“PRC/Portugal BIT”) (CLA-131).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, [ 23 referring to Articles 5(4) and 292 of the 1976 Constitution
of Portugal, 2 April 1976 (RE-10); and Article 1 of the Joint Declaration of the Government of the PRC
and the Government of the Republic of Portugal on the Question of Macao, 13 April 1987 (“Joint
Declaration”) (RE-11).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{| 25, 73; Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on
Jurisdiction, {{ 227. .

1999 Notification (RE-08).

PCA 109262 5

20.

21.

22.

23.

UN document entitled Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General: Status as at

J April 2009."
Sanum was established on 14 July 2005 under the laws of the Macao SAR.

In the spring of 2007, Mr. John Baldwin, Chairman of the Board of Sanum, travelled to Laos to
explore possibilities for investing in Laos upon learning that a locally incorporated entity
involved in the resort and gaming business—the ST Group (“ST”)—was in need of financing to

develop its gaming business.*

According to the Claimant, Mr. Baldwin subsequently met with individuals, attorneys,
representatives of ST, and high-ranking government officials to discuss cooperation in the
development of gaming enterprises in Laos.” Sanum eventually became involved in the

operation and development of two casinos and five slot clubs in Laos.

The Claimant alleges that, prior to its investment, its representatives were assured by Laos
government officials, including the Prime Minister, that Laos had favorable conditions for

° strongly respected the rule of law,'' and that Sanum would be accorded an

foreign investors,
ongoing majority control of its investment and long-term protection and security for those
investments and their returns,’ as well as a favorable and certain tax regime." Sanum submits
that the Prime Minister personally assured it that partnering with ST would be beneficial to it,'*
and that Laos would protect Sanum’s investment.'> Sanum further alleges that other officials of
the Respondent also assured Sanum representatives that they would support Sanum for as long

as it lived up to its commitments.

United Nations, Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General: Status as at 1 April 2009
(2009), Historical Information, China, Note 3, at VIII (“UN Status of Multilateral Treaties”) (CLA-
115/RE-18).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 44.

Amended Notice, {{{] 18-19; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {J 45-48.
Amended Notice, {{ 20.

Amended Notice, {{ 24; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {[ 52.
Amended Notice, {{ 20.

Amended Notice, {{ 21; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 52.
Amended Notice, {{ 22.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 53.

Amended Notice, {{ 23.

PCA 109262 6

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Conclusion of the Master Agreement

Sanum and ST formalized their relationship in a Master Agreement dated 30 May 2007, which
would govern all of the joint ventures in which the parties would participate.'’ Specifically, ST
promised Sanum 60% of each of its existing (and all future) gaming ventures, and Sanum
promised to make payments to ST (e.g. US$1.5 million upon signing the Master Agreement and
US$2 million upon receiving the government approvals to be arranged by ST) and to finance the
development of their planned ventures. '* According to the Respondent, the Master Agreement
was not intended to be a definitive agreement, but an “agreement to agree.”"”

The Master Agreement envisaged the creation of three joint ventures: (1) the Savan Vegas Hotel
and Casino (“Savan Vegas”), for which ST already held a concession; (2) the Paksong Vegas
Hotel and Casino (“Paksong Vegas”), for which ST already held a concession; and (3) three
slot clubs: the Vientiane Friendship Bridge Slot Club, also known as the Thanaleng Slot Club
(“Thanaleng”); the Lao Bao Slot Club (“Lao Bao”); and the Ferry Terminal Slot Club, also

known as Daensavan Slot Club (“Ferry Terminal”).””

Sanum’s investment and ownership in all of the joint ventures were contingent upon

Government acceptance and approval.”!

The Master Agreement provided that the gaming rights would be exclusively those of the joint

ventures.”
Project Development Agreements

On 10 August 2007, two project development agreements (“PDAs”) were concluded.”*

Amended Notice, { 26; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 49-51;
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 4.

Amended Notice, {{ 26; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 49.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 4.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 50; Respondent's Memorial on
Jurisdiction, 5.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 51; Respondent's Memorial on
Jurisdiction, | 6.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 6.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 7.

PCA 109262 7

29.

The first was concluded between Laos on the one hand and Sanum, Xaya Construction Co. Ltd.
(a Laotian company), and Mr. Xaysana Xaysoulivong, on the other hand, with respect to Savan
Vegas (“Savan Vegas PDA”).”' Therein, it was agreed that a joint venture—Savan Vegas and
Casino Co. Ltd.—would be established under the laws of Laos to implement the Savan Vegas
PDA (“Savan Vegas JVC”). The share ownership was divided as follows: Laos would own

20%, Sanum 60%, Xaya Construction Co. Ltd. 10%, and Mr. Xaysoulivong 10%.”

The second PDA was concluded between Laos on the one hand and Sanum, Nouansavanh
Construction Co. Ltd. (a Laotian company), and Mr. Sittixay Xaysana, on the other hand, with

respect to Paksong Vegas (“Paksong Vegas PDA”).”’

Therein, it was agreed that a joint
venture—Paksong Vegas and Casino Co. Ltd—would be established under the laws of Laos to
implement the Paksong Vegas PDA (“Paksong Vegas JVC”).* The share ownership was
divided as follows: Laos would own 20%, Sanum 60%, Nouansavanh Construction Co. Ltd.

10%, and Mr. Xaysana 10%.”

Both PDAs provided for dispute settlement by arbitration before the Economic Dispute

wg 3
Organization in Singapore. °

The Claimant submits that, through the PDAs, the Government agreed to an “Investment
Incentive Policy” pursuant to which the joint ventures would be exempt from certain taxes."!
According to the Claimant, the Government subsequently entered into a Flat Tax Agreement

(“FTA”) with Savan Vegas that capped annual taxes through the end of 2013.”

On 31 October 2007, the Government, Sanum, and ST executed Shareholders’ Agreements for

Savan Vegas and Paksong Vegas.*

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 7; Savan Vegas PDA (RE-03).
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 7.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 7.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 7; Paksong Vegas PDA (RE-04).
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 7.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 7.

Article 22 of the Savan Vegas PDA (RE-03) and Paksong Vegas PDA (RE-04).
Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {7

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {7

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 57; Shareholders’ Agreement between
the Lao Government, Sanum, Xaya Construction Co., Lid., Xaysana Xaysoulivong, and Savan Vegas,
dated 31 October 2007 (“Savan Vegas Shareholders’ Agreement”) (C-056); Shareholders’ Agreement

PCA 109262 8

The Slot Clubs

According to the Claimant, negotiations over the future ownership and management of ST’s
three existing slot clubs—Thanaleng, Lao Bao, and Ferry Terminal—also proceeded in 2007

and 2008.**

On 6 August 2007, Sanum and ST entered into a Participation Agreement concerning the Lao
Bao and Ferry Terminal Slot Clubs according to which Sanum would supply and maintain
certain gaming machines in exchange for a percentage share in the revenue generated (60%).**
Sanum and ST also entered into additional agreements concerning the Lao Bao and Ferry
Terminal Slot Clubs, which granted Sanum management control of the clubs and protection of
its 60% stake.*°

On 4 October 2008, Sanum and ST entered into a Participation Agreement concerning the
Thanaleng Slot Club, pursuant to which Sanum would supply and maintain certain gaming

machines in exchange for revenue share.”

Sanum claims that it also invested in new slot club ventures in the provinces in which the
Government had granted its investments monopoly gaming rights. On 25 October 2009, Savan
Vegas opened a new slot club in Paksan. It also began exploring the possibility of having Savan

Vegas open a slot club and international welcome center in Thakhaek.**
The Claimant describes its investment in Laos as follows:

Sanum has made substantial investments [...], including capital investments in its various
Lao enterprises and projects exceeding US$85 million. It is a majority shareholder in both
Savan Vegas and Paksong Vegas, which have been granted fifty-year land and
development concessions and enjoy valuable monopoly gaming rights in five provinces
pursuant to several agreements with the Lao Government, including the [PDAs] for each
casino project. Sanum has ownership stakes in the Thanaleng, Lao Bao, and Ferry

 

between the Lao Government, Sanum, Nouansavanh Construction Co., Ltd., and Lao River Mining Sole
Co., Ltd., and Paksong Vegas, dated 31 October 2007 (“Paksong Vegas Shareholders’ Agreement”)
(C-057).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 59.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 59; Lao Bao and Ferry Terminal
Participation Agreement, dated 6 August 2007 (C-051).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 59; Ancillary Agreement between ST and
Sanum, dated 1 September 2009 (C-063); Assignment of Lease, Ferry Terminal slot club, dated 1
September 2009 (C-064); Assignment of Leases, Lao Bao Slot Club, dated 1 September 2009 (C-065).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 59.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 60.

PCA 109262 9

40.

Terminal slot clubs, and is entitled to a share of their revenues. Sanum also brought in
highly experienced slot and casino managers to assist in running Savan Vegas, and it has
leveraged its extensive knowledge of the gaming industry to introduce new multistation
games at Thanaleng, which proved very popular and contributed to the club’s success.
Such industry expertise and business know-how has generated considerable returns for
Sanum’s businesses, which have operated pursuant to the required licenses issued by the
Lao Government.”

The Claimant's Claims

It is the Claimant’s case that its investments, once operational, were successful, but that
the Government of Laos, including its courts and provincial authorities, conducted itself in such
a way as to breach multiple obligations under the Treaty; namely, breach of (a) the fair and
equitable treatment obligation under Article 3(1); (b) the expropriation provision in Article 4;
(c) the guarantee of transfer of payments provision in Article 5; and (d) the obligation under
Article 3(2) to provide an investor no less favorable treatment than that provided to investors of

third States.”
The Respondent's Limited Response on the Facts

The Respondent makes limited submissions on the facts at this stage of the proceedings.*! It
submits that (a) the investors have not made any capital investments but rather claim (without
providing documentary evidence) to have loaned approximately US$65 million to the casino;*
(b) over the first four years of casino operations, Savan Vegas reported gambling revenues
increased to US$74 million per year but, according to Savan Vegas, every year the casino made
a loss, relieving it of its obligation to pay out to its shareholders; (c) there are concerns over
the legitimacy of claimed expenses on the casino’s books and loans apparently paid by Mr.
Baldwin with respect to which he has been receiving interest payments. “* The Respondent
intimates that it will file a counterclaim seeking to terminate all of the relevant agreements with

the Claimant.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 273; Hearing Transcript, p. 66.
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 313.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, {{ 54-57.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 55.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, 56.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, 56.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 57.

PCA 109262 10

41.

42.

43.

S

S

4.

5.

Related Proceedings

On the same day that the present arbitration was commenced, Lao Holdings N.V. (“Lao
Holdings”), a company formed in Aruba, the Netherlands, and the 100% owner of Sanum, also

commenced arbitration proceedings against Laos pursuant to the bilateral investment treaty

concluded between the Netherlands and Laos in 2005 (“Lao Holdings Arbitration”).“°

In April 2013, Lao Holdings requested provisional measures from the tribunal in the related
proceedings.*’ On 17 September 2013, the tribunal in the Lao Holdings Arbitration awarded
provisional measures to the claimant ordering the parties to maintain the status quo with respect

to investments subject to that arbitration.*

RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

The Preamble to the Treaty provides, in relevant part:

The Government of the People’s Republic of China and the Government of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic (hereinafter referred to as Contracting States),

Desiring to encourage, protect and create favorable conditions for investment by investors
of one Contracting State in the territory of the other Contracting State based on the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit and for the
purpose of the development of economic cooperation between both States [...]

Article 1(1) of the Treaty provides, in relevant part:

The term “investments” means every kind of asset invested by investors of one

Contracting State in accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Contracting

State in the territory of the latter, including mainly

(a) movable and immovable property and other property rights;

(b) — shares in companies or other forms of interest in such companies;

(c) aclaim to money or to any performance having an economic value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property, know-how and technological process;

(e) concessions conferred by law, including concessions to search for or to exploit
natural resources.

Article 1(2)(b) of the Treaty provides, in relevant part:

The term “investors” means:

In respect of both Contracting States:
(b) economic entities established in ac
contracting State.

 
  

rdance with the laws and regulations of each

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 2(i).
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 10.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 24.

PCA 109262 ll

46. Article 3(1) and 3(2) of the Treaty provide:

(1) Investments and activities associated with investments of investors of either
Contracting State shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy protection
in the territory of the other Contracting State.

(2) The treatment and protection as mentioned in Paragraph | of this Article shall not be
less favorable than that accorded to investments and activities associated with such
investments of investors of a third State.

47. Article 4(1) and 4(2) of the Treaty provide:

(1) Neither Contracting State shall expropriate, nationalize or take similar measures
(hereinafter referred to as “expropriation’”) against investments of investors of the other
Contracting state in its territory, unless the following conditions are met:

(a) as necessitated by the public interest;

(b) in accordance with domestic legal procedures;

(c) without discrimination;

(d) against appropriate and effective compensation.

(2) The compensation mentioned in paragraph 1(d) of this Article shall be equivalent to
the value of the expropriated investments at the time when expropriation is proclaimed,
be convertible and freely transferable. The compensation shall be paid without
unreasonable delay.

48. Article 8(1), 8(2), and 8(3) of the Treaty provide:

(1) Any dispute between an investor of one Contracting State and the other Contracting
State in connection with an investment in the territory of the other Contracting State shall,
as far as possible, be settled amicably through negotiation between the parties to the
dispute.

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled through negotiation within six months, either party to
the dispute shall be entitled to submit the dispute to the competent court of the
Contracting State accepting the investment.

(3) If a dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation cannot be settled
through negotiation within six months as specified in paragraph | of this Article, it may
be submitted at the request of either party to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal. The provisions of
this paragraph shall not apply if the investor concerned has resorted to the procedure
specified in the paragraph 2 of this Article.

 

49. Article 29 of the VCLT states:

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, a treaty is
binding upon each party in respect of its entire territory.

50. Article 15 of the VCST provides:

PCA 109262

When part of the territory of a State, or when any territory for the international relations of
which a State is responsible, not being part of the territory of that State, becomes part of
the territory of another State:

a) treaties of the predecessor State cease to be in force in respect of the territory to which
the succession of States relates from the date of the succession of States; and

b) treaties of the successor State are in force in respect of the territory to which the
succession of States relates from the date of the succession of States, unless it appears
from the treaty or is otherwise established that the application of the treaty to that territory
would be incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty or would radically change
the conditions for its operation.

SUMMARIES OF THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

WHETHER THE CLAIMANT IS COVERED BY THE BIT

1. Whether the BIT extends to the Macao SAR
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that the BIT does not provide protection to the Claimant because the

BIT does not extend to cover the Macao SAR.”

The Respondent notes that the PRC resumed the exercise of sovereignty over Macao in 1999,
and established Macao as an SAR pursuant to Article 31 of the PRC Constitution and the Macao
SAR Basic Law.*° The Respondent alleges that the Macao SAR Basic Law establishes the
capacity of Macao to enter into international trade arrangements on its own behalf! and to adopt
its own policies and laws on the protection and development of industry and commerce,” which
includes the power to execute bilateral investment treaties.** It further contends that the Macao
SAR Basic Law provides that international agreements to which the PRC is a party would not
apply automatically in the Macao SAR but must instead be decided by the Central Government

of the PRC.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 32-37.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{ 25, 71.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 27; Articles 106 and 112 of the Basic Law of the Macao SAR
(RE-09).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 28; Article 114 of the Basic Law of the Macao SAR (RE-09).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 29-30; Articles 22 and Article 136 of the Basic Law of the
Macao SAR (RE-09).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 31; Article 138 of the Basic Law of the Macao SAR (RE-09).

PCA 109262 13

According to the Respondent, it is common ground that Article 29 of the VCLT, which contains
the customary international law rule of “moving treaty frontiers”, is operative in this case

because Laos and the PRC are both signatories to the VCLT.**

The Respondent further submits that Article 15 of the VCST is an expression of customary
international law.”° According to the Respondent, the rule is “commonly understood to have
two aspects, one negative (treaties of the predecessor State cease to be in force in the portion of
territory in question, except for certain types of treaties or specific circumstances) and one
positive (treaties of the successor State become in force in the portion of territory in question,
except for certain types of treaties or specific circumstances).”*’ The Respondent specifies that
the “rule formulated in Article 15 of the [VCST] in its negative and positive aspects and the
exceptions applicable to the rule in both aspects are well grounded in customary international

law.?58

The Respondent submits that both Articles 29 of the VCLT and Article 15 of the VCST co-

exist, are “very closely connected” and compatible.*?

It is the Respondent's case that the Treaty does not extend to the Macao SAR because it falls
within the exceptions to Article 29 of the VCLT® and the exceptions to Article 15 of the
vcsrT."!

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission, { 2.

 

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission, ff 2-12, referring to, inter alia, Cahier, “Quelques aspects de la
Convention de 1978 sur la succession d’Etats en matire de traités”, in Dutoit and Grisel (eds), Mélanges
Georges Perrin (Lausanne: Payot, 1984), pp. 73-74 (“Cahier”) (RA-39). In an e-mail dated 17

November 2013, the Claimant submitted that the Respondents reference to Cahier:

“misleadingly implies that Cahier was discussing the exceptions in Article 15 as being
custom, when it is clear from an even cursory review that he was instead describing the
customary moving treaty frontiers rule — and not the exceptions that were added to Article
15 by the International Law Commission. (The full, brief discussion by Cahier of Article 15
was the following: ‘Article 15 provides that when part of a State’s territory becomes part of
the territory of another State, the predecessor's treaties cease to apply and the successor’s
treaties become applicable to it. This rule is the corollary of the principle announced in
Article 29 of the VCLT, according to which a treaty is binding upon each party with regard
to its entire territory. This provision corresponds to State practice, it was adopted without
amendment at the Conference and it simply codifies a customary rule.’).” (Claimant's
emphasis)

See also Hearing Transcript, pp. 54, 57.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, 4.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, 12.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {ff 15-16, 22.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 35-37; Hearing Transcript, p. 16.

PCA 109262 14

The Respondent contends that the 1999 Notification filed by the PRC with the UN Secretary-
General as depositary operates as a reservation to the territorial application of the BIT to the
Macao SAR.” The Respondent emphasizes that the 1999 Notification specifically provided for
the application of the treaties listed in its Annexes I and II to the Macao SAR,” and that the BIT

was not listed in either of these two Annexes.

The Respondent cites paragraph IV of the 1999 Notification, which states that the PRC “will go
through separately the necessary formalities for [the] application [of treaties that are not listed in
the Annexes to this Note] to the Macao [SAR] if it so decided.” The Respondent argues that
Laos would have had to have been notified separately if the BIT were to be extended to the
Macao SAR and it was not.® The Respondent also notes that Article 138 of the Macao SAR
Basic Law requires consultation with the Macao SAR before a decision regarding treaty
application, and points to the absence of evidence in this case that the Macao SAR has indeed

been consulted.”

The Respondent rejects the argument of the Claimant that the 1999 Notification relates only to
multilateral treaties by stating that: (a) the Overview of the UN Treaty Collection (‘UNTC”)
does not distinguish between the different locations as to where the 1999 Notification is
deposited; (b) the UNTC covers both multilateral and bilateral treaties; (c) the capacity of the
UN to register, file and record treaties is not distinct as between bilateral and multilateral
treaties; (d) Article 102 of the UN Charter requires “treaties” and “international agreements” to
be registered with the Secretariat before parties to such treaties or agreements can invoke them
before an organ of the UN, and, while neither the UN Charter nor the regulations define either
term, the Secretariat defers to the definition of Member States submitting such instruments for
registration; and (e) there is no distinction with regard to the depositary practice for bilateral and

multilateral treaties.“* The Respondent further notes that the requirements for the deposit of

 

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 32; Hearing Transcript, pp. 15-16.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 20, 148-149.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 41.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 42; Hearing Transcript, pp. 18-19.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 41, 43; Hearing Transcript, p. 19.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {¥{ 43, 53(5); Hearing Transcript, p. 26.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{ 43, 53(6), 78; Hearing Transcript, pp. 59-60.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, { 42, referring to the UNTC at http://treaties.un.org; UN Charter:
Chapter XVI: Miscellaneous Provisions (RA-28); Definition key terms used in the UNTC at

y ies.un.org/Pages/Overview.asp) th: iew/definil age l_en. (RA-29);
Notes verbales from the Legal Counsel relating to the depositary practice and the registration of treaties

PCA 109262 15

60.

61.

instruments does not limit the UN Secretary-General to acting as depositary for multilateral
treaties alone (in spite of the focus on multilateral treaties by the Summary of Practice of the
Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral Treaties®) as evidenced by the phrase “deposit
of binding instruments.”””

Further, the Respondent submits that the reference to “multilateral treaties” in the UN document
containing the 1999 Notification does not change the effect of the PRC’s notification in which
the PRC expressly refers to international agreements, and draws no distinction between

multilateral or bilateral treaties.”

The Respondent also argues that the Claimant’s submission
that the notification only applies to treaties that are to be deposited with the Secretary-General
as depositary is irrelevant because that is an external reference and what should be considered is
the intent of the PRC as expressed in the 1999 Notification, i.e., that the Treaty is not listed as

one that extends to the Macao SAR.”

In the Respondent’s view, there exists an important body of practice as well as authority
regarding the qualification of the rule of automatic succession (or extension) of treaties when it
comes to certain types of treaties or circumstances, e.g., “personal” or “bilateral” treaties.”*
According to the Respondent, the 1999 Notification drew a distinction between (a) treaties that
apply to Macao by virtue of the application to the entire Chinese territory (including Macao) as
a result of their character (e.g., treaties concerning foreign affairs or defense); and (b) treaties
that applied to Macao before 20 December 1999, the date of transfer of sovereign rights.”* To

determine whether treaties concluded by the PRC but not included in the 1999 Notification

 

0

pursuant to Article 102 of the UN Charter, http://treaties.un.
/definition/page1_en.xmlfagreements (RA-30).
Summary of Practice of the Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral Treaties, STILEG/7/Rev. 1,

United Nations, New York, 1999, 4 277, 285 (1999) (‘Summary of UNSG Depositary Practice”)
(RA-03).

org/Pages/Overview.aspx ?path=overview

   

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, §[ 43, referring to the Communication from the Legal Counsel of the
United Nations in relation to the requirements for the deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance,
approval, accession and the like with the Secretary-General dated 11 March 2002 (Ref: LA41TR/221/1)
(RA-31); see also Summary of UNSG Depositary Practice (RA-03).

Hearing Transcript, pp. 149, 155-156.
Hearing Transcript, pp. 149-150.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {f 17-19.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 20.

PCA 109262 16

62.

63.

64.

80

extend to Macao, the Respondent considers that it is necessary to refer to the treaty-making

powers of Macao under the Joint Declaration and the Macao SAR Basic Law.”°

The Respondent emphasizes the fact that both instruments recognize Macao’s treaty-making
powers in economic and cultural matters. The Respondent argues that “[uJ]nder these
conditions, there can be no doubt that bilateral investment treaties and other commercial treaties
concluded by China with third countries do not automatically apply to Macao under the positive
aspect of the basic rule [of Article 15] but are instead the object of an exception to such rule.”””

The Respondent cites Article 20(5) of the VCLT which states that a State is deemed to have
accepted a reservation if it has raised no objection within twelve months after either being
notified of the reservation or expressing consent to the treaty, whichever is later.” The
Respondent notes that Laos did not object to the 1999 Notification within the stipulated twelve

months.””

The Respondent stresses that a state’s unilateral declaration can create legal obligations, *°
regardless of the declaration’s form.*! The Respondent contends that good faith binds States to
international obligations that are created by a unilateral declaration and that interested States are

entitled to demand that such obligations be d.*? The Resp argues that

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 20; Joint Declaration (RE-11); Basic Law of the Macao SAR

(RE-09).

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 20; Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 27; Articles 106
and 112 of the Basic Law of the Macao SAR (RE-09); Joint Declaration (RE-11); Hearing Transcript, pp.
147-148

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 21.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 44, referring to Article 20(5) of the VCLT (RE-07), which
provides:

 

“[...] unless the treaty otherwise provides, a reservation is considered to have been
accepted by a State if it shall have raised no objection to the reservation by the end of a
period of twelve months after it was notified of the reservation or by the date on which it
expressed its consent to be bound by the treaty, whichever is later.”

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 44, referring to Article 20(5) of the VCLT (RE-07); Hearing
Transcript, p. 27.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 49-51, referring to the Nuclear Tests Case (New Zealand v.
France), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1974 (20 Dec. 1974) 4 43, 45-47 (“Nuclear Tests Case”) (RA-05)
and Summary of Judgment in the Nuclear Tests Case, p. 99 (RA-06); Mr. Victor R. Cedefio, “First
Report on Unilateral Acts of States,” (A/CN.4/486), (1998) 2 YBILC (Part One), p. 327, {1 59, 86, 89
(“Cedefio”) (RA-07); Hearing Transcript, pp. 24-25.

 

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 52, referring to Cedefio, | 85 (RA-07).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 54, referring to the Nuclear Tests Case, at | 54 (RA-05);
Hearing Transcript, p. 25.

PCA 109262 17

65.

66.

67.

90

IV of the 1999 Notification entitles Laos to rely on the PRC’s unilateral declaration and
supports its legitimate expectation that the BIT not be extended to the Macao SAR until the

PRC made a notification to this effect."

The Respondent notes that Laos accepted the position of the PRC by not objecting to it or
otherwise taking any action with regard to it over the years.“* From the above, the Respondent
contends that the Contracting Parties had effectively established a different intention from the

customary rule in Article 29 of the VCLT.

The Respondent clarifies that, contrary to the contention of the Claimant, reservations can apply
in the bilateral context and are not explicitly excluded by the VCLT.* It also distinguishes the
present case from those cited by the Claimant, by noting that those cases involved reservations
being proposed prior to or during the signing of the bilateral treaties.” Respondent stresses in
any case that it relies on the reservation as a unilateral declaration that gives rise to legitimate
expectations on the part of the other party and, correspondingly, to legal implications such as
estoppel by convention.** The Respondent also argues that, under public international law, the
unilateral declaration of a state can amount to a reservation and satisfy the “otherwise

established” exception contained in Article 29 of the VcLT.”

The Respondent points out that the BIT entered into force in 1993 at a time when Macao was a
dependent territory of Portugal. In 1999, when the PRC assumed sovereignty over Macao and
established the Macao SAR, the PRC could not have extended the application of the BIT to
Macao because the governmental powers of the Macao SAR were established in the Macao

SAR Basic Law.” It further notes that trade and investment policy operate separately as

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 53, 60-64, referring to the Nuclear Tests Case, 4 57 (RA-05);
Hearing Transcript, p. 26.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 56-57; Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 31.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 31.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, {{ 29, referring to Dorr & Schmalenbach, Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties: A Commentary (2012), p. 241 (“Dérr and Schmalenbach”) (RA-26).

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 29.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 29.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 45-47, referring to Dérr and Schmalenbach, pp. 493-494
(RA-26); Summary of UNSG Depositary Practice, {| 277, 285 (1999) (RA-03); Corten & Klein, The
Vienna Conventions on the Law of Treaties: A Commentary (2011) (Oxford University Press), p. 738
(‘Corten & Klein”) (RA-04); see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 20, 22-24, referring to Dorr and
Schmalenbach, pp. 500-501.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 71-72.

PCA 109262 18

68.

69.

between Mainland China and the Macao SAR.”! This is illustrated, the Respondent contends,
by the fact that the Macao SAR entered into separate BITs with the Netherlands and Portugal
after 1999.

The Respondent clarifies that the issue of the territorial application of the BIT to the Macao
SAR involves and is intended to involve consideration of the PRC Constitution and the Macao
SAR Basic Law, as established by legal authority and references in the BIT to municipal law.”*
The Respondent notes that Article 18 of the Macao SAR Basic Law provides that PRC national
laws must be listed in Annex III if they are to be incorporated in the laws of the Macao SAR.”
On this basis, the BIT has never been extended to the Macao SAR and therefore can only have

effect in Mainland China.”*

In response to the argument of the Claimant that the PRC could have prevented the default
application of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule by expressly excluding Macao from the
territorial scope of the BIT when it was executed in 1993, as the PRC and Portugal had already
entered into the Joint Declaration on the issue of Macao at that time, the Respondent states that:
(a) in 1993, the PRC did not have the jurisdiction to state the position of Macao; and (b) the
Joint Declaration of the PRC and Portugal entered into in 1987 contains provisions—namely,
Articles 3, 4, and 5 and Annex II—regarding the autonomy of Macao that were still being
negotiated and had not yet been finalized in 1993, making it impossible to ascertain the effect of
this Joint Declaration at that time. °° Moreover, the Claimant contends that the Joint
Declarations entered into by the PRC for Macao and Hong Kong with Portugal and the United

Kingdom respectively oblige it to maintain their capitalist systems and respect their autonomy.”

The Respondent also notes that the Claimant relies on the exception in the Agreement between
the Government of the Russian Federation and the PRC on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (“PRC/Russia BIT”) concerning its application to the Macao SAR.”*

The Respondent argues that, in that case, the PRC merely reiterated its position as enunciated in

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 73-75.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 73-75.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 67-70, referring to Corten & Klein, pp. 737-738 (RA-04), the
Preamble and Articles 7 and 12 of the Treaty.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 76.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 76.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 26, referring to the Joint Declaration (RE-11).
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 41.

PRC/Russia BIT, signed 9 November 2006 (CLA-90).

PCA 109262 19

100

101

102

103

108

105

106

107

the 1999 Notification; it chose to create the exception in the text of the treaty itself.°° The
Respondent asserts that this does not undermine or nullify the legal effect of the 1999
Notification,’ and is “consistent with the position adopted by China since the resumption of
sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao in 1997 and 1999, respectively.”!”"

In response to the argument of the Claimant that the Respondent’s interpretation of the BIT
would be contrary to the purpose of the investment treaty regime, in that it would deny Hong
Kong and Macao investors the protection available to other Chinese investors, the Respondent
submits that by the provisions of the Macao SAR Basic Law, Macao is given full autonomy of
its economic affairs, including the power to enter into agreements with other States in the field
of economics and trade (Articles 136 and 138 of the Macao SAR Basic Law).'” This internal
arrangement, the Respondent claims, evidences the intention of the PRC, enunciated in the 1999
Notification, to preclude the automatic application of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule in
relation to both the PRC’s bilateral and multilateral treaties entered into before the handover.'**
This is not inconsistent with the purposes of the investment treaty regime, the Respondent
argues, because the economic structure and development of the PRC and Macao was

indisputably different in 1999.!°*

In response to the Claimant’s argument that the Respondent's interpretation would have a wide
impact as it would be applicable to all Chinese BITs, the Respondent submits that the
Claimant's interpretation would have the effect of rendering over 130 BITs automatically

applicable to Hong Kong and Macao; something that was never contemplated.'** This number

106 5

exceeds the number of BITs each SAR has entered into in its history. also brings the

application of the BIT under an exception to Article 15 of the VCST by radically changing the

107

condition of its operation.""’ The Respondent points out that the Macao SAR has the autonomy

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 40.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 40.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, { 26.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 26.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 26.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 26.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 39; Hearing Transcript, pp. 58-59.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 39.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 58, 147-148.

PCA 109262 20

108

109

10

Respondent's Reply on Juri

to enter into its own BITs with other States,’ and, like Hong Kong, it has entered into its own

BITs with other States.'”

With reference to BITs with third states concluded by both the PRC and Macao as well as BITs
with third States entered into by the PRC and Hong Kong, the Respondent notes that none
contain an express provision extending them to the Macao or Hong Kong SARs, respectively.''”
The Respondent places particular emphasis on the PRC/Netherlands BIT in which the
Netherlands expressly extended it to cover the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba whereas the PRC

did not similarly extend it to cover Macao or Hong Kong."

The Respondent also submits that (a) before and after the resumption of sovereignty, the PRC,
Hong Kong, and Macao have each entered into BITs with the same third States; (b) the
territorial definition in the BITs clearly indicates that Macao and the Hong Kong SARs have the
power to enter into BITs to cover their own territory notwithstanding that the PRC has also
entered into BITs with the same third States. This indicates that the territorial limit of the PRC
BITs are confined to Mainland China.''* The Respondent also points out that different forms of

dispute resolution provisions have been resorted to by the PRC, Hong Kong and Macao.''*

It is the Respondent’s submission that, if the PRC BITs would, by reason of the “moving treaty
frontiers” rule, automatically extend to Macao and Hong Kong after the resumption of
sovereignty, the PRC would not allow the SARs to enter into BITs with the same third States
with which it has concluded treaties.''* Nor would that be necessary.'!* It would lead to “legal

chaos” for foreign investors in the PRC, Macao and Hong Kong.''°

 

iction, 4 26.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 39.

”s Post-Hearing ission, 4 25 BIT (CLA-128); gal BIT
(CLA-129); PRC/Netherlands BIT (CLA- 130): PRC/Portugal BIT (CLA-131).

 

 

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, { 25.

See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission, {{{[ 31-34 for the territorial definitions contained in the PRC,
Hong Kong and Macao BITs, which the Respondent claims, show that irrespective of the timing of the
BITs into which it has entered, the PRC has chosen to maintain the position set forth in the two
Notifications and not to extend any BITs to Macao or Hong Kong.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 27.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 30.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 30.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 30.

PCA 109262 21

122

The Respondent further argues that its interpretation of the 1999 Notification is consistent with
the PRC’s “one country, two systems” policy in that it aligns with the economic and legal
independence of the Macao SAR from Mainland China.'!” It contends, furthermore, that it is
the position of the Claimant that contradicts this policy and would, in the long run, adversely
affect the economic development of the SARs.''* The Respondent submits that the interests of
Laos would not be affected by its position because Macao and Laos did not have a treaty prior

to the handover in 1999."

The Respondent rebuts the Claimant’s reliance on Gallagher & Shan for its interpretation on the
grounds that: (a) the passage cited by the Claimant refers to the issue of “treaty coverage on
persons (and entities)” which is different from the territorial coverage of a treaty; (b) the
passage is based on the ICSID case of Tza Yap Shum v. The Republic of Peru, which stands for
the proposition that investors should not be denied protection under Chinese BITs if the term
“autonomy” in the Macao SAR Basic Law is properly construed, which under the circumstances
of this case, supports the Respondent’s position on the exception to the automatic extension of
treaties; and (c) the decision in Tza Yap Shum—which it notes has been severely criticized—is
distinguishable because it dealt with the issue of the nationality of a natural person, which is not

an issue in the present case.'?

The Respondent notes that the PRC is a unitary state and therefore the “federal clause”
exception, whereby treaties entered into by individual federated States do not automatically bind

the entire federation, is not applicable to it.'*"

The Respondent nevertheless likens the PRC to a
federation, as its three territorial units (namely the Mainland, the Hong Kong SAR, and the

Macao SAR) have their own legal, economic, and judicial systems.'"? The SARs are largely

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 26.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 35.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 36.
Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 37, referring to the Journal of World Investment & Trade, Volume
10, Number 6, December 2009, “Queries to the Recent ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction Upon the Case of
Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru: Should the PRC-Peru BIT 1994 be Applied to Hong Kong SAR under
the ‘One Country Two Systems’ Policy”, Chen An; Tza Yap Shum v. The Republic of Peru, ICSID Case

No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, February 12, 2009 (“Tza Yap Shum”) (CLA-
70/RA-10).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 49 79-81, referring to Oppenheim’s International Law, 9" ed.
(1992) Vol. 1, 76 (RA-11); Corten & Klein, p. 746 (RA-12).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 82.

PCA 109262 22

80.

81.

126

127

128

129

autonomous from the Mainland and have the right to be consulted before treaties to which the

PRC is a party are extended to them.'*

The Respondent also argues that, prior to the handover to the PRC, Portugal treated Macao as a
dependent territory. The International Law Commission (“ILC”) noted that the “moving treaty

frontiers” rule does not necessarily apply to the case of a dependent territory.'*

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant notes that it is uncontested that Macao became part of the territory of the PRC
following the handover from Portugal on 1 January 1999.'°° It notes that the decision of the
PRC to structure its governance of Macao as an SAR is a matter of domestic law, distinct from
and irrelevant to the international law issue of whether Macao falls within the sovereignty of the
PRC."

The Claimant contends that whether the PRC/Laos BIT extends to Macao requires an
application of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule, enshrined in Article 29 of the VCLT,'”
according to which, unless a different intention is established, a treaty must be understood as
applicable automatically and of its own force in respect of any territory newly acquired by one
of its parties.'** It is the Claimant's case that the PRC treaties in force as of the date of the
handover of Macao automatically apply to the entirety of the territory over which the PRC
exercised its sovereignty, including Macao, absent any indication from the PRC to the

contrary.'”?

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 82.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, §{{ 83-84, referring to the Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-sixth session, 6 May-26 July 1974, reproduced in A/9610/Rev. 1,
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1974, vol. IL (Part One), 157, p. 208 (ILC
Commentary 1974”) (RA-13).

 

 

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 227.
Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 227.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 4 228-229, referring to the VCLT (RE-
07); Odendahl, “Article 29: Territorial Scope of Treaties”, in Dérr and Schmalenbach, p. 498 (CLA-102);
ILC Commentary 1974, p. 208 (“Odendahl”) (RA-13); Villiger, Commentary on the 1969 Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (Martinus Nijhoff 2009), pp. 392, 393 (“Villiger”) (CLA-116).

 

 

Claimant’ s Response, 4; see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 157-160.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 230.

PCA 109262 23

82.

83.

84.

85.

130

The Claimant submits that Article 29 of the VCLT represents an applicable rule of customary

international law.'°

The Claimant notes that Laos and the PRC are parties to the VCLT.'*! The
Claimant also points out that Laos accepts that the exceptions contained in Article 29 of the

VCLT are those that apply to this case.'*

According to the Claimant, the rule in Article 29 of the VCLT is reflected, in part, in Article 15
of the VCST.'*> However, the Claimant contends that there is no evidence of the requisite
consistent State practice or opinio juris to support the notion that all of the VCST’s provisions
reflect customary international law.’ In particular, the Claimant argues that the exceptions to
the rule in Article 15 of the VCST that differ from the customary rule reflected in Article 29 of
the VCLT cannot be considered to reflect customary international law.'** The Claimant notes

that Laos and the PRC have not ratified the VCST.'*°

The Claimant states that even if the exceptions under Article 15 of the VCST applied as a matter
of customary international law, which it denies, they would not preclude the automatic
extension of the BIT to Macao in 1999.'*” Article 15 looks only to the language and application

138

of the Treaty and not to the internal constitutional arrangements in a given State.'“* Moreover,

the threshold for establishing the exceptions is a high one.'*”

Concerning the first exception, the Claimant argues that the Treaty contains no territorial limits;

nor does it limit the category or territorial origin of investors entitled to its protection."

   

Claimant’s Response, {{[ 9-13; Hearing Transcript, pp. 71, 168. The Claimant emphasizes that it is not
the case that the customary rule in Article 29 of the VCLT applied only at the time the BIT was executed
in 1993, and that its application is supplanted by Article 15 of the VCST for the purposes of determining
the BIT’s territorial scope in 1999 and thereafter. Rather, the Claimant asserts that the principle in
Article 29 means generally that, at any given time, a State is bound by a treaty in respect of any territory
of which it is sovereign. The application of the customary rule in Article 29 means that a territorial
change after the entry into force of a treaty alters the treaty’s frontiers going forward. (Claimant's
Response, ff 14-18)

Claimant’ s Response, 3.

Claimant’ s Response, 1 26.

Claimant’ s Response, {9 20-25.

Claimant’ s Response, J 3; Hearing Transcript, pp. 73-74, 98, 161.
Claimant’ s Response, ff 3, 28-32.

Claimant’ s Response, 3; Hearing Transcript, p. 74.

Claimant’ s Response, 1 44.

Claimant’ s Response, 35.

Claimant’ s Response, { 36; Hearing Transcript, pp. 71-72.

Claimant's Response, {| 37.

PCA 109262 24

86.

87.

88.

146

7

Concerning the second exception, the Claimant submits that the extension of the BIT to the
Macao SAR is not incompatible with its object and purpose which is to “encourage, protect and
create favorable conditions for investment by investors of one Contracting State in the territory
of the other Contacting State[.]”"! In the Claimant’s view, allowing Macanese investors to
benefit from the protections of the BIT is fundamentally compatible with the object and purpose
as is extending the protections of the BIT to foreign investors who have invested in what is

indisputably part of the territory of the PRC.'?

Third, the Claimant argues that including Macao within the scope of application of the BIT does
not radically change the conditions for the Treaty’s operation, because (a) the only change
effected is that Laos must provide investors from Macao the same protection and guarantees

required for investors from Mainland China;'?

(b) this kind of change is simply the normal
consequence of the application of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule and as such cannot
constitute a “radical change”; if mere expansion were enough to constitute a “radical change”,

the exception would “swallow” the rule;'*

(c) this applies also in the case of bilateral treaties
which are not distinguished from multilateral treaties in Articles 29 of the VCLT or Article 15

of the VCST; the PRC was Laos’s treaty partner before 1999, and it remains so afterwards. '*°

According to the Claimant, it is uncontested between the Parties that there are two exceptions to
Article 29 of the VCLT; namely that a “different intention” with regard to the territorial scope
of the BIT “appears from the Treaty” or “is otherwise established”.'“° The Claimant argues that

the Respondent carries the evidentiary burden of establishing the PRC’s “different intention”,'*”

Claimant’ s Response, J 38, citing the Preamble of the Treaty.

Claimant’ s Response, { 38.
Claimant’ s Response, { 39.
Claimant’ s Response, 40; Hearing Transcript, p. 162.

Claimant's Response, {| 42-43. The Claimant distinguishes the present situation from that under the
context of Article 34 of the VCST which deals with the case of “Succession of States in Cases of
Separation of Parts of a State” and includes the same “radical change of conditions for the operation of
the treaty proviso as found in Article 15. There, the Claimant notes that “the question is whether one or
more completely new States will succeed, in whole or in part, to the predecessor's treaty obligations. In
contrast, Article 15 applies where territory has been transferred from one State to another; accordingly,
the States in question remain the same at all times, with the only change being that their territory is either
enlarged or contracted. [...] Where there is the creation of a new State ‘very different from itself,’ the
‘personal nature’ of a bilateral treaty may very well be an issue, because continuity of the treaty
obligations would force the treaty partner into a reciprocal relationship with the successor, a completely
new entity to which it has not agreed to be bound. In contrast, in the Article 15 paradigm, the identity of
both bilateral treaty parties remains the same at all time.” (Claimant’s emphasis).

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 12.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 12.

PCA 109262 25

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

148

which must be established by evidence providing a “sufficient degree of certainty” that would

overcome the default position.'*

The Claimant asserts that the Treaty does not provide for the territorial limitation of its
application or otherwise express a “different intention” or an intention to depart from the default

customary rule.”

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s contention that the Preamble, Articles 7, 11 or 12 of the
Treaty can be invoked to establish the first exception.’ It disputes the Respondent's position
that the reference to domestic law in Article 12 of the Treaty is relevant to the territorial scope

of the Treaty;'*! Article 12 refers to “internal legal procedures” solely in the context of the entry
into force of the Treaty but is silent on the application of the Treaty once effective, as well as on

its territorial scope.'*?

Although the BIT was signed in 1993, or six years prior to the handover of Macao from
Portugal to the PRC, the Claimant contends that both Parties to the BIT were aware—during
both the negotiation and the conclusion of the BIT—that the PRC would resume the exercise of
its sovereignty over Macao in 1999.'** On this basis, the Claimant notes that either Party could

have expressly excluded Macao from the scope of the BIT.’

The Claimant relies upon the explicit exclusion of Hong Kong and Macao from the PRC/Russia
BIT to show that the PRC adopts express language excluding its SARs from the territorial scope

of treaties if it in fact has the intention to do so, which was not the case here.

The Claimant contests the argument of the Respondent that the PRC did not have the

jurisdiction to state the position of Macao at the time of concluding the Treaty, as it was signed

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {[ 231, referring to Karagiannis, “Article
29, Convention of 1969” in Corten & Klein (“Karagiannis”) (CLA-100).

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 13; Hearing Transcript, p. 77.
Hearing Transcript, p. 77.
Hearing Transcript, p. 78.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{{ 235-236, referring to Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction, {¥ 69-70; Hearing Transcript, p. 78.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 237, referring to the Basic Law of the
Macao SAR, Preamble (RE-09).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 237.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 238, referring to Protocol to the
PRC/Russia BIT (CLA-90); Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 13; Hearing Transcript, pp. 80, 163.

PCA 109262 26

94.

95.

96.

before the handover.'** It contends that the PRC had the jurisdiction to state its own position on
the future territorial scope of the Treaty.'*” In response to the Respondent’s argument that the
Parties could not know in 1993 how the Joint Declaration would be effected as the negotiations
relating to the handover were still being conducted at that time, the Claimant notes that the Joint
Declaration had been in effect since 1987 and the parties knew that Chinese sovereignty would
resume over Macao in 1993, which means that the PRC could have already provided for an

exception to the “moving treaty frontiers” rule in the Treaty.'**

The Claimant contends that Laos has provided no evidence establishing the intention to exclude
Macao from the scope of the BIT, or to demonstrate that a “different intention” has been

“otherwise established.”!*?

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s characterization of the 1999 Notification as a unilateral

declaration that prevents the BIT from applying to Macao.'*°

First, the Claimant notes that the 1999 Notification applies only to multilateral treaties for which
the UN Secretary-General is depositary. ‘8! The PRC/Laos Treaty is a bilateral treaty that does
not involve the UN Secretary-General in any capacity. Therefore, it is not surprising that it is
not included in the list annexed to the 1999 Notification—no bilateral investment treaties are
included on the list—,'” and the formalities for the application of a treaty to Macao as set out in
Paragraph IV of the 1999 Notification do not apply to the Treaty.'°? The Claimant contends that
a contrary interpretation would effectively deny all investors from Macao and Hong Kong the
protections enjoyed by their PRC counterparts, which would be incompatible with the purposes

of both the investment treaty regime and the “one country, two systems” policy of the PRC.'

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 14.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 14; Hearing Transcript, p. 81.
Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 15; Hearing Transcript, pp. 81-82.
Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 24.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 241, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, ff 38-59.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 242, referring to UN Status of
Multilateral Treaties (CLA-115); Hearing Transcript, p. 84.

 

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Juris
Multilateral Treaties (CLA-115); Hearing Transcript, p. 84.

liction, {| 242, referring to UN Status of

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 243; Hearing Transcript, pp. 85-86.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 244, referring to Gallagher & Shan,
Chinese Investment Treaties, Policies and Practice (2009) (“Gallagher & Shan”) (CLA-99).

PCA 109262 27

97.

98.

99.

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s argument that the Treaty was deposited with the UN
Secretary-General and contends that the Respondent is confusing (a) the registration function of
the UN Secretariat (pursuant to Article 102 of the UN Charter, which requires all UN members
to register treaties to which they are a party with the UN Secretariat), which covers both
multilateral and bilateral treaties’® and (b) the treaty depository function of the UN Secretary-
General, which is open only to multilateral and regional treaties but not to bilateral treaties.'°°
In other words, “[t]he fact that the Treaty is included in the UNTC is simply a function of the
Treaty having been registered with the United Nations, not of the Secretary-General’s
depository function.” In this case, the 1999 Notification referred only to treaties that were
deposited with the Secretary-General, a category that necessarily excludes the Treaty by virtue
of it being a bilateral treaty.'*

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the manner in which the 1999 Notification is
treated by the UN does not change its effect, the Claimant argues that to accept this, the
Tribunal would effectively have to find that the UN somehow misrepresented the context of the
PRC’s communication.'® In any event, the Claimant submits that even within the text of the
PRC’s notification, reference is made to the UN Secretary-General’s depositary function, which

applies to multilateral instruments.'””

Second, the Claimant contends that reservations do not apply to bilateral agreements since any

im

valid reservation would necessarily modify the treaty for both parties. Thus, the alleged

'? But even if reservations could

failure by Laos to object to the 1999 Notification is irrelevant.
apply to bilateral agreements, the Claimant notes that the 1999 Notification did not refer to the

Treaty it purported to modify, and was not communicated directly to Laos, the other

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 20, referring to UN Charter, Article 102 (RA-28); Hearing

Transcript, p. 86.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 21; Hearing Transcript, pp. 86-87.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {{ 22 (Claimant’s emphasis); Hearing Transcript, pp. 86-87.
Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 23.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 163-164,

Hearing Transcript, pp. 164-165.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 25; Hearing Transcript, pp. 87-88.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 245, referring to Aust, Modern Treaty
Law and Practice (2008) (Cambridge University Press), pp. 131-132 (CLA-94); Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, 43; Hearing Transcript, pp. 88, 90.

PCA 109262 28

100.

101.

102.

174

176

7

179

Contracting State.” According to the Claimant, these are fundamental requirements attaching
to treaty reservations under international law.'*

Third, the Claimant contends that the 1999 Notification does not qualify as a “unilateral
declaration” that limited the territorial scope of the Treaty because, as explained above, the 1999

Notification does not apply to bilateral treaties.'”*

The Claimant further notes that, as the 1999
Notification does not even refer to the Treaty, the intention of the PRC to bind itself through the

alleged unilateral declaration could not have been “clearly established.”"”°

Therefore, it could not have been assumed that the 1999 Notification would limit the territorial

7

scope of the Treaty.'”

 

The Claimant dismisses the Respondent’s reliance on domestic law provisions on the basis that
international law takes precedence over domestic law in determining the application of treaties
and, correspondingly, that domestic laws do not affect the international obligations of a State.'
On the same basis, the Claimant disputes the Respondent’s argument that the internal
arrangements between the PRC and the Macao SAR encompassed in the Macao SAR Basic
Law establish the PRC’s intention as regards the scope of the Treaty (i.e., that Macao has full
autonomy to manage its economic affairs and thus the automatic application of the “moving
treaty frontiers” rule is excluded).'” The Claimant stresses that the PRC never expressed such

an intention on the international plane, and reliance on a State’s internal structure cannot

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 246, referring to the VCLT, Article 23(1)
(RE-07); UN Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties (2011), § 3.1.5.2 (CLA-112); UN
International Law Commission, Draft Articles of the Law of Treaties with Commentary (1966) (“ILC
Commentary 1966”), Commentary on Article 18, notes 3 & 4, p. 208 (CLA-114); Article 23(1) of the
VCLT (RE-07); Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 25.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 246, referring to the VCLT, Art. 2(1)(d)
(RE-07); United Nations Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties (2011), § 3.1.5.2 (CLA-112); ILC
Commentary 1966 (CLA-114); Article 23(1) of the VCLT (RE-07); Claimant’s Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction, 25.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 247, referring to the Nuclear Tests Case,
453 (RA-05); Hearing Transcript, pp. 87-88.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 26
Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 247.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 248, referring to Schaus, “Article 27,
Convention of 1969,” in Corten & Klein, p. 700 (“Schaus”) (CLA-105); Hearing Transcript, p. 91.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 28.

PCA 109262 29

103.

104.

105.

180

186

demonstrate to the requisite high degree of certainty that a State’s intention to exclude the

operation of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule has been “otherwise established.”'*°

On this point, the Claimant stresses that the Respondent’s position has the effect of making the
territorial scope of treaties dependent on internal governmental organization and subject to shifts
therein.'*' It notes that this would also have the effect of equating the delegation of economic
autonomy and autonomy in entering into agreements with foreign states to automatic exceptions
under the “moving treaty frontiers” rule, which it contends is an untenable result.” In any case,
the Claimant notes that the Macao SAR Basic Law does not, on its face, provide for the
exclusion of Macao from the bilateral treaties of the PRC that were in force at the moment of

the handover.'**

The Claimant defends its reliance on Gallagher & Shan by stating that (a) paragraph 2.48 of this
source applies to “entities” incorporated in the SARs, as applicable here; (b) paragraph 2.45 is
not premised on Tza Yap Shum, and (c) paragraph 2.45 refers to the SAR “investors” generally

and is not limited to investors who are natural persons.'**

The Claimant argues that the fact that the PRC and Macao entered into two bilateral agreements
with the same third States almost a decade after the BIT entered into force, cannot impact the
application of the “moving treaty frontiers” rule to the BIT as of 1999." It is the Claimant’s
position that there is no evidence to suggest that the four treaties in question—PRC/Portugal
BIT (2005), PRC/Netherlands BIT (2001), Macao/Portugal BIT (2000), Macao/Netherlands
BIT (2008)—conflict or are mutually exclusive; to the contrary, the Claimant argues that they
establish a complementary regime.'*° The PRC treaties do not contain language referring to or

carving out Macao and the later treaties do not contain language superseding the former

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, | 28, referring to Karagiannis, p. 737 (CLA-100); Hearing

Transcript, pp. 91-92.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 29; Hearing Transcript, p. 92.
Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 29.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 30.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {32 n. 52.

Claimant’s Response, { 46; the Netherlands/Macao BIT (2008) (CLA-128); Portugal/Macao BIT (2000)
(CLA-129); Netherlands/PRC BIT (2001) (CLA-130); Portugal/PRC BIT (2005) (CLA-131).

Claimant’ s Response, 47; see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 94-96.

PCA 109262 30

106.

107.

108.

109.

196

treaties.'*’ This contrasts with the explicit carve-out contained in the PRC/Russia BIT with

regard to the Macao and Hong Kong SARs. ‘8s

The Claimant characterizes the Macao/Netherlands and Macao/Portugal BITs as supplemental
agreements that apply only in the territory of the Macao SAR.'® The only consequence of this
supplemental regime is that Macanese investors can file for arbitration under the PRC or Macao

treaty.'°

Dutch or Portuguese investors complaining of breaches in Macao, however, can only
bring claims against the PRC under the PRC treaties and against Macao under the Macao
treaties.'"' The same does not apply with respect to bringing claims against Macao under the

PRC/Laos Treaty because there is no supplemental Laos treaty with Macao.'**

The Claimant also submits that the existence of supplemental Macao treaties does not conflict
with the object and purpose of the PRC treaties: extending the PRC treaties to Macao ensures
that Macanese investors enjoy dual sets of protection.” By contrast, not extending the PRC
treaties to Macao would deny Macanese investors the protection of 130 BITs concluded by the
PRC, leaving them the protection of only two BITs concluded by Macao,’ and undermining

the “one country, two systems” policy.'°°

The Claimant relies on the Tza Yap Shum decision in which the tribunal, after hearing evidence
on the topic of the Hong Kong SAR’s power to conclude investment treaties, found that there

was nothing inconsistent between the parallel treaty regimes of Hong Kong and the PRC.'*°

The Claimant contends that the Respondent's admission that the “federal clause exception” does

not apply here resolves this issue.'®’ Alternatively, it contends that the rationale behind the

Claimant's Response, {| 47.
Claimant's Response, {| 47.
Claimant's Response, {{ 48.
Claimant's Response, {{ 49; Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {{ 31.
Claimant's Response, {{ 49.
Claimant's Response, {{ 49.
Claimant's Response, {{ 50; Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {{ 32.

Claimant's Response, {{ 50; the Claimant notes that there is a serious question over the ability of the
SARs to conclude international agreements under international law that has yet to be tested. Accordingly,
by denying investors from the SARs access to protection under the PRC treaties, SAR investors could be
deprived of all protections (Claimant’s Response, 51).

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 32.

Claimant’ s Response, 51; Hearing Transcript, p. 96.

PCA 109262 31

110.

111.

“federal clause exception” is irrelevant to this case because this Treaty does not have a federal
clause provision, thereby requiring the Tribunal to resort to the default rule of customary

international law.'**

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s characterization of the 1999 handover as a transfer of a
dependent territory from one administrative power to another. According to the Claimant, the
handover in fact represented the resumption by the PRC of the exercise of its sovereignty over
Macao.'”” But even were the Respondent’s characterization of the 1999 handover accurate,
which the Claimant denies, it states that the “moving treaty frontiers” rule would continue to

apply by analogy.”

WHETHER SANUM QUALIFIES AS AN INVESTOR UNDER THE TREATY
1. Whether the Claimant is established under the municipal laws of the PRC
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent notes that Article 1(2) of the BIT requires an investor that is a juridical person

to be “established in accordance with the laws and regulations of each contracting State,”*”!

which it says is indisputably the PRC in this case.*”

The Respondent contends that the
Claimant is established in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Macao SAR and not
the PRC. As a result, the Claimant does not meet the definition of “investor” in the BIT and

thus, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae.*™*

 

198

200

201

202

203

204

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 251-252, referring to Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 81 where it states that “[b]ecause the PRC is a unitary state, the principles
pertaining to the ‘federal clause’ exception, as traditionally understood, are not applicable.”; Hearing
Transcript, pp. 92-93.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 253, referring to Respondent's Memorial
on Jurisdiction, {{ 79; Karagiannis, p. 748 (CLA-100); ILC Commentary 1966, Commentary on Article
25, note 4, p. 213 (CLA-114).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 254, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, $f{ 25, 85.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 254, referring to the ILC Commentary
1974, p. 209 (RA-14).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 88-89; Hearing Transcript, p. 28.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 89.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 86.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 86.

PCA 109262 32

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

205

206

207

208

209

210

The Respondent clarifies that Mainland China applies PRC laws while the Macao SAR applies
Macanese laws.” It then notes that the Claimant was not incorporated in accordance with the
applicable PRC Company Law,” which does not apply to the SARs of Hong Kong and
Macao.” For PRC law to be applicable to the Macao SAR, the Government of the PRC would
have to have listed this law in Annex III to the Macao SAR Basic Law, which it did not do.
The Respondent also argues that the Macao SAR Basic Law, which was promulgated by the
PRC Congress on 31 March 1993, provided for a legal system applicable to the Macao SAR
different and separate from the PRC legal system.” In conjunction with the aforementioned
PRC Company Law, the Macao SAR Basic Law evidences that the PRC and the Macao SAR
have different laws with regard to the incorporation of a company. ”!°

The Respondent further maintains that the international community recognizes the separate
legal systems of the PRC—specifically, PRC law as applicable to Mainland China and
Macanese laws as applicable to the Macao SAR, as well as Hong Kong laws applicable to the
Hong Kong SAR.*!! The Respondent gives the example of commercial arbitrations, where
parties who choose either Hong Kong law or Macao law as the governing law do not expect

their choice to translate to PRC law.”"?

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant notes that the Parties agree that Sanum was established pursuant to the laws of the

Macao SAR on 14 July 2005.3

The Claimant notes that SARs are jurisdictions separate from the PRC, but contends that their

laws form part of PRC law for the purposes of the Treaty.’'* It argues that a contrary view

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 91.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 49 92-93.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 49 92-93.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 98.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 94.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 95; Hearing Transcript, pp. 29-30, 61-62.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 96; Hearing Transcript, p. 30.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 96.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 265, referring to Claimant’s Amended
Notice, { 15; Exhibit A to Claimant’s Amended Notice; Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction { 87;
Hearing Transcript, p. 103.

PCA 109262 33

117.

118.

119.

would effectively exclude Macao and Hong Kong investors from the protection of BITs worded

similarly to the Treaty.”'*

The Claimant maintains that the term “laws and regulations” of the PRC, as referred to in the
Treaty, refers to a State comprised of autonomous regions with their own legal regimes and
must be taken to include the laws of all such sub-units falling within the entire territory over
which that State exercises its sovereignty, unless a different intention is apparent or
established.”"° The Claimant highlights that the laws of the separate jurisdictions apply within
the territory over which the PRC exercises its sovereignty and the absence of a legal or factual
basis to impose a more restrictive definition to such laws.”"”

The Claimant also argues that, contrary to the intention expressed in the Preamble to the Treaty,
a more restrictive interpretation of the Treaty would lead to an imbalance in the territorial scope
of the protections offered by the host States, in that Laotian investors would receive Treaty
protection in the SARs of Hong Kong and Macao, while Hong Kong and Macao investors

would be denied similar coverage in Laos.”!*

2. Whether the Claimant is an “economic entity”
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the Claimant does not meet the requirement of being an
“economic entity,” as set forth in Article 1(2) of the BIT for the following reasons: (a) an
“economic entity” must have economic or commercial activities within the PRC; (b) the BIT
was not intended to protect shell companies like the Claimant; (c) the nationality of the

“economic entity” is to be determined by whether its management seat and control are located

 

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 266, referring to Gallagher & Shan, {
2.76 (2009) (CLA-99); Hearing Transcript, pp. 103-104.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 267.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 268, referring to the ILC Commentary
1966, Commentary on Article 25, note 4, p. 213; notes 1-3, p. 213 (CLA-114); Hearing Transcript, pp.
104-105.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 269, referring to Respondent's Memorial
on Jurisdiction, {[ 91.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 270, referring to the Preamble of the
PRC/Laos Treaty (Ex. D to Amended Notice); Hearing Transcript, pp. 75, 162-163.

PCA 109262 34

120.

121.

122.

123.

220

221

222

223

204

225

226

within the PRC; and alternatively, (d) the BIT is not intended to protect the investments of non-

Contracting States.”

The Respondent first notes that the requirement in the Treaty that an “investor” be an
“economic entity” means that an entity must have economic activities related to the investment
that is the subject of a claim in order to qualify as an investor. This evidences an intention to
exclude mere shell companies from the definition of an “investor.””°

Concerning the nationality of the “economic entity”, the Respondent first contends that, subject
to the wording and interpretation of the Treaty, there are three criteria by which the nationality
of a company can typically be determined: (a) place of incorporation; (b) seat or siége social;

and (c) place of effective control.””!

The Respondent submits that the second criterion—the seat or siége social—pertains to the

description of “economic entity.” According to the Respondent, this means that the place in

which the economic activities are conducted must be the State in which the company is

. 203
incorporated.~

It further argues that to allow a shell corporation to conduct its economic
activities in third States and yet avail itself of the BIT protections of the State in which it is
merely incorporated would be tantamount to treaty shopping, which the Contracting Parties did

204

not intend to permit under the Treaty.~” Moreover, the economic activities must pertain to the

investment that is the subject of the claim in question under the Treaty.”
The Respondent disagrees with the majority in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine which adopted a
purposive interpretation of the BIT and meaning of “investor” under Article 1(2) of that

treaty. 6 The majority concluded that the treaty “extended its protections to entities
incorporated in third countries using the nationality of the individuals who controlled the

enterprise (or the management seat of the entity that controlled the enterprise) to determine the

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 101.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 102-105.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 106-107.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 108.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 109.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 109.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 110.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 111, referring to Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 29, 2004 (“Tokios Tokelés”) (RA-14).

PCA 109262 35

124.

125.

126.

227

228

229

230

nationality of the claimant.””’ The Respondent notes that in construing the BIT preamble of
that case, the tribunal found that the BIT was intended to “create and maintain favourable
conditions for the investment of investors of one state in the territory of the other,””> which
shows that the tribunal did not limit its consideration to the place of incorporation.*”? The
Respondent argues that considering only the place of incorporation would be even less
appropriate in this case, as the “investor” is defined as an “economic entity.”?*°

The Respondent notes that the majority of the Tokios Tokelés tribunal declined to impose the
“origin of capital” requirement. **! The Respondent observes that the dissent in that case
characterized this position as contrary to the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention and
system.°* Here, the Respondent notes that even if the BIT contains no “origin of capital”
requirement, the reference to an “economic activity” evidences that the object and purpose of
the BIT is to protect investments belonging to a national of a Contracting State only and not
those belonging to the national of a third State that has established a shell company in a

Contracting State.”*?

The Respondent reiterates that international law determines the nationality of an investor by
more than the place of incorporation and considers other factors such as the seat of management

and the financial control of the corporation."

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that Sanum clearly falls within the broad definition of “economic

entity.”°* The Claimant rejects the contention of the Respondent that the term “economic

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 111.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 111, referring to Tokios Tokelés, { 31 (RA-14).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 112, referring to Autopista v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, September 27, 2001, { 107 (“Autopista”).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 112, referring to Autopista, J 107.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 113, referring to Tokios Tokelés, | 77 (RA-14).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 114, referring to Tokios Tokelés, { 6 of Dissenting Opinion of
Professor Prosper Weil (RA-14).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 115.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 119-120, referring to the International Law Commission,
Fifty-eighth Session, Draft articles on Diplomatic Protection Adopted by the Drafting Commission on
second reading, Art. 9, A/CAN/L.684 (2006) (RA-16); OECD Benchmark Definition of Foreign
Investment (Draft) - 4" Edition, DAF/INV/STAT2006)2/REV.3, 2007 (RA-17).

  

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 264.

PCA 109262 36

127.

128.

129.

240

2a

242

243

entity” in Article 1(2) was intended to exclude “entities that are mere shell companies” from the
236

coverage of the Treaty.”
First, the Claimant contends that the fundamental rule of treaty interpretation—that the text is to
be construed “in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms”—applies when
there is no indication that the parties intended to assign a special meaning to a treaty term.” As
applied to this case, Sanum therefore meets the definition of an “economic entity,” as it is a
private company that was incorporated to pursue investment opportunities and participate in all
commercial and industrial sectors allowed by law.**

Second, the Claimant notes that the BIT does not expressly indicate an origin of capital
requirement, and submits that the Respondent has provided neither evidence nor authority for its
contention that the Contracting States intended to restrict the definition of protected investors.”

The Claimant contends that tribunals cannot impose extra-textual limits on the scope of BITs™”

*4' The Claimant notes that the BIT in this case

but should strictly adhere to the treaty terms.
only requires that an economic entity be established pursuant to the laws of a Contracting State,

which means that the inquiry ends once the State of incorporation is ascertained.”

The Claimant contests the reliance of the Respondent on the dissenting opinion in Tokios
Tokelés on the basis that this opinion relied heavily on the facts of that case and the purpose of

ICSID arbitration, considerations which are not present in this case.“? The Claimant also

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 257, referring to Respondent's Memorial
on Jurisdiction, {| 105.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 258, referring to Article 31(1) and (4) of
the VCLT (RE-07) (Claimant’s emphasis).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 259, referring to Economic Definition,
Oxford English Dictionary (CLA-96); Entity Definition, Oxford Dictionaries (CLA-97); Exhibit A to
Amended Notice, Article 2; Hearing Transcript, pp. 106-107.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 260, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, 4 101-110, 115; Hearing Transcript, p. 107.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 260, referring to Tokios Tokelés, | 36.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 4 261, referring to The Rompetrol Group
Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections on
sdiction and Admissibility, April 18, 2008, { 109 (CLA-76); Saluka Investments BV v. The Czech
Republic, Partial Award (UNCITRAL, 17 March 2006), {{{ 197, 239, 241 (CLA-66); Hearing Transcript,
pp. 108-109.

   

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, J 260, referring to ADC Affiliate Limited
and ADC & ADMCA Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16,
Award, October 2, 2006, | 357 (CLA-3).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 262, referring to Tokios Tokelés, (5, 9,
23, 27 of Dissenting Opinion of Professor Prosper Weil (CLA-77); Hearing Transcript, pp. 107-108.

PCA 109262 37

130.

131.

132.

133.

244

245

246,

247

248

dismisses the reliance of the Respondent on cases potentially dealing with piercing the corporate

veil because such issue is irrelevant to this case.”

Finally, the Claimant contends that the term “economic entities” was intended to broaden the
scope of treaty coverage, in view of the more general requirement in investment treaties that
investors be “natural and legal persons” and the fact that the PRC laws do not actually assign

legal personality to all entities, even if they are established for business purposes.”**

WHETHER SANUM BRINGS INVESTMENT-RELATED CLAIMS UNDER THE BIT
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that Article 8(1) and 8(3) of the BIT require that a dispute involving
the quantification of the compensation for expropriation arises in connection with an investment
in the territory of a Contracting State."*

The Respondent notes that the Claimant has only submitted the articles of association of Savan
Vegas and Paksong Vegas (Laos companies in which Sanum has a 60% ownership and Laos has
a 20% ownership) as evidence of its investment in Laos.” The Respondent notes that the
contribution of the Claimant for its shares takes the form of loans that are being repaid annually
from casino proceeds. It contends that this contribution does not meet the requirement of Article
1(1)(b) of the BIT, which includes “shares in companies or other forms of interest in such

companies” in its definition of investment.”

 

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s submission that its investment con: of “investing in
real property; employing its know-how and acquiring other tangible assets in order to establish

and maintain gaming facilities described above, and in obtaining concession[s] from the

* Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 263, referring to Respondent's Memorial

on Jurisdiction, {{ 116 (referring to Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Judgment,
L.C.J. Reports 1970 (RA-15)).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 264, referring to Gallagher & Shan, {{{]
2.72, 2.80 (CLA-99); Hearing Transcript, p. 109.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 123.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 123.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 122.

PCA 109262 38

134.

135.

136.

137.

[R]espondent which accorded its investment enterprises exclusive rights to operate gaming
9249

facilities in five provinces.
The Respondent first contests the Claimant’s argument that it has invested in movable or
immovable property assets in the territory of Laos, pursuant to Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT, on the
grounds that the said property rights belong not to Sanum but to the local companies that are to
operate the gaming facilities.**°

Second, the Respondent notes that it cannot identify any “know-how of Sanum employed in Lao
PDR” or “other tangible assets” that would meet the definition of an investment, and further
notes that the “concessions” to which Sanum refers were actually accorded to its investment
enterprise—namely, Savan Vegas and Paksong Vegas, and not to it!

Last, the Respondent contends that the two PDAs do not qualify as investments, because they
replace existing PDAs (concluded on 11 April 2006 and amended on 26 July 2006) to which
Sanum is not a party and from which Sanum cannot derive rights.” Moreover, the Respondent
notes that “[n]o specific right was granted to Sanum under the PDAs,” as the PDAs merely (a)
express the intention of the Parties to cooperate on project development (Article 4, PDAs); (b)
involve Laos granting development rights to both Sanum and ST (Article 2, PDAs); and (c)
provide that the development project area is to be considered as part of the PDA “after the
company has completely developed the land area of 50 hectares allowed by the Government.”
(Article 2(2), PDAs).

The Respondent also notes that the PDAs only contemplate the conclusion of future contracts
upon the establishment of a joint venture (Article 6, PDAs) or a lease agreement for the
concession area (Article 4(4), PDAs).”** It contends that the shareholders’ rights, the gaming
license, and lease agreement were granted not to the Claimant but to Savan Vegas and Paksong

Vegas, the local vehicles.”**

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 124, referring to Amended Notice, {{ 115.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{| 124-125, referring to Amended Notice, {[ 115.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 126, referring to Amended Notice, {{ 115.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 127.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 127.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 127.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 127.

PCA 109262 39

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

260

The Respondent argues that the rights arising out of the PDAs cannot be taken as “claims for
money or to any performance having an economic value (Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT),” and that
the PDAs themselves do not legitimately give rise to expectations regarding financial value
because they do not guarantee the formation of a joint venture or the granting of a gaming

license.?*°

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that the text of the Treaty neither excludes indirect investments from its

coverage nor provides a basis on which to distinguish between the operating entities and Sanum

for the purposes of defining qualifying “investments.”?*”

Sanum highlights the substantial investments it has made in the various Laotian enterprises and
projects, including (a) capital investments exceeding US$ 85 million; (b) being a majority
shareholder in Savan Vegas and Paksong Vegas; (c) ownership stakes in the Thanaleng, Lao
Bao, and Ferry Terminal slot clubs; and (d) using its industry expertise and business know-how

to generate returns and advance its different enterprises.”**

The Claimant stresses that Article 1(1) defines “investments” to include “every kind of asset

invested,”*° and notes that the restriction that the Respondent seeks to impose on this provision

would be fundamentally unfair to the Claimant, especially in view of its substantial

contributions to Laos.”°°

The Claimant rebuts the Respondent’s contention that the PDAs do not qualify as investments

because they do not constitute contractual guarantees and therefore cannot form the basis of

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 127.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 273. The Claimant also cites cases in
which investment treaty tribunals have found all investments, including indirect investments, to be
encompassed by broad language in the relevant treaties (see Claimant's Statement of Claim and
Response on Jurisdiction, { 273 n. 578); Hearing Transcript, p. 110.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 273, referring to Siemens A.G. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004, {137
(“Siemens”) (CLA-71); Mobil Corporation et al v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/27, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, | 165 (CLA-49); Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of
Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, April 8, 2013, ff 378-80 (CLA-33); Ioannis
Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 6, 2007, 4{{ 123-
124 (CLA-40).

  

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 272, referring to PRC/Laos Treaty,
Article 1 (Ex, D to Amended Notice) (Claimant’s emphasis); Hearing Transcript, p. 110.

  

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 273.

PCA 109262 40

143.

144.

145.

261

262

263

264

265

266,

legitimate expectations. The Claimant argues that the relevant contracts did in fact contain
guarantees, in the form of the Lao Government granting development rights to the respective
casino companies and promising to issue the required licenses for their operation.” The
Claimant further notes that international tribunals have considered contractual rights to be
“assets,” just like tangible property, where a bilateral investment treaty has defined

“investments” broadly. 202

The Claimant submits that Laos has cited no authority to establish the relevance of the method
by which Sanum invested in the local companies to the issue of whether its investments are
covered under the BIT.” The Claimant contends that the loans extended by Sanum to the local
companies fall under the category of “claim[s] to money” under Article 1(1) of the Treaty.”
The Claimant notes that the loans that form part of continuing financing arrangements of an
investment and that are interposed on a non-regular basis have been recognized as protected

investments.”

WHETHER LAOS CONSENTED TO THE ARBITRATION OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS UNDER
THE BIT

1. Article 8 of the BIT
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that the ordinary meaning of Article 8(3) establishes that Laos did not

consent to the arbitration of Sanum’s claims under the BIT.

It notes that Article 8(1) first imposes a six-month negotiation period on the parties.” If the

negotiation is unsuccessful, then the BIT assigns Laotian courts general jurisdiction to hear any

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 274; Savan Vegas PDA, Articles 2(1), 3,
8(10) (C-004); Paksong Vegas PDA, Articles 2(1), 3, 8(10) (C-005).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 274, referring to Compaitia de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award
August 20, 2007, {7.5.18 (CLA-23); Hearing Transcript, pp. 110-111.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 275.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {1 275, referring to Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, May 24, 1999, 4{{ 77, 81-83 (CLA-19); Hearing Transcript, p. 111.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 275, referring to Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, September 28, 2007, 4 214
(CLA-69).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 131-132; Hearing Transcript, pp. 33-35.

PCA 109262 41

146.

147.

148.

149.

267

268

269

270

am

2m

273

274

267

dispute connected with the investment (Article 8(2))""" and an ad hoc arbitral tribunal the more

specific jurisdiction of hearing only those “dispute[s] involving the amount of compensation for

19268 99269

expropriation” and not “dispute[s] involving expropriation.
Accordingly, it is the Respondent’s position that all of the Claimant’s other claims—i.e., the
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, expropriation, and breach of contract—are

excluded from these proceedings.

In reliance on Article 31(1) of the VCLT that requires a treaty to be interpreted according to the
ordinary meaning of its terms, the Respondent contends that the Parties have consented to
international arbitration only for the quantum of an expropriation, and are required by the BIT to
submit all other disputes, including the issue of whether an expropriation has occurred in the
first place, to the local courts of the host State.” The Respondent relies on three arbitral
tribunal decisions that have interpreted arbitration clauses in treaties providing for disputes on
the “amount of compensation” only to be determined by international arbitration.*”! The
Respondent contends that the Claimant’s argument on this matter requires a departure from and

an enlargement of the actual wording of the text”

The Respondent also argues that the limited scope of Article 8(3) is confirmed when read in the
273

context of the expropriation clause (Article 4) and Preamble of the BIT.
The Respondent notes that Article 4(1) of the BIT defines the term “expropriation” and

enumerates the conditions that must attach to an expropriation,””* while Article 4(2) of the BIT

Hearing Transcript, p. 35.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 132; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, | 47; Hearing
Transcript, pp. 35-36.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 47.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {¥{ 133-135.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 133-135, relying on Berschader v, Russian Federation, Arb.
Inst. of Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award, Case No. V 080/2004, #9 152-158 (Apr. 21, 2006)
(involving the Belgium/Luxembourg-Russian BIT of 1989) (“Berschader”) (RA-18); RosInvest Co. UK
Lid. v. Russian Federation (RosInvest), Arb. Inst. of Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award on
Jurisdiction, Case No. V 079/205, { 110 (Oct. 2007) (involving the UK-Russian BIT of 1989)
(“RosInvest”) (RA-19); Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic (Austrian Airlines), UNCITRAL, Final
Award, {{f 96-99 (Oct. 9, 2009) (involving the Austrian-Czech BIT of 1990) (“Austrian Airlines”) (RA-
20); Hearing Transcript, pp. 36-38.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 47.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 137; Hearing Transcript, p. 38.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 138; Hearing Transcript, p. 38.

PCA 109262 42

150.

151.

152.

275

276

27

278

279

280

281

defines the amount of compensation that must accompany an expropriation.” It then contends
that the Respondent’s consent to international arbitration applies only to disputes involving
Article 4(2) and not Article 4(1).°°

The Respondent also notes that the Preamble of the BIT and the “generally recognized
principles of international law accepted by both Contracting States,” referred to in Article 8(7)

of the BIT, further confirm the Respondent's interpretation of Article 8(3);7””

namely, that the
scope of the arbitration clause and the clause giving jurisdiction to Laotian courts must be
understood against the principle of “mutual respect of sovereignty.” The principle of “mutual
respect of sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit” as affirmed in the Preamble and embodied
in the “principles of international law accepted” by both the PRC and Laos under Article 8(7) of
the Treaty constitute part of the Five Principles of Pacific Coexistence that both Contracting
States have recognized.””*

In this case, the Respondent argues that the principle of mutual respect of sovereignty mandates
respecting the Contracting States’ choice to give exclusive jurisdiction to their respective
judicial organs over the disputes connected to an investor’s investments under Article 8(2), save
for that relating to the compensation amount for an expropriation (Article 8(3))2”

The Respondent then argues that the common treaty practice of Laos and the PRC, as well as
the treaty practice of each of these States with other States, further confirms its interpretation. It
notes that the PRC has committed to respecting the sovereignty of Laos in its ratification of the
International Declaration on the Neutrality of Laos dated 23 July 1962. The Respondent also
notes that preambles of other BITs signed by Laos, such as those with Australia and Indonesia,

also refer to the principle of respect for the mutual independence and sovereignty of States.*!

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 139; Hearing Transcript, p. 38.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 140; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, | 47; Hearing
Transcript, p. 39.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 141-142; Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, {| 47.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 143.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 144.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 146, referring to the Department of State Bulletin, Vol. XLVII,
No. 1207 dated 13 August 1962 (RE-13).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 147, referring to Preamble, Laos/Australia BIT signed on
6 April 1994 (RE-14) and Laos/Indonesia BIT signed on 18 October 1994 (RE-15).

PCA 109262 43

153.

154.

155.

156.

282

283

284

285

286

287

It submits that several BITs signed by the PRC also refer to the principle of mutual respect of

282

sovereignty, ~~” and limit the scope of arbitral jurisdiction to only those disputes involving the

quantum of an expropriation claim while assigning the resolution of all other disputes to the
local courts of the host State.”**

The Respondent cautions the Tribunal against relying on the findings of other arbitral tribunals
or state courts that have interpreted narrow consent clauses broadly in order to allow the
investor to arbitrate expropriation claims.” The Respondent argues that none of the bilateral
investment treaties in those cases incorporate the principle of mutual respect of sovereignty, as
does the BIT here.*** The application of the principle of mutual respect of sovereignty obliges
the Tribunal to respect the Contracting States’ choice of submitting disputes of a foreign

investor to local courts.”*°

The Respondent further cites the notification made by the PRC on 7 January 1993, pursuant to
Article 24(5) of the ICSID Convention, as to the jurisdiction of ICSID, in which the PRC stated
that it “would only consider submitting to the jurisdiction of disputes over compensation
resulting from expropriation and nationalization.”

The Respondent rejects any argument that the Claimant may make with regard to Article 8(3)
being construed as containing a fork-in-the-road clause that would operate to exclude

international arbitration once a foreign investor has submitted to Laotian courts any dispute

“ Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 148, referring to Preamble, the PRC/Mongolia BIT 1991 (RE-

16) and Preamble, the PRC/Australia BIT 1988.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 148, referring to Article 8(3) of the PRC/Mongolia BIT 1991
(RE-16).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 149; Hearing Transcript, pp. 39-41, referring to Renta 4
S.V.S.A et al. v. Russian Federation, Arb. Inst. of Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award on
Preliminary Objections, Case No. V 024/2007 (Mar. 20, 2009) (involving the Spanish-Russian BIT of
1991) (“Renta 4°) (RA-21) (the Respondent argues that in that case the tribunal was able to find
jurisdiction because the arbitration clause contained a reference to the expropriation clause which did not
contain a split between the principle of expropriation and quantum of expropriation); Tza Yap Shum
(CLA-70/RA-10) (the Respondent notes that the treaty in this case does not contain the restriction of the
principle of mutual respect of sovereignty as is contained in the Treaty); Czech Republic v. European
Media Ventures, 2007 EWHC 2851 (Comm), involving the Belgium/Luxembourg-Czech BIT (1992)
(“European Media Ventures”) (RA-22) (the Respondent notes that it does not have the award in this
case).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 149, referring to Renta 4 (RA-21); Tza Yap Shum (CLA-
T0/RA-10); European Media Ventures, (RA-22); Hearing Transcript, pp. 41-42.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 42-43.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 150, referring to Notification of the People’s Republic of
China to ICSID pursuant to Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention dated 9 January 1993 (RE-17).

PCA 109262 44

157.

158.

159.

288

289

290,

201

292

293

204

connected to an investment.’** It clarifies that Article 8(3) mandates an interpretation under
which international arbitration is excluded only when the investor submits to Laotian courts a
dispute on the amount of compensation for expropriation, which is the only claim that can ever

be arbitrated.””

(b) The Claimant’s Position
The Claimant rejects the Respondent's interpretation of Article 8(3) of the Treaty.

The Claimant relies on Tza Yap Shum, which contains language similar to that of the BIT.”
There, the tribunal found that the phrase “dispute involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation” (as set out in Article 8(3) of the Treaty) simply meant that the dispute must
include the determination of the amount of compensation but must not necessarily be limited to
it.°! The tribunal noted that the phrase evinced that the parties had consented to arbitrate all
issues pertinent to the determination of the amount of damages, which necessarily includes
whether damages must be awarded at alll.

The Claimant contends that this interpretation is consistent with the language of Article 4(1) of
the Treaty, which sets out standards for the determination of whether an expropriation has taken
place. It is thus clear, the Claimant argues, that whether an expropriation has occurred is an
assessment that is a necessary element of any claim “involving the amount of compensation for

99293

expropriation. The Claimant submits that the term “involving” is broad and extends the

Tribunal’ s jurisdiction beyond disputes in which the only point of dispute is quantum.”

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff, 151-154; Hearing Transcript, pp. 43-45. (In this way, the
Respondent seeks to distinguish the findings of the tribunal in Tza Yap Shum. That tribunal, the
Respondent says, was motivated to interpret the jurisdictional clause broadly because it contained a fork-
in-the-road provision such that if an investor submitted its dispute on the principle of expropriation to a
local court, it was barred from access to international arbitration on the quantum of expropriation. The
Respondent argues that this is not the case under the PRC/Laos Treaty).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 151-154; Hearing Transcript, pp. 43-45.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 281; Hearing Transcript, pp. 123-125;
Tza Yap Shum (CLA-70/RA-10).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 281, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, J 134; Tza Tap Shum (CLA-79).

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 281.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 281; Tza Tap Shum, 152 (CLA-79/RA-
10); Hearing Transcript, p. 117.

Hearing Transcript, p. 117.

PCA 109262 45

160.

161.

162.

163.

295

296,

297

298

299

300

The Claimant argues that a contrary interpretation would render Article 4(1) meaningless,
because the standards set out in Article 4(1) for determining an unlawful expropriation do not
strictly fit within a dispute restricted to the amount or quantum of damages.”** The Claimant
further notes that, contrary to the contention of the Respondent, there can be no distinction
between the question of whether the investor received “appropriate and effective compensation”
under Article 4(2) and the question of whether an expropriation occurred under Article 4(1), as
the former is an element of the latter.”*° The Claimant further points out that clauses like Article
4(1) and 4(2)—variants of which can be found in many investment arbitration treaties, including
those with broad dispute resolution provisions—do not relate to the forum for making
expropriation claims but merely set out the conditions for lawful expropriation and the standard

for compensation.”

The Claimant maintains that Article 8(1) and 8(2) of the BIT do not have the effect of
designating the local courts as the exclusive forum for the resolution of disputes apart from the
quantum of expropriation, as the Respondent claims, because Article 8(1) provides for the
amicable settlement of disputes and Article 8(2) gives the parties the option of submitting the

dispute to the courts of the host State after the designated waiting period.”**

The Claimant cites to courts and tribunals that have interpreted treaty provisions similar to

Article 8(3) to confer jurisdiction over the question of whether an expropriation has occurred.”

The Claimant contests the Respondent’s reliance on, what the Claimant characterizes as, “the

only three cases in which tribunals declined to read such clauses as conferring jurisdiction over

disputes as to the existence of an expropriation”.*°° The Claimant further contends that those

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 282.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 283; Hearing Transcript, pp. 119-120.
Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 39; Hearing Transcript, p. 120.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 38.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 284; Claimant’s Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction, { 36, citing: (1) Tza Yap Shum, at 151 (CLA-70/RA-10); (2) European Media Ventures, | 44
(RA-22) (see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 128-129); (3) Quasar de Valors (formerly Renta 4 S.V.S.A. et
al.) v. The Russian Federation, Award on Preliminary Objections (SCC 20 March 2009), at 5, 20-21
(RA-21) (“Quasar de Valors”) (see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 125-128); (4) Franz Sedelmayer v. The
Russian Federation, Arbitration Award (SCC, 7 July 1998), at 9, 71-73 (CLA-34) (see also Hearing
Transcript, p. 129); and (5) Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, March 21, 2007, 41
70, 76, 116-118, 29-133 (CLA-64) (see also Hearing Transcript, p. 129).

 

 

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 285, referring to the Respondent’s
reliance on (1) Austrian Airlines, { 102 (RA-20); (2) Berschader, 152-158 (RA-18); and, (3)
RosInvest, {110 (RA-19).

PCA 109262 46

164.

165.

301

302

303

304

305

306,

307

308

309

decisions would not in any case support a similar outcome in this case, as they can be
distinguished." For instance, none of them contain fork-in-the-road provisions in their dispute
settlement clauses.*” In addition, the Claimant contends that five of the tribunals that have
interpreted clauses like Article 8 have done so expansively.*

Further, the Claimant argues that the interpretation of the Respondent disregards the context of
Article 8(3)3" The Claimant submits that a proper reading of Article 8(2) of the PRC/Laos
Treaty is that an investor is entitled to submit its dispute to the State courts, but that it will be
barred from seeking arbitration of its expropriation claim if it in fact pursues this option.*°° The
Claimant asserts that the Respondent’s contention that an investor must first submit the issue of
whether an expropriation has occurred to the domestic courts effectively deprives the investor of
access to arbitration; its opportunity to arbitrate the dispute will be foreclosed by its submission
of the issue of expropriation to the domestic courts.*°°

The Claimant contends that Article 8(2) and 8(3) provide an investor two options if the dispute
cannot be settled through negotiation within six months.*” Article 8(3) contains a fork-in-the-
road provision. The Claimant asserts that had the Contracting Parties intended to require the
investor to litigate whether an expropriation had occurred before submitting the question of
quantum to a tribunal, they would not have stipulated that “either” process could begin after six

months.“

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{{| 285-286. Concerning the Respondent's
reliance on (1) Austrian Airlines, the Claimant notes that unlike the Treaty in this case, the BIT in that
case explicitly stated that an investor could only challenge an expropriation before the local authorities
(RA-20) (see also Hearing Transcript, p. 130); (2) Berschader, the Claimant notes that the panel had
considered the phrase “amount or mode of compensation” after it had already concluded that it lacked
jurisdiction on an entirely separate ground and its conclusions on the scope of the arbitration clause were
‘superfluous’ obiter dicta (see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 130-131) (RA-18); and, (3) Rosinvest, the
Claimant notes, inter alia, that that decision did not consider whether the word ‘payment’ may lead to
consideration of the reality of its predicate: ‘expropriation’ (RA-19); see also Hearing Transcript, pp.
131-132.

Hearing Transcript, p. 129.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, ${{ 280-284; Claimant’s Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction, {{ 36; see also Hearing Transcript, p. 129.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 287-288.
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 287-288.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 289, referring to Tza Yap Shum, 4 154-
161 (CLA-70/RA-10).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 290.
Hearing Transcript, pp. 117, 120.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 290.

PCA 109262 47

166.

167.

168.

169.

310

The Claimant also disagrees with the Respondent’s contention that the fork-in-the-road bar in
Article 8(3) merely precludes an investor who has submitted a dispute over the quantum of
compensation to a domestic court from bringing the same claim before an arbitral tribunal.*!°

First, the Claimant notes that Article 8(3) categorically states that arbitration shall not be

 

permitted if the investor has i the dispute “involving the amount of ip ion for

expropriation” to the local courts; a statement that can only make sense if Article 8 permits an

investor to choose between litigating and arbitrating all aspects of its expropriation claim#"!

Second, the Claimant notes that the determination of the fact of an expropriation and the amount
of compensation for an expropriation are linked in the Treaty, so that a court could not

determine one issue without also determining the other.*!*

Third, the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s interpretation renders the right to arbitration

illusory, which in turn defeats the object of the Treaty to encourage investment.*"*

And finally, the Claimant contends that the principle of mutual respect for sovereignty is not
undermined by holding a State to the commitments it made for the benefit of its treaty
partner.*'* On a broader but related note, the Claimant also contends that the Respondent has not
expounded as to how the “principle of mutual respect for sovereignty, equality and mutual
benefit,” as contained in the Preamble of the BIT supports its interpretation.*'° The Claimant
points out that investment treaties with expansive dispute resolution provisions contain similar

language.*!°

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 291, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction ff 151-154.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 292; Hearing Transcript, pp. 121-122.
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 293.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 294, referring to Tza Yap Shum, {| 153
(CLA-70/RA-10); RosInvest, { 130 (RA-19); Amco v. Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1,
Award on Jurisdiction, September 25, 1983, {| 24 (CLA-7); Hearing Transcript, pp. 117-118, 121-122.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 295, referring to Case of the
S.S.'Wimbledon’ (U.K. v.Japan), 1923 (ser. A) No. 1, Judgment (P.C.LJ., 17 August 1923), p. 25 (CLA-
8: CME Czech Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award (UNCITRAL 13 September 2001),
4 533 (CLA-21); Quasar de Valors, { 31 (RA-21); Lalive, “The First World Bank Arbitration (Holiday
Inns v Morocco)—Some Legal Problems,” British Yearbook of International Law (1980), at 158 (CLA-
101); Hearing Transcript, pp. 119-120.

 

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 37.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 37; referring to the Australia/Pakistan BIT (CLA-119) and the
Australia/India BIT as examples (CLA-120); Hearing Transcript, p. 119.

PCA 109262 48

170.

171.

172.

173.

2. Article 3(2) of the BIT
(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s attempt, based on Article 3(2) of the BIT, to import the
arbitration clauses contained in BITs entered into by Laos with third States to this dispute so as

to widen this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.*””

The Respondent argues that the most favored nation (“MFN”) clause under the BIT does not
encompass dispute settlement for the following reasons: (a) the scope of the MEN clause is
limited to “fair and equitable treatment” and “protection” and does not refer to dispute
settlement;*'* and (b) the context of Article 3(2) of the BIT confirms that the MEN clause does

not apply to dispute settlement.*!”

First, the Respondent contends that the plain meaning of Article 3(2) is that the MFN clause is
limited to “fair and equitable treatment” and “protection” as listed in Article 3(1), which does
not cover access to international arbitration.” The Respondent notes that, for an MFN clause to
enlarge the scope of an arbitration clause, its wording must be broad enough to include

arbitration proceedings."

The Respondent argues that “fair and equitable and full protection and security” clause is a
standard term in most modern BITs that has appeared in such treaties since the 19" century,
including in the first Chinese model BIT and other BITs contemporary to that at issue here.*”*
The Respondent stresses that the term “protection” refers to the “protection and security”

standard.’ The Respondent therefore concludes that the scope of the MEN clause is restricted

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{{ 155-157, referring to the Amended Notice, { 2, pp. 119-123,

126.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 158; Hearing Transcript, pp. 47-48.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 158.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 159, referring to Amended Notice, { 2, pp. 119-123, 126;
Hearing Transcript, p. 48.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 159, referring to RosInvest, { 110 (RA-19); Hearing
Transcript, pp. 151-152 (referring to Tza Yap Shum, { 126) and pp. 152-153 (referring to Ros/nvest and
the distinction made in that case between investments or investors in applying the MFN clause).
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, { 50.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, { 51, referring to Gallagher & Shan, pp. 134-135 (RA-34); Hearing
Transcript, p. 151.

PCA 109262 49

174.

175.

176.

177.

to Article 3(1), which is “fair and equitable treatment” with the “protection” indicated therein

having no relation to access to international arbitration.

The Respondent argues that the context of Article 3(2) confirms its non-application to dispute

settlement.’

The specific reference in Article 3(2) to Article 3(1) manifests the clear intention
of the Contracting States that “the MFN clause would import only [the] more favorable
substantive treatments from third-party treaties, and not arbitration or other dispute resolution
provisions.”*”°

In the Respondent’s view, Article 3(2) would have specifically referred to Article 8 if the
Contracting States’ intention was to be able to import an arbitration clause from another treaty
to expand the consent in Article 8(3) of the BIT, which is not the case here.*°” The Respondent
therefore contends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited to that specified in Article 8(3)

of the BIT.**

The Respondent submits that the principle of mutual respect for sovereignty, as referenced in
both the Preamble and Article 8(7) of the BIT, precludes the expansive interpretation of the
MEN clause.” The Respondent contends that a broad application of the MEN to enlarge access
to arbitration would directly violate the agreement of the Contracting States to limit the scope of
permissible arbitration”

The Respondent stresses that the Contracting Parties assigned disputes of the kind brought by
the Claimant exclusively to the courts of the Contracting States, pursuant to Article 8(2) of the
BIT.**! To allow the Claimant to import broader consent clauses that would allow it to arbitrate
claims for breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, breach of contract, and liability

for expropriation, would circumvent the Contracting States’ agreement on this matter.”

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, { 53; Hearing Transcript, pp. 49-50.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 161.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 162.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 162.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 162.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 163-164.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 165.
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 165.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 166.

PCA 109262 50

178.

179.

180.

181.

The Respondent emphasizes that “an MFN clause cannot change the scope, ratione materiae, of
the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal.”** The Respondent distinguishes this case from other
cases in which the consent clauses were broader than that found in Article 8(3) and over which

the tribunals had ratione materiae jurisdiction for all of the disputes brought by the claimant.*™*

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that the MFN clause of Article 3(2) extends the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to claims for the breach of the obligation of fair and equitable treatment, as enshrined
in Article 3(1); the guarantee of free transfer of payments in Article 5; and other protections that
are imported from more favorable bilateral investment treaties, including the Claimant's right to

have its expropriation claim resolved through international arbitration.“

The Claimant rejects the Respondent's contention that any right imported through Article 3(1) is

limited to the substantive entitlements in Article 3(1), thereby excluding dispute settlement.**°

First, the Claimant contends that the “protection” that Article 3(1) accords to investments
extends to all protections provided in the Treaty—including access to international arbitration—

and not merely substantive ones.**”

Moreover, Article 3(2) promises no less favorable treatment
and protection for “activities associated with such investments.” The Claimant argues that the
settlement of disputes is an “activity” associated with an investment.*** The Claimant further
argues that arbitration clauses are highly valued by investors and are considered essential to the

range of protection offered in investment treaties.*”

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 167, referring to Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentina, ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/17), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 21, 2011, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of Brigitte
Stern (“Impregilo”) (RA-24).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 167, referring to Impregilo (RA-24).

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 297; Hearing Transcript, p. 132.
Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 298.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 299-300. The Claimant also argues that
such a reading is consistent with the Preamble to the Treaty which includes the protection of investment
as one of its primary purposes. Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 300;
Hearing Transcript, pp.133-134, 144.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{{[ 300-301, referring to Hochtief AG v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction, October 24, 2011, {| 73
(CLA-38); Hearing Transcript, p. 135.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{] 301-302, referring to RosInvest, {J 130,
132 (RA-19); AWG Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction (UNCITRAL, 3 August
2006), { 59 (“AWG Group”) (CLA-9); Gas Natural SGD, S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case

PCA 109262 51

182.

183.

184.

The Claimant contests the Respondent’s attempt to restrict the term “protection” to “full
protection and security.” It points out that the full protection and security standard obliges the
State to provide the investor with access to justice, just as the fair and equitable treatment
standard entitles the investor to have its claims adjudicated by an impartial decision maker.*”
The Claimant further argues that this obligation gains particular significance when the investor
brings claims for unfair treatment by the domestic courts; it is only by bringing its claims before
an international tribunal that the investor will have access to the standard of justice required

under the fair and equitable treatment standard.“

Second, the Claimant contends that tribunals that have considered broad MEN clauses, such as
the one at issue here, have authorized the importation of dispute resolution clauses.*” The
Claimant rejects the Respondent’s argument that those cases contained broader arbitration
clauses than the Treaty. It argues that the principle underlying the decisions of those tribunals
applies here, i.e., that the less favorable treatment bestowed on the Claimant by the Respondent

has been prejudicial and has effectively foreclosed access to international arbitration.

The Claimant highlights, in particular, the RosInvest case, in which the tribunal noted that the
MEN clause permitted the importation of the dispute resolution clause because it was a
procedural option that offered the investor protection from interference with the use and

enjoyment of the investment.” It contends that the reasoning of the Ros/nvest tribunal applies

 

340

No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions of Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005, { 29
(“Gas Natural”) (CLA-36); Hearing Transcript, p. 133.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 42, referring to Dr. Todd Weiler, The Interpretation of
International Investment Law: Equality, Discrimination and Minimum Standards of Treatment in
Historical Context 101-103 (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2013) (CLA-125); Hearing Transcript, pp. 133-
134, see also p. 170 where the Claimant states that the right of access to justice is included under either
formulation of the standard, i.e., “full protection and security” or “protection”.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {[ 42, referring to Frontier Petroleum Serv. Ltd. v. Czech Republic,
Final Award (UNCITRAL, 12 November 2010), {263 (CLA-35); Hearing Transcript, pp. 134-135.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, 49] 303-304, referring to RosInvest, 14 126,
130, 136 (RA-19); Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, January 25, 2000, {{ 54, 56 (“Maffezini”) (CLA-46); Gas
Natural, {J 9, 31 (CLA-36); Siemens, | 102-103 (CLA-71); National Grid PLC v. Argentine Republic,
Decision on Jurisdiction (UNCITRAL, 20 June 2006), | 93 (CLA-53); Camuzzi International S.A. v.
Repiiblica Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/7, Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal on Jurisdictional
Objections, June 10, 2005, 49 16-17, 28 and 34(iii) (CLA-17); AWG Group, 11 57, 68 (CLA-9).

 

 

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, | 306; Hearing Transcript, pp. 136-137.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 43, referring to RosInvest, | 128 (RA-19).

PCA 109262 52

185.

186.

187.

347

348

349

350

here, where interference with the “activities associated with such investments” (Article 3(2))

would also require access to the procedural option of international arbitration.**

The Claimant rejects as irrelevant and speculative the Respondent’s contention that (a) the MFN
clause would have specifically referred to Article 8 of the Treaty if it were meant to apply to
arbitration; and (b) importing a broader arbitration clause would award the Claimant a right

specifically foreclosed.*“°

As regards the latter argument, the Claimant notes that the Treaty
does not list arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism as an exception to the MFN

clause.”

WHETHER LIS PENDENS AND THE DOCTRINE AGAINST THE ABUSE OF PROCESS BAR THE
CLAIMS OF THE CLAIMANT

(a) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent alleges that the Claimant’s 7 June 2013 Amended Notice is an attempt to add
to these proceedings the claims from the Lao Holdings Arbitration. The Respondent contends
that this “duplication of claims submitted before two separate Tribunals must be procedurally

barred.” **

In its view, prior to the submission of the Amended Notice, the claims were
separate, and their incorporation in this arbitration has caused the Respondent prejudice in its

selection of arbitrators and the preparation of its defenses.*”

The Respondent contends that Lao Holdings was specifically created to own Sanum so that two
BIT arbitrations could be filed against the Respondent.” The Respondent notes that it rejected
the Claimant’s efforts to consolidate the two arbitrations.**' That the Claimant now seeks to
consolidate these cases by importing its claims in the Lao Holdings Arbitration into this

arbitration is a “patent abuse of process.”**

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, | 44; Hearing Transcript, p. 137 (see also Hearing Transcript, pp.

143-146 for further discussion on RosInvest).

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 307, referring to Respondent’s Memorial
on Jurisdiction, $f 162, 166.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 307, referring to Roslnvest, 135 (RA-
19); Gas Natural, | 30 (CLA-36).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 168.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 168; Hearing Transcript, pp. 153-154.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 169.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 169.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 169.

PCA 109262 53

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

Second, the Respondent notes that the doctrine of lis pendens prevents identical claims from

being brought against the same party.**°

The Respondent argues that it should not be forced to
defend the same claims twice before different arbitral tribunals.** The Respondent notes that

the procedural timetables of both arbitrations provide for defenses to be raised at separate times.

The Respondent refers to the inequality and inefficiency of the Respondent having to defend a
different argument based on different evidence in the later proceedings as the Claimant would
be able to modify its argument based on the defense of the Respondent in the earlier

proceedings. 28

Lastly, the Respondent maintains that procedural equality prevents the Claimant from having
“two bites at the cherry,” and notes that the rule of lis pendens has as its primary purpose the

prevention of dual verdicts on the same claims.**°

The Respondent then notes that “[n]ow that Claimant Sanum has spelled out in 170 pages its
full amendments, [it] further objects under Articles 17 and 22 of the UNCITRAL Rules and
requests that the arbitrator deny the amendments.”**” By way of providing context to this claim,
it reiterates that Lao Holdings was specifically created in January 2012 to enable the Claimant
to avail of the protections accorded under the Netherlands/Laos BIT,*** and that Lao Holdings
made untrue statements in order to ensure that the ICSID tribunal had jurisdiction ratione
temporis to decide its claims.**? It characterizes the amendment of the Claimant’s claims in this
case as a further “attempt to manipulate the investment arbitration system.”*

In response to the contention of the Claimant that it had to amend its Notice because of the

refusal of the Respondent to consolidate the two cases, the Respondent notes that the requested

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 170; Hearing Transcript, pp. 52-53.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 170.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 170.

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 171-172, referring to Born, International Commercial
Arbitration, Vol. I, Wolters Kluwer, page 2949 [2009] (“Born”) (RA-25).

Respondent's Reply, 11.
Respondent's Reply, {{ 3-5.
Respondent's Reply, {if 7-10.
Respondent's Reply, 11.

PCA 109262 54

193.

194.

195.

amendment was not to enhance efficiency but was intended, rather, to transfer claims arising

under the Netherlands/Laos BIT to this case.**!

The Respondent highlights that Article 17 of the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules allows the Tribunal to

°° and that

avoid “unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a fair and efficient process’
Article 22 of the UNCITRAL Rules allows the Tribunal to reject an amendment that causes
“delay” and “prejudice.” *° The Respondent points to the effort exerted and costs incurred in the
Lao Holdings Arbitration, and notes that the Claimant had sought the production of documents

in this case to be used in the Lao Holdings Arbitration.

It also notes that Article 22 of the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules prevents an amendment in this case
because this amendment falls outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, as shown by (a) the initial
decision of the Claimant to file separate claims under the Netherlands/Laos BIT and the PRC-
Laos BIT, respectively; and (b) the allegedly limited scope of the PRC/Laos BIT, which the
Respondent claims applies only to claims regarding the quantum of expropriation.*® As further
proof of the alleged lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the claims the Claimant wishes to
introduce in this arbitration, the Respondent points to an allegedly private dispute—between

Sanum and its local partner—that it contends does not belong in an investment arbitration.°°

(b) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that the doctrine of lis pendens is inapplicable in this case because there
is no identity of parties and claims in the two cases.**’ It further submits that lis pendens
provides a ground for staying one proceeding until the other has terminated. It argues that there
are no grounds to support a stay in this case as the resolution of one case will not resolve the

other and, moreover; the simultaneous conduct of both cases actually enhances efficiency.**

Respondent's Reply, 12.

Respondent's Reply, {{ 13-14; Hearing Transcript, p. 53.
Respondent's Reply, {f 15, 17.

Respondent's Reply, 17.

Respondent's Reply, {{ 18-19; Hearing Transcript, p. 53.
Respondent's Reply, { 20.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 310, referring to Azurix Corp. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2001, {{{ 89-89
(CLA-10); Hearing Transcript, p. 141.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {[ 310, referring to Born, at 2933 (RA-25).

PCA 109262 55

196.

197.

198.

199.

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s allegation that the Claimant is committing an abuse of

process. It argues that Laos chose to have two separate proceedings in this case; Sanum had

 

proposed to consolidate the proceedings prior to the selection of arbitrators in both cases.*® It
notes that Laos has benefited from seeing the Claimant’s detailed arguments in both
proceedings before having to file its defense.” The Claimant also argues that the two claimant
parties have the right to bring claims under two different treaties as they are from different

States and have separate rights under the treaties.*”'

Finally, the Claimant contends that the amendment of its Notice to include claims in the Lao

Holdings arbitration could not have prejudiced the Respondent in its selection of arbitrators,

given that Laos has been able to appoint the same arbitrator in both proceedings. *”* The

Claimant also points out that the amendment of its Notice was discussed at the first procedural

hearing, agreed upon by the Parties, and memorialized by the Tribunal in its Procedural Order
373

No. 1.

As to the Respondent’s contention that the Amended Notice should be rejected pursuant to 2010
UNCITRAL Rules 17 and 22, the Claimant raises four points. First, the Claimant contends that
this argument is untimely, given that Laos did not object to this amendment when the process
for this amendment was discussed and adopted, when the allegedly detailed Amended Notice
was filed, or when the Respondent filed its Response on Jurisdiction”? The Claimant insists
that “Laos cannot complain of an ‘abuse of process’ when it agreed to the process.” ws

Second, the Claimant asserts that the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules neither prohibit nor require that a
notice of arbitration be amended prior to the presentation of a claimant’s case in the opening
memorial, and argues that Article 22 typically applies not to the notice of arbitration, but to the

adding or supplementing of claims after the submission of the claim or counterclaim.*”°

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 311; Hearing Transcript, pp. 139, 141,

172-173.
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 311.
Hearing Transcript, p. 140.

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 311; the Claimant also submits that it
attempted to have the same tribunal constituted to hear the two cases (Hearing Transcript, pp. 139, 140).

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 46, referring to Procedural Order No. 1, at 4; Hearing Transcript,
p. 140.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 48; Hearing Transcript, p. 142.

Claimant’ s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 48.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 49.

PCA 109262 56

200. Third, the Claimant notes that neither its Amended Notice nor its Statement of Claim has caused

201.

VI.

 

unfairness, prejudice, or delay; both submis

  

ions predated the Respondent’s filing of any
pleadings in this matter.*”’ As to the Respondent's claims concerning the Lao Holdings
Arbitration, the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s work in that case need not be
duplicated and is in fact directly applicable to the present matter.*”* The Claimant also points
out that any inefficiency or added costs resulting from the parallel litigation can be attributed to

the refusal of the Respondent to consolidate the two arbitrations.*”

Fourth, the Claimant contends that the Respondent has not explained its argument under Article
22, that the Lao Holdings claims fall outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, and questions the

relevance of what it describes as the Respondent’s speculation as to why the Claimant filed two
380

separate arbitrations.

 

202. The Respondent requests that:

i) The Tribunal decline jurisdiction because Sanum is not a qualified investor under the
BIT.

ii

The Tribunal decline jurisdiction because the claims brought are not investment

related claims.

iii) The Tribunal decline jurisdiction because the Respondent did not consent to arbitrate

Sanum’s claims under the BIT.

z

In the alternative, the Tribunal dismisses the several claims introduced into this
arbitration by the Amended Notice filed 7 June 2013, incorporating the duplicative

claims previously made in the Holdings arbitration.

v) The Tribunal issue an award of the Respondent’s costs incurred in connection with
this arbitration, including Laos’ legal fees and other costs, and Laos’ share of the fees

and expenses of the Tribunal and the Administrative Centre.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 50.
Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 50.
Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 51.

Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 52.

PCA 109262 57

203.

Vil.

204.

205.

206.

The Claimant requests an award:

i) Dismissing the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in their entirety;

ii) Awarding Sanum its costs and expenses of this proceeding, including attorneys’ fees,
in an amount to be determined in the course of this proceeding by such means as the

Tribunal may direct; and

iii) Ordering such other relief as may be just and appropriate in the circumstances.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
APPLICABLE LAW

It is common ground between the Parties that public international law is the applicable law. It is

also undisputed that the VCLT is binding upon Laos and the PRC.

WHETHER THE CLAIMANT IS COVERED BY THE TREATY

1. Whether the Treaty extends to the Macao SAR

The question of the application or non-application of the PRC/Laos BIT to the Macao SAR is
central to the question of jurisdiction. The Claimant considers that it applies, while the
Respondent argues that it does not. If the Respondent is correct, the case stops as the Tribunal
would have no jurisdiction and would not need to examine the other objections to jurisdiction. If
the Claimant is correct, the Tribunal must continue its mission by examining the other

objections to jurisdiction.

(a) The theoretical analysis of the relevance of the 1999 Notification to the
Secretary-General of the UN

One of the main arguments relied upon by the Respondent is that the 1999 Notification to the
UN Secretary-General contains the list of treaties that the PRC intended to extend to the Macao

SAR. In the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, it states:

 

Similarly, the 1999 Notification regarding the Macao SAR, which the PRC filed on 13
December 1999 and on which Lao PDR has been relying, provides:

PCA 109262 58

207.

208.

“(...] [V. With respect to other treaties that are not listed in the Annexes to this Note,
to which the People’s Republic of China is or will_become a Party, the Government
of the People’s Republic_of China will _go through separately the necessary
formalities for their ication to the Macao Special Admini: i ion ij
decided.”

 

 

The BIT is not listed in the two Annexes referred to in the 1999 Notification. Thus, it was
not extended to the Macao SAR.*!

The Claimant has answered this argument by underlining that it ignores an important difference

between multilateral treaties and bilateral treaties:

[...] on its face, the Notification did not intend to cover the universe of international
agreements to which the PRC is a party. Rather, as is evident from the official record,
the Notification applied only to multilateral treaties for which the UN Secretary-
General acts as depositary: “By a notification dated 13 December 1999, the
Government of the People’s Republic of China informed the Secretary-General of the
status of Macao in relation to treaties deposited with the Secretary-General.” The
PRC-Laos Treaty, however, is not such an instrument: it is a bilateral treaty with
regard to which the Secretary-General plays no role. Thus, contrary to what
Respondent argues, no conclusion about the territorial scope of the Treaty can be
drawn from the fact that it does not appear in the lists, annexed to the Notification, of
multilateral PRC treaties that would apply to Macau after the handover. In fact, none
of the PRC’s numerous bilateral agreements (or multilateral agreements with other
depositaries) is included in those annexes, because there was no reason to notify the
Secretary-General of purported territorial limitations for treaties where he plays no
role”

  

In its Reply on Jurisdiction, the Respondent tried to explain that there is no difference between
multilateral and bilateral treaties’ as can be seen from the fact that the bilateral treaties are also
published in the UNTS, and to support this line of argument, it cited Article 102 of the UN

Charter, which provides:

1. Every treaty and every international agreement entered into by any Member of
the United Nations after the present Charter comes into force shall as soon as
possible be registered with the Secretariat and published by it.

2. No party to any such treaty or international agreement which has not been
registered in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article may
invoke that treaty or agreement before any organ of the United Nations.***

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 41-42 (Respondent's emphasis).
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, { 242 (Claimant’s emphasis).

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, {| 42; Notes verbales from the Legal Counsel relating to the
depositary practice and the registration of treaties pursuant to Article 102 of the UN Charter,
http://treaties.un.org/Pages/Overview.aspx ?path=overview

/definition/page1_en.xml#agreements (emphasis added) (RA-30).

UN Charter: Chapter XVI: Miscellaneous Provisions (RA-28) (emphasis addded).

PCA 109262 59

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

214.

The Tribunal must, however, emphasize that such an approach ignores the fundamental
difference between the role of the UN as depositary and its role as an instance of registration.
The role as depositary concerns exclusively multilateral treaties; the role as instance of
registration concerns bilateral treaties. In both situations, the UN ensures the publication of the
treaties. It is not because multilateral treaties and bilateral treaties are all published in the UNTS
that the roles played upwards by the UN are not to be differentiated. When acting as depositary,
the UN Secretary-General plays an important role as far as reservations to multilateral treaties

are concerned, while no question of reservation arises in relation to bilateral treaties.

The Tribunal cannot therefore accept this line of argument by the Respondent. The Tribunal
finds that the 1999 Notification has no relevance as far as bilateral treaties are concerned. As
such, it does not need to enter into an examination of the Respondent’s arguments to the effect
that the 1999 Notification could be considered either as a reservation to the application of
Article 29 of the VCLT or as a binding unilateral declaration according to which the PRC/Laos
BIT—not being mentioned among the multilateral treaties listed therein—is not applicable to
the Macao SAR.

The Respondent’s reliance on the 1999 Notification being of no avail, the Tribunal must analyze

the legal parameters that are applicable in this case.

(b) The relevance of Article 29 of the VCLT and Article 15 of the VCST

The Parties’ Positions

The Parties have invoked both Article 29 of the VCLT and Article 15 of the VCST.

As the written and oral submission of the Parties were far from exhaustive on these Articles, at
the end of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal sought clarification from the Parties on the
following point:
The respective roles, if any, of Article 29 of the [VCLT] and Article 15 of the [VCST]
in relation to the application or non-application of the PRC/Laos Treaty to the Macau

SAR.

It is useful to reproduce here these two articles. Article 29 of the VCLT reads as follows:

Article 29 - Territorial Scope of Treaties

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, a
treaty is binding upon each party in respect of its entire territory. (emphasis added)

PCA 109262 60

215. Article 15 of the VCST reads as follows:

Article 15 - Succession In Respect of Part of Territory

When part of the territory of a State, or when any territory for the international
relations of which a State is responsible, not being part of the territory of that State,
becomes part of the territory of another State:

(a) treaties of the predecessor State cease to be in force in respect of the territory to
which the succession of States relates from the date of the succession of States;
and

(b) treaties of the successor State are in force in respect of the territory to which the
succession of States relates from the date of the succession of States, unless it
appears from the treaty or is otherwise established that the application of the
treaty to that territory would be incompatible with the object and purpose of the
treaty or would radically change the conditions for its operation. (emphasis added)

216. The Respondent summarizes its position on the respective roles of Articles 15 and 29 as

follows:

Respondent submits its analysis on Question I in two parts. The first part establishes
that Article 15 of the [VCST] is an expression of customary international law (A). The
second part establishes that both Article 29 and Article 15 are applicable to this case as
they are both expressions of customary international law and their co-existence is not
incompatible (B).*

217. The conclusion of the Respondent’s analysis is that:

[...] there can be no doubt that bilateral investment treaties and other commercial
treaties concluded by China with third countries do not automatically apply to Macao
under the positive aspect of the basic rule but are instead the object of an exception to
such rule.*°

218. The Claimant, for its part, argues the following:

Article 29 is applicable to the PRC-Laos Treaty both because the PRC and Laos are
parties to the VCLT and because Article 29 undeniably represents the applicable rule
of customary international law. In contrast, neither the PRC nor Laos has ratified the
[VCST]. [...] [T]here is no evidence of the requisite consistent State practice or opinio
juris to support the notion that its provisions reflect customary international law. In
particular, the aspect of Article 15 of the [VCST] that differs from the customary rule
reflected in Article 29—its exceptions—cannot be considered to reflect customary
international law. [...] Even if the exceptions in Article 15 were somehow deemed to
constitute applicable law, the PRC-Laos Treaty does not fall under its exceptions. **”

Respondent's Post Hearing Submission, { 2.

Respondent's Post Hearing Submission, 21.

Claimant’ s Response, (3, 6.

PCA 109262 61

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

389

390)

The Tribunal’s Analysis

It is common ground that both the PRC and Laos are parties to the VCLT. It is also common
ground that neither the PRC nor Laos are parties to the VCST. The customary nature of Article
15 is controversial between the Parties: they both accept that the general rule of the “moving
treaty frontiers” of Article 15 of the VCST is customary, but the Claimant argues that the

exceptions to Article 15 are not customary.

i) Both Article 29 of the VCLT and Article 15 of the VCST are rules of customar'

international law

It is undisputed by the Parties that Article 29 in its entirety has the force of binding customary
international law.*** As this is not controversial the Tribunal does not consider that it needs to

make lengthy developments to support this statement of law.

By contrast, although there is unanimity or “quasi-unanimity” among the doctrine to consider
that Article 15 also represents customary international law, in view of the diverging analyses

presented by the Parties, the Tribunal will elaborate at some length on this question.

The Tribunal first notes that the ILC, in its 1974 Commentary on Draft Article 14 (which
became Article 15) of the VCST, is explicit that the “moving treaty frontiers” rule was a pre-
existing customary rule.**” In the same sense, Mr. Yasseen, the president of the ILC Drafting
Committee that prepared the text of the VCST, declared: “This principle is a generally
recognized principle of international law; it is observed in the practice of States and can be
considered as part of customary international law

The Tribunal also cites some authors who have written on this issue, for example, Philippe

Cahier explains that Article 15 “corresponds to State practice, was adopted without modification

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission, { 2; Claimant’s Statement of Claim and Response on
Jurisdiction, ${{ 228-232; Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 4{{ 11-12; Hearing Transcript, pp. 14:1-
22; 71:1-73:14.

 

ILC Commentary 1974, at pp. 208-209 (RA-13); see also Hearing Transcript, pp. 158-160, 169-170.

Yasseen, “La Convention de Vienne sur la succession d'Etats en matiére de traités,” AFDI, 1978, at p. 92
(RA-40). [English translation provided by the Tribunal, the original French being: “Ce principe est un
principe généralement reconnu du droit international; il est observé dans la pratique des Etats et peut étre
considéré comme faisant partie du droit international coutumier.”}

PCA 109262 62

224.

225.

by the Conference and simply codifies a customary rule.”*”' Also, in a course given at the
Hague Academy of International law on “La succession d’Etats” in a Section entitled

”? it was noted that

“L’existence de régles coutumiéres : la portée juridique des Conventions”,
there are some rules whose customary value are contested: “I. Les régles 4 l’égard desquelles
existent des controverses doctrinales”,*”* but that others clearly have customary value: “III. Les
régles des Conventions qui ont indéniablement une valeur coutumitre”.*** Among the latter
was included: “la régle coutumiére de la variabilité des limites territoriales d’ application des
traités”.*°°

The Claimant has admitted that Article 15 is customary as far as the general rule is concerned
but submits that the exceptions are not customary. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant has not
provided any reason in support of this position and the Tribunal has found no indication that
such a dichotomy can be made; the doctrine on the customary character of Article 15 has never

made such distinction but has referred to the rule as a whole.

ii) The rules _are_not_i i but_merely deal with different_moments in _the

 

evolution of a situation

Article 15 explains and regulates what happens at the moment of transition from one sovereign
to another whereas Article 29 prescribes what the general situation is outside of a transitional
period, whether a territory has undergone a transition or not. In other words, the rule of Article
15 can correctly be described as the “moving treaty frontiers” rule. The rule of Article 29 does
not deal with a situation of change,*”® but only states the general principle of international law
Cahier, pp. 73-74 (RA-39) [English translation provided by the Tribunal, the original French being: “[...]

correspond 4 la pratique des Etats, il a été adopté sans changement par la Conférence et il ne fait que
codifier une régle coutumiére.”]

 

Stern, La succession d’Etats, Hague Academy of International Law Collected Courses, t. 262, 2000
(“Stern”) (CLA-140). [English translation from the French: “State Succession” and “The existence of
customary rules: the legal scope of the Conventions”]

Stern, at p. 147 (CLA-140). {English translation from the French: “The rules whose customary nature is
controversial”

Stern, at p. 164 (CLA-140). [English translation from the French: “The rules of the Conventions that have
an undeniably customary nature”]

Stern, at p. 169 (CLA-140). [English translation from French: “The customary international law rule of
the moving treaty frontiers”.]

See for example, Odendahl, p. 489 : “[...] questions of State succession are not covered by Article 29.”
(CLA-102). See, in the same sense, Doehring, The Scope of the Territorial Application of Treaties:
Comments on Article 25 of the ILC’s 1966 Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties (1967) 27 Z.a.0.R.V.
483, pp. 488-489: “The draft [Article 25 that became Article 29] gives no answer as to the legal situation
created when, in the course of the application of a treaty, a change occurs in the national boundaries of a
State.” (CLA-133).

PCA 109262 63

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

397

related to the territorial extension of a State’s sovereignty, which can be described as the

principle of the territorial application of a State’s legal order.

Of course, this does not mean that the two rules do not have an extremely close relationship,
which explains why they were not always clearly distinguished by the Parties. The situation
described in Article 29 can be the result of the application of Article 15, or, it can also be seen
the other way around, i.e., that Article 15 regulates the transition in the way it does, because this
is the normal result of the territorial application of the law. This was indeed emphasized in The

Hague Academy course on State Succession already mentioned:

This rule [Article 15] is but an application, in a given succession process, namely the
transfer of a portion of territory between two States which remain in existence, of the
general principle on the territorial application of treaties or, in other words, of the rules
on the distribution of competences among States.*°””
This is also indicated by the ILC, when discussing the draft article that was to become Article
15:

As to the rationale of the rule, it is sufficient to refer to the principle embodied in
article 29 of the [VCLT] under which, unless a different intention is established, a
treaty is binding upon each party in respect of its entire territory. This means generally
that at any given time a State is bound by a treaty in respect of any territory of which it
is sovereign, but is equally not bound in respect of territory which it no longer
holds.*”*

In other words, the two rules exist side-by-side, Article 15 being the corollary of Article 29 and

Article 29 being a consequence of Article 15.

iii) The i to Article 15 of the VCST are in_ the i to
Article 29 of the VCLT

This close relationship explains indeed why the exceptions to the two rules are in fact very
similar—contrary to what the Claimant argued—as can be seen from what has been emphasized

in the two Articles in paragraphs 214 and 215 above.

In both Articles, the non-application of a treaty to the whole territory can only result from the

treaty itself or if it is otherwise established. The reasons for the non-application of a treaty to an

Stern, p. 169. [English translation provided by the Tribunal, the original French being: “Cette régle n’est
que la mise en oeuvre, dans un processus successoral spécifique, le transfert d’un territoire entre deux
Etats dont chacun reste identique a lui-méme, du principe général de I’ application territoriale des traités,
autrement dit des régles de répartition des compétences entre Etats.”

ILC Commentary 1974, p. 208(3) (RA-13).

PCA 109262 64

231.

232.

233.

234.

235.

400

expanded territory at the moment of a succession are more limited than the reasons for the non-
application of a treaty to the entire territory, but are included in them. Indeed, automatic
succession applies unless it appears from the treaty itself or is otherwise established that such a
result would not be appropriate for one of two reasons: either because such succession would be
incompatible with the object and the purpose of the treaty or because it would radically change
the conditions of its operation. As far as the non-application of a treaty to the whole territory is
concerned, it is sufficient that such non-application results from the treaty or, for whatever
reason, the State sees fit to decide such non-application: for example, the PRC and the Russian
Federation decided that the PRC/Russia BIT would not apply to the Macao SAR, for no stated

reason.

This analysis means that in order to ascertain whether or not the PRC/Laos BIT applies to the
Macao SAR, Article 15 of the VCST with its exceptions as well as Article 29 of the VCLT with

its exceptions—which are two faces of the same coin—are relevant.

(c) The Tribunal’s analysis of the concrete situation of the PRC/Laos BIT

A first remark to be made by the Tribunal is the difficulty it faced in ascertaining the application
or non-application of the PRC/Laos BIT to the Macao SAR due to the paucity of factual
elements presented by the Parties: there were no affidavits from the PRC, Laos or the Macao

SAR, which could probably have been obtained from the respective authorities.

Moreover, the response to a question raised by a member of the Tribunal during the Hearing on

Jurisdiction did not clarify the matter. The question was the following:

So, my question is: Has there been any paponation any list of bilateral treaties? I’m
very surprised that this does not exist [...

The response from counsel for the Respondent was the following:

Now, as to your question of the lists of treaties that, on the one hand, have been
entered into by China, there is, to my knowledge, no list, no official list [...

 

The response from counsel for the Claimant was similar:

There is no evidence in the record that any similar Notification in any way, shape, or
form was made by China in respect of the category of bilateral investment treaties. It’s
not in the record. It didn’t happen.*”"

Hearing Transcript, p. 56:23-25.
Hearing Transcript, p. 60:12-14.

PCA 109262 65

236.

237.

238.

239.

The Tribunal, being left with no actual information on the status of the PRC/Laos BIT must
analyze the situation by application of the relevant rules: Article 15 of the VCST and Article 29
of the VCLT. In the Tribunal’s view, the conditions of Article 15 shall be verified first, as the
transition came first in the chronology of events relevant to the issue of whether the Treaty

applies or not.

The Tribunal will therefore turn first to Article 15 of the VCST and apply the rule developed in
the framework of the international law on State succession. It is well known that it is the PRC’s
contention that no transfer of sovereignty took place in December 1999, since it merely
“resumed” its exercise of sovereignty over Macao, as it did over Hong Kong. The Tribunal
wants to put it beyond doubt that its approach does not contradict this position of the PRC when
it applies the rules on State succession. Indeed, as explained by an author in relation to Hong
Kong (an explanation that also applies to Macao), “there is little doubt that the ‘transition’ on
1 July 1997 largely comports with the definition of ‘state succession’—as ‘the replacement of
one state by another in the responsibility for the international relations of territory’—and that
the issues raised as a result of this event are generally covered within the branch of international
law which ‘deals with the legal consequences of change of sovereignty over territory.”

The central question is: Does the PRC/Laos BIT enter into the general rule or the exceptions to
Article 15 and Article 29? If the general rule applies, the BIT will be applicable to the Macao
SAR; if one of the exceptions applies, the BIT will not be applicable to the Macao SAR. The
general rule—i.e., the extension of the treaty to the whole territory, at the moment of a transfer
of sovereignty or at any time—applies if none of the exceptions are satisfied. In order to
ascertain whether or not the general rule applies, a negative approach must be adopted, i.e. an
approach that verifies first whether any of the exceptions apply. If the answer is negative, it can
be asserted that the applicable rule is the general rule of extension of the treaty to the new part

of the territory, or in the case there is no succession, to the whole territory.

i) Does it appear from the PRC/Laos BIT that it was not extended to the Macao SAR at
the moment of recovery of sovereignty by the PRC, because the application of the
Treaty to that territory would be incompatible with the object_and_ purpose of the
Treaty?

 

The object and purpose of the BIT is stated in the Preamble in the following terms:

 

401

402

Hearing Transcript, p. 85:4-7.
Mushkat, in “Hong Kong and Succession of Treaties”, /CLQ, 1997, pp. 191-197 (“Mushkat”).

PCA 109262 66

240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

403

404

[The two Contracting States] desiring to encourage, protect, and create favorable
conditions for investment by investors [...] based on the principles of mutual respect
for sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit and for the purpose of the development of
economic cooperation between both States, [hJave agreed as follows [...]*°*
The purpose is twofold: to protect the investor and develop economic cooperation. The
Tribunal does not find—and no element has been provided by the Respondent to that effect—
that the extension of the PRC/Laos BIT could be contrary to such a dual purpose. In fact, the

larger scope the Treaty has, the better fulfilled the purposes of the Treaty are in this cas

 

: more
investors—who would not otherwise be protected—are internationally protected, and the

economic cooperation benefits a larger territory that would otherwise not receive such benefit.

In other words, the Tribunal is satisfied that the extension of the PRC/Laos Treaty to the Macao
SAR is not incompatible with its object and purpose, which again is to “encourage, protect and
create favorable conditions for investment by investors of one Contracting State in the territory
of the other Contracting State [...] and for the purpose of the development of economic

cooperation between both States [...]”.*°*

 

Allowing investors from the Macao SAR to benefit from the protections of the PRC/Laos
Treaty is fundamentally compatible with this object and purpose, the more so that there is no

other possibly competing BIT adopted by the Macao SAR with Laos.

ii) Is it otherwise i that the PRC/Laos BIT was not extended to the Macao SAR
at the moment of recovery of sovereignty by the PRC, because the application of the
Treaty to that territory would radically change the conditions for its operation?

The question which must be answered next is whether the extension of the PRC/Laos BIT to the
Macao SAR radically changes the conditions of application of the Treaty. The Tribunal
considers that this question is particularly relevant considering the different economic
philosophy that pertains to Mainland China and the Macao SAR, which is illustrated by the

famous formula “one country, two systems.”

Concerning the question of bilateral treaties and whether or not a succession to them radically

changes the conditions for their operation, there are two schools of thought.

For some States, the personal aspect of a bilateral treaty implies that the replacement of one

State with another in a bilateral relationship radically changes the condition for its operation

Preamble to the PRC/Laos Treaty (Ex. D to Amended Notice).
Preamble to the PRC/Laos Treaty (emphasis added) (Ex. D to Amended Notice).

PCA 109262 67

246.

247.

248.

405

with the consequence that the general rule of continuity should not apply. For other States, the
continuity rule applies generally to bilateral treaties as well as to multilateral treaties, unless
there are specific elements that lead to the conclusion that a change in the Contracting Parties

would radically change the conditions for their operation.

The Tribunal notes first that Article 15 does not distinguish between multilateral and bilateral
treaties. Second, the Tribunal considers that it would be excessive to say that all bilateral
treaties are so personal, so related to intuitu personae questions that they cannot survive a
State’s succession. In other words, the Tribunal considers that it is necessary to consider the

application of the general rule to bilateral treaties on a case-by-case basis.

In the case at hand, a specific element is the fact that the States Parties to the PRC/Laos BIT
were States with planned economies, and that the extension of this BIT was to include a
capitalist region. This could give some credibility to the argument that there is a fundamental
change of circumstances which would call for the non-extension of the Treaty. Some doctrinal
approaches would seem to support to such an argument. In The Hague Lecture on State

Succession mentioned earlier, it was indicated that:

[...] political treaties constitute a specific category of treaties concluded intuitu
personae, according to the characteristics of a specific State, such as treaties of
alliance, or certain commercial treaties concluded between States with a planned
economy. Their extinction in case of succession is, again, an application of a general
principle of international law which is the fundamental change of circumstance

 

It can indeed be the case that when a treaty is concluded between two States with planned
economies, the extension of such treaty to a capitalist economy would fundamentally change the
conditions for its application if the treaty was based on features specific to a planned economy
and irreconcilable with the liberal principles of a capitalist economy. The Tribunal, however,
has not found in the Respondent’s case any indication in this direction or any attempt to prove
the existence of different conditions for the application of the PRC/Laos BIT in Mainland China

and in the Macao SAR.

Stern, p. 170 (CLA-140) [English translation provided by the Tribunal, the original French being:

 

“Les traités politiques constituent une catégorie spécifique de traités conclus intuitu
personae, en fonction des caractéristiques d’un Etat précis, tels que des traités d’ alliance,
ou certains traités commerciaux conclus entre Etats 4 économie planifiée. Leur extinction
en cas de succession apparait, encore une fois, comme une mise en oeuvre d'un principe
général du droit qui est le ch fonde Ide ci ”
(emphasis added)

 

PCA 109262 68

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

406

407

408

409

410

In the present case, it is the Tribunal’s view that a treaty that would not be extended to the
Macao SAR under Article 15 would be a treaty imposing “communist” values or institutions in
the Macao SAR. This is very clear under the “one country, two systems” doctrine, which is
reflected both in the respective Preambles of the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law of the
Macao SAR.

The Preamble to the Joint Declaration affirms that “[t]he current social and economic systems in
Macao will remain unchanged, and so will the life-style" The Preamble to the Basic Law of
the Macao SAR states that “[...] under the principle of “one country, two systems”, the socialist
system and policies will not be practiced in Macao.”"””

It appears that the treaties that will not be extended under the applicable principles are those
whose application would endanger the capitalist system and the liberal way of life. Such is not

the case of the PRC/Laos BIT; to the contrary.

Indeed, a comparison of the BITs of the Netherlands and Portugal entered into with the PRC
(which are very similar to the PRC/Laos BIT) and the Macao SAR, respectively, show that they
contain very similar provisions. For example, the articles on the settlement of investment
disputes are the same but for one feature; this tends to prove that the rules of the PRC/Laos BIT
can be considered as compatible with their application in the Macao SAR and do not need to be
rejected for incompatibility with the capitalist economic system.***

It could also be said—and the Respondent presented arguments to this effect—that the
automatic extension should not apply, as it has been otherwise established by the Joint

410

Declaration” and the Macao’s SAR Basic Law,""’ which both recognize Macao SAR’s treaty-

making powers in economic matters.

The Joint Declaration deals in the following manner with the treaties of the PRC (the second
paragraph of this Article has been reproduced in Article 138 of the Basic Law of the Macao
SAR):

Joint Declaration (RE-111).

Basic Law of the Macao SAR (RE-09).

A similar analysis has been performed as far as the resumption of the sovereignty of the PRC over Hong
Kong by Mushkat (p. 169): “[...] the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong cannot be deemed a
“fundamental change’ that ‘radically transforms’ the nature of the territory, allowing claims of rebus sic
stantibus” to refute continuity of the applicable treaty regime.”

Joint Declaration (RE-1 1).
Basic Law of the Macao SAR (RE-09).

PCA 109262 69

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

aul

Vi

Subject to the principle that foreign affairs are the responsibility of the Central
People’s Government, the Macao [SAR] may on it’s own, using the name “Macao,
China”, maintain and develop relations and conclude and implement agreements with
states, regions and relevant international or regional organizations in the appropriate
fields, such as the economy, trade, finance, shipping, communications, tourism,
culture, science and technology and sports. [...]

The application to the Macao [SAR] of international agreements to which the [PRC] is
a member or becomes a party shall be decided by the Central People’s Government, in
accordance with the circumstances and needs of the [SAR], and after seeking the
views of the government of the [SAR].
Based on these articles, the Respondent argued that the automatic extension provided for in
Article 15 has to be rejected as it was otherwise provided by the Joint Declaration and the Basic

Law of the Macao SAR.

According to the Tribunal, this argument merits consideration as it could appear at first sight
that the PRC and Portugal have provided for a specific way to deal with the extension of
international agreements of the PRC to the Macao SAR, and have therefore superseded the

automatic extension provided for as the general rule in Article 15 of the VCST.

The Tribunal notes at the outset that the Basic Law of the Macao SAR in and of itself, as an
internal law, cannot be considered as legally capable of modifying the international rule set out
in Article 15. It is well known that “the binding character of treaties is determined by

international law, which on this point takes precedence over internal law.”*'"

The Tribunal, however, considers that the same is not true of the Joint Declaration which can be
considered an international treaty and, more precisely, a devolution treaty, by which the two

States involved in a process of succession decide the modalities of such succession.

Before entering into a consideration of the legal value of such a devolution treaty, the Tribunal
wishes to focus on the meaning of Article VIII of the Joint Declaration, reproduced word-for-
word in Article 138 of the Basic Law of the Macao SAR, as the Parties presented diverging
interpretations of these articles. The Tribunal recalls the main elements of Article VIL: “The
application to the Macao [SAR] of international agreements [...] shall be decided by the Central

People’s Government [...] after seeking the views of the government of the Region.”

The Respondent principally relied on this article for the proposition that, because the Macao

SAR was not consulted by the PRC before the Treaty was extended to its territory, the Treaty

Schaus, in Corten & Klein, p. 700 (CLA-105).

PCA 109262 70

261.

262.

263.

264.

has no application to Macanese investors. Indeed the Respondent places great weight on the
fact that the views of the Macao SAR in relation to the PRC/Laos BIT have never been

requested:

To my knowledge, neither in Macao nor in Hong Kong has the local government been
consulted over a possible extension of an International Treaty upon the request of the
Central Government. Beijing has never consulted or has never asked the Government,
either the executive body or the legislative body, over the potential application in
Macao of treaties to which China has entered into [.. jy?

The Claimant has a radically different reading of the same language:

What Laos has said is that this means that you don’t apply the customary rule until the
PRC actually consults with the Macao SAR. But, in fact, the more consistent reading
with respect to the customary rule is—and supported by the text here, is that, in fact,
the customary rule applies until such time if and when the PRC decides to actually
make explicit a contrary intention, and at that juncture should take the step of
consultation.“'*
In other words, according to the Respondent, the PRC/Laos BIT could only have been extended
after seeking the views of the Macao SAR Government; and, according to the Claimant, the
PRC/Laos BIT is to be presumed applicable to the Macao SAR until the PRC Government
decides, after consulting the Macao SAR, that it does not apply. The Tribunal considers that

neither of these lines of reasoning stands scrutiny.

The Claimant’s analysis is not coherent with the basic rule of interpretation of treaties embodied
in Article 31 of the VCLT, requiring that a treaty “shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and
in the light of its object and purpose.” The wording of Article VIII of the Joint Declaration is to
the effect that the treaties will be applied when the PRC Government so decides and not that

they will be applied unless the PRC Government so decides.

But the Respondent’s analysis, although coherent with the wording of the text, does not bring
about the result sought by the Respondent. This is so because of the legal nature of the Joint

Declaration, which can be considered as a devolution treaty.*"*

Hearing Transcript, p. 60:4-11.
Hearing Transcript, p. 93:8-15.

By analogy, it can be mentioned that the Joint Declaration concerning Hong Kong has been registered as
a treaty in the UN. See Slinn, Aspects juridiques du retour de Hong Kong a la Chine, AFDI, 1996 (p.
274): “Le cété délicat de la question du statut de l’arrangement se refléte dans I’emploi du titre
«Déclaration commune» plutét que de celui d’ «accord», encore que l’instrument ait été enregistré par les
deux parties comme un accord international conformément a I’article 102 de la Charte de 'ONU.”

PCA 109262 val

265.

266.

267.

Such treaties can only bind third parties if they apply the customary principles of international
law. This was explained in The Hague Course on State Succession. One of the customary rules
on State succession is the rule of the “effet relatif des traités”, the consequences of which were

described in the following manner:

Bien entendu, cette régle signifie simplement que les traités de dévolution s’ils
donnent des solutions différentes de celles qui sont prévues par les régles de la
succession d’Etats ne s’imposent pas aux Etats tiers ; si ces traités mettent en ceuvre
les solutions résultant du droit coutumier, la maniére dont la succession d’Etats est
réglée s’impose aux Etats tiers, parce qu’ils sont tenus au respect du droit
international. La encore la régle n’apparait que comme une transposition, dans le
domaine de la succession d’ Etats, d’une des régles de base du droit des traités, qui est
la régle de l’effet relatif des traités, codifiée 4 l'article 57 de la Convention de Vienne
sur le droit des traités.*'°

This was also underscored in relation to the Joint Declaration between the PRC and Great
Britain concerning Hong Kong by an author, who said that “[nJotwithstanding the
reasonableness of the Hong Kong formula or the ‘devolutionary’ function of the Sino-British
Joint Declaration, questions may be posed in relation to the binding effect on third parties.”""°

As pointed out by the Claimant during the Hearing on Jurisdiction, no element has been
submitted to the Tribunal to indicate that Laos was informed of such an internal procedure or

whether such procedure was ever enforced:

[...] there is actually no evidence in the record about the actual practice of the PRC
with respect to this consultation, internal procedure, none. So, we actually have no
evidence about when it has been invoked, in what circumstance it has been invoked,
whether it’s a law on the books and doesn’t reflect practice—nothing. We have
nothing on that.*"7

 

[English translation from the French: “The delicate aspect of the question of the status of the arrangement
is reflected in the use of the title “Joint Declaration” rather than “Agreement”, even though the
instrument was registered by the two parties as an international agreement pursuant to Article 102 of the
UN Charter.”] The same is possibly true for this Joint Declaration, but the Tribunal was provided with no
information to that effect.

Stern, p. 169 (CLA-140). [English translation from the French: “Of course, this rule simply means that if
devolution treaties adopt different solutions to those foreseen by the rules of State succession, those
solutions do not bind third States; if the treaties adopt solutions that conform with customary
international law, the manner by which the State succession is governed does apply to third States
because they are obliged to abide by international law. There again the rule only appears as a
transposition, in the domain of State succession, of one of the fundamental rules of the law of treaties,
which is the rule of the relative effect of treaties, codified by Article 57 of the VCLT.”]

Mushkat, p. 194.

 

Hearing Transcript, p. 90:19-25.

PCA 109262 72

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

420

In other words, Laos, having not been informed that its treaty with the PRC would only be
extended after a procedure of consultation—which in fact never seems to have been enforced—,
cannot claim that such an agreement between the PRC and Laos could set aside the international

tule applicable to a bilateral treaty between itself and the PRC.

In the absence of convincing elements to the contrary, the Tribunal is left with no other option
but to consider that, by application of Article 15 of the VCST, the PRC/Laos BIT must be
deemed to have been extended to the Macao SAR. This provisional conclusion has to be
verified and confirmed by the analysis of the application to the situation of Article 29 of the

VCLT which has broader exceptions than the ones included in Article 15 of the VCST.
iii) Does it appear from the PRC/Laos BIT that it is not i to the whole territory?

The Tribunal notes, on the one hand, that the PRC/Laos BIT does not contain an express
provision stating that it applies to the Macao SAR. But this is not necessary as the principle of
territorial extension of the State’s legal order embodied in Article 29 applies, unless otherwise

indicated.

The Tribunal further notes, on the other hand, that it is also evident that the PRC/Laos BIT has
not expressly excluded its application to the Macao SAR, as has, for example, been the case of
the Protocol accompanying the PRC/Russia BIT entered into in 2006.“'* This Protocol
expressly provides that “[uJnless otherwise agreed by both Contracting Parties, the Agreement
does not apply to” the Macao SAR. “Both Parties mentioned during the Hearing on

Jurisdiction the fact that the Treaty does not mention that it does not apply to the entire territory.
In the morning session, counsel for the Respondent stated:

And the principle reads as follows: “Treaties are binding upon the entire territory,
unless it’s provided otherwise in the Treaty and intention appears in the Treaty or is
otherwise established.” We have been through the Treaty together. It does not provide
for a definition of the territory. So, the principle would be, under Article 29, that
unless it is otherwise intended by the Parties or by—here, by China, then it should
apply to the entire territory of China.*”

PRC/Russia BIT (CLA-90).
PRC/Russia BIT (CLA-90).
Hearing Transcript, p. 14:14-22.

PCA 109262 73

273.

274.

275.

276.

In the afternoon session, counsel for the Claimant echoed this statement:

Now, you heard Ms. Willems this morning, I think confirm this when she stated,
“There is no provision as to restriction of territory.” On this we agree."
This element should, however, not be overestimated as it might simply be explained by the fact
that the PRC/Laos BIT was signed in 1993, and that at that time it would not have made sense
to exclude the Macao SAR which was not then a part of the Chinese territory under PRC
sovereignty. By contrast, with respect to the PRC/Russia BIT, which was signed in 2006, it
made sense to deal with the question of the extension of the BIT to Macao. As stated by Mark

Villiger:

A general presumption is established that, when a State concludes a treaty, the latter
applies to the entire territory of the State, and individual areas and territories need
only be mentioned where there is a special reason for doing so, in particular to
exclude them from the treaty’s application. [...] If there are territorial changes, the
treaty continues, in principle, to apply to the entire territory; different intentions would
have to be renegotiated with, or at least be tacitly approved by, the other parties."*??

It is a fact that no intention to exclude the Macao SAR from the application of the PRC/Laos

BIT has been transmitted by the PRC to Laos, at least none that the Tribunal has been made

aware of.

On the other hand, the return of Macao to Chinese sovereignty was not a unforeseen event; it
had been negotiated for a relatively long period of time. The first step was the establishment of
diplomatic relations between the PRC and Portugal on 8 February 1979, which permitted the
launching of negotiations between the two countries on the future of Macao. Official
negotiations began in June 1986 in Beijing and gave birth to the Joint Declaration of 1987
which entered into force on 15 January 1988. The Joint Declaration states that Macao will

return to the PRC’s sovereignty on 20 December 1999, and organizes the transitory period.*”*

Hearing Transcript, p. 77:12-14.
Villiger, pp. 392-393 (emphasis added) (CLA-116).

This information is public and is derived from an article by Goy, La rétrocession de Macau, AFDI, 1997,
pp. 271-285. See also Claimant’s Rejoinder: “[...] it was clear in 1993 that both Portugal and the PRC
recognized that the former’s administration over Macau would cease, thereby restoring full Chinese
sovereignty over its territory” ({ 15) (Claimant’s emphasis). See also the Hearing Transcript, p. 80:2-9,
where counsel for the Claimant stated:

“So, there is no dispute that six years before the Treaty was signed, the PRC had
concluded in 1987 the Joint Declaration with Portugal which provided that the
Government of the People’s Republic of China will resume the exercise of sovereignty
over Macao with effect from 20 December 1999. And as the Tribunal’s aware, it’s a

PCA 109262 74

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

Thus, at the moment of the conclusion of the PRC/Laos BIT, it was already common knowledge

that in a few years’ time, Macao would be under the PRC’s sovereignty.

This factual situation means that no definite conclusion can be drawn either from the silence of
the Treaty on its extension to the Macao SAR, or its silence on the non-extension of the Treaty

to the Macao SAR.

 

This question in fact turns on the meaning of the existence of two sets of BITs by the same
foreign country—Laos—one with the PRC and one with the Macao SAR. The question thus

lity of co-existence of a PRC-BIT and a Macao SAR-BIT with the

 

raised is whether the possi
same third State “otherwise establishes” that the PRC/Laos BIT cannot apply to the Macao
SAR.

Having been made aware of the existence of two instances where there co-exists a BIT with the
PRC and with the Macao SAR, the Tribunal asked, at the close of the Hearing on Jurisdiction,

for clarification on that point. As indicated by the President of the Tribunal:

[I]t has been brought to our attention [...] that there are two—in the case of Portugal
and the Netherlands, there are actually treaties entered into by Macao with these
countries and also with China. [...] [I]t would be helpful to us if you could analyze the
text of these four treaties in terms of any relationship between the two and how they
[work] or don’t together.“
The motivation for this question was to ascertain whether the analysis of these BITs could give
some “otherwise established” indications on the respective role of these two series of treaties
and, for example, help to ascertain whether the existence of one necessarily excluded the

existence of the other.

An initial remark must be made by the Tribunal. The four treaties—the PRC/Portugal,
PRC/Netherlands, Macao/Portugal, Macao/Netherlands treaties—were concluded after the
handover of Macao to the PRC in 1999. As such, they do not call for the application of Article
15 of the VCST, but only of Article 29 of the VCLT. Interestingly, in the case of Portugal, the
Macao/Portugal BIT preceded the PRC/Portugal BIT by five years, while in the case of the

 

pretty detailed Declaration about the intent of the two Parties with respect to the transfer
of sovereignty in 1999”.

Hearing Transcript, p. 176:7-13.

PCA 109262 15

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

287.

425

Netherlands, the PRC/Netherlands BIT was concluded seven years prior to the
Macao/Netherlands BIT.

This sequence of events—a PRC-BIT followed by a Macao-BIT with the same third country,
and a Macao-BIT followed by a PRC-BIT with the same third country—has been analyzed by
the Claimant as indicating that “there is no evidence that the PRC considered duplicate treaties

between itself and Macau on the one hand and third States on the other to be contradictory or

5 ie 25
mutually exclusive. “2

The Tribunal considers this analysis compelling.

A first point which was has come to light is that the territorial scope of the two series of BITs is

not the same.

In the PRC/Portugal BIT signed in 2005, the territorial scope is as follows:

Article 1(2)b)
For the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China, the
territory comprised by the Macao peninsula and the islands of Taipa and Coloane.

In the Macao SAR/Portugal BIT signed in 2000, the territorial scope is as follows:

Article 1(4)

The term “territory” means the territory in which the Parties have, in accordance with
international law and their national laws, sovereign rights or jurisdiction, including
land territory, territorial sea and air space above them, as well as those maritime areas
adjacent to the outer limits of the territorial sea, including seabed and subsoil thereof

In the PRC/Netherlands BIT signed in 2001, the territorial scope is as follows:

Article 1 (4)

For the purpose of this Agreement, the term “territory” means respectively:

- For the People’s Republic of China, the territory of the People’s Republic of China,
the People’s Republic of China, the People’s Republic of China, the People’s Republic
of China (including the territorial sea and air space above it) as well as any area
beyond its territorial sea within which the People’s Republic of China has sovereign
rights of exploration of and exploitation of resources of the seabed and its sub-soil and
superjacent water resources in accordance with Chinese law and international law.

Claimant's Response, {{ 47.

PCA 109262 16

288.

289.

290.

291.

292.

293.

In the Macao SAR/Netherlands BIT signed in 2008, the territorial scope is as follows:

Article 1(c)(ii)
- in respect of the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of
China, the territory is peninsula of Macau and the islands of Taipa and Coloane.

The Respondent draws the following conclusions from the comparison of the territorial scope of

the two series of BITs:

The territorial definition in the BITs clearly indicates that the Macao [SAR] [has] the
power to enter into BITs to cover [its] own territory notwithstanding the fact that
China has also entered into BITs with these same third states. This indicates that the
territorial limit of the Chinese BITs [is] confined to Mainland China.*”°
The Tribunal does not accept this conclusion. It can indeed also mean, with as much if not more
logic, that the PRC-BIT applies to the whole territory including the Macao SAR, while the

Macao SAR-BIT is confined to the territory of Macao but cannot extend to Mainland China.

Another argument put forward by the Respondent is that the overlapping of the PRC and Macao
90427

BITs with the same third State would bring about “legal chaos for foreign investors.
In the Tribunal’s view, the superposition of instruments of protection does not bring about
chaos, but rather better protection to foreign investors. The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant
when it states that “[t]he fact that the PRC authorized Macau to enter into the bilateral
investment treaties at issue does not otherwise establish an intention that its own BITs should
not extend to the territory of Macau; it is equally consistent with a supplemental regime of
protection for Macanese investors, above and beyond that provided by the PRC treaties.”***

Tf one takes the example of the two BITs with Portugal, it is apparent that Article 9 of the PRC-
BIT and Article 8 of the Macao-BIT are very similar, with a difference being that the PRC-BIT
gives a further option to the investor—in addition to the choice of the competent national courts
and an ad hoc arbitration tribunal under the rules of UNCITRAL—to resort to ICSID

arbitration:

Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 27.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, {{ 30.

Claimant’ s Response, 48 (Claimant’s emphasis).

PCA 109262 7

 

Macao SAR/Portugal BIT, 2000
Article 8

1 — Disputes between an investor of one
Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party relating to an
investment in the first area of the second
will be resolved through

negotiations.

2 — If the dispute cannot be resolved in
accordance with the preceding paragraph
within six months from the date on which
one of the litigants have requested in
writing, the investor may choose to
submit the dispute to one of the following
instances:

a) The competent courts of the
Contracting Party in whose
area the investment is located;
or

b) At an ad hoc arbitral tribunal
established in accordance with the rules
of arbitration of the United Nations
Commission for Trade and
Development (UNCITRAL), which are
then in force

 

 

PRC/Portugal BIT, 2005
Article 9

1. Any dispute concerning

investments between a Party and an
investor of the other Party should as far
as possible be settled amicably between
the parties in dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled within
six months of the date when it has been
raised by one of the parties in dispute, it
shall, at the request of the investor of the
other State, be submitted at the choice of
the investor to:

a) the competent court of the Party that is
a party to the dispute;

b) arbitration under the Convention of 18
March 1965 on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (ICSID);

c) an ad hoc arbitral tribunal to be
established under the Arbitration Rules of
the United Nations Commission

on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL) or other arbitration rules.

 

 

294. The Tribunal does not consider that the concomitant application of these two BITs would lead
to “legal chaos”. The more dispute settlement options an investor has, the better it is protected,

and the more enhanced the economic cooperation will be between the concerned States.

295. In the Tribunal’s view, the existence of two treaties facilitates rather than hinders the fulfillment
of the goals of the BITs, which are the protection of the foreign investors and the economic
development of the host State. The Tribunal notes that the same analysis was performed by the

tribunal in the Tza Yap Shum case, where it stated that “Hong Kong’s power to conclude its own

PCA 109262 78

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

investment promotion and protection treaties with countries wherewith China also has entered
9429

into a BIT is not necessarily redundant.
The Respondent has presented another argument, based on the Macao SAR’s autonomy in
economic matters, to support the view that the PRC/Laos BIT does not apply to the Macao
SAR, i.e., “[t]he very fact that Macao has entered into no BIT with Laos reveals that the Macao
SAR under its autonomy has chosen not to enter into any investment protection treaty with
Laos."

The Tribunal is not convinced by such reasoning. In its view, it is also possible to make the
argument to the contrary: that the Macao SAR has not entered into a BIT with Laos because it

considered that its investors were sufficiently protected by the PRC/Laos BIT?

A last mention should be made of a remark made by the Claimant related generally to the object
and purpose of BITs. After stating that “there is thus no conflict where extending the PRC
treaties to Macau ensures that Macanese investors enjoy dual sets of protections in the two

instances discussed above”, the Claimant added that:

[...] the object and purpose is_not served by denying Macanese investors the
protection of the 130 BITs concluded by the PRC—in circumstances where there is no
statement or convincing evidence mandating the contrary conclusion from either the
PRC or the Macau SAR - and leaving them to avail themselves of only two bilateral
treaties that Macau has concluded on its own behalf.“*!
Of course, the Tribunal limits its finding to the specific PRC/Laos BIT, which it has analyzed
on the basis of the few factual elements provided to it and in application of the relevant rules of
international law. Other conclusions might be arrived at with other factual circumstances

surrounding other BITs.

The Tribunal concludes therefore that the PRC/Laos BIT is applicable to the Macao SAR.

Tza Yap Shum, 76 (CLA-70/RA-10).
Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission, { 37.

Claimant's Response, {[ 50 (Claimant’s emphasis). See also, in the same sense, Claimant's Statement of
Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 244, where the Claimant states that the Respondent's position:

“[...] would categorically deny all investors from Macau and Hong Kong the protections
generally afforded to other Chinese investors worldwide. Such an outcome is not only
inconsistent with the purposes of the investment treaty regime, it is incompatible with
China’s “one country, two systems” policy, which was created to enhance—not
diminish—the protections afforded to investors and other denizens of the SARs.”

PCA 109262 719

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

2. Whether Sanum qualifies as an investor under the Treaty
(a) Whether Claimant is established under the municipal laws of the PRC

The Parties disagree as to whether the reference to “the laws and regulations of each contracting
State” in Article 1(2)(b) of the Treaty should be understood in the sense of covering the full
territorial extension of each State or, in the case of the PRC, of excluding the Macao SAR and
the Hong Kong SAR.

The Respondent’s argument for excluding the SARs is based on the existence of three different
legal regimes in the State of China: one for Mainland China and one for each of the SARs.
These regimes include different company laws and the company law of Mainland China does
not apply to the SARs. For the Tribunal, the issue is not how many laws or legal regimes there
are in the PRC and whether the investor has been established under one or the other, but
whether an economic entity established under any one of such legal regimes is an economic
entity established in accordance with the laws and regulations of the PRC. In other words,

should the Tribunal include a territorial limitation in interpreting the scope of Article 1(2)(b)?

The language of the Treaty does not differentiate between economic entities in accordance with
the legal regime under which they were established. There is no difference of treatment between
the two States. The Preamble affirms the desire “to encourage, protect and create favorable
conditions for investment by investors of one Contracting State in the territory of the other
Contracting State [...]”. The Tribunal has already decided that the Treaty applies to all the
territory over which the PRC is sovereign. It is consequent with that decision that an economic
entity established under the laws applicable in any part of the territory of the PRC is to be

considered to have been established under the laws and regulations of the PRC.

The Respondent has placed particular emphasis on the mutual respect of the sovereignty of the
parties recorded in the Preamble of the Treaty. There is no doubt that the PRC has sovereignty
over the Macao SAR and the Hong Kong SAR; it would not be respectful of that sovereignty for

the Tribunal to consider that laws enacted in either of the two SARs are not enacted in the PRC.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant is an economic entity established in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the PRC as required by Article 1(2)(b) of the

Treaty.

PCA 109262 80

306.

307.

308.

309.

(b) Whether Sanum qualifies as an “economic entity” within the meaning of the
Treaty?

The Respondent has interpreted the term “economic entity” as showing the intent of the
Contracting Parties to the Treaty to exclude shell companies. Respondent contends that, in order
to qualify as an economic entity, an investor must perform some economic activities in the State
the protection of which the investor seeks and not in third States. In addition, these activities
need to pertain to the investment that is the subject of the claim. The Respondent has related
these conditions for an investor to qualify as such under the Treaty to the criteria used to
ascertain the nationality of a company. For the Respondent, “economic entity” is concerned
with the criterion of the seat of a company; the concept of “economic entity” encompasses more
than the concept of incorporation. It is the Respondent’s contention that mere incorporation

does not in and of itself determine the nationality of an investor.

The Tribunal has difficulty in reading these limitations into the Treaty. As pointed out by the
Claimant, Chinese treaties are drafted so as to include entities that may not be separate legal
entities with their own legal personality. The concept of “economic entity” contemplates a wider
array of entities than the concept of corporation and is related to the particularities of the
Chinese legal system. Rather than a limitation on the concept of investor, “economic entity” is
a wider term that may include entities that are engaged in economic activities but without

separate legal personality.

The Tribunal also has difficulty with the connection allegedly intended by the Treaty between
the concept of nationality and economic entity. The Treaty requires that the economic entity be
incorporated in the PRC or Laos. To extend the criteria to define nationality through the use of
“economic entity” in the definition of investor is a far-fetched exercise in interpreting the text of
the Treaty. It is hardly consonant with the canons of interpretation under the VCLT to which

both Contracting Parties subscribe.

The search for a convenient place of incorporation is common practice whether for fiscal
reasons or for the network of investment treaties a country may have concluded. There is
nothing wrong per se in this search. As stated by the Aguas del Tunari, S.A. v. Republic of

Bolivia tribunal:

PCA 109262 81

310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

435

It is not uncommon in practice, and—absent a particular limitation—not illegal to
locate one’s operations in a jurisdiction perceived to provide a beneficial regulatory
and legal environment in terms, for example, of taxation or the substantive law of the
Be . aa. 432
jurisdiction, including the availability of a BIT.

In the same vein the Phoenix Action Ltd v. The Czech Republic tribunal articulated the position

as follows:

International investors can of course structure upstream their investments, which meet
the requirement of participating in the economy of the host State, in a manner that best
fits their need for international protection, in choosing freely the vehicle through
which they perform their investment.“
However, tribunals have rejected the practice of so-called treaty shopping when a company is
incorporated in a certain jurisdiction after a dispute has arisen in order for the investor to avail

itself of access to arbitration that it otherwise would not have:

[A]n international investor cannot modify downstream the protection granted to its
investment by the host State, once the acts which the investor considers are causing
damages to its investment have already been committed.*™*

The Respondent has not argued that this was the case in the dispute before the Tribunal.

The Respondent has relied extensively on the separate opinion in Tokios Tokelés. The
Respondent has submitted that the decision in Tokios Tokelés was wrong. It is not for this
Tribunal to determine whether the majority of that tribunal or the dissenting arbitrator was
correct. Suffice it to say here that Tokios Tokeles is irrelevant to the matter before this Tribunal.
The Claimant is not controlled by nationals of Laos who incorporated it in the Macao SAR and

now claim protection under the Treaty against their own State; that is not the issue here.

The Respondent has affirmed that, “[t]he purpose and object of this BIT is to protect nationals
of one State when investing in the other. It is not to extend the protection to investors and
capital from outside the two States.’*° The Claimant is an economic entity national of the PRC.
The Respondent itself has recognized that the Treaty does not include origin-of-capital

requirements. Therefore, this argument of the Respondent is without merit.

 

Aguas del Tunari,

.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent's
Objections to Jurisdiction, October 21, 2005, {{ 330(d).

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O6/5, Award, April 15, 2009, { 94
(“Phoenix”) (emphasis in original).

Phoenix, {95 (emphasis in original).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 118.

PCA 109262 82

315.

316.

317.

318.

319.

To conclude, the Tribunal determines that Sanum qualifies as an investor under the Treaty.

3. Whether the Claimant has made an investment in Laos

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has not made an investment in Laos because it did
not directly invest in Laos and because the contributions made in relation to the shares owned in
Savan Vegas and Paksong Vegas were “apparently made by loans that are being repaid annually
from proceeds of the casino.”“° The Tribunal will proceed to consider whether indirect
investments qualify as investments under the BIT and, if this is the case, whether contributions

made in the form of loans to the local companies qualify as investments.
For ease of reference the Tribunal reproduces here Article 1(1) of the BIT. It reads as follows:

The term ‘investments’ means every kind of asset invested by investors of one

contracting State in accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Contracting

State in the territory of the Latter, including mainly,

(a) movable and immovable property and other property rights;

(b) shares in companies or other forms of interest in such companies;

(c) a claim to money or to any performance having an economic value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property, know-how and technological process;

(e) concessions conferred by law, including concessions to search for or to exploit

natural resources.

The definition is wide-ranging and open. First, while certain investments are highlighted, the
list is not exclusive. It is a list of the investments that the parties to the BIT considered to be the
main investments covered, but not exclusively covered, under the Treaty. Second, the term
“investments” is defined as “every kind of asset invested”. Third, the term “investments” is not
qualified by any adjective such as “direct”. More importantly, it would be surprising that the
parties would have intended to exclude indirect investments and at the same time include among
the “main” investments “shares in companies or other forms of interest in such companies”.
This provision covers the common business practice of foreign investors using local companies

as vehicles to channel the investment, as occurred in this instance.

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has not supported its argument with any reference to
decisions of arbitral tribunals and has not rebutted or contested the arguments of the Claimant
set forth in its Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction other than observing in general

that certain submissions have not been dealt with as “a result of their irrelevance or non-

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 123.

PCA 109262 83

320.

321.

322.

323.

437

438

application to this case and hence the absence of a refutation must not be taken as an admission
90437

to as the correctness of the assertions.
As to the contributions made to the companies in the form of loans, Article 1(1) of the Treaty
does not specify the form in which the contributions must be made to qualify as an investment,
whether in the form of loans or equity. On the other hand, Article 1(1) explicitly includes in the
definition “a claim to money” as one of the main items to be considered as investments. Loans
are undoubtedly “claims to money” that qualify as investments, as long as they are invested,
which is undoubtedly the case here. Sanum alleges also that it has employed its know-how in

the hotel and gaming facilities industry.***

The Tribunal therefore concludes that Sanum has made an investment protected by the

PRC/Laos BIT.

4, Whether Laos Consented to Arbitrate Sanum’s Claims under the Treaty

(a) Whether the Respondent has consented to arbitrate Sanum’s claims under
Article 8 of the Treaty

The issues before the Tribunal are whether access to arbitration is available to the investor
before it has recourse to the local courts, and whether the investor may have recourse to
arbitration to determine whether an expropriation has occurred. It will be useful to reproduce

here the terms of Article 8 of the Treaty and the related paragraphs | and 2 of Article 4.
Article 8 provides:

1. Any dispute between an investor of one Contracting State and the other
Contracting State in connection with an investment in the territory of the other
Contracting State shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably through negotiation
between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled through negotiation within six months, either party
to the dispute shall be entitled to submit the dispute to the competent court of the
Contracting State accepting the investment.

3. If a dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation cannot be
settled through negotiation within six months as specified in paragraph 1 of this
Article 1, it may be submitted at the request of either party to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal. The provision of this paragraph shall not apply if the investor concerned
has resorted to the procedure specified in the paragraph 2 of this Article.

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 23.

Amended Notice, 115.

PCA 109262 84

324.

325.

326.

327.

439

The relevant paragraphs of Article 4 read as follows:

1. Neither Contracting State shall expropriate, nationalize or take similar measures
(hereinafter referred to as “expropriation”) against investments of investors of the
other Contracting State in its territory, unless the following conditions are met:

a. as necessitated by the public interest;

b. in accordance with domestic legal procedures;
c. without discrimination;
d. against appropriate and effective compensation.

2. The compensation mentioned in paragraph 1 (d) of this Article shall be equivalent
to the value of the expropriated investments at the time when expropriation is
proclaimed, be convertible and freely transferable. The compensation shall be
paid without unreasonable delay.

The Parties disagree as to whether a Chinese investor may have access to arbitration prior to
having recourse to the competent courts of Laos. According to the Respondent, Article 8(2)
means that the parties to the Treaty agreed that “no other forum was offered to hear Chinese
investor claims, but Laotian local courts. The same would apply to Laotian investors’ claims
against China." This reading of Article 8(2) would completely eliminate access to arbitration
in respect of any dispute, including disputes in respect of the quantum of compensation

provided for in Article 8(3).

The structure of Article 8 follows a logical sequence: first amicable negotiation, second recourse
to the competent courts or on certain matters access to arbitration. Access to arbitration is
optional; the dispute “may be submitted at the request of either party to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal.” The investor or the State may submit a dispute to arbitration involving the amount of
compensation if negotiation on this matter is not successful. Article 8(3) does not provide that
access to arbitration by either party to the dispute on the amount of compensation is subject to
prior recourse to the Laotian courts. Under Article 8(2), the Parties to the dispute are not obliged
to submit their dispute to the local courts, they are simply “entitled” to do so. In any case, the
investor or the State would be entitled to have recourse to the local courts irrespective of

whether the Treaty provided for it.

The Parties disagree on the scope of Article 8(3) and on the relationship between Article 8 and

Article 4. For the Respondent, Article 8 is clear: it limits access to arbitration in respect of “a

 

dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation.” The Respondent argues that
its interpretation of Article 8(3) is further confirmed by the notification made by the PRC on

7 January 1993, pursuant to Article 24(5) of the ICSID Convention, as to the jurisdiction of

Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, | 47(2).

PCA 109262 85

328.

329.

330.

331.

440

ICSID. According to that notification, the PRC “would only consider submitting to the

jurisdiction of disputes over compensation resulting from expropriation and nationalization.”
As far as the notification is concerned, the Tribunal notes that it is settled case-law that such
notification is for informative purposes only and cannot be considered as a legal obligation to

narrow or broaden an otherwise accepted consent to jurisdiction“!

Looking then at the “ordinary meaning” of this disposition, as it has to do in accordance with
the rules of interpretation of the VCLT, the Tribunal considers that the terms of Article 8(3)
indicate that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is more limited than the dispute clauses found in
many BITs. Article 8(3) refers to “disputes involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation” and it does not simply refer to disputes involving an expropriation. As a first
impression the text of this provision would seem to restrict the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
matters related to the amount of compensation due in instances of expropriation. However,
other readings are possible. The term “involving” has a wider meaning than other possible terms
such as “limited to” which could have been used if the intention of the State Parties had been to
limit the jurisdiction of the Tribunal exclusively to disputes on the amount of compensation.
“To involve” means “to wrap”, “to include”, terms that are inclusive rather than exclusive. This
wider reading of Article 8(3) would seem more consistent with the other provisions of the
Treaty as we will see shortly. It is also consistent with how a similar provision was interpreted

by the Tza Yap Shum tribunal.

The interpretation of this provision shall also take into account its “context”. The Tribunal
considers that the first sentence of Article 8(3) cannot be read in isolation, (a) from the sentence
that follows, namely, “[t]he provisions of this paragraph shall not apply if the investor
concerned has resorted to the procedure specified in the paragraph 2 of this Article”; (b) from

Article 8(2) and (3) from the conditions to establish expropriation set forth in Article 4(1).

The second sentence of Article 8(3) denies access to arbitration if the party concerned has
resorted to “the competent court of the Contracting State accepting the investment.” The
Respondent has argued that this sentence in Article 8(3) refers to recourse to the competent

court for a dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation and not generally to

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 150.

Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001) (Cambridge University Press), pp. 342-347:
“[...] notifications under Art. 25(4) are for purposes of information only and are designed to avoid
misunderstanding.” (p. 344); see also Tza Yap Shum, 4 163-165; PSEG v. Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 4, 2004, Y 135-147; see also Kaiser Bauxite v. Jamaica,
ICSID Case No. ARB/74/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 6, 1975, 4 23, 24.

 

PCA 109262 86

332.

333.

334.

recourse to a competent court. While this is arguably coherent in the context of Article 8, it is

difficult to accommodate in the wider context of Article 4(1).

In accordance with Article 4(1), to establish whether an expropriation had taken place, a
competent court would need to decide whether the action of Laos meets the four conditions set
forth in that paragraph. The fourth condition is “appropriate and effective compensation.” Thus
if Articles 8 and Article 4(1) are read together, an investor who would have recourse to a
competent court to determine whether an expropriation has occurred would be precluded from
submitting the dispute on the amount of compensation to international arbitration because the
competent court would have already determined the compensation. There is an overlap between
the conditions to be met by an expropriation under the Treaty and the Respondent’s reading of
Article 8(3) in isolation of its context. The Respondent has ignored completely this overlap and
has assumed that the jurisdiction may be split between the local courts and an arbitral tribunal.
Indeed, the Respondent has argued that “[t]he liability/quantum split under Article 8(2) and (3)

is consistent with the substantive split under Article 4(1) and 4(2.°*? The alleged neat
relationship between the two Articles ignores the result that emerges from the preceding

analysis by the Tribunal.

The Respondent’s interpretation would leave Article 8(3) without effect. The task of the
Tribunal is to interpret the Treaty in such a way that all the provisions of the Treaty have effect
even if specific provisions do not refer to each other. The principle of effet utile requires
international courts and tribunals to interpret international rules “so as to give them their fullest
weight and effect consistent with the normal sense of the words and with other parts of the text
and in such a way that a reason and a meaning can be attributed to every part of the text.
This principle of interpretation has been applied by investment arbitration tribunals and other

international tribunals.

To illustrate how the principle has been applied, the Tribunal refers to the decision of the ICSID

tribunal in Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka, which explained:

Nothing is better settled, as a canon of interpretation in all systems of law than that a
clause must be so interpreted as to give it a meaning rather than so as to deprive it of
meaning.*“*

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction,  47(3).
Gardiner, Treaty Interpretation (2008) (Oxford University Press), p. 149.

Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri Lanka, CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award of
June 27, 1990, { 40.

PCA 109262 87

335. It has since then been confirmed in a great number of investment awards, which refer to the:

[...] cardinal rule of the interpretation of treaties that each and every operative clause
of a treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than meaningless. It is equally well
established in the jurisprudence of international law, particularly that of the Permanent
Court of International Justice and the International Court of Justice, that treaties, and
hence their clauses, are to be interpreted so as to render them effective rather than

ineffective.“**

336. Other arbitral tribunals have faced the task of interpreting similar treaty provisions and the

Parties have adduced their decisions in this proceeding. As noted by the Respondent, there is a

split among the awards that have interpreted such provisions. The Respondent has pointed out

that in their Preambles, none of the BITs underlying the cases of Tza Yap Shum, European

Media Ventures or Renta 4 adduced by the Claimant in support of its arguments include the

following sentence found in the Preamble of the Treaty: “to encourage, protect and create

favorable conditions for investment by investors of one Contracting State in the territory of the

other Contracting State based on the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty, equality and

mutual benefit and for the purpose of the development of economic cooperation between both

States.” (R dent’s hasis). The has i the importance of these

P P. P

principles:

When applied—how do we apply the principle of respect of sovereignty to
international arbitration and international investment arbitration? Well, those
principles, when applied to international investment law, and in particular dispute
resolution, should and—when applied to international arbitration, foreign investor-
State arbitration, push the Tribunal, oblige the Tribunal < respect the choice of

domestic jurisdiction clause that is inserted in the Contract.

337. Counsel to Respondent concluded by saying that “a purposive approach does not allow this

Arbitral Tribunal to go beyond the wording of the Article 8(3) of the BITs.”"“7

338. The Tribunal is not convinced that the reference to these principles in the Preamble of the

Treaty is sufficient to explain the differences in the interpretation of the jurisdictional clause by

the arbitral tribunals concerned. More importantly, the Tribunal is unconvinced that the

Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award (Ad hoc, 19 August 2005), 248; see also e.g., Noble

Ventures v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/I1, Award of October 12, 2005, | 50; or Pan American
Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on

 

 

Preliminary Objections of July 27, 2006, {{ 132; C

‘emex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas II

Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction of December 30, 2010, {| 104-114; Tidewater Inc. and others v. The Bolivarian Republic of

Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5, Decision on Jurisdiction of February 8, 2013, 4 134.
Hearing Transcript, p. 42:16-23.
Hearing Transcript, p. 43:9-11.

PCA 109262

presence of these principles in the Preamble of the Treaty may override the conclusions of the
Tribunal in the analysis of the text of Article 8. In the instant case, to follow the reasoning of
the Respondent would mean to justify leaving without effect a clause of the Treaty on the basis

of the purpose of the Treaty.

339. The purpose and object of the Treaty covers two distinct aspects: the protection of investments
and the development of economic cooperation between both States. The balance between these
two aspects must be borne in mind by the Tribunal in the analysis of the text of the Treaty, but it
does not mean that the Tribunal needs to give preponderance to one aspect over the meaning of
a particular clause of the Treaty or leave a clause without effect. The purpose of a treaty as set
forth in its preamble may be useful to resolve doubts in its interpretation but it would not justify

leaving without effect a clause of the treaty.

340. To explain the different conclusions reached by arbitral tribunals, the existence or absence of
fork-in-the-road clauses in the underlying BIT is, in the view of the Tribunal, a more relevant
factor, and it is a factor taken into consideration by these tribunals. Indeed, in none of the BITs
underlying the cases relied upon by the Respondent is there a fork-in-the-road clause that would
limit the investor’s access to arbitration if the investor had recourse first to the local courts to
determine whether an expropriation had actually occurred. As stated in the opening statement of

Claimant’s counsel at the Hearing on Jurisdiction:

Most importantly, I will note at the outset that none of them [of the cases relied on by
the Respondent] involve—have fork-in-the-road clauses in their dispute-resolution
clauses, and that makes an enormous difference because, as I’ve shown, having the
fork-in-the-road clause makes it impossible for an investor to do what Laos says they
want the Treaty says it ought to do, which is first bring a claim for expropriation to the
Laos courts and then wholly bring the question of compensation/quantum to a
Tribunal.

341. As in the case of the Treaty, the Spain/Russia BIT and the PRC/Peru BIT include fork-in-the-

road provisions. In reaching its decision on the meaning of the first sentence of Article 8(3) in

the latter, the tribunal in Tza Yap Shum stated:

In the opinion of the Tribunal to rule otherwise would eviscerate the provision relating
to ICSID arbitration since, in accordance with the final sentence of Article 8(3), to
have recourse to tribunals of the State recipient of the investment would definitely
preclude the possibility to accede to arbitration under the ICSID Convention.”

 

Hearing Transcript, pp. 129:21-130:3.

“© Tza Yap Shum, { 188 (CLA-70/RA-10) [English translation provided by the Tribunal. The English
translation provided by the Claimant is inaccurate].

PCA 109262 89

342.

343.

344,

345.

a

346.

347.

450

For the reasons explained above, the Tribunal shares this view and concludes that the

Respondent has consented to arbitrate claims of expropriation under Article 8 of the Treaty.

(b) Whether the Respondent has consented to arbitrate Sanum’s claims under
Article 3(2)

The question before the Tribunal is whether the MFN clause in the Treaty grants an independent
basis for the Tribunal to determine whether an expropriation has occurred and to determine
whether the other substantive breaches of Treaty obligations claimed by Sanum have occurred.
The Tribunal has already determined that it has jurisdiction as to whether an expropriation has

occurred under Article 8 and need not further consider this matter under Article 3(2).

Article 3(2) reads as follows:

The treatment and protection as mentioned in Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be
less favorable than that accorded to investments and activities associated with such
investments of investors of a third State.

Article 3(1) provides:

Investments and activities associated with investments of investors of either
Contracting State shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy
protection in the territory of the other Contracting State.
The Parties disagree as to whether the sentence “shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment
and shall enjoy protection in the territory of the other Contracting State” refers to the standard of
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security or whether it extends to all

protections provided in the Treaty, including access to international arbitration.

On the one hand, the Respondent contends that “protection” refers to protection and security
and not to all the substantive protections under the Treaty. On the other hand, the Claimant has
argued that the most natural reading of the term “protection” is that “it extends to all of the

protections provided in the Treaty.”"*°

Claimant's Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {{ 300 (Claimant's emphasis).

PCA 109262 90

348.

349.

350.

351.

The Claimant has also argued that “activities associated with such investments” include the
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, disposal of investments and the settlement of

n

disputes involved in protecting such investments.“*' Claimant adduces multiple awards to

support different aspects of this reading of “activities associated with such investments.”**
Respondent has not addressed this point in its Reply and has simply insisted that Article 3(1)

refers to protection and security and bears no relation to access to international arbitration.

The interpretation of the MEN clause has been subject to discrepant views since the decision on

jurisdiction of the Maffezini tribunal.***

Therefore, it is not difficult for the parties to a dispute to
find prior decisions in support of their conflicting positions. The Tribunal is not obliged to
follow any particular prior decision but it cannot ignore the arguments of the Parties and the
decisions they have used to support them. Therefore, before entering into the analysis of the
MEN clause in the Treaty, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to make two general
observations related to the cases of RosInvest and Tza Yap Shum that figure prominently in the

Parties’ arguments.

First, notwithstanding the variety of approaches adopted by arbitral tribunals, those tribunals

show concern for the reach of their interpretations and seek to limit their effect.

Second, general pronouncements of arbitral tribunals need to be considered cautiously in the
context of the cases in which they were made. For instance, in the series of cases involving
Argentina, access to arbitration is subject first to submitting the dispute to the ordinary courts
and after 18 months an investor may proceed to arbitration even if a court decided the dispute
and the investor was dissatisfied with the result. The Respondent has distinguished the instant
case from the Argentine cases because the underlying treaties contained broader arbitration
clauses than the dispute resolution clause found here, and the tribunals merely remove threshold
requirements for accessing arbitration’ The Tribunal agrees with the limited relevance of the

Argentine cases.

Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 300.
Claimant’ s Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, {| 300.
Maffezini (CLA-46).

Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 167.

PCA 109262 o1

352.

353.

354.

Third, Claimant has drawn the attention of the Tribunal to the award on jurisdiction in the
RosInvest case and to that tribunal’s finding that the MFN clause permitted importation of a
dispute resolution clause. However, this finding needs to be treated with some reservation in

view of the caution the Ros/nvest tribunal showed when it considered the MFN clause. It stated:

[...] without entering into the much more general question whether MFN-clauses can
be used to transfer arbitration clauses from one treaty to another, the Tribunal
concludes that, for the specific wording of Article 3(1) of the UK-Soviet BIT, and for
the Specific purpose of arbitration with regard to expropriation, the wide wording of
Article 8 of the Denmark-Russia BIT is not applicable.
The tribunal reached this conclusion on the effect of an expropriation on the treatment of an
investment and then continued to analyze a separate provision on the treatment of the investor
and stated: “Again limiting its considerations to the possible application of the MFN-clause to
arbitration regarding expropriation, the terms ‘use’ and ‘enjoyment’ in paragraph (2) lead the
Tribunal to different conclusions from those reached with regard to paragraph ar?
Fourth, the tribunal in Tza Yap Shum conducted an extensive analysis of the history of MFN
clauses and of the MEN clause in the PRC/Peru BIT. The dispute settlement clause in that treaty
follows closely the text of Article 8 of the Treaty except that in Article 8(3) of the Peru/PRC
BIT there is the following additional sentence: “Any dispute related to other matters between
the investor of any Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party may be submitted to
ICSID if the parties to the dispute so agree.”**” The Tza Yap Shum tribunal in its analysis of this
Article 8(3) gave particular weight to the fact that the parties had contemplated in that article the
possibility of submitting other matters to arbitration but only if the parties would agree
beforehand. In view of the need for a further specific agreement, the tribunal rejected the
claimant’s arguments to extend through the MEN clause access to arbitration in respect of

disputes over the other alleged breaches of the Peru/PRC Bir.**

RosInvest, {129 (emphasis added) (RA-19).

RosInvest, {130 (emphasis added) (RA-19).

[English translation from the Spanish provided by the Tribunal]
Tza Yap Shum, { 216.

PCA 109262 92

355.

356.

357.

Before turning to the MFN clause in the Treaty it will be useful to recall the claims advanced by
the Claimant under the Treaty MFN clause. In the Amended Notice, the Claimant has invoked

its right under Article 3(2) of the Treaty:

[...] to receive treatment no less favorable than the Respondent has accorded to the
investors of third States, such as the Netherlands, the Republic of Korea, France,
Sweden, Switzerland, Denmark, the United Kingdom, Germany and Australia, in
respect of its right to seek compensation for a breach of either the autonomous treaty
standard of fair and equitable treatment or alternative standards of treatment no less
favorable, such as Article 8 of the Laos-Germany BIT. Article 2(3) of the Laos-
Sweden-BIT, or Article 6 of the Laos-Japan BIT, through recourse to binding,
independent, international arbitration.

In addition, and in the alternative, should Article 8(3) of the instant Treaty be
construed in such a manner as to in any way curtail or limit the access that a Chinese
investor would otherwise enjoy (had it been a national of the Netherlands, the
Republic of Korea, France, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark,
Australia or Germany), including the availability of access to arbitration under the
Treaty itself, Sanum hereby invokes its right to receive treatment no less favorable
than the Respondent has accorded to these third country investors, under Article 3(2)
of the Treaty, as well.”

The Tribunal observes that, in its Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction, under the
heading “Article 3(2) Grants Authority to the Tribunal To Hear All of Sanum’s Claims”, the
Claimant analyzes Article 3(2) of the Treaty but it does not include any analysis of the dispute
settlement clauses in the BITs through which allegedly the MFN clause would operate. There is

no analysis or specific preference expressed for any of them. While the BITs referred to by the

 

Claimant are part of the record before the Tribunal, it would have been of a tance to the
Tribunal had the analysis of Article 3(2) been complemented by an analysis of the dispute

settlement clauses in the BITs listed in the Amended Notice.

The MEN clause in Article 3(2) refers to the treatment and protection in Article 3(1). Article
3(1) provides for fair and equitable treatment and protection of investments and activities
associated with investments of investors. The Claimant has argued in favor of a broad meaning
of the term “protection” under Article 3(1). On the other hand, the Claimant seems to realize
that the term “protection” as used in Article 3(1) of the Treaty has a limited meaning. Indeed,
the Claimant argues that, under the BITs of Laos with Germany, Korea and the United
Kingdom, Laos has agreed to accord “full protection and security” and this obligation offers
investors broader protection than that afforded under Article 3(1) of the Treaty. The Claimant

does not discuss the implications of this statement for its reading of Article 3(1). In the view of

Amended Notice, 4 122-123.

PCA 109262 93

358.

359.

the Tribunal, this argument shows that the Claimant considers it necessary to have recourse to
the MEN clause to reach the level of protection afforded by the addition of the terms “full” and
“security”. In other words, the Claimant’s argument on the application of the MFN clause
contradicts the Claimant’s broad reading of the term “protection” in Article 3(1) as including all
protections under the Treaty. If this were the case, there would be no need to have recourse to

the MEN clause to enjoy wider protection.

Thus, the position advanced by the Claimant requires the Tribunal, to (a) extend “protection”
under Article 3(1) to all protections provided for in the Treaty; (b) extend through Article 3(2)
the reach of Article 3(1); and, (c) go a step further and extend the reach of this clause to include
access to arbitration in respect of disputes over a breach of all protections under the Treaty.
Article 3(1) is limited in its scope and does not include the traditional formula of full protection
and security, as the Claimant itself recognizes. In addition, to read into that clause a dispute
settlement provision to cover all protections under the Treaty when the Treaty itself provides for
very limited access to international arbitration would result in a substantial re-write of the
Treaty and an extension of the States Parties’ consent to arbitration beyond what may be
assumed to have been their intention, given the limited reach of the Treaty protection and
dispute settlement clauses. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that it has no jurisdiction for claims

submitted under Article 3(2) of the Treaty.

5. Whether the Doctrines of Lis Pendens and Against the Abuse of Process Bar the
Claims of the Claimant

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has committed an abuse of process by submitting,
as part of the Amended Notice, claims already made before in the Lao Holdings Arbitration.
The Respondent further argues that these claims are inadmissible on grounds of lis pendens. The
Respondent has requested that the Tribunal reject the amendments the Claimant has made in its
Statement of Claim and Response on Jurisdiction on the basis of Articles 17 and 22 of the 2010

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

PCA 109262 94

360.

361.

362.

363.

364.

365.

a

According to Article 17(1) of the Rules:

[...] the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers
appropriate, provided that the parties are treated with equality and that at an
appropriate stage of the proceedings each party is given a reasonable opportunity of
presenting its case. The arbitral tribunal, in exercising its discretion, shall conduct the
proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a fair and
efficient process for resolving the parties’ dispute.

Article 22 reads as follows:

During the course of the arbitral proceedings, a party may amend or supplement its
claim or defense, including a counterclaim or a claim for the purpose of a set-off,
unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate to allow such amendment or
supplement having regard to the delay in making it or prejudice to other parties or any
other circumstances. However, a claim or defense, including a counterclaim or a claim
for the purpose of a set-off, may not be amended or supplemented in such a manner
that the amended or supplemented claim or defense falls outside the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal.

The Tribunal will address whether there have been delays or prejudice caused by the Amended

Notice; whether the Respondent had the opportunity to present its case; whether lis pendens is

an obstacle to admission of the claims in the Amended Notice; whether the amended claims are

within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal; and, whether the Claimant has abused the process.

Is the Amended Notice a cause for delay? Procedural Order No. 1 provided for the filing of an
Amended Notice within ten days of the date of that order. The Amended Notice was filed on
June 7, 2013 within the prescribed time. Therefore, it is self-evident that the Tribunal may not

consider the Amended Notice to have caused any inappropriate delay.

Has each Party had the opportunity to present its case? Suffice it to say here that the Amended
Notice not only was filed in good time but also was filed nearly two months before the

Statement of Claim and the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction.

Has the Amended Notice caused prejudice? It is undisputed that the Claimant offered to
consolidate the two proceedings and the Respondent refused. Whatever the reasons for the
Respondent’s refusal, the Respondent is now precluded from claiming that it has been
prejudiced. Whether it has or not is not a matter for the Tribunal to elucidate since

consolidation was an option available to the Respondent.

PCA 109262 95

366.

367.

368.

Vill.

369.

Are the claims introduced in the Amended Notice inadmissible on the grounds of lis pendens
since they are the subject of a parallel proceeding? The Lao Holdings Arbitration is based on a
different BIT and the claimant parties are related but different. The mere fact that the subject
matter of the dispute may in some aspects overlap with these proceedings is not sufficient
reason to reject the claims as inadmissible. As to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, to the extent
that the Tribunal has determined that it has jurisdiction to consider only the expropriation claims
before it, that jurisdiction encompasses only the expropriation claims that may be before the Lao

Holdings tribunal.

Does the pursuit of overlapping claims in two different arbitral tribunals established under two
different BITs by different parties constitute an abuse of process? As already observed above, it
is undisputed that the Respondent refused to consolidate this proceeding and the Lao Holdings
Arbitration. This fact is sufficient ground for the Tribunal to consider that there is no abuse of

process.

To conclude, the Tribunal determines that the expropriation claims in the Amended Notice are

properly before this Tribunal.

COSTS

Each Party has requested that the costs of the proceedings, including its own costs, be borne by
the other. The Tribunal reserves this question for consideration and decision along with the

merits of the dispute.

PCA 109262 96

IX. DECISION

370. For the reasons set out above the Tribunal decides:

ii

iii)

iv)

vi)

That the PRC/Laos BIT does apply to the Macao SAR.

That Sanum is a protected investor under the BIT and its claims are investment-
related.

That the Tribunal has jurisdiction to arbitrate only the expropriation claims of Sanum
under Article 8(3) of the BIT.

That it has no jurisdiction to arbitrate Sanum’s other claims by application of Article
3(2) of the BIT.

To reject the Respondent’s request to dismiss claims introduced by the Amended

Notice which allegedly duplicate claims made in the Laos Holdings Arbitration.

To consider and decide the Parties’ requests in respect of costs together with the

merits of the dispute.

Dated this 13" day of December 2013, Singapore:

Boibte Shem.

 

Professor Bernard Hanotiau Professor Brigitte Stern

PCA 109262

Arbitrator Arbitrator

ao Mp

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
Presiding Arbitrator

97

