IN ANAFTA ARBITRATION UNDER THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

~ between -

S.D. Myers, Inc.
(«SDMI”)

(Claimant)

-and-

Government of Canada
(“CANADA”)

(Respondent)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 21
(concerning certain applications for correction and
interpretation of the Tribunal’s Second Partial Award)

 

Introduction

1 The Tribunal made its Second Partial Award (the “SPA”) on 21 October 2002, and
communicated it to the Disputing Parties on the same day.

2 By alletter dated 1 November 2002 SDMI requested the Tribunal to make certain

and/or interpretations of the SPA to Articles 35 and 36 of the
UNCITRAL Rules (the “Rules”).

 

3 By a letter dated 13 November 2002 CANADA requested the Tribunal to give an
interpretation of the SPA pursuant to Article 36 of the Rules.

4 Both requests were submitted within the time limits specified in the relevant
Articles of the Rules.

SDMI’s Request

5 SDMI contends that there are three errors in the SPA, as follows:

a. CANS2,329,319.00 of orders obtained by SDMI were incorrectly omitted
from the total value of bids, quotations and orders from which the
Tribunal assessed the gross income that would have been received but for
CANADA’s measure;

b. a deduction of CAN$1,900,000.00 in respect of duplicate bids was
incorrectly applied by the Tribunal because CAN$1,100,000.00 already
had been deducted to account for duplicate bids, and;

c. paragraph 134 of the SPA contained an incorrect reference to a provision
of the NAFTA, and some incorrect comments by the Tribunal concerning
the relationship between Chapters 11 and 14 of the NAFTA.

Discussion of SDMI’s request

Bids and Orders

6 SDMI refers to the fact that the Tribunal specifically mentioned “orders” at an early
stage in its discussion on the value of bids and quotations (see, eg, paragraph 230),
but not thereafter.

7 As stated in the text of the section of the SPA, under the heading The Income
‘Stream, in reaching its conclusion concerning the value of the bids and quotations

-2.

mewn eee e ee PAGE 64

the Tribunal considered a number of elements; made certain specific deductions;
and applied its collective judgment. It assessed SDMI’s losses during the closure
and afterwards. This analysis took into account all of the components of the bid
population referred to by SDMI, including completed orders.

8 The Tribunal’s analysis reflected its consideration of yp d by others
both during and after the closure, and its assessment of the effect of delay to its
opportunities to process PCBs and PCB wastes. It was and remains the judgment
of the Tribunal thst its analysis took due account of all of the opportunities
available to SDMI, and the effect of CANADA’s measure on those opportunities.

9 Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that it would not be appropriate to correct or
interpret the SPA as requested by SDMI.

Duplication

10 SDMI contends that the Tribunal made a deduction of CAN$1,900,000 in respect
of duplicated quotations, bids and orders. In fact, it did not. The paragraph to
which SDMI refers involved the Tribunal’s consideration of the value of quotations
issued by SDMI after CANADA’s closure of the border. The Tribunal’s reference
to duplication involved some quotations that related to inventory on which SDMI
had bid prior to the re-opening of the border. The paragraph in question does not
address, and the deduction does not relate to, duplications as such. In determining
the deduction to be applied in the relevant context, the Tribunal took into account
other broader considerations including its assessment of the reliability of the data.

11 Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that it would not be appropriate to correct or
interpret the SPA as requested by SDMI.

Chapters 11 and 14

12

13

15

SDMI has ly identified a typ hical error in p ph 134 of the SPA,
and the Tribunal will make a correction pursuant to Article 36 of the Rules in the
form of an Addendum to the SPA.

Concerning SDMI’s request for correction of the Tribunal’s comment on the
relationship between Chapters 11 and 14, the Tribunal stated in paragraph 134 of
the SPA:

waseeeed an investor in financial services generally could not bring a Chapter
11 claim... ...

(emphasis added)

It seems clear that investors in financial services acquire some level of Chapter 11
protection, but not all. A Tribunal appointed in a Chapter 11 arbitration initiated by
such an investor might be required to analyse the relationship between the Chapters
11 and 14 in considerable detail. However, this case did not involve an investor in
financial services, and the Tribunal’s passing comment had no effect on its
determinations conceming either liability or quantum.

Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that it would not be appropriate to correct or
interpret the SPA as requested by SDMI, other than to correct the typographical
error mentioned above.

. CANADA’s request

16

CANADA contends that the Tribunal’s award in respect of interest in the SPA is
ambiguous, and states that it ...... cannot reconcile its calculation of interest
payable under the [SPA] with [SDMI'’s] publicly announced estimate.

 

Discussion of CANADA’s request

17 In the SPA the Tribunal established a specific procedural regime for dealing with
any differences b the Disputing Parties in ction with the lation of
interest, as follows:

Uf the Disputing Parties are unable to agree on the relevant calculations
they may place the issue before the Tribunal as a matter to be determined,
together with the question of the allocation of costs, in its Final Award. In
that event the Tribunal will consider appointing an accountancy expert, in
accordance with Article 27 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, to review
the Disputing Parties’ respective positions and to report to the Tribunal

and

 

All gq ing costs and, if ry, the calculation of interest
shall be postponed to the Tribunal's Final Award.

18 It appears that, at the time of CANADA’s request, the Disputing Parties had not
attempted to agree on the interest calculations, CANADA’s request was premature,
and did not conform to the procedure established by the Tribunal. Nevertheless, by
a letter dated 21 November 2002 the Tribunal provided informal guidelines
concerning the calculation of interest and specified a time limit within which the
Disputing Parties should state whether it will be necessary to invoke the procedure
for appointing an expert as contemplated by the SPA.

19 Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that it would not be appropriate to interpret
the SPA as requested by CANADA.

Signed:

 

J Martin Hunter (on behalf of the Tribunal)

