IN A NAFTA ARBITRATION UNDER THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

S.D. Myers, Inc.

(“SDMI”)
(Claimant)
- and -
Government of Canada
(“CANADA”)
(Respondent)

SECOND PARTIAL AWARD

 

Preface

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3
IL. History of the Proceedings 6
Ill. Chronology of Events 17
IV. The Scope of Recovery 20
Vv. Review of Some Principles Concerning the Assessment of Compensation 25
VI. —_ Quantifying the compensation to be awarded 4l
VII. Interest 74
VII. Costs 76
IX. _ Dispositive Provisions of the Award 77

 

 

 

CHAPTER I

PREFACE
The Tribunal

1. An account of the events that gave rise to the dispute, the commencement of the
arbitration and the initial constitution of the Tribunal were set out in the Preface to the
Tribunal’s Partial Award dated 13 November 2000 (the First Partial Award or FPA).!
For present purposes, it is sufficient to record that the Tribunal was duly constituted and
became seized of the arbitration on 4 March 1999. The constitution of the Tribunal
changed following the resignation of Mr Bob Rae on 3 June 1999 and the appointment of
Mr Edward C Chiasson QC as his replacement on 24 June 1999.

2. In the second phase of the arbitration, the Disputing Parties delivered two rounds of
substantial memorials and some supplementary memorials, as well as thousands of pages
of evidentiary exhibits and experts’ reports.? Under the hammer of the adversarial
process the arguments advanced by the Disputing Parties were inevitably refocused and
refined; some arguments assumed greater importance, others faded into relative

insignificance and a few were dropped altogether.

3. This is not unusual. The evidence-gathering process, which in this case for practical
reasons proceeded in parallel with the delivery of the Disputing Parties’ memorials,
sometimes gives rise to the production of material that casts new light on issues. While
the Tribunal has considered all of the arguments and evidence submitted by the Disputing
Parties, in the interest of (relative) brevity in the text of this award the Tribunal reviews

only the arguments that are necessary to explain its reasoning.

' The FPA was published, inter alia, in International Business Lawyer; International Law Review; Asper Review of
International Business and Trade Law; and on a number of websites, including a Canadian Government website,
www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/tna-nac/gov-e.asp, and www.appletonlaw.com.

? Fortunately for the members of the Tribunal, who had to travel long distances for the case management meetings
and witness hearings in Toronto, virtually all of the written material was submitted in electronic form on CD-ROM
as well as in hard copy. The Tribunal was profoundly grateful to the Disputing Parties for this facility.

   

4. In this context, it is relevant to recall that this case is essentially fact-driven. CANADA’s
principal defence on the merits’ was that its measure was justified by environmental
considerations. The Tribunal reviewed this aspect of the case in some detail in its First
Partial Award‘. In summary, the evidence demonstrated that CANADA’s measure was
introduced for the primary purpose of protecting the interests of the Canadian waste

disposal industry.

5. It followed that the measure was in breach of CANADA’S obligations under Articles
1102 and 1105 of the NAFTA. The Tribunal also determined that this was neither an
expropriation case under NAFTA Article 1110 nor a case of imposing performance

requirements under Article 1106 of the NAFTA.

6. The Tribunal proceeds to the quantum stage of the arbitration against the background of
the findings contained in its First Partial Award summarised above. It is not open to the
Tribunal to award any kind of punitive relief. The Tribunal is concerned only with
assessing the compensation that should be awarded to SDMI for the losses it suffered as a

proximate® result of CANADA’s measure.

7. The methodology adopted by the Tribunal is described later in this award.

Abbreviations

8. The following abbreviations are adopted in this award:
CANADA The Government of CANADA
CANS, and $ Canadian dollars
Disputing Parties SDMI and CANADA
FPA First Partial Award
MEXICO The United States of Mexico
MYERS Canada Myers Canada Limited
NAFTA The North American Free Trade Agreement
Parties CANADA, MEXICO and the USA
PCB Polychlorinated biphenyl

3 The threshold investor question was later categorised by CANADA as a jurisdiction issue

4 Paragraphs 297, 298.

5 The Tribunal does not consider the terms consequential or foreseeable, used in common law damages assessment
in the law of contract or tort, to be particularly relevant to the assessment of compensation in a case governed by
international law. This topic is discussed later in the award.

PO
SDMI
Transcript

UNCITRAL
UNCITRAL Rules
US EPA

U.S. or USA

Procedural Order

S. D. Myers, Inc

Verbatim record of the hearing held in Toronto from 21
to 26 September 2001

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 1976

United States Environmental Protection Agency

The United States of America

CHAPTER II

HISTORY OF THE PROCEEDINGS

The procedural history of the arbitration up to 13 November 2000 was set out in

Chapter II of the Tribunal’s First Partial Award and is not repeated in this award.

By a letter dated 13 November 2000 the Tribunal invited the Disputing Parties to produce
a progress report to the Tribunal by 15 December 2000 in which they were to provide
their views on the procedural aspects of the second stage of the arbitration, as
contemplated in paragraph 1 of Procedural Order No. 1. The Tribunal also indicated that,
if necessary, a further case management meeting would be held as early as practicable in

2001.

By letters dated 15 December 2000, the Disputing Parties replied to the Tribunal’s
request. CANADA expressed its reluctance to attend a procedural hearing before the end
of January 2001. SDMI stated that the Investor would be ready to provide a Memorial on
damages to the Tribunal and CANADA by mid-January 2001, complete with expert

reports and accompanying evidence.

By a letter dated 23 December 2000, the Tribunal sent to the Disputing Parties a draft
Procedural Order No. 17 in which it proposed a schedule for the initial phase of the

second stage of the arbitration.

By a letter dated 3 January 2001, the Tribunal, after taking account of the parties’ letters
dated 27 December 2000 and 2 January 2001, requested SDMI to present a summary of
its case and to make a proposal concerning the second stage procedure as soon as it was

ready to do so.

On 7 January 2001, after taking account of CANADA’; letter 4 January 2001 concerning
the proposed procedural schedule, the Tribunal abandoned the draft of Procedural Order

No. 17 and directed as follows:

. Unless the parties agree upon the second stage procedure the Tribunal
will hold a further case management meeting with the parties in Toronto
on 21 February 2001.

. In order that the arbitrators’ individual schedules may be accommodated
in a way that will minimise the expense to the parties, the parties shall
notify the Tribunal by 9 February 2001 as to whether or not they have
reached an agreement on the second stage procedure.

. The Tribunal proposes that MYERS should deliver to CANADA whatever
it can be ready to deliver by mid-January in relation to the quantification
of its claims (presumably excluding experts’ reports), together with its
proposals as to the second stage procedure.

. The Tribunal proposes that CANADA should provide its views on the
procedure to be followed in the second stage within 10 days of receipt of
‘MYERS’ mid-January materials’. (Clearly it is not necessary for
CANADA to have MYERS’ full Memorial before it indicates its views on
the second stage procedure, but equally clearly it should have at least a
summary of the case it faces).

. The parties should then consult with each other on the ‘second stage
procedure’ and report to the Tribunal by 9 February 2001, preferably
jointly but otherwise separately, as to whether or not they have reached
agreement.

. If they have reached an agreement the Tribunal will issue a Procedural
Order No. 17 ‘By Consent’. If they have not reached agreement, the
Tribunal will meet the parties in Toronto on 21 February 2001.

On 16 January 2001, SDMI delivered the Investor’s Summary on Damages as well as a

proposed procedural schedule for the second stage of the arbitration.

By a letter dated 19 January 2001, CANADA delivered two confidentiality agreements
signed by its experts, Mr Rostant and Mr White, in accordance with paragraphs 9(c) and
12 of Procedural Order No. 11.

By a letter dated 21 January 2001, the Tribunal asked CANADA to reply to SDMI’s
proposals for the second stage procedure as soon as possible and to supply a provisional

reply to SDMI’s Summary on Damages by the end of January.

By a letter dated 23 January 2001, CANADA commented on SDMI’s proposal and

outlined its own views as to the procedural steps to be taken during the second stage of

20.

21.

22.

23.

the arbitration. By a letter dated 24 January 2001, SDMI replied to CANADA’s

suggestions.

By a letter dated 31 January 2001, CANADA replied to SDMI’s letter dated 24 January

2001 and submitted its response to the Jnvestor’s Summary on Damages.

By a letter dated 4 February 2001, the Tribunal invited the Disputing Parties to agree on
the procedure for the second stage of the arbitration. Failing such agreement, the
Tribunal would hold a case management meeting with the Disputing Parties before the

end of February 2001.

By a letter dated 8 February 2001, CANADA notified the Tribunal that it had that day
filed an application to the Federal Court of Canada seeking to set aside the First Partial
Award. In the same letter CANADA stated that it intended:
. to ask the Tribunal to delay the assessment of damages until the courts
complete judicial review of the Tribunal’s partial award on liability
CANADA also expressed its concern at the use of documents in court proceedings that
had been delivered as evidence in the first stage of the proceedings, but had been marked

confidential.

By letters dated 9 February 2001, the Disputing Parties informed the Tribunal that
agreement had not been reached on a procedural framework for the second stage of the

arbitration.

By a letter dated 13 February 2001, the Tribunal directed that a case management

meeting take place in Toronto on 21 February 2001 to consider:

. CANADA’s application to suspend the arbitration pending the outcome of
the judicial review process; (for this purpose the Tribunal directed
CANADA to deliver a reasoned written application by 15 February 2001
and SDMI to reply by 19 February 2001).

. the procedural schedule for the second stage of the arbitration.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

. whether or not the Tribunal should appoint its own forensic accountancy

expert pursuant to Article 27 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

. whether or not the Tribunal’s previous confidentiality orders should be
varied in order that additional material may be put before the national
court in Canada for the purposes of the judicial review process. (The
Tribunal asked the parties to address the practical aspects of this question

in brief written statements ahead of the 21 February 2001 meeting).

On 15 February 2001, CANADA delivered to the Tribunal and SDMI a document
entitled Application for a Stay of the Arbitral Proceedings pending the Outcome of the
Federal Court of Canada Application to set aside.

By a letter dated 19 February 2001, SDMI delivered to the Tribunal and CANADA a

document entitled Investor’s Response to CANADA ’s Submission on Stay of Arbitration.

By a letter dated 20 February 2001, CANADA delivered to the Tribunal and SDMI a
statement of its position on amendments to the Tribunal’s Confidentiality Order in the

context of the national court review process.

On 21 February 2001, a case management meeting was held in Toronto at which the
Tribunal heard oral submissions by counsel for the Disputing Parties on the matters

identified in its 13 February 2001 letter.

By a letter dated 23 February 2001, SDMI delivered to CANADA its request for the

production of documents.

On 26 February 2001, after deliberations, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 17
establishing the second stage procedural schedule; Procedural Order No. 18 concerning
CANADA’s application to suspend the arbitration; and a letter to the Disputing Parties

dealing with the confidentiality of parts of the record.

On 1 March 2001, SDMI delivered to CANADA and the Tribunal the /nvestor’s
Memorial (Damages Phase) pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 8 of Procedural Order No. 17.
By a letter of the same date, SDMI stated that CANADA’s response in late March to its

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

request dated 23 February 2001 made it necessary to seek from the Tribunal an
amendment of Procedural Order No. 17 in order to permit the Disputing Parties to deliver

supplementary memorials.

By a letter dated 9 March 2001, after taking account of the parties’ submissions on the
issue expressed in CANADA’s letter of 2 March 2001 and SDMI’s letter of 3 March
2001, the Tribunal determined that it would not make an order for the delivery of

supplementary memorials at that stage of the abitration.

On 12 March 2001, CANADA delivered to SDMI its Request for Interrogatories and

Production of Further Documents pursuant to paragraph 9 of Procedural Order No. 17.

On 26 March 2001, CANADA supplied to SDMI certain documents pursuant to
paragraph 10 of Procedural Order No. 17, as requested by SDMI in its letter dated 23
February 2001.

On 27 March 2001, SDMI delivered its response to CANADA’s Request for
Interrogatories and Production of Documents dated 12 March 2001. The parties

subsequently requested and exchanged further documentary material.

By a letter dated 19 April 2001, CANADA, still seeking production of further documents,
sent to the Tribunal a Motion for Production of Documents and Responses to

Interrogatories.

By a letter dated 25 April 2001, the Tribunal directed SDMI to reply to CANADA’s

motion within 14 days.

By a letter dated 3 May 2001, SDMI delivered the Investor’s Response to Canada’s

Motion on Production of Documents and Interrogatories.

By a letter dated 4 May 2001, CANADA requested an extension of time for filing its
counter-memorial on damages until 30 days after receiving a full response to its
interrogatories and document request by SDMI pursuant to paragraph 17 of Procedural

Order No. 17 and Article 15 (1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

On 14 May 2001, CANADA delivered a Reply to Investor’s Response to Motion for

Production of Documents and Interrogatories.

By a letter dated 25 May 2001, following CANADA’s requests for an extension of time
for the delivery of its Counter-Memorial in its letters dated 17 and 24 May 2001, the
Tribunal directed CANADA to deliver a provisional Counter-Memorial by the end of the
first week of June and at the same time granted to CANADA the opportunity to deliver a
Supplementary Counter-Memorial after the document production and interrogatories
issues had been resolved. By the same letter the Tribunal also directed both Disputing
Parties to supply a report on outstanding document and interrogatories issues within

seven days.

By a letter dated 1 June 2001, SDMI advised the Tribunal that no further progress had
been made between the Disputing Parties and that the same issues remained outstanding.

By a letter of the same date, CANADA produced a list of outstanding production issues.

By a letter dated 5 June 2001, the Tribunal suggested that a further case management

meeting should be held.

In a letter dated 7 June 2001, SDMI suggested that the Tribunal could make a ruling on
the issues in question solely upon the record before it or, alternatively, resolve them in a
conference call. SDMI also made certain submissions in relation to the involvement of
the parties’ experts as provided for in Procedural Order No. 18. By a letter of the same

date CANADA replied to the matters raised in SDMI’s proposal.

On 7 June 2001, CANADA delivered to SDMI and the Tribunal its Counter-Memorial on
Damages pursuant to paragraphs 6 and 8 of Procedural Order No. 17.

By a letter dated 12 June 2001, the Tribunal determined that a case management meeting

would take place in Toronto on 21 June 2001.

By letter dated 14 June 2001, the Tribunal invited the parties’ experts to attend the case

management meeting and asked the parties to produce a list of the then outstanding issues

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

on 20 June 2001. SDMI delivered to the Tribunal a list of the outstanding production

issues on that date.

On 21 June 2001, a further case management meeting was held in Toronto with the

Tribunal, the Disputing Parties and their experts.

By a letter dated 24 June 2001, the Tribunal invited MEXICO and the USA to exercise
their rights under Article 1128 of the NAFTA and to deliver submissions by 17 August
2001.

By a letter dated 25 June 2001, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 19 setting out

the remaining procedural steps of the arbitration as agreed between the Disputing Parties.

By a letter dated 11 July 2001, the Tribunal informed the Disputing Parties that it had

appointed an administrative secretary in accordance with the Disputing Parties’ consent.

On 20 July 2001, CANADA delivered to SDMI and the Tribunal its Supplementary

Counter-Memorial pursuant to paragraph 7 of Procedural Order No. 19.

In three letters dated 23 and 24 July 2001, SDMI and CANADA notified the Tribunal

that further document production issues had arisen.

By a letter dated 25 July 2001, the Tribunal issued to the Disputing Parties certain
provisional guidelines on how to proceed. By a letter dated 26 July 2001, CANADA
notified the Tribunal of its compliance with the Tribunal’s provisional suggestions. On

31 July 2001, the Tribunal confirmed its provisional guidelines.

On 10 August 2001, SDMI delivered to CANADA and the Tribunal The Investor’s Reply

Memorial in accordance with paragraph 8 of Procedural Order No. 19.

By a letter dated 10 August 2001, CANADA delivered to the Tribunal certain material

concerning the interpretation of the NAFTA, for the Tribunal’s information.

By a letter dated 14 August 2001, CANADA requested the Tribunal to revise the

procedural schedule, as a result of the introduction of new evidence by SDMI.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

By a letter dated 15 August 2001, SDMI delivered to the Tribunal its response to
CANADA’s letter of 14 August 2001.

By a letter dated 15 August 2001, the USA requested the Tribunal to extend the date by
which it and MEXICO were invited to exercise their rights under Article 1128 of the
NAFTA. By a letter dated 16 August 2001, the Tribunal consented to the delivery of any
Article 1128 submissions after CANADA delivered its Reply Memorial.

By a letter dated 16 August 2001, the Tribunal issued a provisional response to the
Disputing Parties’ questions and proposed that a conference call should take place on

24 August 2001.

By a letter dated 16 August 2001, CANADA notified the Tribunal that further document

requests remained outstanding.

By letters dated 18 and 21 August 2001, CANADA and SDMI stated their positions to

the Tribunal concerning documents recently introduced by SDMI.

By a letter dated 22 August 2001 MEXICO requested confirmation that the extension of
time for submissions granted to the UDSA applied equally to MEXICO.

By a letter dated 24 August 2001, the Tribunal gave the confirmation requested by
MEXICO.

By a letter dated 24 August 2001, the Tribunal provided the Disputing Parties with an
agenda of the matters it wished them to address during the telephone conference later that

day.

On 24 August 2001 two telephone conferences took place between the Tribunal and the

Disputing Parties’ representatives.

By a letter dated 25 August 2001, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 20 amending
the schedule set out in Procedural Order No. 19, as agreed between the Disputing Parties

during the second telephone conference on the previous day.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

By a letter dated 25 August 2001, the Tribunal notified MEXICO and the USA of the

revised procedural schedule and invited their submissions by 12 September 2001.

On 31 August 2001, CANADA delivered to SDMI and the Tribunal its Rejoinder
Memorial pursuant to paragraph 4 of Procedural Order No. 20.

By a letter dated 12 September 2001, MEXICO delivered to the Tribunal and the
Disputing Parties its submissions pursuant to Article 1128 of the NAFTA.

On 14 September 2001, SDMI and CANADA delivered to the Tribunal their Pre-hearing
Memoranda pursuant to paragraph 5 of Procedural Order No. 20 and paragraph 11 of
Procedural Order No. 19. SDMI also delivered to CANADA and the Tribunal a
Summary of Key Areas of Agreement and Disagreement between KPMG and LRTS.

By two letters dated 14 and 17 September 2001, MEXICO informed the Tribunal that it

wished to send two representatives to the hearing.

By a letter dated 17 September 2001, CANADA informed the Tribunal that its expert

Mr Stillman was unable to attend the hearing in person.

By a letter dated 18 September 2001, the USA delivered to the Tribunal and the
Disputing Parties its written submissions under Article 1128 of the NAFTA.

By a letter dated 18 September 2001, CANADA objected to SDMI’s submission of its
expert’s Summary delivered on 14 September 2001 on the ground that this was contrary

to the joint experts’ report contemplated by Procedural Order No. 20, paragraph 6.

By a letter dated 18 September 2001, the Tribunal notified the Disputing Parties that
questions concerning Mr Stillman’s examination and the absence of a joint experts’

report would be dealt with at the beginning of the hearing.

The Second Stage hearing took place in Toronto from 21 to 26 September 2001. The
Tribunal heard oral and closing statements from the representatives of the Disputing
Parties and oral submissions from the representative of MEXICO. In addition, the

following witnesses were heard:

Mr Bob Rasor

Mr Dana Myers

Mr Peter Wallace

Prof Roger Ware

Mr Jeffrey Harder

Mr Howard Rosen

Dr Joan Berkowitz

Mr Douglas White

Mr Robert Stillman (by videoconference)

Mr Derek Rostant
(listed in order of appearance)

77. On 25 September 2001, the penultimate day of the hearing, the Tribunal asked the
Disputing Parties’ principal accountancy experts, Messrs Rosen and Rostant, whether
they could assist the Tribunal in calculating a figure of what Myers might reasonably
have been expected to get out of Canada as a result of its investment in the relevant time
period’ by producing a joint matrix or model in spreadsheet form containing the different
variables and values involved in such calculation.’ The experts agreed to endeavour to

produce such a joint document.*

78. Towards the end of the hearing the Tribunal also discussed with the Disputing Parties the
question of its award in respect of costs pursuant to Articles 38 and 40 of the UNCITRAL
Rules and, in particular, whether the Disputing Parties wished to have the opportunity to
make further submissions on costs after they had seen the Tribunal’s Second Partial
Award. The Disputing Parties informed the Tribunal that they would like to have such an

opportunity.” Accordingly, it was agreed that the present award would be in the form of a

° Transcript, 25 September 2001, page 877, lines 14-16.
7 Transcript, 25 September 2001, pages 877/878 and 881/882.

* Transcript, 25 September 2001, page 883, lines 12-16; page 884, lines 16-19 per Mr Rostant; page 882, lines 19-20
per Mr Rosen.

° Transcript, 26 September 2001, pages 1056 — 1060.

Second Partial Award and the Tribunal gave directions for the subsequent delivery of

further submissions on the question of costs.'°

79. By a letter dated 23 December 2001, the Tribunal reminded the experts that delivery of
their joint matrix or model had not yet been received and invited them to deliver a joint

report on the matter by the end of the year.

80. By a letter dated 27 December 2001 Messrs Rostant and Rosen transmitted to the
Tribunal a joint matrix or model in Excel format for the purpose of assisting the Tribunal
in determining the quantification of the compensation to be awarded if the Tribunal

would adopt CANADA’s third alternative and SDMI’s loss of profits approach.

81. Thereafter the Tribunal deliberated on several occasions (either in person or by telephone

conference) before making this Second Partial Award.

'© Transcript, 26 September, page 1057, line 19-24: ....within 14 [days] of receiving the partial, the second partial
award, the parties will simultaneously present to the Tribunal and exchange submissions on their costs claims and
any supporting information they want to put in ....... ]

82.

83.

84.

85.

CHAPTER III

CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS

The overall factual background to the dispute was set out in some detail in Chapter III of
the Tribunal’s First Partial Award and it is not necessary to repeat all of it in this award.
Some of those facts, and certain additional facts, are relevant to the Tribunal’s

consideration of the compensation to be awarded to SDMI.

SDM is a privately held corporation, located in Tallmadge, Ohio. From the early 1980s
SDMI’s principal business was the remediation of hazardous wastes, partly by a
recycling process and partly by sending the highly toxic residues to other specialist
entities for disposal by incineration. By the early 1990s, at the latest, SDMI had become

an industry leader in the remediation of PCB-contaminated waste material in the USA.

In common with many other countries, the USA had previously banned the manufacture
of PCB’s and the importation of PCB-contaminated material. It follows that the U.S.
PCB waste disposal industry would work itself into redundancy within a finite period.
For this reason, SDMI decided to take steps to enter the fledgling Canadian market, in
which little progress had been made towards disposal of the inventory of PCB-
contaminated material. Among other things this had the potential benefit of extending

the useful life of its Tallmadge facility.

MYERS Canada was incorporated as an SDMI affiliate'' in 1993. SDMI initially
considered constructing a recycling and processing facility in Canada. This would have
had the advantage that the transportation costs of the low volume, highly toxic PCB-
contaminated residue for destruction would have been lower than the transportation costs
of the high volume waste products obtained from the customers, but the potential benefit
of extending the useful life of SDMI’s Tallmadge facility would have been reduced.
SDMI’s strategy soon became to acquire PCB-contaminated materials from owners in
Canada; to transport the material to Tallmadge for processing and recycling; and to

dispose of the residue for incineration by specialist contractors.

86.

87.

88.

89.

In pursuit of this strategy, in 1993 SDMI developed a plan involving two parallel
initiatives. The first was to build a leading market position in Canada, so that SDMI
would be in a position to gain a significant share of the market if and when the border
opened. To this end SDMI and MYERS Canada embarked on a comprehensive
marketing campaign to establish the MYERS brand as the leading name for the disposal
of PCB’s. SDMI spent in excess of $1 million (MYERS Canada had no resources of its
own to commit to the project) for this purpose. Environment Canada’? maintained a
record of the total inventory of PCB’s in use and of PCB-contaminated waste materials in
storage in Canada. By the end of 1995 nearly 3,000 storage sites in Canada had been
identified and either SDMI or MYERS Canada had contacted almost all of them, with

routine follow-up calls after one or two months.

The second initiative, under the leadership of Rev. Michael Valentine, was an intensive
lobbying campaign to persuade the US EPA and politicians in Washington, DC, that
opening the border to this traffic was in the USA’s national interest - both as to the
trading opportunities it offered to the U.S. waste-disposal industry and as to the benefit of
reducing the volume of this highly toxic material in storage within North America as a

whole.

The success of SDMI’s second initiative is not in doubt. In October 1995, the US EPA
informed SDMI that it would be granted an enforcement discretion. This would enable
SDMI to import PCB-contaminated material into the USA as of 20 November 1995. The
US EPA indicated that enforcement discretions also would be granted to other U.S. waste

disposal operators.

On 16 November 1995, CANADA issued a temporary emergency measure that had the
effect of closing the U.S./Canadian border to the export of PCB’s and PCB-contaminated
waste material.'? This prevented SDMI and MYERS Canada from fulfilling the orders

they had obtained and, effectively, from obtaining firm commitments from other potential

 

"' Its precise status within the MYERS group of companies is described in the First Partial Award, paragraph 227.

" The relevant Canadian governmental agency.

'S The measure itself, and its transition from temporary status to a permanent order are described in detail in the First
Partial Award, paragraphs 123-126.

90.

91.

92.

93.

customers — although SDMI and MYERS Canada did maintain their marketing efforts

while the ban was in place.'*

On 18 March 1996, the system of enforcement discretions was replaced by a general
Import for Disposal Rule, under which licences would be granted where the US EPA was
satisfied that all imported PCB-contaminated residues would be destroyed either by

incineration or by chemical treatment.

After a further policy review within government departments, and much consultation,
CANADA revoked the export ban on 7 February 1997, approximately 15 months after
the it had been introduced, enabling SDMI to resume the implementation of its business

plan.

On 7 July 1997, the United States Federal District Court of Appeals for the 9" Circuit
quashed the US EPA’s Import for Disposal Rule.'*

On 20 July 1997, approximately five months after the border was opened from the
Canadian side, the border was closed to the trans-border shipment of PCB’s and PCB-
contaminated waste once again; this time by the USA. At the date of this Second Partial
Award the border has remained closed to the importation into the USA of PCB-

contaminated materials.

'4 Customer contacts were sometimes developed by SDMI, sometimes by MYERS Canada; but the Tribunal accepts
SDMI’s proposition that it was understood by all concerned that the material would be shipped to the USA for
processing in SDMI’s Tallmadge facility.

'S Sierra Club v E.P.A. (U.S. Ct App., 9" Circ), No. 96-70223, 7 July 1997.

94.

CHAPTER IV

THE SCOPE OF RECOVERY

In its First Partial Award, the Tribunal made a number of observations concerning the

principles that should be adopted in making the assessment of compensation that would

take place in the second stage of the arbitration if SDMI were to succeed on liability.

Among them were:

and

and

By not identifying any particular methodology for the assessment of compensation
in cases not involving expropriation, the Tribunal considers that the drafters of
the NAFTA intended to leave it open to tribunals to determine a measure of
compensation appropriate to the specific circumstances of the case......

The Tribunal agrees with CANADA that it would be premature at this stage to
attempt to set out detailed, exclusive, principles for calculating the compensation
payable. The disputing parties should have the opportunity to make further
Jactual and legal submissions on the question of the precise methodology to be
used.

The Tribunal has already suggested that whatever precise approach is taken it
should reflect the general principle of international law that compensation should
undo the material harm inflicted by a breach of an international obligation.

The Tribunal also noted that punitive damages may not be awarded under the NAFTA.”

and

CANADA has submitted, and the Tribunal accepts, that the following principles
also apply:

. The burden is on SDMI to prove the quantum of the losses in
respect of which it puts forward its claims.

'© EPA, paragraph 309.
EPA, paragraph 314.
'S EPA, paragraph 315.
'° EPA, paragraph 308, footnote 53.

. Compensation is payable only in respect of harm that is proved to
have a sufficient causal link with the specific NAFTA provision
that has been breached. The economic losses claimed by SDMI
must be proved to be those that have arisen from a breach of the
NAFTA, and not.from other causes;

. Damages for breach of any one NAFTA provision can take into
account any damages already awarded under a breach of another

NAFTA provision. There must be no ‘double recovery’.°

95. SDMI summarises its proposals for the assessment of compensation as follows:

and

and

and

The international law principle of compensation that is applicable in this NAFTA
claim is that Canada must put the Investor into the position that it would have
been but for Canada’s wrongful act. According to NAFTA Article 1116, the
Investor is entitled to claim for all damage and loss arising from Canada’s
breach.

The investor’s analysis is based on an income loss approach, which looks at
losses to the Myers companies, i.e. in the US and Canada, and how they are
interconnected ... ?

To put the Investor and the Investment back in the place they would have been but

for the breach, we have to figure out what they lost. What they lost, among other
things, was an opportunity to capitalize on the tremendous goodwill that was
going to translate into market share. And this goodwill, which soon would
become market share, is a form of intangible property, and this is recognised
within Article 1139's definition, part (g) as an investment.>

The Investor’s approach can be summarized as follows:

a) take the known business activity of the Myers Companies in
Canada

 

°° FPA, paragraph 317.
2! SDMI Pre-hearing Memorandum, paragraphs 7 et seq.

22 SDMI opening statement, transcript, page 45:20.

?3 SDMI closing statement, transcript, 26 September 2001, page 957, lines 9-19.

b) discount this activity by a specific factor to take into account the
percentage of contracts that would have reasonably been
pleted based on evid egarding the Myers C
activities in the U.S. and on the state of the market in Canada......

° calculate this value over the relevant period of liability to obtain
the expected gross lost revenue; and

d) discount this expected revenue loss by the gross margin of the
respective product being remediated to produce a loss of
Incremental Cash Flow

This loss must also be augmented by appropriate out of pocket losses and by an
applicable rate of interest applied to the total of these figures to produce the total
necessary to put the Investor and the Investment into the position they would have
enjoyed but for the wrongful acts of Canada.”

96. CANADA summarises its alternative proposals for the assessment of compensation as
follows:
In the light of the nature of the breach and of the damages, the Tribunal will have

to decide which of the 3 methods put forward by the disputing parties most
appropriately measures the loss suffered as a result of the breach:

a) Canada’s first alternative: reimburse S.D. Myers for its
expenditures in Myers Canada.

b) Canada’s second alternative: compensate S.D. Myers for the
delay in realizing the benefits of its expenditures in Myers Canada
in the form of an interest rate applied to the period of the breach.

° Canada’s third alternative approach: compensate S.D. Myers for

the profits that would have been earned but for the ban.?*

CANADA’s position was expanded in its closing statement at the second stage hearing as
follows:
Canada’s initial position, of course, is the Tribunal ought to award my friend’s

client the investment, the value of monies placed in this investment during the
period prior to the ban ..

 

4 SDMI’s Reply Memorial, paragraph 24.
5 CANADA’s pre-hearing brief, page 3.

97.

98.

The second position which has been developed by Mr Rostant in his material
before you deals with an equity rate of return of 18% [on the invested money].””

and

...the more interesting analysis is the analysis where he adopts the contribution
margin approach to damages and in Canada’s alternative 3, assesses damages or
recommends an assessment of damages at $297,600.

. each of the three options placed before you are in part dependent upon two
sub-options, and the sub-option which deals with alternative 3 is predicated on
two calculations: one, a calculation what do you do if you look at the so-called
seamless web that my friend has described, I think in his opening statement of
both Myers (Canada) and SDMI; or, if you should decide that it is the investment,
to paraphrase Bill Clinton’s famous campaign mottos, ‘It’s the investment that
matters’, in which case we say that the margin should be no more than 10
percent, and even that number may be a trifle high ...°8

Of the three alternatives suggested by CANADA, the Tribunal considers that neither of
the first two would be an appropriate measure of compensation. Giving SDMI a return
on its investment in Canada for the fifteen-month period while the border was closed
from the Canadian side, would not appropriately reflect the actual loss to SDMI as an
investor in Canada in the particular circumstances of this case. Equally, returning to
SDMI the cash it invested, plus interest, would not be an appropriate measure of the loss
that SDMI suffered as a proximate result of CANADA’s breach of its obligations under
the NAFTA.

SDMI did not invest in Canada to achieve a rate of return solely related to the quantum of
its monetary investment. Insofar as it was delayed, it was delayed in making profits and
further developing the opportunity to make profits. Some of the Canadian PCB inventory
was processed by others while the border was closed. When the border re-opened, some
of the remaining inventory that SDMI would have processed was, or would have been,
processed by others. SDMI lost the income that it might have obtained from these
inventories. Furthermore, SDMI lost income from that part of the inventory that was not

lost to others during the closure, but which it might have processed during the nineteen

 

°6 Transcript, 26 September 2001, pages 977/978, lines 24-25, 1-3.
2’ Transcript, 26 September 2001, page 978, lines 15-18.

99.

100.

month “window of opportunity” it would have had but for CANADA’s export ban.
Return of the money that SDMI invested in Canada, or merely paying SDMI a “return”
on that investment, would not see it whole. It would not take adequate account of

SDMI’s potential to earn an income stream.

In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is not attempting to enunciate any general
principles that might serve as precedents in other cases. It is recording its view that the
first two of CANADA’s alternative approaches would not provide an appropriate

measure of compensation on the facts of this particular case.

Subject to consideration of issues concerning direct, indirect or consequential damages,
remoteness and foreseeability, the Tribunal considers that the appropriate loss to be
addressed in this particular case is the loss of net income stream. This approach formed
both the basis of SDMI’s principal claim and the third alternative suggested by
CANADA. The Tribunal’s view is reinforced by the fact that the expert accountants
retained by both sides agreed that SDMI’s lost income stream is capable of rational
assessment,” even though they disagreed substantially as to the result that should

follow.*°

 

°8 Transcript, 26 September, pages 978/9, lines 19-25, 1-10.

®° Subject to an assertion by CANADA that the loss was too speculative because of the risk of action by the Sierra
Club, a matter that is addressed below.

*° A table in Mr Rostant's 31 August 2001 report shows that he arrives at a figure of CDNS2,430,000 and Mr Rosen
at CDN$23,112,000 for the combined SDMI and MYERS Canada lost revenues. Although the gap narrowed by the
time of the September 2001 hearing, it remained substantial.

CHAPTER V

REVIEW OF SOME PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE ASSESSMENT OF

COMPENSATION
Introduction

101. Before turning to quantify the lost net income stream suffered by SDMI it is necessary to
review a number of matters of principle raised either by the Tribunal in its First Partial
Award, or by the Tribunal or the Disputing Parties during the second stage of the

arbitration.

The significance of an investment

102. In its First Partial Award the Tribunal found that compensation must be based on
breaches of specific NAFTA provisions. The two Articles that were breached in this
case, Articles 1102 and 1105, both refer to the actions of a host state that relate to an
investor, or to its investment, in relation to various aspects of its investment. The fact that
an entity was treated in a manner contrary to Chapter 11 does not of itself trigger a right
to compensation. The existence of an investment is a threshold to maintaining a

Chapter 11 claim.

103. Chapter 11 deals with measures adopted relating, inter alia, to investors. For there to be
an investor, there must be an investment. In this arbitration the investment must be in

Canada.

104. In its First Partial Award the Tribunal concluded that SDMI was an investor and that
MYERS Canada was an investment. It was recognised that a number of other activities

might also qualify as investments.*!

5! In its Reply Memorial (Damages Phase) in paragraph 12, at page 8, SDMI asserted that: S.D. Myers, Inc operated
in Canada as an investment as defined by Article 1139. Because of this fact, ...it could not qualify as a cross-border
service under...Article 1213, This proposition is rejected. Apart from being logically insupportable, it is not
consistent with the definition of investor in Article 1139, which in this situation is an entity that ...has made an
investment.

105. The Tribunal also determined that MYERS Canada was an enterprise as defined in
paragraph (a) of Article 1139 which was owned and controlled directly or indirectly by
SDMI. This was sufficient for SDMI to fulfil the threshold test concerning whether or
not SDMI was an investor for the purposes of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, which
CANADA had resisted in the first stage of the arbitration.

106. SDMI also raised a number of other grounds on which it might have qualified as an
investor for the purpose of Chapter 11, but it was not necessary for the Tribunal to
consider them. The Tribunal noted that they might have relevance for the purpose of

assessing the compensation to be awarded.

107. In the result, the Tribunal considers that it is not necessary to make any further
determinations on the scope of the investment for the purpose of quantifying the
compensation to be awarded to SDMI, but recognises that if it were necessary for it to do
so, there were a number of other propositions put forward by SDMI that would have to be

. 2
considered.”

108. Having reviewed the threshold question of the existence of an investment in the context
of its determination in the First Partial Award, the Tribunal now turns to recapitulate

some of the basic facts.

109. | SDMI was a family-owned business with Mr Dana Myers in command. MYERS Canada
was established to be the Canadian face of SDMI, to assist with Canadian operations and

thereby to generate business and revenue for SDMI. MYERS Canada was provided with

>? For example, the concept of goodwill was discussed at the hearings. It could be argued that SDMI created
goodwill as an asset through its activities in the Canadian market. Chapter 11 acknowledges that intangible
property can be an investment. The Supreme Court of Canada held, in Manitoba Fisheries v Canada, [179] 1
S.C.R. 101, that goodwill is intangible property. It might be argued that if goodwill were a kind of intangible
property recognised by the law of the host state, it would constitute intangible property for the purposes of Chapter
11. The status of goodwill as an investment was contested by the parties, but neither side discussed the Manitoba
Fishers case and its implications for a Chapter 11 arbitration. If it were to have been necessary to decide the status
of goodwill under Chapter 11, the Tribunal would have written to the parties after the hearing to invite them to
explore the implications of Manitoba Fisheries. In the event this has not been necessary.

 

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

capital, know-how and managerial direction by SDMI. MYERS Canada carried on

business as if it were a branch of SDMI.*?

Mr Myers decided how relations between SDMI and MYERS Canada were to be
conducted. He decided how the income from remediation contracts with Canadian-based

PCB owners would be allocated.

In discussing the loans between SDMI and MYERS Canada, Mr Myers testified that:

It was sort of like taking money out of one pocket and putting it in the other
34
pocket.

In summary, there was a family-owned business with SDMI at its centre and one family
member, Mr Dana Myers, in overall charge of the combined USA and Canadian

operations.

MYERS Canada was an integral part of SDMI’s business plan for its Canadian PCB
remediation operations and the manner in which it actually attempted to implement that
plan. Letters soliciting business often were sent on MYERS Canada letterhead, even if
the author were a SDMI employee writing from Tallmadge.** In all of the contracts that

actually were carried out, customers were billed in the name of MYERS Canada.

The remediation of PCB wastes that the Myers companies undertook was not simply a
matter of carrying out factory operations in the USA. Assistance with pre-shipment
activities could be a substantial part of the overall operation for a Canadian PCB owner.
Some PCB contaminated materials might have to be drained from the equipment that
contained it for several days before shipment could take place. Because processing was
to take place in the USA, cross-border transportation had to be arranged and the

paperwork and any permits associated with transborder shipment had to be executed. For

® Transcript, liability phase, volume 1, 14 February 2000, page 209, testimony of Reverend Michael Valentine in
response to a query from the Tribunal.

* Transcript, liability phase, volume 1, 14 February 2000, page 337.

5 Joint Book of Documents, Volume II, tab 72, testimony of Rev Valentine, liability phase, 14 February 2000,
question 299 et seq.

the first few shipments, SDMI sent a senior employee, Lynn Fritz, to supervise pre-

shipment activities. MYERS Canada employees also were involved.*°

115. Mr Myers testified at the damages hearing that the plan was to Canadianise the on-site
operations prior to shipment. Local residents were to be trained to serve as crews.*”
Articles 1102 of NAFTA addresses not only the way in which an enterprise has operated

or currently operates, but also its expansion.**

116. The measures that CANADA introduced, contrary to Articles 1102 and 1105, interfered
with the ability of MYERS Canada to carry on and expand its contribution to the overall
operation. MYERS Canada was an investment of SDMI and a fundamental and integral
part of the efforts of SDMI to generate revenues. SDMI has established on the facts of
this case that it sustained damages that have a sufficient causal link to the interference

with an investment in Canada, contrary to the provisions of Chapter 11.

117. Where there is a breach of Chapter 11, and interference with the economic activity of an
investment, the overall damage to the economic success of the investor arising from the

measure adopted by the host state must be examined.

118. An investor may submit to arbitration a claim that a provision of Chapter 11 has been
breached and that .... the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising
out of, that breach. To be recoverable, a loss must be linked causally to interference with
an investment located in a host state. There is no provision that requires that all of the

investor’s losses must be sustained within the host state in order to be recoverable. The

°° Transcript, liability phase, Volume 1, 14 February 2002, testimony of Dana Myers: Q: And what were the
services that Myers Canada did in respect of those seven shipments? A. They helped sell the jobs, they helped
coordinate getting people at the sites to do the transportation, do the training.

>? Dana Myers, Myers Reply Memorial, schedule 1, tab 1, paragraph 9: Once we had access of the market for a
steady supply of PCB waste remediation orders, I always expected that we would train a Canadian crew that would
work under our supervision to perform this service.

** In Dana Myers’ testimony at the second stage, the following exchange took place: Q.: (by a member of the
Tribunal): Mr Myers, in your affidavit you talk about ‘I always expect [sic] we would train a Canadian crew that
would work under our supervision to perform the service.’... I’m just trying to understand what this ‘training under
our supervision’, does that mean that there is a Canadian Lynn Fritz eventually, or is Lynn Fritz still going up there
to supervise? A. I think it would be a Canadian Lynn Fritz. It’s sort of difficult to take Americans up to Canada
because they want work papers and all that kind of stuff and it's hard to get. So it’s easier to hire people, if you're
going to work in Canada, to hire people in Canada eventually.

 

119.

120.

121.

122.

test is that the loss to the (foreign) investor must be suffered as a result of the interference

with its investment in the host state.

Article 102(c) of the NAFTA states that one of the objectives of the agreement is to:

... increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties

Article 102(2) provides that the Parties:

..Shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in light of the
objectives set out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with applicable rules of
international law

The purpose of virtually any investment in a host state is to produce revenues for the
investor in its own state. The investor may recover losses it sustains when, as a

proximate cause of a Chapter 11 breach, there is interference with the investment and the

financial benefit to the investor is diminished.

The Tribunal concludes that compensation should be awarded for the overall economic
losses sustained by SDMI that are a proximate result of CANADA’s measure, not only

those that appear on the balance sheet of its investment.

The relationship between Chapters 11 and 12

123.

124.

Chapter 11 concerns measures that relate to investors and investments. In this case,
SDMI claimed, and NAFTA Article 1116 mandates, recovery of .../oss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of.... CANADA’s breach of certain articles of Chapter 11. To
sustain the claim, the SDMI had to establish a breach of Chapter 11. It did so under
Articles 1102 and 1105.

Article 1102 requires equal treatment ...with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.
Article 1105 requires the Parties ...to accord to investments... fair and equitable

treatment.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

Chapter 12 deals both with items of trade - services - and with the provider and provision
of services. It ...applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to cross-
border trade in services by service providers of another Part..... A service provider is

simply one that provides a service. Service is not defined. Measures include, inter alia,

39
the marketing and delivery of a service.

SDMI claims that it suffered loss because CANADA interfered with MYERS Canada.
MYERS Canada did perform certain work in Canada and was remunerated for it, but it
did not destroy PCB’s. This was done in the USA by SDMI. It constituted a service
performed by SDMI in the USA for its customers in Canada. The evidence showed that,
to further its objective of providing this service in the USA, SDMI also used its personnel
from and in the USA to perform tasks in Canada. This also was the provision of a cross-
border service. The business of MYERS Canada was the marketing and logistical
support for the provision by SDMI of a cross-border service. The damages claimed

include lost revenue to SDMI for its provision of cross-border services.

CANADA contends that because SDMI was a cross-border service provider, it cannot
recover its losses related to that activity in a claim under Chapter 11; that is, it cannot
recover damages sustained gua cross-border service provider, only those incurred as an

investor. It says that the provision of a cross-border service is not an investment.

Article 1213 defines ...the cross-border provision of a service or cross-border trade in
service... as follows:
...the provision of a service: (a) from the territory of a Party [the United States]
into the territory of another Party[Canada]...(c) by a national of a Party[SDMI]

in the territory of another Party [Canadaj...it ...does not include the provision of
a service in [CANADA] by [Myers Canada]...

Standing alone, the provision of a cross-border service from the USA into Canada or in
Canada by a U.S. national is not an investment in Canada, but is protected by Chapter 12.

Conversely, insofar as the service is provided by the investor’s investment, the provisions

* NAPTA Article 1201.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

40
of Chapter 12 are not available to the investor, but Chapter 11 is engaged. The question
is: once Chapter 11 is engaged, is its application limited to the activities of the

investment?

SDMI was in some respects a service provider. It provided cross-border services to
Canadian entities both in terms of destroying PCB’s and in undertaking activities in
Canada in pursuance of that objective. It was engaged in the cross-border trade in

services. As such, it was entitled to benefit from the provisions of Chapter 12.

In its First Partial Award, the Tribunal adopted the application of the cumulative principle

to this case.’

That principle holds that in a given situation, a government or private
entity might have different rights under different trade provisions that generally

complement, rather than diminish, each other.

The concept is neither novel nor startling. The grant of a right generally does not take
away other rights unless they are mutually exclusive, or the grant is stated expressly to

abrogate another right.

The cumulative principle does not apply where there is actual conflict between different
provisions. CANADA does not contend that there is any conflict between the provisions
of Chapters 11 and 12 as they apply to the facts of this case. No conflict exists to limit

the application of the cumulative principle.

General principles such as the cumulative principle must yield to specific treaty
provisions to the contrary. An example in the context of Chapter 11 is in Article 1102,
which expressly excludes from the scope of the chapter measures that are covered by
Chapter 14 (financial services). An investor in financial services generally could not
bring a Chapter 11 claim. Chapter 11 does not contain a similar exclusion of activities

that engage Chapter 12.

49 but does not include the provision of a service in the territory of a Party by an investment, as defined in
Article 1139 (Investment - Definitions), in that territory.

4" EPA paragraphs 291-294; 318.

135. SDMI has acquired no extra rights in this case because of the existence of Chapter 12, but
neither has it lost any. The Chapter 11 rights of SDMI are no stronger or weaker merely
because there is another section of the NAFTA that provides some additional constraints

on the way a state treats nationals of another NAFTA state.

136. As noted, the exception in the definition of a cross-border service is cast in the terms of
Chapter 11. It reveals the intention of the Parties to avoid mischaracterising as cross-
border services the provision of services by an investor using its investment to provide
the service in the territory of the investment.”” The investment makes the provider of the

service an investor and Chapter 11 is engaged.

137. Article 1112(2) states:

The requirement by a Party that a service provider of another party post a bond
or other form of financial security as a condition of providing a service into its
territory does not of itself make this Chapter applicable to the provision of that
crossborder service. This Chapter applies to the Party’s treatment of the posted
bond or financial security.

This provision underscores the intention to limit the application of Chapter 11 to the
protection of investments and their activities and not to extend it to the provision of

cross-border services in the absence of an investment. Chapter 11 is not engaged merely

because of a requirement to post security.

138. In summary, the fact that SDMI as a cross-border service provider may have recourse to
the dispute provisions of Chapter 12, does not deprive it of the right to claim as an
investor under Chapter 11. Extending to it rights as a cross-border service provider under

Chapter 12 does not take away from SDMI rights conferred on it by Chapter 11.

139. Chapter 11 is engaged because SDMI was an investor. It has a right to recover the

economic losses to its investment initiative caused proximately by an interference with its

 

* In its Reply Memorial (Damages Phase) in paragraph 11, at page 8, after quoting the exception, SDMI states: ...a
-border service provided by an investment...in the territory of another NAFTA Party is not covered by the
-border service provisions of the NAFTA. This is the clear and unambiguous expression of the NAFTA. The
exception does not use the term cross-border service. The word service is used alone. That is, the performance by
an investor of what would have been a cross-border service of an investor is dealt with under Chapter 11. The cross-
border provision of a service is not.

 

 

investment contrary to the provisions of Chapter 11. The fact that some of the totality of
SDMI’s losses due to interference with its investment involved cross-border services

does not prevent SDMI from recovering them.
Causation

140. In its First Partial Award the Tribunal determined that damages may only be awarded to
the extent that there is a sufficient causal link between the breach of a specific NAFTA
provision and the loss sustained by the investor. Other ways of expressing the same
concept might be that the harm must not be too remote, or that the breach of the specific

NAFTA provision must be the proximate cause of the harm.

141. The assessment of damages is not always a precise science. This case illustrates the
point. Although the expert accountants for both sides stated that SDMI’s loss of profit or
contribution margin* was capable of assessment, their respective quantifications were

subjective and based on the exercise of their judgement.

142. The Tribunal reviews the legal framework for assessing damages and the many factors
that the Parties, not always in agreement, stated should be taken into account. This leads
to an award of damages, which is the Tribunal’s judgement of what is appropriate in this
case. In some circumstances, in the calculations, a fixed percentage or dollar amount is
expressed. In others it is not. In all circumstances, the result is based on the Tribunal’s

appreciation of the evidence and its interpretation of the applicable law.

143. Article 1116 is relevant to the scope of recovery. It states that an investor can claim for:
...loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of... a breach of Section A of Chapter 11.
Article 1117, which is not in issue in this arbitration, provides the same remedy when an

investor claims on behalf of its investment.

144. SDMI relies on authorities that include decisions of the Iran-United States Claims

44

Tribunal, but they concern the measure of damages in an expropriation.” While some

assistance can be obtained from a consideration of these authorities, the NAFTA deals

43 The terms were used interchangeably.
4 Eg, Amco Asia Corporation v. Indonesia | ICSID Reports 413.

explicitly with the measure of damages for an expropriation and those provisions are not

controlling in this case.

145. SDMI says that it is entitled to .../ost profits and consequential damages (such as the loss
of competitive advantage and market share).... It states that this Tribunal has established
that there is a ...need for a direct causal link between Canada’s unlawful international
conduct and the occurrence of damages. Several authorities are referred to in support of

this proposition.

146. CANADA characterises any loss of profits by SDMI as consequential and not

recoverable.

147. The concept of foreseeability of damages is referred to by both parties. SDMI says that
the damages ...must have been reasonably anticipated by the disputing parties at the time
of the breach.’ Reliance is placed on the decision in Shufeldt (U.S.) vs. Guatemala.
SDMI also asserts that a special intention to harm an investor ...permits the Tribunal to

award damages even in they would otherwise by considered to be too remote.

148. In summary, SDMI seeks to recover the present value of the net income stream it says
was lost by reason of the interim orders closing the Canadian border, plus a loss of
opportunity it says it would have had to invest or use the money derived from that income
stream and actual out-of-pocket losses suffered by it. Loss of opportunity*” is also

characterised as consequential.

149. Relying on the Dix Claim**, SDMI contends that in response to egregious conduct the
Tribunal can and should award damages that otherwise would not be recoverable as too
remote. Even if it were possible legally to award damages that were otherwise too
remote on the basis of the misconduct of a respondent, and the Tribunal has made no
such finding in this case, such damages would be clearly punitive, and thus prohibited by

Article 1135(4).

45 Investor’s Memorial (Damages Phase), paragraph 50.
46 (1930), 11 RIAA 1081.

47 “1 oss of opportunity” is addressed below.

48 (1903), IX RIAA 119

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

Characterising SDMI’s loss of profit claim as a claim for consequential damages is
neither helpful nor consonant with the authorities. Insofar as it arises out of the provision
of a cross-border service, there is an argument that the claim is not recoverable in
proceedings under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA’, but that does not make it a claim for

consequential damages other than in a non-legal, descriptive, sense.

Professor Whiteman states appropriately:

Damages are disallowed when they are ‘not a natural consequence’ of the
wrongful act for which the respondent government is liable under international
law. At times such losses are referred to as ‘consequential’ and are disallowed
on that account.*°

The authorities are clear that claims for loss of profits are recoverable. The issue is
remoteness. The tribunal in Shufeldt said that a respondent’s obligation is:
«.f0 recoup or compensate...for damages...which result directly or

indirectly...and...such compensation includes both damages suffered and profits
lost...

The Shufeldt tribunal continued to note that the profits .../ost ...must be the direct fruit of
the contract and not too remote or speculative.”

SDMI calls in aid the concept of foreseeability to support its claim for damages.
CANADA responds stating that while it knew that SDMI was contemplating entering the
market, at the time the interim measure was enacted, it did not know the extent to which

SDMI had made preparation and did not know that MYERS Canada existed.

Foreseeability is a concept found in the law of contract. The authorities referred to by the
Disputing Parties confirm that this is so. Using contractual measures of damage in the
context of this case is not helpful. It led SDMI to contend that the question is whether the

damages claimed were foreseeable by both parties at the time of the breach, which is

* The Tribunal has rejected this argument.
*° Whiteman, M.M., “Damages in International Law”, vol. 3, 1830.

*! Shufeldt at page 1099 quoting from May v. Guatemala as quoted in Foreign Relations of the United States, 1900
at page 673.

* Shufeldt Loc. Cit.

misconceived in a contractual context. This in turn provoked CANADA’s rejoinder

concerning its lack of knowledge at the time of the breach.

155. In its Memorial, SDMI quotes the Tribunal in Shufeldt, which held that damages should
be direct and ...reasonably supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties as
the probable result of the breach. SDMI then states that .../t/o be foreseeable, the
damages claimed must have been reasonably anticipated by the disputing parties at the
time of the breach. This statement neither follows from the quoted passage in Shufeldt,

nor accurately reflects the legal authorities to which that Tribunal was referring.

156. The phrase reasonably anticipated does not refer to the concept of foreseeability as it is
used in the law of contract. It is used in the context of speculation. Claimed profits must
not be merely speculative. They must have been anticipated reasonably; in that sense,

reasonably foreseeable at the time of the breach.

157. After referring to submissions concerning directness and foreseeability, the Amoco Asia
Tribunal quoted French law stating: /t/he debtor can only be liable for the damages
which were foreseen or foreseeable at the time the contract was entered into... and
referred to the English case Hadley v. Baxendale,® which is a seminal authority in the
English law of contract damages which places foreseeability at the time of making the

contract.

158. Insofar as the word foreseeability is used in the context of what was anticipated, what
was realistic, it is appropriate. In this context it is a descriptive word, not a legal term of

art.

159. The inquiry in this case is more akin to ascertaining damages for a tort or delict. The
damages recoverable are those that will put the innocent party into the position it would
have been in had the interim measure not been passed. The focus is on causation, not

foreseeability in the sense used in the law of contract. In contract law, foreseeability may

*3 Investor’s Memorial (Damages Phases), page 21, paragraph 50.
* Amoco Asia, paragraph 269.
*5 (1854), 9 Exch. 341.

limit the range of recoverability. That is not the case in the law of tort or delict.

Remoteness is the key.

160. Similarly, a debate as to whether damages are direct or indirect is not appropriate. If they
were caused by the event, engage Chapter 11 and are not too remote, there is nothing in

the language of Article 1139 that limits their recoverability.*°

Loss of Opportunity

161. | SDMI’s lost opportunity claim fails for a number of reasons. To be compensated for the
value of the lost use of money by a payment of interest that reflects what the market
considered to be the value of money at the time is appropriate. To allow SDMI a return
based on what it might have done with the money would be to recognise claims that are

speculative and too remote.

162. On the evidence it is not clear what SDMI would have done with the money if it were to
have been earned. It had a number of options. If SDMI could have achieved a return
significantly greater than the value of money at the time, it could have borrowed and used
the money to make that return. If it were unable to do so, payment by CANADA would
be redressing SDMI’s impecuniosity - which is not the function of an award of

compensation in the particular circumstances of this case.
Out-Of-Pocket Expenses

163. SDMI asserts that it lost certain out-of-pocket expenses. These were expended to
develop or sustain its Canadian initiative and are subsumed in an award that compensates

SDMI for its lost and deferred net income streams.

*® Although not pressed with vigour, at various points in the proceeding CANADA argued that recoverability was
limited territorially. The proposition is not found in the language of Chapter 11.

Mitigation

164. Several witnesses referred to the activities of SDMI subsequent to the re-opening of the
border as mitigation. The term is not appropriate in that context and tends to obscure

accurate analysis of the position.

165. If CANADA’s measure were to have destroyed SDMI’s opportunity to develop its
business of remediating the Canadian PCB inventory (and this is a position that is
advanced by SDMI) it could not mitigate that damage by doing what it allegedly had lost
the opportunity to do. Logically, the two do not fit. Mr Rosen said in response to a
question from a member of the Tribunal:

Q. ...you basically treated the volumes that Myers was not able to process during
the closure period as lost forever—

A. That’s correct.
Q. Subject to the contracts they in fact did in the spring?

A. That's correct.”

If this is right, there would have been no inventory for SDMI to process in order to

mitigate its losses.

166. If what SDMI lost was the inventory processed by others during the closure, its first-
mover advantage, the loss of a percentage of post-closure inventory to others, and the
inability to process some inventory due to the shortening of the time available, then
SDMI would not have been mitigating that loss by bidding for and processing the

remaining inventory that was available once the closure ended.

167. During the period November 1995 to February 1997 CANADA developed a regulatory
regime under which the border would be re-opened, and it did so. SDMI was back in
business, albeit in a somewhat changed market. It then was put out of business five
months later by its own government. The issue is not mitigation. It is the measure of

compensation. What did SDMI lose by reason of the Canadian closure?

*? Transcript, 23 September 2001, q. 426.

Goodwill

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

This topic was addressed in the Disputing Parties’ Memorials and at the hearing. It is

discussed by the Tribunal in this Partial Award in the context of SDMI’s losses.

In its Reply Memorial (Damages Phase) in paragraph 25 at page 12, SDMI stated that
sevens The most valuable asset that the Myers Companies had was the goodwill which
generated a book of quotes and orders. This appeared to address the likely results of

SDMI’s marketing efforts.

SDMI’s intensive marketing campaign undoubtedly built up substantial goodwill,
whatever that term may mean in non-technical accountancy terminology. In practical
terms it meant that (a) a large number of Canadian PCB holders became aware of the
Myers brand name and reputation for quality service and (b) such holders became aware
that, in general, SDMI and MYERS Canada were in a position to offer materially lower
prices than those being quoted by Chem-Security of Alberta, which in 1994 and 1995

was the only serious Canadian competitor in the field.

In the context of the measure of compensation, the Tribunal considers that these practical
factors can be equated to the first-mover advantage,** which was also the subject of much
discussion during the second stage of the arbitration.©’ In assessing the compensation to
be awarded to SDMI this element undoubtedly must be put into the equation. The value
of the first-mover advantage and the extent to which it was eroded by the 15 months that
followed CANADA’s measure must be assessed in the overall context of the harm
suffered by SDMI as a result of the export ban. This is addressed when the loss of

income stream is considered later in this award.

The Tribunal has concluded that it is not necessary to, and does not, embark on an

analysis of the factual and conceptual issues that would need to be addressed to determine

** When using the expression first mover advantage, the Tribunal is adopting the terminology employed by the
Disputing Parties. Technically, SDMI was a second mover by reference to Chem-Security, its main competitor in
the early stages.

* As noted previously, the concept of goodwill would be considered in the context of SDMI’s investment if that
were required.

whether goodwill could constitute an investment in its own right within the terms of

Chapter 11.

40

CHAPTER VI

QUANTIFYING THE COMPENSATION TO BE AWARDED

Introduction

173.

174.

175.

The quantification of loss of future profits claims can present special challenges. On the
one hand, a claimant who has succeeded on liability must establish the quantum of his
claims to the relevant standard of proof; and, to be awarded, the sums in question must be
neither speculative nor too remote. On the other hand, fairness to the claimant requires
that the court or tribunal should approach the task both realistically and rationally. The
challenges become more acute in start-up situations where there is little or no relevant
track record. The Tribunal has taken due notice of SDMI’s successful experience of
seizing marketing opportunities in the USA, but at the same time acknowledges that the

Canadian market had certain distinctive features.

As stated above, the Tribunal has determined that the appropriate primary measure of

compensation is the value of SDMI’s lost net income stream.

The Tribunal is faced with the widely differing proposals of two distinguished
accountants, supported by the equally distinguished firms of which they are partners,
together with the opinions of a number of other experts retained by the Parties. Although
somewhat belatedly”, the accounting experts provided to the Tribunal spreadsheets
which stated amounts claimed by categories. The Tribunal found the spreadsheets to be a
useful tool, which assisted its analysis. However, taking into account the significant
disparities in the positions of the Parties, the Tribunal considered it necessary to perform
its own analysis of the facts and figures disclosed during the second stage of the
arbitration, guided by the party-appointed experts and the evidence overall. The Tribunal

exercises its own judgement where judgemental decisions are required to be made.

© The Tribunal does not criticise the accountancy experts because the matter was undoubtedly fraught with
difficulties, but the matrix was requested at the end of the September 2001 hearing and it was agreed that it would be
produced within 10 days. The Tribunal’s task was not made any easier by the fact that the matrix was not delivered
to the Tribunal for several months after the hearing was closed, and well after its initial deliberations had started.

4

The Effect of CANADA’s Measure

176.

177.

178.

179.

SDMI claims that it would have been able to process a significant proportion of the
Canadian inventory of PCB’s between December 1995, when it could have started, and
July 1997 when the border was closed from the U.S. side. SDMI asserts that its first-
mover advantage was lost as a result of the Canadian closure. SDMI also asserts that the
closure of the border ended its unique opportunity. It contends that, by the time the
border re-opened, other competitors were poised to enter the Canadian market and that
SDMI’s competitive advantage was eliminated. As noted, its accountancy expert
proceeded on the basis that the closure resulted in the irretrievable loss of the inventory

that SDMI had expected to process.

At the other end of the scale, CANADA claims that the effect of the measure was merely
to delay by approximately 15 months SDMI’s entry into what CANADA says was

essentially the same market.

As is often the case in such matters, there is some validity and some error in the positions

of each of the Disputing Parties.

SDMI had a demonstrated ability to seize opportunities to develop its PCB remediation
business in the USA, acquiring a large market share and making substantial profits.
During the second phase hearing Dana Myers recalled that, with a $1 million investment
in plant, SDMI had achieved great success with its U.S. resource recovery unit. When
the unit was sold, he estimated it had made $40 million for the company.’ He testified:
..I got an Entrepreneur of the Year in Northwest Ohio for positive cash flow,
positive profits and growth in the company from 16 million in the year I took over

to over 42 million about two years after I took over, all because of this resource
recovery.”

°' The transcript of the damages hearing, Volume II, page 261, actually quotes Dana Myers as saying that he turned
the $1 million investment in the resources company into four million by the time he sold the resources recovery
unit. The Tribunal recalls that Mr Myers actually referred to forty million, and the accompanying explanation by
Mr Myers in the transcript is consistent with this figure.

© Transcript, 22 September 2001, q. 466.

42

180.

181.

182.

183.

In his supplemental affidavit in the second phase of the arbitration, Dana Myers noted
that in 1991-92 the Resources Recovery Unit alone had generated US$19 million in
profits.°> The Resources Recovery Unit focused on transformers. It was only one
component (about 24-40%} of SDMI’s PCB remediation business in the USA.“
Similarly, transformer work was only one component of the work that SDMI had planned

for its Canadian venture.

SDMI had an excellent record of profitability, and an outstanding record of passing safety
audits by regulators and customers. There is no reason to doubt that many potential
customers based in Canada would have been impressed by SDMI’s record, and that
SDMI would have worked hard to maintain that reputation while engaged in its Canadian

operations.

Other facts also demonstrated the SDMI’s prospects for success in Canada. SDMI had
spent a considerable amount of time and effort making the company known to the holders
of Canadian PCB’s; during the closure over 50% of the Canadian inventory on which
SDMI had quoted was processed by others; immediately prior to the closure SDMI was
positioned to take advantage of the open border; it clearly had a price advantage over any
Canadian competition; and there were significant geographical advantages that favoured

SDMI.

There is no clear measure of the effect of the closure on SDMI. Understandably, those
close to SDMI’s Canadian venture feel strongly that it was devastating. Equally, those
close to CANADA feel strongly that SDMI has exaggerated its effect. The accountancy

and other experts had to rely on assumed facts provided to them by the Disputing Parties.

Supplemental Witness Statement of Dana Myers, Schedules to Investor’s Reply Memorial (Damages Phase), tab
1, paragraph 19.

“ Transcript, Volume II, page 271.

5 SDMI’s main competitor in Canada, Chem-Security, suffered a number of serious mishaps during the period of
the border opening. From August 1996 through July 1997 there were four accidents at the Swan Hills plant,
including several explosions that resulted in the release of toxic chemicals into the air. Edmonton Journal Article,
29 July 1997, appended to Mr Wallace’s Affidavit in Volume | of the Schedules to the Investor’s Reply Memorial
(Damages Phase).

43

184. It is clear that SDMI did lose a portion of the Canadian PCB inventory that it would have
processed during the closure, and that it lost some measure of first-mover advantage.
Nevertheless, the evidence does not fully support SDMI’s position. SDMI’s pre-closure,
first-mover, advantage was described as being relative to its U.S. competitors, but ten of
them had obtained enforcement discretions by early 1996. As U.S. competitors were
apparently intending to enter the Canadian market, it is likely that SDMI’s first-mover

advantage would have been short-lived.

185. Whether SDMI had any or a significant first-mover advantage at all was a matter of some
controversy. The Tribunal accepts that the Canadian PCB remediation market was
extremely price sensitive and CANADA asserted that this left little room for other factors
that could be the foundation for a first-mover advantage. The Tribunal is satisfied that
SDMI did have a first-mover advantage but, considering the totality of the evidence, the
Tribunal concludes that, although not inconsequential, it has not been shown to be as
substantial as claimed by SDMI. Further, insofar as SDMI did have a first-mover
advantage, the Tribunal concludes that, while it was eroded by the closure, the extent of

that erosion is incapable of precise assessment on the evidence before the Tribunal.

186. U.S. competitors could have entered the Canadian market promptly after November 1995
and it is likely that they would have quoted highly competitive prices to gain entry to the
market. Although a number of them were active in the late Autumn of 1995 in pursuing
enforcement discretions, the evidence concerning their activities when the border re-

opened is not specific.

187. The extent to which SDMI’s U.S. competitors would have lagged behind is not at all
clear. In October 1995, when the US EPA granted the enforcement discretion to SDMI,
it also sent letters to 42 other waste processing operators in the USA to advise them of the
opportunity in Canada afforded to SDMI. In a letter dated 4 December 1995,
Dana Myers complained to the US EPA that SDMI would be harmed by:

..letting our competitors compete with an EPA-granted regulatory cost
advantage.

“© Transcript, 21 September 2001, q. 127.

44

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

Dana Myers’ fears were soon realised, because a number of U.S. companies submitted
applications®’ and ten were granted enforcement discretions by February 1996. Within
not much more than three months of the border being opened, SDMI might have faced up

to ten of its U.S. competitors active in the Canadian market.

The evidence of SDMI’s expert, Mr Rosen, tends to confirm the position, but it lacks
foundation. He stated in his report that:
While [SDMI] was rendered inactive in Canada, its U.S. competitors applied to

the USEPA for permission to import PCB's from Canada (i.e. in the event that the
border closing would one day be lifted).

The applications were submitted soon after October 1995, as a result of the US EPA’s
letter to SDMI’s competitors. There is no evidence that the interim measure triggered the
applications. On the contrary, it appears that SDMI’s success in obtaining the
enforcement discretion provoked them. The U.S. competitors, like SDMI, were stopped
in their tracks by CANADA’s measure. The only difference during the period of the
closure was that, while SDMI and MYERS Canada continued to maintain contacts with
potential customers, there is no evidence that the potential U.S. competitors made any

significant effort to establish a position in the Canadian market.
In his affidavit, Dana Myers stated that:

US companies that had no real thought that the Canadian market would even
have been available...now had lots of time to plan to compete with us...and
eventually they did.”

He gave no particulars of who these competitors were or the extent to which they

eventually competed with SDMI.

By the Summer and Autumn of 1995, SDMI’s Canadian competitors were preparing to
target the Canadian inventory of PCB’s. In the Spring of 1997, when the border re-
opened, the marketing records produced by SDMI in the arbitration showed that SDMI

°’ The first was received by 27 October 1995, the day after SDMI received its enforcement discretion, and by
15 November 1995 nine companies had applied. (KPMG Revised Report, 19 July 2001, page 7.)

Rosen Report, 28 February 2001, page 4.
© Dana Myers, statement, 3 August 2001, paragraph 30.

45

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

was losing ground to some of its local competitors in Canada and was having to reduce
its prices to outbid the Canadian competition to obtain contracts. The evidence also

shows that on some occasions SDMI met and defeated Canadian competition.

The evidence also was clear that, in the highly price sensitive Canadian PCB remediation
market, SDMI’s main advantage was its ability to undercut the prices offered by its
Canadian competitors. If U.S. competitors were to have entered the market, price would
have been a strong factor potentially offsetting the goodwill that SDMI had built. Dana
Myers’ testimony was consistent with this conclusion. When questioned about
quotations by U.S. competitors, he testified:

We started off in Canada quoting prices that were 10, 15, 20 percent higher than

our U.S. prices because we knew the prices would come down so we started

higher so that we could come down a bit and still make the margins we wanted to
70
make.

Some of the evidence focused on an alleged first-mover advantage over SDMI’s U.S.
competitors, but Mr Rosen said that SDMI completely lost its Canadian business ...

because the market had changed dramatically as a result of Canadian and U.S.

competitors... [p]rimarily Canadian.”
Professor Warre was another expert called by SDMI. He stated in his report:

The issue is whether S.D. Myers had a first-mover advantage over its US
competitors, not over Chem-Security; with respect to the latter S.D. Myers was
already in a highly advantageous position in terms [sic] of price at least.”

Chem-Security was identified by Dana Myers as our main competitor in Canada.”
Mr Wallace was a witness called by SDMI. The Tribunal found his testimony to be of

value. It was based on Mr Wallace’s extensive first-hand observations as a participant in

the industry while the contested events were unfolding. His company, Greenport, was a

™ Transcript, 22 September 2001, q. 359.

7! Transcript, 23 September 2001, q. 428.

” Warre affidavit, 3 August 2001, paragraph 31.

™ Dana Myers statement, 3 August 2001, paragraph 24.

46

sometime competitor and sometime collaborator with SDMI. In his appearance before

the Tribunal, he was fair and factual.

198. In his affidavit, Mr Wallace recalled a market prior to the border closure by CANADA
that was eager to dispose of PCB’s and in which SDMI had a highly favourable market

position. In assessing that market he stated:

In my experience, PBC waste holders by and large wanted to get rid of their
inventories to escape the bureaucratic red tape surrounding mandatory MOE
inspections of their storage sites. Some were concerned, like Canada Brick, that
the Alberta borders might actually close again and they might miss their window
of opportunity. They were motivated and willing to take advantage when the
opportunity presented itself.”

Mr Wallace’s view was supported by the fact that over half of the inventory targeted by
SDMI was destroyed during the closure despite relatively high prices.

199. Mr Wallace also stated:

If there had been no ban, the PCB wastes in Ontario would have flowed south,
pure and simple, and in great volumes.

200. The main beneficiary of that flow, in Mr Wallace’s opinion, would have been SDMI:

The Myers Companies were, in my view, the initiator of the opening of the border
to the US. They pushed the hardest to get the border open and were the most
visible US company in the Canadian market that had a compelling disposal option
to the sky-high prices of Chem-security.

Shortly before the Alberta border opening, I was aware that the Myers Companies
had spent considerable efforts establishing themselves with Canadian PCB Waste
holders as a viable option to Swan Hills. This marketing work translated into a
significant amount of goodwill which amounted to a strong head start for the
Myers Companies over other U.S. competitors who eventually entered the
Canadian market. No other US competitors to SDMI took the steps or the effort to
develop a strong market presence in Canada the way that the Myers Companies
did.

When the Alberta border opened there was not a flurry of activity from US
Companies, other than the Myers Companies. No one else appeared ready to go.

The others did not have enforcement discretions. As a person in business, I

™ Wallace affidavit, paragraph 35.
5 Ibid, paragraph 40.

47

201.

202.

203.

recognize the advantages of being the first into a market. When you develop a
marketplace like The Myers Companies did, you get a significant advantage — we
are developing another recycling business right now. We were told by the
Customs and Revenue Canada officials that when you develop a business your
competition tries to clone you within about six months. You can clean house in
that first six months, but you've got to be first off the mark. The Myers Companies
had a distinct competitive advantage because they had the vision no one else
had.

Mr Wallace testified that by the time the border re-opened, the marketplace was very

different:

The lengthening period of the Canadian border closure also resulted in an
increasing credibility gap for SDMI and PBC service providers like Green-Port
who offered the lower priced US options to their customers. We had a number of
joint projects with SDMI during this period and it became increasingly difficult to
hold onto these proposals when no one could accurately predict if the border was
in fact going to be open, or if it would open at all.

It was only in February 1997, when the border actually opened, that our
customers were again able to take seriously again [sic] the idea of sending PBCs
to the US for disposal. For many of the quotes related to SDMI, it was clearly too
late. It was necessary for those affected to rebuild their credibility, then build up
moment all over again. Much of the goodwill that was created in 1995, and the
momentum that existed then, was in a holding pattern by 1997. The SDMI lost
credibility and so did we.”

In his oral testimony, Mr Wallace gave an example of the credibility problem. When
Greenport bid on a job in which it would use SDMI’s facilities in the USA to dispose of

wastes held by school boards:

..it was actually close to when the border was actually going to open up the
second time...and even though we showed a better price, a better US price than
the Swan _ hills version, they couldn’t wait because what happens if the border
doesn't open. This is part of the credibility problem we had."

More generally, Mr Wallace explained that:

So what happened initially when we were giving out the Myers pricing through
Green-Port we were telling people in ’95 okay, the borders are going to open, the

76 Ibid, paragraphs 43, 44 and 45.
7 Ibid, paragraphs 38 and 39.
*§ Transcript, 22 September 2001, pages 366-367.

48

borders are going to open. Then the borders did open, but then they shut down
right away, so we lost a head of stem there. And the longer it went on, there were
customers that...we lost credibility because you can only say the borders are
going to open so long and the longer you go on in that continuum, you just
continue to lose credibility. And not only Green-Port lost credibility, but Myers
lost credibility. So that when the borders open up, unless people saw it in print in
the Canadian Gazette or however it came out, they wouldn't believe it. They said
no, no, you guys have been telling us the borders are open, we don’t believe. And
it was tough then building that momentum up again to get people to consider
shipping to the U.S.”

204. Even before the border was re-opened, the evidence shows that SDMI was outbid by U.S.
competitors in some instances.*” According to Mr Wallace, SDMI also faced competition
from Canadian companies who had time to establish themselves in the marketplace after

the border closure:

The Canadian competitors in 1995 that were just setting up to go, they were very
well entrenched. They had market penetration, they had a brand name. It was a
much different market and it was way more competitive and the margins were
much smaller.*!

205. Mr Wallace’s view that the rise of Canadian competitors had seriously changed the
market between the closure and the re-opening is consistent with Dana Myers’ testimony

at the hearing on liability® and Mr Rosen’s evidence.**

” Ibid, pages 345-346.

*° Page 122, Myers Customer Comments [logs kept by Myers company sales representatives of conversations with
potential customers]. Polytechnique de Montreal says that they would go with the low bid and that they received 2
quotes from U.S. firms and we are higher priced... TCI (a U.S. based firm) is later mentioned as one of the lower
bidders.

‘! Transcript, 22 September 2001, q. 321.

© Transcript, liability phase, pages 437-438.

Q. So you must have been pretty pleased when the border reopened in February of 1997?

A. Let's put it this way: When the border opened the first time, I remember going home and all's I could
think of was I played Handel's Messiah like seven times and I just thought, 'This is, I can't believe it.’ And when it
opened the second time, it was like pfft (phoen.) because all the fun had been taken out, the big part of the business
had been taken out, and you guys just screwed it up, so...

Q. I see. So with all of the advantages that you acquired under the PCB waste export regulations vi

your competition in the United States, you didn't think that was a positive thing?

 

A. Well, during that 14 months, look at the number of Canadian competitors that sprung up in Canada that
we didn't have before; people who came and said __ you know, Eric Smith, he's a big one.

He came to me on November Ist and he says, ‘Look. Your prices are too low. You've got to raise them
some.'

49

206. Mr Wallace also agreed in some respects that SDMI retained a price advantage over its
Canadian competitors even after the border re-opened. In an exchange with a member of

the Tribunal, Mr Wallace testified:

Q. Did S.D. Myers have a price advantage vis-a-vis American competitors by
February 1997? There's evidence that they had some depending on which job --
such that the Canadian competitors would stick to the 20 percent rule. What
about vis-a-vis American competitors in February 1997, when the border
reopened?

A. The American competitors weren't prevalent, I can tell you that They weren't
very aggressive in the marketplace. We didn’t encounter American pricing from
other competitors. The only exception to that, I would say, would be on a real big
job like, for instance, we bid on Toronto Hydro cable recycling job back in...I
think it was 1997, and TCL actually submitted a quote and we said ‘These guys
actually quote’...

We had the low bid with the Myers price because we were showing both options,
the Canadian option and the U.S. option, and our quote for the Myers -- with
Myers doing it at their facility was lower than TCI, but it ended up going to a
Canadian company who -- you know, because the U.S. border wasn't open.

207. His evidence during a discussion with another member of the Tribunal was as follows:

Q. But I'm thinking relative to Myers because that was the comparison that you
were -- made earlier. You saw the Myers facility, you were very impressed with
it, and then you said that when the border was closed by Sheila Copps that
secretly you had a sigh of relieve. When the border reopened, and I'm thinking
relative to Myers, what was your feeling or your sense at that point?

A. Well, Myers, in terms of ballast recycling, we couldn't touch their prices so we
decided to retire our trailers, and same with Comtech.

HRER

 

And, you know, you had Contact (phoen.), you had Cintec which didn't have a permit in November of 1995.
They kept going, going. They finally got their permits. I think Synexin (phoen.) got a permit.

 

So more Canadian companies got into the business by 1997 because Canada basically protected that
industry. And in my mind, I don't think any of those people, other than perhaps Cintec, would have ever gotten the
business had the borders been open because they couldn't have done it and competed.

‘3 The Event [the export ban by Canada] fostered new Canadian competitors.
Transcript, 22 September 2001, q. 317.

208.

209.

210.

I want to tell this anecdote. We were bidding on a deal with S.D. Myers as
Hamilton-Wentworth. They had something like 11 shipping containers full of
transformers and ballasts, it's all recyclable stuff, and Green-Port was going to
do the crane work and the site services, and we were going to load the trucks to
Myers. And to give you an idea even back then how competitive Myers prices
were compared to the rest of the recyclers, the Canadian recyclers, and the
reason for that was Myers was carrying the U.S. incineration prices and the
Canadian recyclers were carrying Swan Hills incineration prices, a huge
difference. The -- Swan Hills incineration prices were double the U.S.
incineration price, and we walked out of the meeting and one of the Canadian
competitors, and I won't say which one it is, he said, ‘There's only two groups
that have a chance at this tender’, and he said, ‘S.D. Myers and God.’ And that
gave you an idea -- and we talked with another competitor and I said, ‘How come
you're not going to bid this one?’ And he says, ‘I'm not going to bid something
I'm not going to get. So that gives you and idea of how competitive Myers prices
were on transformers and valves and we knew we were going to be reduced to the
role of the broker...

The overall picture that emerges from Mr Wallace’s testimony, when placed in the
context of other credible evidence, is as follows: SDMI had enjoyed a highly favourable
position with respect to its standing with customers and prices at the time the border
closed; when the border re-opened, its profile with many customers had been eroded and
SDMI needed time and effort to try to re-establish itself; new Canadian competitors had
emerged and some U.S. competitors were starting to participate in the market; while
average market prices were lower than they had been when the market closed, SDMI was

still competitive or superior in price in many situations, but not all.

SDMI’s potential for generating profits depended, among other things, on its contacts and
profile with customers, the inventory of PCB’s owned by customers, the presence of
competitors, average market prices and its ability to undercut competitors in terms of
price. An examination of these factors shows that SDMI was in a substantially different

(and worse) position when CANADA re-opened the border in 1997.

Although the evidence suggests that SDMI’s position was eroded, it does not support the
proposition that it was destroyed completely. The Canadian competition, such as it was,
had been present and was growing, but SDMI was able in many contexts to meet it

effectively. The U.S. competitors who were interested in the market acted very soon

85 Op. Cit., q. 322.

211.

212.

213.

after the enforcement discretion was issued in November 1995, but in relation to a variety
of contracts or market niches they do not appear to have been a significant threat to

SDMI when it returned to the market in 1997.

Although Dana Myers wrote in his statement that his company lost its momentum within
days of the interim measure ...and never did get it back,*° he testified that he always
believed that the border would be re-opened.*” This is not surprising because SDMI was
aware that Canadian officials were working on establishing a regulatory regime for an
open border. The largest number of quotations, excluding those after the border re-
opened - 411 out of 597 - was during the period of the closure. On a monthly average -
59.7 - the majority of quotations were issued in the ten-month period before it was known
officially that the border would re-open. Between then and the re-opening, the monthly
average was approximately 38 quotations. After the border re-opened, SDMI continued
to issue quotations and did so even after it was closed by the USA. These data do not
suggest the collapse of SDMI’s initiative either within days or, indeed, at any time prior

to the closure of the border from the U.S. side.

SDMI also presented testimony from Mr D Jeffrey Harder, of BDO Dunwoody. His
evidence was that the reason for the low number of orders processed after the border re-
opened was as follows:
Apparently, the volume of PCB wastes shipped from Canada to the United States
from February to July 1997 was not great for two major reasons. Because there
was not much notice that the Canadian border would be reopened it took time for
Myers Companies to become operational...PCB waste disposal customers in

Canada did not contract with Myers Companies...because they thought that the
Canadian border might be closed again soon after it reopened.**

He was the only witness to make this assertion. There is no evidence to support either
supposition. SDMI lobbied actively throughout 1996 to obtain the re-opening of the

Canadian border. Reverend Valentine’s principal mission for SDMI was top get the

border re-opened. The re-opening was published in the Canada Gazette in October 1996.

*° Dana Myers statement, 3 August 2001, paragraph 30.
*’ Transcript, 21 September 1998.
*§ BDO Dunwoody LLP Report, 3 August 2001, paragraph 30.

214.

215.

It came as no surprise to SDMI. Neither proposition supports the contention that
CANADA’s measure completely destroyed the position of SDMI in the Canadian market.
In fact, they support the conclusion that the closure of the border by the USA was the
factor that finally put an end to SDMI’s prospects for generating income in Canada.
CANADA is not responsible for compensating SDMI for any losses that are due solely to
the fact that the “window of opportunity” was closed by the USA in July 1997.

The Tribunal concludes that SDMI was disadvantaged in the Canadian market by
CANADA’s measure. It lost the advantage of a head-start which would have seen it in a

better position than its competition for several months.

SDMI lost the opportunity to process part of the inventory on which it quoted, and which
was processed by others during the closure. SDMI also lost to others part of the
inventory that remained available after CANADA re-opened the border and it lost part of
the pre-closure inventory for which it could have obtained orders and exported before the
USA closed the border in July 1997. In addition, SDMI’s opportunity to process part of

the pre-closure inventory was delayed by approximately 15 months.

Capacity of SDMI’s Tallmadge processing facility

216.

217.

CANADA claimed that SDMI did not have the processing capacity to deal with the

volume of PCB’s that are the subject of its claim.

In paragraphs 14 and 15 of his 2 August 2001 statement, Mr Rasor (SDMI’s plant
manager in Tallmadge) stated that at the relevant time the facility was running at 50% of
capacity, that it could have processed the anticipated volumes from Canada and that if
additional capacity were required it would have been developed as it had been on other
occasions. When cross-examined he testified:

Q. Now, in 1995, ‘96, or ‘97 did you identify any need to expand the capacity of
the plant?

A. No. No, sir. We were trying to find additional work.”

* Transcript, 21 September 2001, q. 54.

218.

219.

Dana Myers’ testimony was consistent with this assertion. He said:

Q. Now, in terms of the volumes that were dealt with in the quotes that you did
issue in Canada, assuming that the borders were open, would those volumes
stretch the capacity of S.D. Myers, Inc.?

A. I believe that we could have done all the work that we were quoting with the
facility that we had, perhaps some additional expansion.”
Having considered the evidence of Mr Rasor, the Tribunal is satisfied that SDMI’s
facility in Tallmadge could have processed all of the PCB-contaminated materials it
could have acquired in the Canadian market and that it could have done so without

investing significant sums in new plant or equipment.

The Tribunal’s assessment

220.

221.

A number of facts are relevant to consideration of the quantification analysis. Over 50%
of the Canadian PCB inventory upon which SDMI had bid was destroyed by Canadian

operators during the period of the closure.”!

The Tribunal takes the view that, in the
absence of SDMI and the other U.S. operators, the prices for remediation of that part of
the inventory were higher than the prices that would have prevailed if SDMI and the

other U.S. operators had been in the market.

Despite environmental problems at Chem-Security’s Swan Hills facility, the quotations
that form the basis of the Claimant’s calculation do not embrace the total Canadian PCB
inventory; that is, the calculation relates only to that portion of the inventory on which the
SDMI bid. They are conservative. When the border re-opened over 40% of the
Canadian PCB inventory upon which SDMI bid was available to it, albeit in a changed

market.

The Income Stream

222.

As stated above, the Tribunal has concluded that the appropriate measure of damages is

the value of the lost and delayed net income streams. The Canadian closure had three

°° Transcript, 22 September 2001, q. 274.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

adverse effects on SDMI’s investment. Part of the total available inventory was
irretrievably lost to others; part of the inventory that remained unprocessed after the
border re-opened was lost to others; and another part was delayed, or lost because SDMI

could not obtain the orders and export the material before the USA closed the border.

During the Canadian closure a quantity of PCB’s were processed. It is necessary to
ascertain the percentage of that inventory that could reasonably have been expected to be

processed by SDMI. Its value was lost.

Some of the inventory that remained available when the border re-opened would have
been processed by SDMI, but was or would have been processed by others because of the

effect of the Canadian closure. Its value was lost.

Some of the pre-closure inventory that remained available when the border re-opened
would have been processed by SDMI before July 1997 when the USA closed the border,

but by reason of the Canadian closure, was not. Its value was lost.

SDMI would have processed earlier some of the pre-closure inventory that was available
in February 1997. It is entitled to compensation for the cost of delay caused by

CANADA’s ban.

The Tribunal has rejected the application of the concept of mitigation in the context of
this case. SDMI was not mitigating. It was back in business. This was evident from the
level of activity undertaken by SDMI both during and after the closure. In fact, SDMI

continued with some of its activities even after the U.S. closure.

CANADA should compensate SDMI for the net income streams that it lost, for the
abridgement of the time available to SDMI and the value of income delayed by the
Canadian closure. It is not responsible for more. Apart from the ongoing affect on
SDMI’s competitive position, which is taken into account, CANADA’s liability ended
when it re-opened the border. CANADA is not responsible for SDMI’s inability to

 

°' Op. Cit., q. 322.

remediate Canadian PCB’s after the U.S. closure or any other consequences of the

closure by the USA.

Methodology

229. In order to assess the compensation due to SDMI as result of CANADA introduction of

the export ban in November 1997, the Tribunal works through the following steps:
Income stream lost to others during the closure period
. Step 1. An assessment is made of the realistic value of the quotations
relied upon by SDMI in support of its case on quantum.

. Step 2. An assessment is made of the price degradation that would have
occurred if the border had remained open, and the value obtained in Step 1

is adjusted accordingly.

. Step 3. An assessment is made of the likely success rate for turning

quotations into completed orders.
. Step 4. The success rate is applied to the value obtained in Step 2.

. Step 5. An assessment is made of the proportion of this value that would
have been converted into a gross income stream for SDMI during the

period of the closure.

. Step 6. The value of the remaining gross income stream is derived.
Income stream lost to others during the post-closure period

. Step 7. The value of post-closure quotations is calculated and added to the
value obtained in Step 6, to produce the gross income stream available to

SDMI when the border re-opened.

Step 8. An assessment is made of the amount of the total post-closure
gross income stream that was, or would have been, lost to others due to the

closure.

Income stream not lost to others, but which would have been processed by SDMI

during the 19 month “window of opportunity”

Step 9. An assessment is made of the portion of the pre-closure inventory

that was not lost to others.

Net income stream

Step 10. An assessment is made of the net income streams that would
have been derived from the total gross income streams, by deducting the

cost of sales.

Step 11. An assessment is made of the financial effect of the shortened
time available to SDMI to process (or at least export) the remaining pre-

closure inventory, and of the financial effect of the delay.

Total recovery for SDMI

Step 12. The compensation to be awarded to SDMI is the total of the two
lost net income streams, plus the estimated income that would have been
derived from part of the remaining pre-closure inventory that could have
been processed (or exported) by SDMI before July 1997 when the border
was closed by the USA, and the time-value of the delayed net income

stream.

Each step now is discussed in turn.

Quotations Value

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

The total number and value of bids and quotations proposed by SDMI was 833 bids and
quotations with a claimed value of CAN$101,774,735,” plus 107 orders worth
CAN$2,329,319. This gives a total of CAN$104,104,054.

These figures did not remain constant during the arbitration. SDMI’s counsel provided
an explanation for their development. He divided the bids into three groups: “A” —
orders; “B” - bids and quotations for which a bid or quotation document exists; and “C” -
bids and quotations for which a bid or quotation document was not found, but which were
considered appropriate to include based on the commercial records of the company. The

CAN$101,774,735 is comprised of groups “B” and “C”.”°

Group B included quotations issued after the border re-opened in February 1997. These
amounted to approximately CAN$9,200,000 in total, of which approximately
CAN$800,000 were quotations delivered after the border was closed from the U.S. side
in July 1997. CANADA contends that all of the quotations after the border re-opened
should be excluded because the inventory to which the quotations relate was available to

SDMI and should not be used to calculate lost income.

The Tribunal takes the view that the post-July 1997 quotations should be excluded from
the calculations, but not those sent during the period from February to July 1997. The
post-July 1997 inventory was available to SDMI, but the quotations could not be
converted into orders because of the closure from the U.S. side for which, as the Tribunal
has held, CANADA is not responsible. The remaining CAN$8.4 million of the post-

February 1997 is considered as relevant.

Included in the totals were approximately $19.8 million each for a number of large soil
quotations and a Canadian Federal Government proposal. CANADA’s position is that

these should both be excluded.

* Opening statement, Transcript, 21 September 2001, page 20 and following.
%3 4
Loc. Cit.

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

Although SDMI occasionally undertook remediation of contaminated soil, it did so
usually as a means of encouraging customers to give SDMI contracts to remediate other

PCB-contaminated materials. It generally was not a significant part of SDMI’s business.

CANADA does not contend that all soil quotations should be excluded, but maintains
that the large soil inventories should be excluded along with the large soil inventory
component of quotations that included other categories of PCB-contaminated materials.
CANADA points out that, in effect, SDMI could contract for the remediation of large soil
inventories only as a broker, because it did not have the ability to process them at its own

facility in Tallmadge.

The Tribunal determines that it is appropriate to discount the CAN$19.8 million relating
to large soils contracts, but not to exclude them completely. SDMI did bid for them and
it did process, or arrange for processing, of some soil. The Tribunal determines that the
value of the potential soil contracts should be reduced by 60% to CAN$7.92 million,
which results in a deduction of CAN$11,880,000 from the CAN$101,774,735 total.

The proposition that the Canadian government would not have awarded a contract to
SDMI for policy reasons has a certain credibility; but in fact CANADA did not act
consistently in this respect, because it does include an SDMI $2 million government bid
in the totals. However, CANADA’s main position is that there is no material that
supports inclusion of the bid in question. In particular, no bid document was produced by

SDMI.

SDMI relied on a letter dated 13 December 1995 to the U.S. government, in which Dana
Myers referred to a bid for processing PCB’s for the Federal Public Works Department in
the Province of Quebec. The letter is somewhat ambiguous. It is not clear whether
SDMI was claiming that it actually had submitted a bid or was complaining that, as a

result of CANADA’s measure, it no longer could do so.

SDMI’s counsel referred the Tribunal to testimony given by Dana Myers, but this did not
establish whether SDMI actually bid for the contract concerned. Dana Myers stated that

SDMI increased its efforts to have the Canadian border opened in the early Autumn of

241.

242.

243.

244.

1995, because it wanted to put in a bid for the Public Works contract. Neither in his
statement nor in his oral testimony did Dana Myers state that SDMI actually did so. The
issue was live prior to the hearing. If a bid were to have been made, it should have been
possible to produce documentary evidence in the arbitration or, at the very least, Dana

Myers could have testified to the point explicitly at the hearing.”*

Having considered the relevant evidence, the Tribunal determines that SDMI’s claimed
amount of CAN$19,800,000 in respect of the bid for the Public Works Department’s
contract should be deducted from the CAN$101,774,735 total.

Also included in the quotations’ total were Canadian Federal Government PCB’s valued

°> Mr Rostant considered that this should not be included

at approximately $7.6 million.
because the value was included in the Public Works item mentioned above.”’ This
contention was not rebutted by SDMI. The amount is deducted from the quotation

population.

Mr Rosen listed a number of quotations categorised as “no files”. Mr Rostant considered
that these should not be included in the quotation population because they lacked
documentary support.” The value at issue is approximately CAN$2.4 million. The
Tribunal is not satisfied that all of these quotations should be excluded, but that the lack
of documentation and the subjectivity of their inclusions are matters to be taken into

account.

The experts do not agree on a number of other items. These include so-called “cut off”
items (CAN$986,745), alleged duplications (CAN$1.1 million) and “other items”
(CAN$233,572).°* These total approximately CAN$2.3 million. In his report, Mr Rosen
stated that he was satisfied that the quotations included in the quotation population were

accurate,” although he did agree with some of the concerns expressed by Mr Rostant.

* Op. Cit., q. 322.
°5 Op. Cit., q. 322.
°© Op. Cit., q. 322.
°7 Op. Cit., q. 322.
°8 Op. Cit., q. 322.
°° Rosen Report, 9 August 2001, pages 4, 17.

245.

246.

247.

248.

Late in the proceedings, an electronic record of contacts made by SDMI personnel to
Canadian PCB holders was produced by SDMI. It corroborated the marketing effort of
the company, but also shed light on the extent to which it is appropriate to rely on the
quotation population as a foundation for assessing the potential income stream that was

lost.

Many of the calls to Canadian PCB holders were cold, in that that was no clear indication
of an interest in having SDMI process PCB’s. Some revealed a refusal to deal with
SDMI for a number of reasons, including price and concern with shipping PCB’s to the
USA. While this information does not undermine the overall credibility of SDMI’s

quotations data, it does put its use into perspective.

The Tribunal has taken these matters into consideration in evaluating the different
opinions expressed by the experts on both sides. Some items are dealt with by using
fixed amounts, for example, the starting point of CAN$101,774,735 and the value of the
Public Works and Government of Canada inventories. The latter are identified
specifically by the Disputing Parties and are rejected in whole, on the grounds explained
above. The Tribunal’s judgement of the appropriate value of the large soils bids is stated
above. Other matters are dealt with on the basis of the Tribunal’s review and

appreciation of the whole of the evidence.

In summary, the Tribunal’s conclusion on Step 1 (that is, the quotations that should be
taken into account as the point of departure in the assessment of the income stream lost in

the period of the closure) is as follows:

SDMI’s total quotations and bids $101,774,735
Less:

bids delivered after July 1997: $800,000

percentage of large soils bids: $11,880,000

public works bid: $19,800,000

Federal Government PCB’s: ..87,600,000

miscellaneous items (including
“no files”, “cut off” items,
duplications, and “others”

-$2,400,000, $986,745, $1,100,000

and $233,572): $3,000,000
post-closure bids:!°° $8,400,000
Total $50,294,735

Price degradation

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

SDMI’s damages calculations do not contain any adjustment for potential price
degradation. Mr Rosen's position was that, being based on actual quotations, the data
reflect actual price movements. Relying on the evidence of Dr Stillman, CANADA

proposes that the value of the quotations should be discounted by 42%.'°!

CANADA excludes from its analysis the quotations issued by SDMI after the border was
re-opened. SDMI does not, and where quotations for the same inventory were issued

both before and after the border re-opened, it uses the earlier quotation value.'°

It is clear that competition would have affected prices. Dana Myers stated:

We started off in Canada quoting prices that were 10, 15, 20 percent higher than

our U.S. prices because we knew the prices would come down so we started

higher so that we could come down a bit and still make the margins we wanted to
103

make.

Mr Rosen agreed that prices would have come down had the border remained open.'™
He expressed the view that this fact was addressed in the quotation population he used for

his analysis and by the margin that he applied to the gross revenue.'”°

Dr Stillman derived his percentage from an analysis of a sample of quotations, to which

he applied notional and actual prices to derive an average.

' These are discussed below.
11 Op. Cit., q. 322.
1 Op. Cit., q. 322.
1 Op. Cit., q. 322.
14 Op. Cit., q. 322.
105 Op. Cit., q. 322.

254.

255.

256.

257.

The Tribunal has concluded that it is not appropriate to exclude all of the quotations
delivered after the border re-opened. Some of the inventory of Canadian PCB’s that
remained after the Canadian closure was lost to SDMI as a result of CANADA’s
measure. Insofar as that inventory is included, the relevant price is that which was
quoted after the border re-opened. Although it may not do so completely, it more

accurately reflects the price that actual competition would have caused.

Prices quoted during the closure do not reflect the full effect of the competitive situation
that would have existed if the border had remained open. Some discount to the quotation
value is appropriate. That value reflects some measure of competition, as is apparent

from the telephone logs; but, in a limited market, the effect is limited.

Based on the evidence overall, the Tribunal determines that the value of the quotations
should be discounted by 15% to take account of price degradation that would have
occurred through the operation of competitive pricing by others if the border had

remained open from November 1995 to February 1997.

This conclusion results in a value of SDMI’s quotations for the purpose of the calculation
of the gross income stream lost during the closure at CAN$50,294,735 x 0.85 =
CAN$42,700,000, approximately.

Success Rate

258.

259.

SDMI calculated its market share as a derivative of the volume of the Canadian PCB
inventory on which it bid throughout the period of its involvement in the Canadian
market, to which it has applied a success rate based on SDMI’s experience in the USA.
CANADA used as a measure the volume of the inventory that was processed during the
closure and derived the success rate from export permits issued. The Tribunal does not

wholly embrace either approach.

A calculation based on SDMI’s bids has a more firm foundation than one based on the
volume of inventory processed. The latter is likely to have been affected by the ban.

Activity in the market was less than it would have been, but for the closure. The

260.

261.

262.

263.

competitive landscape was different than it would have been, and there was little or no

sense of urgency in the marketplace.

SDMI provided calculations based on several percentage success factors, but its primary
case was based at 66%; that is, SDMI claimed that it would have been awarded contracts
to process 66% of the Canadian PCB inventory in respect of which it submitted
quotations. The source of this percentage was the success rate that SDMI claimed to

have achieved in the USA.

SDMI’s actual success rate in the U.S. market varied depending on the pool of data used
and the type of material being processed. Mr Rosen stated that for transformers it was
45%.'°° Dr Berkowitz examined US EPA data published in a trade journal for the years
1992 to 1995 inclusive. These data showed that SDMI had an average of 38.3% of the
U.S. market. She stated that the difference was based on the fact that she used 100% of
the U.S. transformer market, whereas Mr Rosen focused on the main players in that
market. She also noted that SDMI was involved in the remediation of PCB-contaminated
materials from other sources although, as described by Mr Myers, its primary engine of
profit was the remediation of electrical transformers. SDMI’s share of the non-

transformer U.S. market was less than one percent.'°”

In part, the difficulty with a calculation based on SDMI’s quotations is the data
surrounding them. An examination of the information provided to the Tribunal to reflect
the bidding process shows a measure of unreliability. The total dollar value of the bids
requires careful scrutiny. Extrapolation of SDMI’s experience in the USA into the
Canadian market must be treated with caution. The U.S. market was mature. It was
highly competitive. SDMI was well known. U.S. holders of PCB’s were required by law
to eliminate them. There were special liability issues in the USA. None of these

elements were precisely equivalent to the situation in Canada.

In addition to disputing the size of the relevant inventory, CANADA takes the position

that SDMI’s success rate would have been 25%.

106 Op. Cit., q. 322.
107 Op. Cit., q. 322.

264.

265.

266.

267.

268.

CANADA relies on the evidence of Dr Stillman. He based his opinion on an
examination of export permits and concluded that SDMI’s success rate would have been
44.8% before excluding permits related to an Alberta company, Custom Environmental.
He concluded that these should be excluded based on a conversation with Mr John

Myslicki, the head of the Transboundary Movement Division of Environment Canada.

The regulators were concerned that export permit applications did not reflect the actual
volumes of PCB’s that Custom Environmental had in its possession and that the company
was acting merely as a broker to obtain permits in advance of signing contracts with PCB
owners. Their investigations were ongoing when the border was closed from the U.S.

side.'°*

Dr Stillman made no independent investigation of the Custom Environmental situation
and Mr Myslicki, who was called by CANADA as a witness at the liability stage of the

arbitration, did not give evidence on the point.

It is not clear whether the export permits related to Custom Environmental were for
inventory that it possessed or controlled, but even if they (or some of them) were, it could
not be said that the volumes and value represented by them would not have been
available had the market been allowed to continue beyond July 1997. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that all of the export permits that related to Custom Environmental should be

excluded, but it is not in the position to select those that should not be included.

Having reviewed the evidence, the Tribunal considers that a projected success rate of
25% is too low. SDMI was well established in the USA, and its marketing efforts in
Canada had developed an awareness of its presence among the holders of the Canadian
inventory of PCB-contaminated materials. It had experience, geographic appeal and —
importantly — offered lower prices than its Canadian competitors. It was accustomed to
dealing with its U.S. competitors, and they were not particularly active in the Canadian

market.

108 Op. Cit., q. 322.

269.

270.

271.

272.

Considering the evidence as a whole, a projected success rate of 66% is too optimistic. It
is significantly higher than SDMI’s best percentage achieved in the USA and a great deal
more than the average success rate in the USA of SDMI in the years immediately prior to

its Canadian initiative.

CANADA claims that, but for the Canadian closure, among the risks faced by SDMI was
the potential response of the Sierra Club. Mr Rostant placed significant weight on this
particular risk. Although there was certainly some risk from the Sierra Club’s activities,
as well as the possibility of litigation or political intervention by other environmental
lobby groups, the Tribunal takes the view that it is not practicable to put a specific

percentage on it.

The Tribunal also accepts that there are risks inherent in undertaking any new business
venture, particularly in uncharted territory, but these risks were diminished somewhat by

SDMI’s marketing efforts, its reputation and its past experience.

A significant proportion of the time and effort invested by the parties in the second stage
of the arbitration was devoted to determining SDMI’s likely success rate measured as a
percentage of the quotations it issued. There is no scientific method of ascertaining a
value to be put on this factor. The only method by which the Tribunal can reach a
determination is to apply its judgement based on the relevant evidence as a whole. The

figure chosen by the Tribunal through the process of its deliberation is 44%.

Income stream lost to others during the closure period

273.

The success rate of 44% is applied to the previously calculated value of CAN$42,700,000
to yield a potential gross revenue stream of CAN$18,800,000 during the period of the
closure. A little over 50% of this apparently was processed by others, and thus
irretrievably lost to SDMI. Based only on the value of SDMI’s pre-closure quotations,
the Tribunal assess that SDMI lost a potential gross revenue stream of CAN$9,700,000
during the period of the closure. When the border re-opened, a potential gross income

stream of approximately $9,100,000 remained.

Income stream lost to others during the post-closure period

274.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

It is not easy to assess how much of the inventory that remained available after the border
re-opened was, or would have been, processed by others as a result of the closure. The
Tribunal assesses that a fair assessment is 18% of the quotations issued between February
and July 1997, and of the value of the quotations that remained from the period of the

closure were or would have been lost to others by reason of the closure.

Calculation of the value of the total post-closure inventory that was lost to SDMI by
reason of the closure is also difficult. The Tribunal estimates that 18% was processed by

others. The question is 18% of what?

Of SDMI's quotations prior to the closure, approximately CAN$9,100,000 remained. An
additional CAN$8,400,000 of quotations were issued between February and July 1997,
but many of these were for the same inventories on which earlier quotations had been
issued. Taking this, and the factors that affect the reliability of the quotation data into

account, the Tribunal discounts this figure to CAN$6,500,000.

Using the same approach as applied to quotations issued prior to the closure, SDMI's
success rate of 44% suggests that it would have obtained contracts for a value of

CAN$2,800,000 (CAN$6,500,000 x 0.44) from the post-closure quotations.

Added together, the value of the inventory that remained after the closure plus the value
of post-closure quotations result in a value of approximately CAN$11,900,000 that

potentially would have been processed by SDMI.

The Tribunal estimates that approximately CAN$2,100,000 of this value was or would

have been processed by others by reason of the closure.

After the closure, an inventory value of CAN$9,100,000 remained, of which 18% was
lost to others. This has been discussed in the preceding paragraph; that is, it is included
in the CAN$2,100,000. The remaining CAN$7,500,000 of the pre-closure inventory
(CAN$9, 100,000 — (CAN$9,100,000 x .18)) is considered below.

281. In summary, the Tribunal’s concludes that SDMI lost gross income streams of
$9,700,000 and $2,100,000 and is entitled to compensation for the interruption of the 19

month “window of opportunity”, and for delay.

Net Income Stream

282. The next element of the exercise is to determine the net value of the income streams that
SDMI lost, and that were delayed as a result of CANADA’s measure. Although the
Disputing Parties’ experts arrive at substantially different results, their approaches to

assessing the loss were essentially the same.

283. Mr Rosen stated in his initial report that:

The loss of potential discretionary cash flow is determined as the difference
between the projected incremental revenues that would have been earned ... and
the expenses that would have been incurred to realize the incremental revenue.!”

284. Mr Rostant described CANADA’s alternative three for the compensation of damages:

Simply put, contribution margin is an accounting term that is defined as sales less
variable costs, plus any additional fixed costs that may be necessary to achieve
the lost sales.

285. The different amounts arrived at by the experts are due mainly to the variables and values
employed in the calculation of the potential gross income stream figure - e.g. validity of
quotations, success rate, price degradation etc. - and, fundamentally, by CANADA’s

proposal to restrict the compensation to losses suffered directly by MYERS Canada. The

Tribunal has considered these matters, and stated its conclusions above.

286. The Disputing Parties’ experts also take divergent views on which costs need be deducted

from the gross income stream in order to determine the lost profit.
287. Mr Rostant describes the character of the different costs involved in his Revised Report
as follows:

Accountants typically refer to cost as being variable, semi-variable or fixed when
dealing with the costs of making and processing a sale. A variable cost is a cost

1 Rosen Report, page 28.

288.

289.

that varies directly with the volume of activity, such as trucking costs to bring the
Canadian PCB’s to the SDMI facility. A semi-variable cost is a cost that varies
with production or activity, but not in direct portion to volume typically, because
it contains both fixed and variable elements. Maintenance is an example of a
semi-variable cost. Finally, a fixed cost is a cost that remains relatively constant
regardless of the volume of production within a fairly broad range of activities
(eventually if sufficient production is added, additional fixed cost will be incurred
to meet demand). The equipment necessary to process the PCB at SDMI’s Ohio
facility is an example of fixed costs."|

Mr Rosen does not distinguish between costs that would have been incurred by SDMI for
the processing of Canadian PCB’s during the closure period. He simply refers to
Incremental Expenses to be Incurred by the Investment’ and ‘Incremental Expenses of the
Investor, explaining:

In order to earn the additional revenues as outlined in this report (i.e. had the

Event not occurred), the Investor/the Investment would have incurred incremental
operating expenses.

The accountants accept that, if the loss of net income stream approach were adopted by
the Tribunal, the gross income stream figures from lost sales should be adjusted to reflect
the cost of sales. They differ as to the measurement of the costs to be attributable to

1

those sales.''' Mr Rosen concluded that the costs were 47% of the value of sales based

on SDMI's Resource Recovery department.'!”

Mr Rostant used an aggregate cost of sales
based on an analysis of a number of departments. He contended that using data only
from the Resource Recovery department ignores the many components of SDMI's facility
that would be involved in the processing of PCB’s. He stated in his report and later in his
testimony, that his approach was consistent with the actual practice of SDMI. This was
based on a discussion with Ms Horell, the former controller of SDMI.''> The Tribunal is
inclined more to Mr Rostant's approach than to that of Mr Rosen on this particular

point.''

' Rostant, Revised Report, page 17.
'! Rostant Report, 31 August 2001, page 12.

112

Rosen Report, 28 February 2001, page 45.

"3 Rostant Report, 31 August 2001, page 38; transcript, 25 September 2001, qq. 75, 246.
"4 Rosen Report, Appendix III, page 44.

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

The data suggest that both sides agree that the incremental variable costs are
approximately 5.6%. The net margin appears to be in a range between approximately

47% and 39%.'!

Both experts include a deduction to take account of scrap metal sales. They also discuss
different margins for soils and Canadian government PCB’s. Their calculations include
amounts for capital improvements to increase the capacity of the plant. The experts agree
that the quantification of the lost net income stream is a matter of judgement. It was
acknowledged as such by Mr Rostant who wrote in his August report:

The Tribunal is faced with experts who, after applying their professional
judgements, have arrived at significantly different conclusions.'"

The Tribunal has reviewed the specific areas of difference between the experts and

concludes that a number of factors must be taken into consideration.

The first is that from the gross income stream must be deducted an amount to reflect the
cost of the Canadian operation. Mr Myers arbitrarily allocated 10% of the total

remediation contract income stream to MYERS Canada.'!”

The records pertaining to
contracts that were performed are consistent with this allocation. The percentage was to
cover costs and to earn a net income of approximately 5-6%.'"’ CANADA questioned
the appropriateness of the 10% allocation, because it was not based on any assessment of
the actual participation of MYERS Canada in specific contracts, that is, revenue was
allocated to MYERS Canada regardless of whether it was actually involved in securing or
processing a particular order. The Tribunal is not prepared to second-guess the decision
of SDMI’s management. The allocation was reflected in the contracts actually performed
by SDMI. The Tribunal allocates 5% of the gross income stream to cover the costs of the

Canadian operation.

The second concerns the treatment of a discretionary employee profit sharing plan. The

experts disagreed about the way in which this should be taken into account in

"5 Op, Cit., schedule 6.
"6 Op. Cit., page 3.
"7 Op. Cit., q. 322.

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

determining the cost base. Payment was based on the level of profitability of SDMI and
ranged from a low of 0.9% of net sales in 1992 to a high of 5.6% of net sales in 1993.
Mr Rostant's opinion was that the plan should be reflected in the calculation of the lost
income stream.''? SDMI's position is that, being discretionary, the plan should not be

included.

Details of the legal entitlement, if any, of employees were not provided to the Tribunal,
but the available information suggests that the discretionary aspect of the plan was the
percentage of net sales, not the fact of participation. In any event, the available
information shows a consistent payment over the years to employees and the Tribunal
takes the plan generally into account in its calculations, albeit not based on a specific

percentage allocation.

Having taken into account all the factors it considers relevant, the Tribunal concludes that
SDMI’s net income stream would have been approximately 45% of the gross income

stream.

The Tribunal has concluded that the lost gross income stream during the closure and post-
closure were respectively CAN$9,700,000 and CAN$2,100,000 and that the delayed
income stream was CAN$7,500,000. The Tribunal assesses the values of the net income

streams lost during the closure at CAN$4,400,000 and after the closure at CAN$900,000.

The Tribunal has experienced difficulty in assessing the effect of CANADA’s measure
on the remaining pre-closure income stream. But for the closure of the border some part
of that stream would have been processed by SDMI during the nineteen month “window
of opportunity”. The Tribunal assesses the value of the income stream that SDMI could
reasonably have derived from the remaining pre-closure inventory at CAN$3,400,000

(CAN$7,500,000 x 0.45).

Processing the balance of the remaining pre-closure inventory was delayed. The income

stream from that balance would have been achieved over time. Having reviewed all the

 

"8 Op. Cit., q. 322.
" Rostant Report, 19 July 2001, page 25.

available information provided by the Disputing Parties, the Tribunal concluded that it

was not possible to make a precise assessment of this element of the compensation that

should be awarded to SDMI. After deliberation, and applying its collegiate judgement,
the Tribunal assesses that CAN$750,000 should be awarded to SDMI to cover (a) the

shortened period available to SDMI to process the remaining pre-closure inventory, and

(b) the time value of the delayed opportunity to process part of the remaining pre-closure

inventory.

Conclusions

300. The Tribunal’s conclusions, reached by working through the twelve steps, are as follows:

Step 1. The realistic value of SDMI’s relevant orders and quotations is assessed at

CAN$50,294,735.

Step 2. The price degradation that would have occurred if the border had
remained open is assessed at 15%: this percentage applied to the value assessed in

Step 1 = CAN$42,700,000.
Step 3. The success rate is assessed at 44%.

Step 4. The 44% success rate applied to the value obtained in Step 2 =
CANS18,800,000

Step 5. The gross income stream lost by SDMI to others during the closure is

calculated (applying 50+%) at CAN$9,700,000.

Step 6. The remaining gross income stream from the pre-closure inventory

available after CANADA re-opened the border was CAN$9,100,000.

Step 7. To this figure is added the realistic value of SDMI’s post-closure
quotations, giving a total gross income stream available to SDMI when the border

re-opened assessed at CAN$11.9 million.

Step 8. The post-closure gross income stream that was, or would have been, lost

to others by reasons of the closure is assessed at CAN$2.1 million.

Step 9. The remaining pre-closure income stream is assessed at CAN$7.5 million.

* Step 10. The lost net income streams (45% of gross) are calculated at
CAN$4,400,000 (during closure), CAN$900,000 (post-closure) and
CAN$3,400,000 (remaining pre-closure).

e Step 11. The compensation to be awarded in respect of the shortened time period

available to SDMI to process the remaining pre-closure inventory, and for the

time value of delay, is assessed at CAN$750,000.

e Step 12. The total lost net income plus compensation for the abridged opportunity
and delay is assessed at CAN$6,050,000.

301. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the total compensation payable to SDMI shall be
CAN$6,050,000 excluding interest, which is considered below.

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

CHAPTER VII

INTEREST

It was common ground between the Parties that interest should be payable on any sums
awarded in favour of SDMI and that the period over which it would be payable and the

rate to be applied is a matter for the discretion of the Tribunal.

So far as the period is concerned, the Tribunal determines that interest shall be payable
from the date of the Notice of Arbitration (30 October 1998) until the date of payment of

the sums awarded in this Second Partial Award.

The rate of interest to be applied is closely connected with the question of the currency of

account in which the award of compensation is made.

On the one hand, the currency in which SDMI operated was USS and no doubt all income
received into SDMI’s bank account in Ohio would have been converted into that
currency. On the other hand, based on the bids made to potential Canadian customers
(and the revenue from the seven completed contracts), the currency of account of the
transactions between SDMI/MYERS Canada and their Canadian customers was (or was
to be) CAN$. On balance, the Tribunal considers that the currency of account of the lost
income stream is more closely connected with the loss and damage suffered by SDMI
than the working currency of SDMI in Ohio. Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that

the currency of the compensation awarded in this Second Partial Award should be CAN$.

It follows that the interest rate to be applied should be related to the standard Canadian
prime rates applicable from time to time during the relevant period. The relevant period
shall be the date of the Notice of Arbitration to the date of payment of the Award. Such

interest shall be compounded annually.

The Tribunal determines that CANADA shall pay to SDMI compound interest on the
sum awarded in Chapter VI above at the Canadian prime rate plus 1% over the period

referred to above.

308.

If the Disputing Parties are unable to agree on the relevant calculations they may place
the issue before the Tribunal as a matter to be determined, together with the question of
the allocation of costs, in its Final Award. In that event the Tribunal will consider
appointing an accountancy expert, in accordance with Article 27 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, to review the Disputing Parties’ respective positions and to report to

the Tribunal.

309.

310.

CHAPTER VIII

COSTS

It was agreed at the second stage hearing that the Tribunal would make a Second Partial
Award on the quantification of the compensation to be awarded and that the Disputing
Parties would be given an opportunity to submit their claims in respect of costs, together

with any submissions they wish to make, after they have seen the Second Partial Award.

Accordingly, all questions concerning costs under Articles 38 and 40 of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules are postponed to the Tribunal’s Final Award.

CHAPTER IX

DISPOSITIVE PROVISIONS OF THE AWARD

311. CANADA shall pay to SDMI compensation for the loss or damage suffered as a result of
CANADA’ breaches of its obligations under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA in the amount of
CAN$6,050,000.

312. CANADA shall pay to SDMI interest (compounded annually) for the period starting at
the date of the notice of arbitration until the date of payment of the award calculated at

the Canadian prime rate plus 1%.

313. All questions concerning costs and, if necessary, the calculation of interest shall be

postponed to the Tribunal’s Final Award.

MADE in the City of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Signed:

Bryan P Schwartz Edward C Chiasson

J Martin Hunter

Dated 21 October 2002

