International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

Sempra Energy International
(Claimant)

Argentine Republic
(Respondent/Applicant)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16)

(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Application for

Annulment of the Award

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr Christer Séderlund, President
Sir David A.O. Edward, QC
Ambassador Andreas J. Jacovides

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Mr Gonzalo Flores

Representing Sempra Energy International: Representing the Argentine Republic:
Mr R. Doak Bishop, King & Spalding LLP Until 26 January 2010:
Mr Craig S. Miles, King & Spalding LLP Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr Roberto Aguirre Luzi, King & Spalding LLP —_ Procurador del Tesoro de la Naci6n Argentina
Mrs Silvia Marchili, King & Spalding LLP

Mrs Kerrie A. Nanni, King & Spalding LLP From 27 January 2010:
Dr. Joaquin Pedro da Rocha

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 29 June 2010

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 1
THE DISPUTE. 6
THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

 

A brief summary of Argentina’s Annul A
THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDING

The first claim: PPI adjustment of tariffs...

 

 

 

The second claim: Pesification of tariffs under the Emergency Law

 

The third claim: The breach of the Licenses’ stability clauses. .....

 

The fourth claim: Failure to reimburse subsidies...

 

The fifth claim: Interference with the collection of bills and related matters .....

The matter of treaty breache: ll

 

Argentina’s defence based on necessity and preclusion under Article XI of the BIT

PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE.

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTORY COMMENTS 12
The scope of review to be undertaken by the Committee

JURISDICTION 14
Introducti 14
ARGENTINA’S REQUEST TO ANNUL IN RESPECT OF JURISDICTION......

SEMPRA’S POSITION 16
THE COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSION ON JURISDICTION.
EMERGENCY UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA’S POSITION 19
Article XI of the BIT. 19
Differences between Article XI of the BIT and the state of necessity

Grounds for 1 21
Manifest errors of law 21
Manifest excess of powers 22

 

 

The self-judging nature of the Article XI of the BIT

 

Replacing Article XI with the state of necessity
Failure to state reasons 23
SEMPRA’S POSITION 24

A manifest error of law is not a ground for annulment.

 

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

 

The Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers ............

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

Article XI is not self-judging 2
There was no failure to state reasons. 2
CONSIDERATION OF THE FOREGOING ARGUMENTS BY THE COMMITTEE...
Application of Article XI of the BIT 29
Manifest error of law. 29
Failure to state reasons 30
Introduction 30
Di i 30
Did the Tribunal’s rejection of the proposition that Article XI is self-judging constitute an
annullable error? 31
Manifest excess of powers 32
Introduction 32
The admissibility of Argentina’s arguments...... 33
The Tribunal’s finding 34
DISCUSSION 39
Articles II(2) (a) and X of the BIT 46
CONCLUSION 47
COSTS 47

 

DECISION 48

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS DECISION

Arbitration Rules

Argentina

Award

BIT

CGP
CGS

Claim Memorial

CMS

Convertibility Law
Counter-Memorial
Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction

Decision on Jurisdiction

The Emergency Law
Gas Decree

Gas Law

ICJ

ICSID

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Argentine Republic

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Award of 28 September 2007

Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine
Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investment, 14 November 1991

Camuzzi Gas Pampeana S.A.
Camuzzi Gas del Sur S.A.

Claim Memorial submitted by Sempra in the arbitration
proceeding on 3 September 2003

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8)

Law No. 23.928 of 27 March 1991

Counter-Memorial submitted by the Argentine Republic in the
arbitration proceeding on 1 August 2005

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction submitted by Sempra in the
arbitration proceeding on 4 March 2004

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/16), Decision on Jurisdiction of 11 May 2005

Law No. 25.561 of 6 January 2002

Decree 1738/92 of 1992 on the implementation of the Gas Law
Law No. 24076, partially enacted on 9 June 1992

International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Convention

ILC Articles

LG&E Decisions

License(s)

Licensee(s)

Local Companies

PPI

Rejoinder

Reply

Schreuer

Sempra

Umbrella Clause

VCLT

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States

ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, adopted by the International Law Commission in
2001

LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1)

Distribution Licenses of Distribuidora de Gas del Sur S.A. and
Distribuidora de Gas Pampeana S.A., approved by Decree No.
2451 and Decree No. 2456, respectively, of 18 December 1992

Camuzzi Gas Pampeana S.A. and Camuzzi Gas del Sur S.A.

Sempra’s partly-owned and indirectly held companies CGS and
CGP

United States Producer Price Index

Rejoinder submitted by the Argentine Republic in the arbitration
proceeding on 5 December 2005

Reply submitted by Sempra in the arbitration proceeding on 28
September 2005

Christoph Schreuer et al. The ICSID Convention, A Commentary
(second edition), 2009

Sempra Energy International
Article II(2)(c) of the Argentina — US BIT, according to which
“TeJach Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into

with regard to investments.”

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

INTRODUCTION

1. On 25 January 2008, the Argentine Republic filed with the Secretary-
General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes an application requesting annulment of the 28 September
2007 Award, rendered by the tribunal in the arbitration proceeding
between Sempra and Argentina (hereinafter jointly referred to as “the
Parties”). The Application for Annulment was made within the time
period provided in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention.

2. In its Application, Argentina sought annulment of the Award on four of
the five grounds set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention,
specifically claiming that:

(i) The Tribunal was not properly constituted
(ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(a));

(ii) The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
(ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(b);

(iii) There had been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(d)); and

(iv) The Award had failed to state the reasons on which it was based
(ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(e)).

3. The Application for Annulment also contained a request, under Article
52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(1) for a
stay of enforcement of the Award until the Application for Annulment
was decided.

4, The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 30
January 2008 and on the same date, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 50(2), transmitted a Notice of Registration to the
Parties. The Parties were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54(2), enforcement of the Award was provisionally
stayed.

5. By letter of 15 September 2008, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration

Rule 52(2), the Parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc

i (“the C ittee”) had been i of
Mr Christer Séderlund, from Sweden, Sir David A.O. Edward, ac,
from the United Kingdom, and Ambassador Andreas J. Jacovides, from
Cyprus, each of them appointed by their respective countries to the
ICSID Panel of Arbitrators. On the same date the Parties were
informed that Mr Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve
as Secretary of the Committee.

 

6. On 16 September 2008, Sempra filed a request to lift the provisional
stay of enforcement of the Award.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

By letter of 25 September 2008, the Parties were notified that
Mr Christer Séderlund had been designated President of the
Committee.

By letter of 10 October 2008, the Committee proposed to hold a first
session by telephone conference on 21 October 2008. A provisional
agenda for the session was attached to the letter. The Parties were also
notified that the Committee had decided to continue the provisional

stay of enforcement of the Award until 8 December 2008, the date fixed
by the Committee to hear the Parties’ oral pleadings on stay.

The first session of the Committee was held, as proposed, on 21
October 2008 by telephone conference. At the session, Sempra was
represented by Messrs Craig S. Miles and Roberto Aguirre Luzi and by
Ms Kerrie A. Nanni, from the law firm of King & Spalding LLP
(Houston). The Argentine Republic was represented by

Dr Gabriel Bottini and Dra Gisela Makowski from Procuracién del
Tesoro de la Naci6n Argentina.

During the first session: (a) the Parties expressed their agreement that
the Committee had been duly constituted, in accordance with the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and confirmed that they
had no objections to any of its members; (b) several issues of procedure
were agreed and decided; and (c) the Committee informed the Parties of
its decision to continue the provisional stay of enforcement of the
Award until a decision on this matter was taken by the Committee.
Scheduling arrangements which could not be agreed during the course
of the first session were resolved by the Parties shortly after.

In accordance with the Parties’ agreement, Argentina filed its
observations on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award on 7 November 2008 and Sempra filed its observations on 21
November 2008.

On 8 December 2008, a hearing was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington D.C., at which the Parties presented oral arguments on the
matter of stay of enforcement. Present at the hearing were: the
Members of the Annulment Committee: Mr Christer Séderlund,

Sir David A.O. Edward, QC, and Ambassador Andreas J. Jacovides;
the Secretary of the Committee: Mr Gonzalo Flores; Sempra’s
representatives: Messrs R. Doak Bishop, Craig S. Miles and Roberto
Aguirre Luzi of King & Spalding LLP (Houston); Mr Mark Clodfelter
and Ms Maria Kostytska Scala, of Winston & Strawn LLP
(Washington, D.C.) and Mr Dave O. Smith of Sempra Energy
International; and representatives of the Argentine Republic:

Dr Gustavo Adolfo Scrinzi, Sub-Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina, Dr Gabriel Bottini, Dr Ignacio Torterola,

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Dr Alejandro Turyn and Dr Alejandro Agustin Vasquez Azpilicueta,
from Argentina’s Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion.

Messrs Bishop, Miles, Aguirre Luzi and Clodfelter addressed the
Committee on behalf of Sempra. Messrs Scrinzi, Bottini and Torterola
did so on behalf of Argentina.

On 18 December 2008, Sempra wrote to the Committee, claiming that
Argentina had “again refused to change its interpretation of its
obligations under Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention”,
referring to the Vivendi ad hoc committee’s request for a “comfort
letter”! and to Argentina’s response to that committee of 28 November
2008. By letter of 29 December 2008 Argentina declared its readiness
to provide comments on Sempra’s 18 December submission while, at
the same time, describing its letter to the Vivendi ad hoc committee as
“self-explanatory”.

 

By letter of 30 January 2009, Argentina notified the Committee of its
intent to adduce additional written testimony into the proceeding. By
letter dated 6 February 2009, Sempra objected, emphasizing that the
proposed testimony had been presented to the Sempra Tribunal which
had conclusively disposed of it. In a reply letter of 20 February 2009,
Argentina opined that the proposed testimony should be admitted as it
had a bearing on the allegation that a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure had occurred in the Sempra arbitration.

On 3 March 2009, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment.

The Committee issued its Decision on the Argentine Republic’s
Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award on 5 March
2009. In its decision, the Committee granted a continuation of the stay
of enforcement of the Award subject to the condition that Argentina
place in escrow an amount of USD 75 million. The Committee’s
decision further provided that, if Argentina failed to place the sum
required in escrow within 120 days from the date of the issuance of the
decision, the Committee might — at the request of Sempra — order
termination of the stay of enforcement with or without providing an
opportunity for Argentina to make up for any failure in payment.

The Committee further decided on Argentina’s request to adduce
additional evidence on 31 March 2009. In its decision, the Committee,
invoking ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1), according to which “[t]he
tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence [--]” and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 53, according to which “[t]the provisions of

Compaiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine

Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award rendered on 20 August 2007
(4 November 2008).

20.

21.

22.

23.

ID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(acs)

these Rules shall apply mutatis mutandis to any procedure relating to [-
] annulment of an award and to the decision of the Committee”,
confirmed its power to rule on the admissibility of any evidence
invoked by a party to annulment proceedings.

   

 

The Committee, however, noting that the ambit of its review was
strictly limited to questions of law relating to the grounds for
annulment exhaustively listed in the Convention, rejected Argentina’s
application to adduce additional testimony. Specifically, the
Committee considered that the proposed evidence could not contribute
to elucidating whether or not the Tribunal dealt with certain evidentiary
matters in such a manner as to constitute a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure.

On 4 May 2009, Sempra filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

By letter of 13 May 2009, Sempra requested that the stay of
enforcement be lifted. The reason invoked for the request was that
Argentina had not agreed to, let alone offered, any escrow agreement,
as provided in the Committee’s 5 March decision.

In particular, Sempra referred to paragraph 119 of the Committee’s
decision, which provided:

In the event where Sempra considers the escrow
arrangement offered by Argentina as unsatisfactory,
Sempra may bring this matter to the Committee’s
attention by submitting a notice at the relevant time, but
no later than 30 (thirty) days before expiry of the time
limit set forth above. Argentina shall be entitled to submit
comments and take corrective action by reason of such
notice. If the Committee considers that the escrow
arrangement is unsatisfactory — despite corrective action,
if any — the Committee may terminate the stay pursuant to
Rule 54(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

By letter of 22 May 2009, the Committee invited Argentina to offer
comments on Sempra’s letter of 13 May 2009.

In acommunication of 1 June 2009, Argentina made reference to
discussions said to have taken place between Argentina and “counsel
for Sempra” in the Enron case’, inter ali oncerning a proposal to put
an escrow agreement in place as a condition for continuing the stay in

 

 

 

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa
Assets, LP. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3) — Annulment
Proceeding. The law firm of King & Spalding LLP (Houston) represents the claimants
in both annulment proceedings.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

those annulment proceedings. Argentina had explained that such an
arrangement as proposed would create “unacceptable risks of
attachment” to Argentina, pointing to the contingency of other creditors
attaching Argentina’s entitlement to lift the amount in escrow, should
its application for annulment be granted. Argentina noted, in particular,
that the ad hoc committee in the Enron annulment proceedings had, for
reasons given in paragraph 42 of that committee’s decision of 20 May
2009, granted a continuation of the stay without conditions. Argentina
requested this Committee to do likewise.

By letter of 10 June 2009, Sempra expressed its disagreement with the
Enron committee’s reasoning on the point of third-party attachment
risk, emphasizing that, taking such a risk into account “encourages
recalcitrant debtors [---] to continue repudiating their international
monetary obligations”, and questioning why Sempra should suffer the
consequences of “Argentina’s unilateral decision to renege on its prior
international monetary obligations”.

In the same letter, Sempra reiterated its request that the Committee lift
the stay of enforcement, noting that Argentina had not only failed to
“offer” an escrow arrangement but had not even responded to a draft
escrow agreement proposed by Sempra, let alone committed any funds
into such escrow.

By letter of 17 June 2009, the Committee stated that it would consider
the Parties’ arguments on the matter of the ongoing stay and
decision in respect of the Sempra’s request that the stay now be lifted.
Further, the Committee invited the Parties to communicate “any new

 

ue a

development or other circumstances, which may be relevant for the
matters presently pending”.

On 29 June 2009, the Argentine Republic filed its Reply on Annulment.

By letter of 16 July 2009, Sempra asked the Committee to lift the stay
of enforcement of the Award. Argentine immediately filed a response
on 17 July 2009.

The Committee issued its Decision on Sempra Energy International's
Request for the Termination of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award
(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules) on 7 August 2009. The
Committee terminated the stay of enforcement of the Award,
dismissing Argentina’s argument that the placing of funds in escrow (or

 

jing a letter of credit) would cause prohibitive cost and create an
“unacceptable risk of attachment to Argentina”. In doing so, the
Committee noted that: (a) the circumstances invoked by Argentina did
not amount to economic hardship that would constitute a valid
consideration when deciding whether to continue or terminate the stay

30.

31.

32.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

(as already decided in its 5 March decision; paragraphs 77-79); and (b)
that it does not “see as its function to create safeguards against the
possibility of third-party creditors generally obtaining satisfaction in
respect of outstanding claims.[...] [s]uch contingencies are outside the
scope of considerations which an ad hoc committee should take into
account”. Argentina not having complied with the condition imposed
by the Committee for continuing the stay for the duration of this
proceeding, the stay of enforcement of the Award was terminated.

On 13 August 2009, Sempra filed its Rejoinder on annulment.

A 3-day hearing was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C.
on 1-3 September 2009, at which counsel for both Parties presented
their arguments and submissions, and responded to questions from the
Members of the Committee. Present at the hearing were: the Members
of the Annulment Committee and its Secretary. On behalf of Sempra
attended: Messrs R. Doak Bishop, Craig S. Miles and Roberto Aguirre
Luzi and Mrs Silvia Marchili, Kerrie A. Nanni and Carol Tamez of
King & Spalding LLP (Houston); and Messrs Dave O. Smith and
Santiago Albarracin, from Sempra Energy International. On behalf of
the Argentine Republic attended: Dr Osvaldo César Guglielmino,
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Dr Gustavo Adolfo
Scrinzi, Sub-Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina,

Dr Gabriel Bottini, Dr Diego Gosis, Dra Veronica Lavista,

Dra Viviana Kluger and Dr Nicolds Duhalde, from Argentina’s
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién and Dr Domenico di Pietro, from
Chiomenti Studio Legale. Messrs Bishop, Miles and Aguirre Luzi
addressed the Committee on behalf of Sempra. Messrs Scrinzi, Bottini,
Gosis, di Pietro and Ms Lavista did so, on behalf of the Argentine
Republic.

The Committee declared the proceeding closed on 7 May 2010. During
the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee
deliberated by various means of communication, including a meeting at
The Hague on 14 — 16 December 2009, and have taken into account all
pleadings, documents and testimony before them.

THE DISPUTE

33.

In 1989 Argentina introduced a privatization programme in order to
revitalize its economy and put an end to the then ongoing economic
An important facet of this program was the introduction of a
legal and regulatory framework by way of the Convertibility Law,
introduced in 1991, together with an implementing decree, fixing the
Argentine peso (ARS) to the US Dollar (USD) at the exchange rate of
one to one.

 

crisis.

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

In 1992, the natural gas industry was restructured, and the government-
owned company Gas del Estado was privatized. In this connection, the
Gas Law was introduced together with its implementing regulations in
the form of the Gas Decree. Within the framework of this regulatory
regime, a number of companies were formed for purposes of
distribution of gas for residential and commercial users. Sempra
invested in two of these gas companies by acquiring an indirect
shareholding amounting to 43.09% of Sodigas Pampeana’s and Sodigas
Sur’s shares, which, in turn, are the holders of 90% and 86,09%,
respectively, of the shares of Camuzzi Gas Pampeana S.A. (“CGP”)
and Camuzzi Gas del Sur (“CGS”), i.e. the “Licensees”, two Argentine
companies which have been granted licenses for the distribution of gas
(hereinafter the “License(s)”) in 1996.

In December 2001 a financial crisis erupted in Argentina, and in the
period 2001-2002 the Government of Argentina undertook a number of
measures which, in the view of Sempra, constituted a wholesale
abrogation and repudiation of significant rights and entitlements under
the Licenses and other entitlements under the regulatory environment,
that had been established within the framework of the Argentine
privatization program. Essentially, these rights concerned the
Licensees’ entitlement to calculation of tariffs in USD and their semi-
annual adjustment on the basis of the US Producer Price Index (“PPI”).

In January 2002, the Emergency Law was enacted, the currency board
system was abrogated, the Argentine economy was pesified — including
public service agreements and licences — and all contracts and
relationships then in force were, according to the Emergency Law, to be
adapted to the new context.

On the basis of the above-stated circumstances, Sempra filed, on 11
September 2002, a Request for Arbitration under the ICSID
Convention, invoking the US-Argentina Bilateral Investment Treaty
(“BIT”).

On 31 December 2003, Argentina filed objections to the Centre’s
jurisdiction and the competence of the Tribunal. On 11 May 2005 the
Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction, wherein it held that the
dispute fell under the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of
the Tribunal.

A merits phase in the arbitration followed, and the Award on the merits
was dispatched to the Parties on 28 September 2007. In the Award it
was held that Argentina had breached the fair and equitable standard
and the Umbrella Clause of the BIT. On these bases, Sempra was
awarded damages.

40.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

On 25 January 2008 Argentina requested the annulment (and stay of
enforcement) of the Award.

THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

A brief summary of Argentina’s Annulment Application

41.

42.

43.

In this annulment proceeding, Argentina has raised a number of issues
with regard to the arbitral proceeding and the Award, each of which, on
Argentina’s case, have been dealt with in such a way as to constitute
one or more grounds for annulment of the Award in its entirety. The
issues raised by Argentina concern the jus standi of Sempra to bring
claims relating to the Licenses and related rights; alleged impropriety in
dealing with Argentina’s proposal for the disqualification of the
members of the Tribunal; matters relating to the admission of certain
fact witnesses in the arbitration proceeding; interpretation of various
terms of the Licenses; and the way in which the Tribunal dealt with the
fair and equitable treatment standard and the Umbrella Clause of the
BIT.

Finally, as explained in greater detail below, Argentina raised
arguments in respect of the way that the Tribunal dealt with emergency
under Argentine law, necessity under customary international law and
preclusion on the basis of Article XI of the BIT.

In its application for annulment, Argentina invoked (as already noted in
paragraph 2 above) the following grounds for annulment as provided
for in the ICSID Convention:

1. The Tribunal was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a) of the
ICSID Convention).

2. The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of
the ICSID Convention).

3. There has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention).

4. The Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based.
(Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDING

44,

In the arbitration Sempra argued that the measures adopted by
Argentina in the period 2000 — 2002, initiated by the enactment of the
Emergency Law and leading to the pesification of tariffs under that law,
the abrogation of the PPI adjustment of tariffs, the unilateral
modification of the Licenses without compensation and related matters,
amounted to abrogation and repudiation of most of the rights it had
under the regulatory framework.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

On this basis, Sempra claimed that Argentina was in breach of specific
commitments made to the investors in violation of the applicable legal
regulatory norms and the specific guarantees provided under the BIT,
seriously impairing the value of its investments.

The conduct of Argentina constituted, in Sempra’s view, wrongful
expropriation of its investment as well as breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard, including legitimate expectations, by
measures characterized by arbitrary and discriminatory treatment and
failure to provide full protection and security, as well as also breaching
the BIT’s Umbrella Clause. In sum, according to Sempra, all of the
protections offered under the BIT had been breached.

Argentina denied that there had been any breach in respect of the
measures it undertook and which have been complained of by Sempra.
The legal and regulatory framework governing the privatization
provided for the Licensees’ right to fair and reasonable tariffs and the
right to calculate tariffs in USD could be applied only as long as the
Convertibility Law was in force. Moreover, information that the
investors relied on when making their investments was conveyed by
private consulting firms and was not attributable to Argentina, which
had expressly disclaimed responsibility for such information.

In Argentina’s view, the legal and regulatory framework had also been
strictly upheld when adopting the measures complained of and none of
those measures amounted to a breach of the Licenses or the BIT. In
any event, Argentina maintained that its responsibility, both under
domestic as well as international law concerning necessity, whether
customary or treaty-based, is excluded.

Against the overall scenario described above, Sempra dealt with a
number of specific measures undertaken by Argentina in the context of
the economic, social and political difficulties gradually emerging in
Argentina at the end of the 1990s and the measures undertaken by
Argentina commencing in December of 2001 and gathering momentum
in the following year.

The first claim: PPI adjustment of tariffs.

50.

51.

According to Sempra, adjustments of the tariffs based on the PPI (“PPI
adjustments”) were suspended from 1 July 2000, and permanently.

Argentina denied that the measures undertaken were in any way in
breach of any undertaking, but simply represented a reasonable
adjustment to the Argentine economy in a situation of recession and
deflation, making the adjustments to the license terms justified.

52.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

The Tribunal held that the Licensees had been entitled to PPI
adjustments, and that these adjustments had been abrogated by
Argentina.

The second claim: Pesification of tariffs under the Emergency Law

53.

54,

55.

56.

On 6 January 2002 Argentina enacted the Emergency Law, which
essentially entailed the abrogation of the Licensees’ right to calculate
tariffs in USD and the conversion of tariffs at a fixed rate of exchange
of one USD to one ARS.

According to Argentina, the calculation of tariffs in USD was linked to
the Convertibility Law, which, in turn, was subordinated to the
overreaching policy goal that tariffs should be fair and reasonable.

Sempra contends that the abrogation of these rights constituted
violations of the protections offered by Argentina, in particular, in
respect of the fair and equitable treatment standard and the Umbrella
Clause.

The Tribunal, basing itself on an examination of the legal and the
regulatory framework, concluded that there was indeed a right for
Sempra to calculate tariffs in USD, that this was a central feature of the
tariff regime, and that this right was abrogated.

The third claim: The breach of the Licenses’ stability clauses.

57.

58.

59.

Sempra’s claim in this respect refers, in particular, to contractual
provisions of the Licenses prohibiting the freezing of prices, and the
duty of the Licensor not to amend the basic rules of the Licenses
without written consent of the Licensees. The non-observance of these
commitments constituted, in Sempra’s view, a breach of the Umbrella
Clause in the BIT.

Argentina argued that the prohibitions referred to were binding only for
the executive branch of government and that any measure arising from
congressional action would not fall foul of this prohibition.

The Tribunal, noting that the matter at hand did not concern the State’s
right to adjudicate or legislate, but whether the terms of the Licenses
gave a right to damages, dismissed Argentina’s argument.

The fourth claim: Failure to reimburse subsidies

60.

The fourth claim advanced by Sempra concerns the failure of Argentina
to reimburse certain subsidies promised to the Licensees, essentially

61.

62.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

CGS. Additionally, Sempra considered that such subsidies were to be
calculated in USD as being in lieu of higher tariffs.

Argentina denied the claim invoking its attempts to regularize the
payments of subsidies and the proposition that the situation now is back
to normal. As the subsidies, in Argentina’s view, have always been
paid in ARS, no conversion into USD is warranted.

The Tribunal concluded that Argentina recognized the amount of
subsidies owing before 31 December 2001, and that the monies due
must be compensated with the parity exchange value of the ARS to
USD at that time.

The fifth claim: Interference with the collection of bills and related matters

63.

65.

Sempra argued that a number of measures have caused interference in
collection of bills and that other suspensions and impositions have
impacted negatively on the operations of the Local Companies.

Argentina rejected the significance of any such measure as being
limited and exceptional and, in any event, later reversed.

The Tribunal considered that it did not find much merit in these
“peripheral” claims, but that it was prepared to consider them in the
context of Sempra’s overall claim for compensation.

The matter of treaty breaches

66.

67.

68.

The Tribunal held, essentially, that Argentina had not breached the
standard of protection established in Article [V(1) of the BIT
(expropriation or equivalent). The Tribunal held, however, that “[t]he
measures in question” had, beyond any doubt, substantially changed
the legal and business framework, under which the investment was
decided and implemented and that, as a consequence, the fair and
equitable treatment standard of Article II(2)(a) of the BIT had been
breached.

As for Sempra’s argument relating to breach of the Umbrella Clause,
the Tribunal, opining that the Licenses were “the ultimate expression of
a series of complex investment arrangements made with a specific
intention of channeling the influx of capital”,* concluded that, indeed,
the Umbrella Clause in Article II(2)(c) of the BIT was also breached.

As for Sempra’s assertion that it had been the victim of arbitrary and
discriminatory action from the side of Argentina, the Tribunal

Award, para 286
‘Award, para 303
Award, para 312

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

concluded that the treatment afforded to Sempra did not appear to have
been discriminatory or arbitrary in comparison to measures meted out
to other entities or sectors in Argentina and did not, therefore,
constitute a breach of the BIT’s protection from arbitrariness and
discrimination (Article II(2)(b)).

69. As for the claim concerning full protection and security, the Tribunal
noted that this particular standard has evolved in the context of physical
protection but that also, in given cases, a broader interpretation could
be justified. However, the Tribunal saw no reason on the basis of the
circumstances of the present case to thus extend this standard of
protection and, therefore, rejected Sempra’s claim under Article II(2)(a)
of the BIT.

Argentina’s defence based on necessity and preclusion under Article XI of the BIT

70. In the course of the arbitration, Argentina also raised the defense of
necessity under Argentine law and customary international law as well
as the question of preclusion under Article XI of the BIT (in that order).

71. The Tribunal held that the conditions under which emergency might be
exercised and legally validated under Argentine law were not present,
based on Argentine court precedents, and that “the very constitutional
provisions which were subject to judicial control and which led to the
definition of those conditions cannot be invoked to preclude a finding
of wrongfulness”.° Nor did the Tribunal — applying Article 25 of the
ILC Articles as an expression of customary international law — find that
the cumulative requirements set up by that provision were present in
order to excuse wrongfulness. As for preclusion under Article XI of the
BIT, the Tribunal held, as will be discussed in greater detail below, that
the cumulative requirements for exoneration under Article 25 of the
ILC Articles were not satisfied, making it unnecessary, in the view of
the Tribunal, to undertake further judicial review under Article XI.

72. In summing up, the Tribunal held that Argentina had incurred liability
for breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard as well as the
Umbrella Clause, and ordered Argentina to pay compensation.

PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTORY COMMENTS

The scope of review to be undertaken by the Committee

73. An ad hoc committee may only determine whether (a) to annul the
Award in whole or in part — rendering the Award (or part thereof) null
and void for all intents and purposes, cancelling its res judicata effect —

© Award, para 330

74,

75.

76.

77.

ID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(acs)

or (b) let the Award stand. Annulment is distinct from an appeal. An
ad hoc committee cannot substitute its own judgement on the merits for
the decision of the Tribunal. Following a decision to annul an ICSID
Award, the dispute may be resubmitted to new tribunal to obtain a
decision on the merits.

Annulment review is limited to a specific set of carefully defined
grounds (listed exhaustively in Article 52(1) of the ICSID
Convention)’. New arguments or evidence on the merits will therefore
be irrelevant for the annulment process, and therefore not admissible. It
cannot be excluded, however, that evidence, particularly expert
evidence, may exceptionally be accepted in annulment proceedings
insofar it is specifically relevant for the annulment grounds listed in
Article 52(1) of the Convention (insofar invoked by a party).

 

As for the interpretation of grounds for annulment there is compelling
support for the view that neither a narrow nor a broad approach is to be
applied.

Nor is there any preponderant inclination “in favorem validitatis”, i.e. a
presumption in favour of the Award’s validity.” In line with the
consistent, but not invariable, practice of ad hoc committees, this
Committee will not express any views on aspects of the Tribunal’s
reasoning on the merits.

It is standard practice for applicants seeking annulment to invoke more
than one ground for annulment — as has been done in the present case.
The Committee sees it as its task to gauge the circumstances invoked in
support of each ground independently. The fact that a particular set of
facts may have a bearing on more than one ground of annulment does
not, as such, render any error alleged in support of anyone of those
grounds of annulment any the more manifest.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 50(1)(c)(iii) also confirms that these grounds are the sole
grounds for annulment.

As explained by the ad hoc committee in the Klickner arbitration, “... application of the
paragraph Article 52(1) of the Convention demands neither a narrow interpretation,
nor a broad interpretation, but an appropriate interpretation, taking into account the
legitimate concern to surround the exercise of the remedy to the maximum extent
possible with guarantees in order to achieve a harmonious balance between the various
objectives of the Convention.” (Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United
Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, p 3).

Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7),
Decision on Annulment of 5 June 2007, para 22, that “[s]uch presumption

[---] finds no basis in the text of Article 52 and has not been used by annulment
committees”.

 

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

Once an ad hoc committee has concluded that there is one instance of
manifest excess of powers (or any other ground for annulment), which
warrants annulment of the Award in its entirety, this will be the end of
the ad hoc committee’s examination. Since annulment of an award in
its entirety necessarily leads to the loss of the res judicata effect of all
matters adjudicated by the Tribunal, it is unnecessary to consider
whether there are other grounds — whether in respect of the same matter
or other matters — that may also lead to annulment.

On the other hand, an ad hoc committee will need to proceed
differently where it decides not to annul the Award or decides to annul
the Award only in part. In those instances it will be necessary for the
ad hoc committee to examine all of the grounds invoked by the
applicant in support of its application.

 

The question arises whether different considerations apply where the
matters of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence have
been put in issue. In other words, if the affirmation of jurisdiction by
the Tribunal is alleged to constitute a manifest excess of powers (or any
other ground for annulment), does this question have to be addressed as
a preliminary issue (and dismissed), before considering grounds of
annulment invoked by the applicant in respect of other aspects of the
Award or the arbitral proceedings? The argument for taking this course
would be that, if the dispute fell outside the jurisdiction of the Centre
and, therefore, outside the competence of the Tribunal, the conduct of
the Tribunal in procedural and substantive respects would not be
relevant.

The contrary argument would be that, since no decision of an ad hoc
committee (or any reasoning underlying it) can have no effect other
than upholding or (partially) annulling the Award, the reasons given by
the ad hoc committee for its decision, while decisive for its
conclusions, will not be binding on a new Tribunal upon resubmission
of the case. Thus, if an ad hoc committee has found that a Tribunal’s
assertion of jurisdiction is the result of an error justifying annulment of
the Award, a new tribunal may nevertheless declare itself competent to
deal with the case.

 

 

In the present case, although the Committee has come to the conclusion
that the Award must be annulled on another ground, it considers that,
on balance, it is desirable that it should deal with Argentina’s argument
on jurisdiction as a preliminary matter.

JURISDICTION

Introduction

83.

In the arbitration, Argentina disputed the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on a
number of grounds, inter alia, Sempra’s lack of jus standi, arguing,

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

essentially, that Sempra’s claims were connected to the Licensees and
not directly to its investment, as any alleged violation complained of
was susceptible of affecting the Licensees only.

Sempra contended that all requirements under the ICSID Convention
and the BIT for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction were present, i.e.,
essentially, that there was a legal dispute between a national of the
United States and Argentina concerning losses, that these affected the
interest of Sempra in the Licensees, and that both parties have
consented to ICSID arbitration.

Argentina, referring to the second part of Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention, further argued that of the Tribunal should apply “domestic
legislation and international law”.'° Sempra argued that it is the ICSID
Convention and the BIT that should be applied to determine
jurisdiction."'

The Tribunal confirmed’? that Article 42(1) applies to the merits of the
dispute only, so only Article 25 of the Convention and the terms of the
BIT should be applied.

The Tribunal also found that also a non-controlling shareholder is an
investor under the terms of the BIT. Further, the Tribunal held that
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention establishes an optional jurisdictional
alternative and not, as argued by Argentina, an autonomous
jurisdictional requirement."*

Furthermore, the Tribunal noted that, contrary to Argentina’s argument,
Sempra alleged that it had suffered a direct loss. The Tribunal also
concluded that there was an (alleged) loss, arising directly to Sempra’s
investment, giving Sempra a cause of action under the BIT.

 

As for Argentina’s claim that Sempra lacks jus standi, i.e. that it is
bringing a derivative action on behalf of the Licensees, the Tribunal
concluded that, on Sempra’s case, it was pursuing its own rights under
the BIT. The Tribunal concluded that a cause of action also accrues to a
minority shareholder,'* and that a cause of action lies under the BIT.'®

Argentina’s position is dealt with in the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, para 25
Id, para 26

Id, para 27

This option evidently was open under Article VII(8) of the BIT.

Decision on Jurisdiction, para 91.

The matter of investors’ jus standi under, inter alia, the US-Argentina BIT has been
discussed also in other, previous ICSID cases, see e.g. Enron v. Argentina (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O01/3), Decision on Jurisdiction (2 August 2004), CMS Gas
Transmission Co. v. Argentina (ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8), Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction (17 July 2003), AES Corp. v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17),
Decision on Jurisdiction (26 April 2005), LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentina (ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (30 April 2004), Lanco
International v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6), Preliminary Decision on
Jurisdiction (8 December 1998), Azurix v. Argentina (ICSID No. ARB/O1/12),
Decision on Jurisdiction, (8 December 2003), Swez v. Argentina (ICSID Case No.

  

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

90. The Tribunal held that claims submitted by Sempra were founded “
both the contract and the BIT”."° In its Decision of Jurisdiction, it
concluded that the dispute fell within the jurisdiction of the Centre and
the competence of the Tribunal.

 

ARGENTINA’S REQUEST TO ANNUL IN RESPECT OF JURISDICTION

91. In this annulment proceeding, Argentina has raised two fundamental
issues in support of its claim that the Tribunal has engaged in a
manifest excess of powers in declaring jurisdiction to be vested in the
Centre and itself competent to deal with the dispute. Firstly, the
Tribunal accepted “the claim of a shareholder with respect to the
alleged damage to rights belonging to the companies in which it held
and holds shares”. Secondly, Argentina raised the “potential problem
that, in both situations, might arise in the event of double
compensation”.'” In this latter respect, Argentina referred to the
contingency that the subsidiaries themselves might have actionable
claims, premised on the Licenses and other contractual rights, claims
which are also comprised by the present claim by Sempra under the
BIT. Argentina further contended that the Tribunal failed to appreciate
the fact that the Licenses and other contractual rights were entered into
between the Licensees and Argentina, and not with Sempra when
considering Sempra’s claims, while, at the same time, disregarding
agreements between Argentina and the Licensees as res inter alios acta.

ii

   

92. The fact that the Tribunal failed to state grounds for its Decision on
Jurisdiction by which it accepted the jurisdiction of ICSID and its own
competence also amounts, in the view of Argentina, to a failure to state
reasons on which these decisions were based, which warrants
annulment of the Award.

SEMPRA’S POSITION

93. Sempra has rejected Argentina’s affirmations related to alleged absence
of jus standi mainly on the following grounds.

 

ARB/03/17), Decision on Jurisdiction (16 May 2006), Total S.A. v. Argentina (ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/01), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 August 2006),
Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Decision on
Jurisdiction (22 February 2006), Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. Argentina (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction (17 June 2005), Camuzzi International S.A. v.
Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2), Decision on Jurisdiction (11 May 2005),
Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal (formerly Générale des
Eaux) v. Argentina (“Vivendi IT”) (ICSID Case No. 97/3), Decision on Jurisdiction (14
November 2005), Siemens v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction (3 August 2004), El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15), Decision on Jurisdiction (27 April 2006).

‘6 Decision on Jurisdiction, para 101

7 Memorial on Annulment, para 48

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

The question whether a particular investment qualifies for protection is
determined by the relevant instrument on investment protection, in this
case the BIT. According to the Article I(ii) of the BIT, “shares of stock
or other interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof”
constitute, inter alia, investments within the meaning of that BIT.

According to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention “a national of
another Contracting State” constitutes an investor under the
Convention; hence, Sempra qualifies as such.

Sempra is claiming for its own rights under the BIT and is not pursuing
a derivative action for the account of the Licensees. From this follows
that Sempra is an investor which has made an investment under the
BIT.

The potential of double recovery is not relevant for the question of
jurisdiction. In any event, this risk is not present.

Damages claimed by Sempra, and awarded by the Tribunal, concern its
own damages and not those of the Licensees.

The Tribunal’s reasoning on the matter of jurisdiction is firmly based
on the provisions of the Convention and the BIT; there is no excess of
powers, let alone manifest, or failure to state reasons.

THE COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSION ON JURISDICTION

100.

101.

The jurisdiction of the Centre is determined by Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, and is governed by the terms of the instrument expressing
the parties’ consent to arbitration. In the present case, the relevant
instruments are, in the case of Argentina, the BIT, and in the case of
Sempra, its request for arbitration.

Because Article 25 of the Convention does not define “investment”,
that task was “left largely to the terms of bilateral investment treaties or
other instruments on which jurisdiction is based”.'* The BIT provides
in its Article I(i), inter alia:

For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the
territory of one Party owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party,
such as equity, debt and service and investment
contracts; and includes without limitation:

tI

'S The quotation is taken from the CMS Annulment Decision, para 71.

102.

103.

104.

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value and directly related to an investment;

tI

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any
licenses and permits pursuant to law.

The plain language of the BIT is evidence of the broad meaning of the
term “investment” envisaged by the contracting parties when entering
into the BIT. Notably, the definition explicitly includes “investment
contracts”, “shares of stock or other interests in a company”, and “any
right conferred by law or contract”, “owned or controlled directly or
indirectly”.

The Committee is clearly of the opinion that Sempra is entitled to bring
a claim under the ICSID Convention against Argentina in respect of
damage allegedly caused to Sempra’s “investment” in Argentina, i.e. its
indirect, minority shareholdings in the Local Companies. The
Barcelona Traction case, and the principle confirming the recognition
under international law of the personality of juridical entities under
municipal law, are irrelevant in the present BIT context. Shareholders
may claim under the BIT — as distinct from what was the case in the
Barcelona Traction case —simply because this BIT extends such rights
to “investors” as defined therein, a right which does not exist under
customary international law.

In the opinion of the Committee, the arguments advanced by Argentina
in support of its objection to jurisdiction confuse two distinct issues.
The first issue is whether Sempra is entitled to bring a claim under the
ICSID Convention and the BIT in respect of alleged damage to its
partly and indirectly owned Local
Companies, CGP and CGS, by impairment of Licenses and other
valuable rights held by those subsidiaries. The second is whether acts
or omissions on the part of Argentina with respect to CGP or CGS have
in fact caused damage to Sempra’s investment and, if so, what is the
proper measure of that damage. The first issue is one of jurisdiction,
while the second issue relates to the merits of the dispute. In the
present case, if Sempra were to be found entitled to reparation for
damage to its investment, the measure of damages would not

 

investment through loss caused to it

 

 

 

necessarily be directly proportionate to any pecuniary loss or deficit
suffered by CGP or CGS. That being an issue on the merits, the
Committee does not consider it further.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

105. For these reasons, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal has
neither engaged in any manifest excess of powers nor failed to state
reasons on the matter of the jus standi of Sempra.

EMERGENCY UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW

ARGENTINA’S POSITION

Article XI of the BIT

106. Argentina has submitted that the Tribunal committed a manifest excess
of powers by failing to apply Article XI of the BIT. Argentina has
based its position on, essentially, the following circumstances.

 

107. In the Award, the Tribunal determined that Article XI is not self-
judging and, consequently, it was incumbent on the Tribunal to carry
out a substantial review of its applicability. However, the Tribunal held
that Article XI does not establish conditions other than those that
follow from the state of necessity under customary international law as
enunciated in Article 25 of the ILC Articles. The Tribunal concluded —
as follows from its Award"? — that, having previously determined that
the Argentine crisis did not meet the requirements of the state of
necessity under customary international law, it would not undertake
further judicial review under Article XI.

 

108. From this follows that the Tribunal failed to distinguish between Article
XI of the BIT and the state of necessity under customary international
law.

Differences between Article XI of the BIT and the state of necessity

109. Argentina has developed its position on the question of the Tribunal’s
alleged failure to apply Article XI of the BIT in the following way.

110. In the Award”, the Tribunal considered that “[t]he BIT provision is
inseparable from the customary law standard insofar as the definition of
necessity and the conditions for its operation are concerned” and that
Article XI “does not set out conditions different from customary law in
such regard”.

111. However, Article XI of the BIT differs significantly from the state of
necessity under customary international law, which is substantially
contained in Article 25 of the ILC Articles. This fact requires that this
difference is observed in view of the potentially different outcomes of
an evaluation of Article XI as opposed to Article 25 of the ILC Articles,

° Award, paras 378 and 388
*° Para 376

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

and more importantly, it makes it manifest that the Tribunal has failed
to embark on an interpretation of Article XI.

112. The main differences between Article XI and the state of necessity
under customary international law relate to the sphere of operation of
these rules, to their nature and operation, their content, scope, and, as
well as to their effects.

113. Article XI is a special conventional rule, while the state of necessity is a
general rule of customary international law. Therefore, Article XI may
only be invoked within the framework of the BIT. It is a specific
provision, bilaterally agreed upon by the contracting States, which
delimits the scope of the protections contained in that BIT. On the
other hand, the state of necessity “can be invoked in any context against
any international obligation”,”' except for obligations excluding the
possibility of invoking the state of necessity.

114. The plea of necessity under customary international law is subsidiary to
that of Article XI of the BIT. Article XI is a provision that delimits the
scope of application of that BIT: “if it applies, the substantive
obligations under the BIT do not apply”. By contrast, “Article 25 is
an excuse, which is relevant only if it has been decided that there has
otherwise been a breach of those substantive obligations under the
BIT’*

115. Article XI is a primary rule, since it delimits the scope of the
substantive obligations of the BIT itself. If the requirements under
Article XI are met, there is no breach of the BIT. Article 25 is a
secondary rule, since it provides discharge from responsibility of the
State for internationally wrongful acts. It is a “*ground for precluding
the wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international
obligation’, under certain strict conditions”. The state of necessity
does not extinguish or terminate the obligation, but excludes
responsibility for its non-performance.

116. Therefore, only if conduct violates the BIT by infringing a standard of
treatment and such conduct is not precluded under Article XI, can the
question arise whether the responsibility of the State is excluded by
virtue of the state of necessity.

117. Article XI does not include the stringent requirements of the state of
necessity. There is no equivalent to the Article 25 standard of “grave

2! Quoted from the Continental Casualty Award, para 167; Continental Casualty Company
v, Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Award of 5 September 2008.

22 CMS Annulment Decision, para 129
> Td., para 129

Continental Casualty Award, para 166

   

24

20

118.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

and imminent peril” amongst the exceptions provided for in Article XI
or to the requirement that the measure be “the only way for the State to
safeguard” its interests, or that the State invoking the exception must
not have contributed to the situation of necessity.

Finally, the preclusion under Article XI and the state of necessity differ
as to their effects. In the case of the state of necessity, Article 27 of the
ILC Articles provides that “[T]he invocation of a circumstance
precluding wrongfulness ... is without prejudice to ... [t]he question of
compensation for any material loss caused by the act in question”. If,
however, Article XI is found to apply, no compensation is payable
since such provision excludes “the operation of the substantive
provisions of the BIT”

 

Grounds for annulment

119.

120.

There are, in Argentina’s view, three grounds for annulment in
connection with the manner in which the Tribunal dealt with Article XI
of the BIT, namely: (a) manifest errors of law; (b) manifest excess of
powers; and (c) failure to state reasons.

Firstly, the Tribunal made manifest errors of law in equating Article XI
of the BIT with the state of necessity under customary international
law, in assuming that these provisions were on the same footing, and in
applying the rule of Article 27 of the ILC Articles to Article XI.
Secondly, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by its failure to
apply Article XI. Finally, the Tribunal failed to explain the reasons
why it could refrain from applying Article XI and instead apply rules
on state of necessity under customary international law.

  

Manifest errors of law

121.

122.

The Tribunal made manifest errors of law when dealing with Article XI
by declaring that “[s]ince the Tribunal has found above that the crisis
invoked does not meet the customary law requirements of Article 25 of
the Articles on State Responsibility, it concludes that necessity or
emergency is not conducive in this case to the preclusion of
wrongfulness, and that there is no need to undertake a further judicial
review under Article XI, given that this Article does not set out
conditions different from customary law in such regard”.

By equating Article XI of the BIT with ILC Article 25, and assuming
they were on the same footing, the Tribunal committed manifest errors
of law.

> Award, para 388

21

123.

124.

125.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

In addition, the Tribunal also made another manifest error of law by
applying the rule of ILC Article 27 to Article XI of the BIT.

Although Argentina admits, in principle, that a mere error of law is not
a ground for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, in
certain circumstances, an error of law may be sufficiently serious to
qualify as a manifest excess of powers for failure to apply the proper
law.

The manifest errors of law that are present in the Award in the instant
case, are sufficiently serious to amount to a manifest excess of powers
in accordance with Article 52(1)b of the ICSID Convention for failure
to apply the proper law.

Manifest excess of powers

126.

Not only did the Tribunal make manifest errors of law in connection
with Article XI of the BIT, but it also engaged in a manifest excess of
powers by its failure to apply that provision. Applying Article XI
entailed recognising its self-judging nature, thus respecting the decision
of Argentina to take measures under cover of that article. However, if
such article was deemed not to be self-judging, it would call for a
substantive review of the measures adopted by Argentina in order to
verify whether those measures satisfied the substantive standards for
preclusion that are enunciated in this provision. The Tribunal did not
accept the self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT, nor did it
perform a substantive review. The Tribunal simply replaced Article XI
of the BIT with the state of necessity under customary international law
which, as explained, differs substantially from the former as to its
sphere of operation, nature and functioning, content, scope and effects.
The Tribunal did not apply Article XI of the BIT, thus manifestly
exceeding its powers.

The self-judging nature of the Article XI of the BIT

127.

The Tribunal was called to apply Article XI, which provision, in
Argentina’s view, would apply in a situation such as the one that
evolved in Argentina as from late 2001. This imposed on the Tribunal
a duty to defer to Argentina’s decision to take measures to maintain
public order and protect its essential security interests, since Article XI
is self-judging. The State invoking a provision such as Article XI of
the BIT is the sole judge of its applicability to the contested measures.
By disregarding the self-judging nature of Article XI, the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers.

22

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Replacing Article XI with the state of necessity

128.

129.

130.

131.

In the Award the Tribunal concluded that Article XI of the BIT was not
self-judging and that a substantive review was required.”°

Such a substantive review would have, as its object, an examination of
the standards contained in Article XI in order to ascertain whether the
requirements of that provision were present. However, instead of
proceeding to such substantive review, the Tribunal decided not to
apply Article XI and replaced that provision with Article 25 of the ILC
Articles, i.e. by a rule of customary international law.

The Tribunal even acknowledged explicitly that it would not apply
Article XI by stating that there was no “need to undertake a further
judicial review under Article XI"’’. This declaration represents a
conclusive indication of the manifest excess of powers, in which the
Tribunal engaged in abstaining from applying this BIT provision.

The fact that Argentina also invoked the state of necessity in the
arbitration did not allow the Tribunal to disregard Article XI of the BIT
and to apply, in its place, Article 25 of the ILC Articles. The Tribunal
should have undertaken an examination of the requirements of the state
of necessity as a ground for precluding wrongfulness only if Article XI
of the BIT was held not to apply, and a violation under that BIT had
been established.

Failure to state reasons

132.

133.

The Tribunal failed to state reasons pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention in respect of two fundamental issues regarding
Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal did not explain why the lack of a
definition in that BIT of the substantive standard of “essential security
interests” made it necessary to rely on the requirements of the state of
necessity under customary international law. Nor did the Tribunal
explain why Article XI did not establish conditions different from the
requirements under customary international law set forth in Article 25
of ILC Articles.

In the Award, the Tribunal stated that in the absence of a definition of
what is to be understood by an “essential security interest”, the
requirements of a state of necessity under customary international law,
as expressed in Article 25 of the ILC Articles, become relevant to the
matter of establishing whether the necessary conditions have been met
for its invocation under the BIT*.

°6 Award, para 388
> Award, para 388
°8 Award, para 375

134.

135.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

The Tribunal did not explain in the Award why the lack of a definition
of “essential security interests” of Article XI led to the application of
the requirements of the state of necessity under customary international
law in place of the BIT provision.

In conclusion, by failing to explain why the lack of a definition of
“essential security interests” in Article XI led to application of the
requirements of the state of necessity instead of Article XI, the Tribunal
failed to state the reasons on which it based its decision in the terms of
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. The Award should therefore
be annulled on this ground.

SEMPRA’S POSITION

136.

137.

138.

139.

Sempra has firmly rejected the notion that the Tribunal committed any
excess of powers by any failure to interpret or apply Article XI of the
BIT, or failed to state reasons for its conclusions in this regard.

Nothing regarding the Tribunal’s analysis of Argentina’s Article XI and
necessity defences constitutes a ground for annulment.

The Tribunal correctly interpreted and applied Article XI as well as
Argentina’s defence of necessity. It found that Argentina had means
available other than the Emergency Law to address its economic crisis.
and that it substantially contributed to the circumstances which gave

 
 
 

rise to the economic crisis. Moreover, Argentina’s annulment request
is based on new arguments and material that post-date the Award.
Therefore, these objections should be rejected.

The Tribunal’s mission was to interpret and apply Article XI and
Argentina’s defence based on state of necessity under customary
international law. This the Tribunal did. It analyzed Article XI and
concluded that because of its lack of clarity, and the fact that it reflects
customary international law, a state invoking Article XI must satisfy
the same conditions required to invoke the defence of necessity. The
Tribunal explained that it reached its interpretation of Article XI
because: (i) the BIT’s object and purpose requires a narrow
interpretation of Article XI; (ii) Article XI does not contain any
definition of the terms “essential security interests” or “necessary”;
(iii) Article XI reflects customary international law; and (iv) relevant
tules of international law should be used to interpret BIT provisions
that either reflect customary international law or are not defined in the
BIT. The Tribunal interpreted Article XI in accordance with relevant
tules of treaty interpretation, as codified in Articles 31 and 32 of the
VCLT.

As follows from the Award, the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s defence
based on Article XI because: (i) the Emergency Law was not necessary

24

140.

141.

142.

143.

ID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(acs)

 

to maintain “public order” or protect Argentina’s “essential security
interests”, and (ii) there were other means available to maintain “public
order” and to protect Argentina’s “essential security interests”.

The Tribunal found that “there was a severe crisis”, but that this crisis
had not “compromised the very existence of the State and its
independence, thereby qualifying as one involving an essential state
interest”.” The Tribunal stated that “[q]uestions of public order and
social unrest could be handled as in fact they were, just as questions of
political stabilization were handled under the constitutional
arrangement in force”?

The Tribunal concluded that (i) “there is no convincing evidence that
the events were out of control or had become unmanageable” and

(ii) that its task under the BIT was to find whether the Emergency Law
was the “only” alternative to address the economic crisis.’ The
Tribunal held that “this does not appear to have been the case”, and
therefore, there was more than one alternative to maintain “public
order” or protect its “essential security interests”

The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s argument that it had not contributed
to the crisis. The Tribunal first concluded that a “State cannot invoke
necessity if it has contributed to the situation giving rise to a state of

necessity”.*? The Tribunal found this was an “expression of a general

 

principle of law devised to prevent a party taking legal advantage of its
own fault”.“* Thus, it did not just base its finding on Article XI or
customary international law, but on a general principle of law. The
Tribunal concluded that Argentina could not succeed in its defence
under Article XI or the defence of necessity, if it had contributed to the
situation of necessity, and based on the evidence produced by the
Parties, the Tribunal concluded that in fact Argentina had made a
“substantial contribution” to the state of necessity alleged by Argentina
as its basis for invoking Article XI and the defence of necessity.

 

 

Additionally, in respect of the specific grounds invoked by Argentina
for annulment of the Award, Sempra has submitted the following.

A manifest error of law is not a ground for annulment

144. In respect of Argentina’s invocation of a manifest error of law, Sempra
summarizes its case by noting that a manifest error of law is not a
» Award, para 348

% Award, para 348
5! Award, paras 349-350
* Award, para 351
% Award, para 353
* Award, para 353

25

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

ground for annulment. Moreover, Sempra adds, even if manifest error
of law could constitute a ground for annulment, it is not present in this
context; the Tribunal interpreted the law correctly.

The Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers

145. Sempra relies on the fact that the Tribunal agreed that “[t]he
requirement for a state of necessity under customary international law,
as outlined above in connection with their expression in Article 25 of
the ILC Articles, become relevant to the matter of establishing whether
the necessary conditions have been met for its invocation under the
BIT’.*

146. The Sempra Tribunal also rejected the criticism raised by Argentina
against the way the CMS Tribunal addressed Article XI and necessity,
concluding that the definition of necessity and the conditions for its
operations are inseparable, having regard to the fact that it is under
customary law that such elements have been defined.

147. As for Argentina’s invocation of Article XI as lex specialis, the
Tribunal accepted that “[i]t is no doubt correct to conclude that a treaty
regime specifically dealing with a given matter will prevail over more
general rules of customary law”.** However, as the BIT text did not
provide sufficient guidance, the Tribunal considered customary
international law the most appropriate means to interpret the BIT
provision.

148. The Tribunal held that the conditions under which Article XI of the BIT
and the state of necessity under customary international law may be
invoked are the same. The Tribunal reiterated this point when it
rejected Argentina’s self-judging argument by explaining that: “The
judicial control must be a substantive one, and concerned with whether
the requirements under customary law or the BIT have been met and
can thereby preclude wrongfulness. [Because the Tribunal rejected the
customary international law necessity defence] there is no need to
undertake a further judicial review under Article XI given that this
Article does not set out conditions different from customary law in such
regard”.”

 

149. Sempra has also referred to the following circumstances. Article X of
the BIT provides that “[t]his Treaty shall not derogate from: . . .
b) international legal obligations . . . that entitle investments or
associated activities to treatment more favourable than that accorded by

Award, para 375
© Award, para 378
57 Award, para 388

26

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

this Treaty in like situations”.** Thus, the BIT’s object and purpose
indicate an intent not to interpret particular BIT provisions in a manner
that accords investments less protection than that provided under

 

customary international law.

In addition, Sempra recalls, the BIT contains several gateways to
international law, setting it as the floor below which treatment cannot
be afforded, unless required under the BIT. For example, Article
II(2)(a) of the BIT, provides that the treatment afforded by the BIT
cannot be “less than that required by international law”. Furthermore,
Article 42 of the ICSID Convention imposes on the Tribunal a duty to
apply international law. Thus, the BIT cannot be seen as a separate and
independent instrument, but as a creature of the international law
regime, which at the same time is the applicable law that governs the
BIT.

Sempra does not agree either that Article XI and the defence of
necessity under customary international differ in a number of
fundamental ways as argued by Argentina. Moreover, Argentina did
not present these arguments to the Tribunal, which should suffice to
reject this claim.

Sempra does not accept Argentina’s affirmation that the content of
Article XI and Article 25 are different, and that there is no “textual
link” to customary law in Article XI, on the grounds: (a) that there is no
textual equivalent to “grave and imminent peril”; (b) that Article XI
does not require that a “necessary” measure be the “only way” to
achieve the covered purpose; and (c) that there is no requirement in
Article XI that the State not have contributed to the situation
necessitating the measure.

Article XI reflects customary international law, a self-contained regime
which must be used to interpret Article XI. Also, various elements of
Article XI actually reflect international law, and not just the state
defence of necess

 

ty, but also distress and force majeure.

Article XI is limited to maintenance of peace, “essential security
interests”, and public order. Article 25, on the other hand, only
provides that the State interest must be an “essential interest of the
State”, meaning that Article XI is not more expansive than customary
law.

 

Sempra also does not accept Argentina’s assertion that Article XI and
Article 25 are different, the latter (but not the former) being without
prejudice to compensation. It is, in any event, irrelevant to the question

8 Award, para 431

27

156.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

whether the conditions under which Article XI and the customary
necessity plea can be invoked are the same or not.

The Tribunal did not refrain from applying Article XI, but interpreted
this provision as requiring a State invoking it to satisfy the same
conditions as required to invoke the plea of necessity under customary
law. The Tribunal interpreted one aspect of Article XI — the conditions
under which it can be invoked — to be the same as those required by
customary international law, and found, as a matter of fact, that
Argentina failed to satisfy those conditions. No excess of powers, let
alone any manifest excess of powers is involved.

Article XI is not self-judging

157.

The Tribunal thoroughly examined Argentina’s argument that Article
XI is self-judging in character, and that it came to the well reasoned
conclusion that this was not the case. Instead, it found that a
substantive review was required. The Tribunal did not exceed its
powers, and fully stated reasons for its decision.

There was no failure to state reasons

158.

Sempra has emphasized that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons
regarding its analysis of Article XI of the BIT and considers
Argentina’s position on that issue inconsistent in that Argentina also
considers that the Tribunal failed to apply Article XI. Sempra
considers, however, that each step in the Tribunal’s reasoning in respect
of Article XI is lucid and consistent in that it clearly shows how the
Tribunal concluded that” (1) Article XI did not define or provide the
legal elements and conditions necessary for its application“’, (2) it was
bound to look to analogous rules of customary law", (3) the conditions
for the application of state of necessity under customary law were the
same as the elements for the application of the terms of Article XI due

 

to their similarities and the lack of clarity provided by the BIT for its
application”, and (4) the BIT and Article XI provide treatment that was
not less than that of customary law. Therefore, there was no failure to
state reasons.

°° Sempra’s rejoinder on annulment, para 328
*° Award, paras 375, 378

+! Award, para 375

* Award, para 376

28

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

CONSIDERATION OF THE FOREGOING ARGUMENTS BY THE
COMMITTEE

Application of Article XI of the BIT

159. For reasons which will be discussed in greater detail later, the
Committee finds that the Award must be annulled in its entirety on the
basis of manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention) in respect of failure to apply Article XI of the BIT. The
question therefore arises whether it is necessary for the Committee to
deal with other arguments advanced by Argentina in relation to the way
in which the Tribunal dealt with Article XI. The Committee feels that
it should deal with these arguments for the sake of completeness.

Manifest error of law

160. Argentina has argued that the Tribunal made “manifest errors of law” in
respect of the way in which it dealt with Article XI. These manifest
errors of law consisted in equating Article XI of the BIT with Article
25 of the ILC Articles.

161. Argentina also argued that the Tribunal committed a serious error of
law, by considering the application of Article 27 to a possible duty of
compensation of the State before, and indeed without, reviewing
whether responsibility was precluded under Article XI. Additionally,
in this respect, the application of Article 27 under customary
international law constituted a manifest error of law. While admitting
that a “mere error of law” is not a ground for annulment under Article
52(1) of the ICSID Convention, Argentina affirms that such error may
be serious enough to reach to the level of a manifest excess of powers
for failure to apply the proper law.*

162. As Argentina itself recognises, a serious error of law is not in itself a
ground for annulment under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention. It
is instead Argentina’s contention that a serious error of law may, in
certain circumstances, constitute a manifest excess of powers (and
therefore be annullable on that ground).

163. It is correct — as also pointed out by Argentina — that certain ad hoc
committees have dealt with this issue and opined, for instance, that
incorrect application of law might constitute a manifest excess of
powers if “it amounts to effective disregard of the applicable law”.*

164. As a general proposition, this Committee would not wish totally to rule
out the possibility that a manifest error of law may, in an exceptional

+ Annulment Memorial, para 426

*  Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/1) (Amco II), Decision on Annulment of 3 December 1992. Similar statements
have been made by other ad hoc committees, e.g. the MTD Annulment Committee, which
stated that annulment may be a consequence of the purported application of the relevant
law, while in fact applying quite a different law (MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD Chile S.A.
v. Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Annulment Decision of 21 March 2007, para 47).

29

165.

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

situation, be of such egregious nature as to amount to a manifest excess
of powers.

In this case, the Committee has reached the conclusion that the Tribunal
—in respect of Article XI of the BIT — has failed altogether to apply the
applicable law and, by failing to do so, has committed a manifest
excess of powers. This conclusion of the Committee precludes any
question of manifest error in applying the applicable law. It is therefore
ssary for the Committee to engage in any more pre
ission of where that specific line should be drawn between an error
of law that justifies annulment and one that does not.

    

Failure to state reasons

Introduction

166.

167.

Discussion

168.

 
 

According to Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention, “[t]he Award [-
shall state the reasons upon which it is based”. The importance of this
ion is highlighted by the fact that failure to state reasons
constitutes a ground for annulment according to Article 52(1)(e).

 

The fact that a total absence of reasons merits annulment is clear, but
such a situation is rarely, if ever, encountered in practice. Rather there
will be an (alleged) absence of reasons for a particular aspect of an
award, or otherwise insufficient, inadequate or possibly contradictory
reasons. Difficulties arise when determining what standard should be
applied in deciding whether a defect of reasoning should lead to
annulment. While certainly “frivolous, perfunctory or absurd
arguments by a tribunal’ may well be subject to annulment, such
clear-cut cases do not abound. Ad hoc committees are faced with
making the important distinction between finding, on the one hand,
reasons which are reasonably comprehensible and consistent,
demonstrating, on the whole, a logical and discernable line of thinking,
and, on the other hand, “circumstances [where] there is a significant
lacuna in the Award, which makes it impossible for the reader to follow
the reasoning on this point”.“°

 

The Committee observes that the Tribunal dealt with Argentina’s
defence based on necessity under Argentine law, customary
international law, and Article XI of the BIT in that order. In so doing,
the Tribunal followed the order in which Argentina argued these
defences. It is evident that the Tribunal gave a detailed account of its
reasoning in respect of necessity under customary international law. In
this regard the Tribunal noted that the ILC Articles, although not
constituting a source of customary law still (as was accepted by the
Parties) represents a fair expression of such law, and held that the
conditions laid down in Article 25 of the ILC Articles were necessary

“8 Schreuer, ICSID Commentary (2009), page 997 (para 344).

46

CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, para 97.

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

conditions for invoking an “essential security interest” under the BIT.“”
The Tribunal dedicated considerable attention to the question whether
or not Article XI is self-judging (a point also extensively argued by
Argentina) and arrived at a reasoned conclusion on that point. Having
reasoned so far, the Tribunal held that judicial review of the invocation
of Article XI, and the measures adopted, must be a substantive one, and
concerned with whether the requirements under customary law or the
Treaty were met and could thereby preclude wrongfulness.** The
Tribunal reasoned that since the BIT itself did not deal with the legal
elements necessary for the legitimate invocation of a state of necessity,
criteria found in customary international law had to be applied. From
the above overview it is clear how the Tribunal reasoned in order to
reach the conclusion it did. Hence, there is no failure to state reasons.

 

Did the Tribunal’s rejection of the proposition that Article XI is self-judging
constitute an annullable error?

169.

170.

171.

172.

Argentina argues that by failing to appreciate that Article XI is self-
judging, the Tribunal disregarded Argentina’s discretion to take
measures in order to maintain public order and protect its essential
security interests. Therefore, by ignoring the fact that a state invoking
Article XI is the sole judge of the appropriateness of the contested
measures, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

 

In the Committee’s view, it is clear that there was no failure on the part
of the Tribunal to consider the matter of whether Article XT is self-
judging or not. On the contrary, it applied considerable attention to the
subject (as evidently did the Parties), reaching the conclusion that
Article XI is not self-judging, a conclusion that the Tribunal was
perfectly entitled to reach.

Argentina censures the Tribunal for having “dogmatically” asserted
what it considered to be the object and purpose of the BIT, without
giving reasons and drawing its conclusions from that. Equally
seriously, according to Argentina, the Tribunal reversed the logical
sequence of the interpretative process by passing over the text of the
relevant treaty provision itself in breach of Article 31(1) of the VCLT.

In addition, Argentina has argued extensively in favour of the self-
judging nature of Article XI of the BIT, referring to a number of
sources (expert testimony, official statements and other authorities).
These arguments are, however, clearly appropriate to a review of the
merits and cannot be considered by an ad hoc committee.

7 Award, para 375
“8 Award, para 388

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Manifest excess of powers

Introduction

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

As has been confirmed on numerous occasions there is a fundamental
distinction between erroneous application of the law and a failure to
apply the law. By way of example, the following statements by ad hoc
committees may be mentioned. The MINE ad hoc committee stated:

“Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be
distinguished from erroneous application of those rules
which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no
ground for annulment”. ‘

The Amco (I) ad hoc committee stated:

The ad hoc Committee will limit itself to determining
whether the Tribunal did in fact apply the law it was
bound to apply to the dispute. Failure to apply such law,
as distinguished from mere misconstruction of that law,
would constitute a manifest excess of powers on the part
of the Tribunal and a ground for nullity under Article
52(1)(b) of the Convention. The ad hoc Committee has
approached this task with caution, distinguishing failure
to apply the applicable law as a ground for annulment
and misinterpretation of the applicable law as a ground
for appeal.

On Argentina’s case, the Tribunal failed to apply Article XI of the BIT,
and, by this failure, apart from a failure to state reasons, committed a
manifest excess of powers.

It is clear that Argentina in the present case (as well as in CMS)!
argued the plea of necessity under customary international law before
proceeding to the matter of preclusion under Article XI. This sequence
of argument is illogical as the question whether a state of necessity

justifies exoneration from state responsibility will become an issue only

where liability is not already precluded under Article XI of the BIT. As
a general rule, a treaty will take precedence over customary
international law.

One can certainly discuss Article 25 on the assumption (implicit or
explicit) that Article XI does not lead to preclusion. If it is concluded
(as in this case) that a justification for wrongfulness is not available
under Article 25, the Tribunal would need to go back to Article XI in

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/4); Decision on Annulment of 22 December 1989, para 5.04.

50

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.

ARB/71/1), Decision on Annulment of 16 May 1986 (Amco I).

sl

Para 132 of the CMS Decision on Annulment.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

order to decide whether the assumption under which the Article 25
inquiry was pursued is valid in the circumstances. In this case,
however, the Tribunal did not do that.

178. Argentina has argued that the Tribunal made “manifest errors of law” in
respect of its failure to deal with Article XI of the BIT. This manifest
error of law consisted in equating Article XI of the BIT with Article 25
of the ILC Articles.

 

179. Argentina further contends that the Tribunal committed a serious error
of law by considering the application of Article 27 concerning a
possible duty of compensation of the State before (or indeed without)
reviewing whether responsibility was precluded under Article XI of the
BIT. Additionally, in this respect, the application of Article 27 under
customary international law constituted a manifest error of law. While
admitting that a “mere error of law” is not a ground for annulment
under Article 52(1) of the Convention, Argentina affirms that such error
may be serious enough to reach to the level of a manifest excess of

powers for failure to apply the proper law. ”

The admissibility of Argentina’s arguments

180. In argument before the Committee, Sempra contended that certain of
the arguments advanced by Argentina on the first issue were new, in the
sense that they had not been advanced before the Tribunal, which had
not had an opportunity to consider them. They were therefore
inadmissible in these annulment proceedings.

181. Sempra claims that Argentina presented® only two arguments
concerning (1) the self-judging nature of Article XI, and (2) that the
defence of necessity precluded liability and compensation. Further,
Argentina did not differentiate between the state of necessity under
customary international law, on the one hand, and preclusion under
Article XI, on the other.

 

182. At paragraph 366, having quoted the terms of Article XI, the Tribunal
sets out the arguments of Argentina as follows:

366. The Respondent, relying on the opinion of Dean
Slaughter and Professor Burke-White, asserts that public
order and national security exceptions have to be
interpreted broadly in the context of this Article so as to
include considerations of economic security and political
stability. Moreover, the Respondent’s experts
understand this Article to be self-judging insofar as each
party will be the sole judge of when the situation
requires measures of the kind envisaged by the Article,
subject only to a determination of good faith by tribunals
that might be called upon to settle a dispute on this point
(Foomore omitted] Th the Respondent's view, the gravity of

2 Annulment Memorial, para 426

*3 Sempra’s Counter-Memorial, para 373,

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

the crisis that it faced amply justified resorting to such
measures, which can only be considered as having been
adopted in good faith.

183. Argentina thus raised two issues. The first concerned the scope and
application of Article XI. The second concerned the question whether
Article XI is self-judging. The first issue is logically prior to the
second.

184. The ad hoc Committee finds that, in so far as the arguments of
Argentina can be said to be “new”, they are a permissible development

of Argentina’s arguments on the first issue identified above and are
therefore admissible.

The Tribunal’s findings

185. After setting out in greater detail the arguments of Argentina and of
Sempra, the Tribunal proceeded to set out its own assessment of the
arguments (reproduced here for ease of reference):

373. In weighing this discussion, the Tribunal must first
note that the object and purpose of the Treaty is, as a
general proposition, for it to be applicable in situations
of economic difficulty and hardship that require the
protection of the internationally guaranteed rights of its
beneficiaries. To this extent, any interpretation resulting
in an escape route from the defined obligations cannot
be easily reconciled with that object and purpose.
Accordingly, a restrictive interpretation of any such
alternative is mandatory.

374. The Tribunal considers that there is nothing that
would prevent an interpretation allowing for the
inclusion of economic emergency in the context of

Article XI. Essential security interests can eventually
encompass si

  

uations other than the traditional military
threats for which the institution found its origins in
customary law. However, to conclude that such a
determination is self-judging would definitely be
inconsistent with the object and purpose noted. In fact,

* Tt may be noted that the matter of Article XI was dealt with by Argentina in its Counter-
Memorial in the arbitration (AR39), Section XI in paras 647 ~ 659 (particularly in
paragraph 654). In its Rejoinder (AR5O), Argentina set out its defence under Article XI
and distinguished it from the doctrine of necessity under customary international law
(paras 432 — 635, e.g. para 633), affirming its position that invoking the above-
mentioned article should not be confused with invocation of the state of necessity by
explaining that “[t]hey do not constitute a defence as the state of necessity but an
i ion of the provisions of the applicable BITs”. This disti is also addressed
by paras 376 — 377 of the Award. From the above considerations it is clear — contrary
to Sempra’s allegations — that Argentina distinguished the application of Article XI of
the BIT from the plea of necessity under customary international law.

 

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

the Treaty would be deprived of any substantive
meaning.

375. In addition, in view of the fact that the Treaty does
not define what is to be understood by an “essential
security interest,” the requirements for a state of
necessity under customary international law, as outlined
above in connection with their expression in Article 25
of the Articles on State Responsibility, become relevant
to the matter of establishing whether the necessary
conditions have been met for its invocation under the
Treaty. Different might have been the case if the Treaty
had defined this concept and the conditions for its
exercise, but this was not the case.

376. The Tribunal notes that in the view of Dean
Slaughter and Professor Burke-White, which the
Respondent shares, the CMS award was mistaken in that
it discussed Article XI in connection with necessity
under customary law. This Tribunal believes, however,
that the Treaty provision is inseparable from the
customary law standard insofar as the definition of
necessity and the conditions for its operation are
concerned, given that it is under customary law that such
elements have been defined. Similarly, the Treaty does
not contain a definition concerning either the
maintenance of international peace and security, or the
conditions for its operation. Reference is instead made to
the Charter of the United Nations in Article 6 of the
Protocol to the Treaty.

377. The expert opinion of Dean Slaughter and
Professor Burke-White expresses the view that the treaty
regime is different and separate from customary law as it
is lex specialis. As Professor Burke-White explained at
the hearing, the consequence of this approach is that
while Article XI requires only a good faith
determination, under customary law the whole panoply
of requirements laid down in Article 25 of the Articles
comes into play. Moreover, Professor Burke-White
stated that the U.S. and Argentina had “decided to
accord investors greater protection than they would
receive under customary international law, but
simultaneously to guarantee to states, the States Parties
greater protection to deal with threats to their national
security.”

378. It is no doubt correct to conclude that a treaty
regime specifically dealing with a given matter will
prevail over more general rules of customary law. The
problem here, however, is that the Treaty itself did not
deal with the legal elements necessary for the legitimate
invocation of a state of necessity. The rule governing

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

such questions will thus be found under customary law.
As concluded above, such requirements and conditions
have not been fully met in this case. Moreover, the view
of the Respondents legal expert, as expressed at the
hearing, contradicts the Respondent’s argument that the
Treaty standards are not more favorable than those of
customary law, and at the most should be equated with
the international minimum standard. The Tribunal does
not believe that the intention of the parties can be
described in the terms which the expert has used, as
there is no indication that such was the case. Nor does
the Tribunal believe that because Article XI did not
make an express reference to customary law, this source
of rights and obligations becomes inapplicable.
International law is not a fragmented body of law as far
as basic principles are concerned and necessity is no
doubt one such basic principle.

 

379. As explained by Dean Slaughter, the U.S. position
has been gradually evolving towards support for self-
judging clauses in respect of national security interests,
and some bilateral investment treaties reflect this
change, albeit not all of them. Yet, this does not
necessarily result in the conclusion that such was the
intention of the parties in respect of the Treaty under
consideration. Truly exceptional and extraordinary
clauses, such as a self-judging provision, must be
expressly drafted to reflect that intent, as otherwise there
can well be a presumption that they do not have such
meaning in view of their exceptional nature.

380. In the case of the Treaty, nothing was said in
respect of a self-judging character, and the elements
invoked in support of this view originate for the most
part in U.S. Congressional discussions concerning
broader issues, or in indirect interpretations arising
mainly with respect to the eventual application of model
investment treaties used by the U.S. The Respondent's
post-hearing brief has listed a number of discussions and
statements which relate to the issue of a self-judging
interpretation, but these items are contextual and do not
specifically address the case of the Treaty in question.

 

381. Professor Burke-White also stated at the hearing
that, in his understanding, the letter submitting the
Treaty to the Argentine Congress did not say “anything
about it being self-judging, nor anything about it being
non-self-judging ... this document does not speak to that
issue.” This expert also explained that while he had no
evidence about the internal discussions within the
Argentine Government as to the intent of the Treaty,
there was such evidence in respect of the intent of the
U.S. Government, and that given the “reciprocal nature

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

of the Treaty ... the intent ... would be for a self-judging
interpretation of Article XI.” This is, however, again a
contextual interpretation that does not appear to meet the
stricter requirements of Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties in respect of treaty
interpretation in the light of its context, or the resort to
supplementary means of interpretation.

382. More to the point is a letter sent by an official of
the United States Department of State on September 15,
2006 to a former official asked to testify in the context
of a different arbitration, which the Respondent brought
to the attention of the Tribunal on June 25, 2007. In this
letter, it is stated that “notwithstanding the decision of
the ICJ in the Nicaragua case, the position of the U. S.
Government is that the essential security language in our
FCN treaties and Bilateral Investment Treaties is self-
judging, i.e., only the party itself is competent to
determine what is in its own essential security interests.”

The Respondent is of the view that this confirms the
interpretation given by it of the Treaty in this case. The
Claimant, however, has opposed this understanding on
the argument that the letter refers to an interpretation
supposedly adopted as from 2006 and that in any event it
does not refer to the Treaty with Argentina nor does it
preclude liability or compensation.

383. The discussion noted above concerning the GATT
and the Nicaragua decision, just like the Oil Platforms
case, confirms that the language of a provision has to be
very precise for it to lead to a conclusion about its self-
judging nature. In those decisions, the fact that the
language was not express turned out to be crucial to the
rejection of arguments favoring a self-judging
interpretation. So too, the International Court of Justice
held in the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros case, when referring
to the conditions defined by the International Law
Commission, that “the State concerned is not the sole
judge of whether those conditions have been met.”

384. The Tribunal must also note that not even in the
context of GATT Article XXI is the issue considered to
be settled in favor of a self-judging interpretation, and
the very fact that such article has not been excluded
from dispute settlement is indicative of its non-self-
judging nature.

385. The same holds true of the U. S. Department of
State letter referred to above in that it does not address
any specific treaty, least that with Argentina.
Furthermore, the fact that arbitration is the compulsory
dispute settlement mechanism established in the Treaty

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

in question, like with GATT/WTO, could be rather
indicative of the non-self-judging nature of the essential
security interest clause. Not even if this is the
interpretation given to the clause today by the United
States would this necessarily mean that such an
interpretation governs the Treaty. The view of one State
does not make international law, even less so when such
a view is ascertained only by indirect means of
interpretation or in a rather remote or general way as far
as the very Treaty at issue is concerned. What is relevant
is the intention which both parties had in signing the
Treaty, and this does not confirm the self-judging
interpretation.

  

386. Moreover, even if this interpretation were shared
today by both parties to the Treaty, it still would not
result in a change of its terms. States are of course free
to amend the Treaty by consenting to another text, but
this would not affect rights acquired under the Treaty by
investors or other beneficiaries. In fact, Article XIV of
the Treaty provides that in case of termination, the
investment will continue to be protected under its
provisions “for a further period of ten years.” So too,
with reference to rights protected under the Energy
Charter Treaty, the tribunal in Plama has held that any
denial of advantages to which an investor might have
rights “should not have retrospective effect,” as such a
situation would result in making legitimate expectations
false at a much later date.

387. As an English court has recently held in respect of a
claim of non-justiciability relating to a State challenge to
the OEPC award, the fact that a treaty is concluded
between States cannot allow the derogation of rights that
belong to private parties. In that case, the issue
concerned dispute settlement, and as a consequence the
doctrine of non-justiciability was held not to apply.

388. In the light of this discussion, the Tribunal
concludes that Article XI is not self-judging and that
judicial review is not limited in its respect to an
examination of whether its invocation, or the measures
adopted, were taken in good faith. The judicial control
must be a substantive one, and concerned with whether
the requirements under customary law or the Treaty
have been met and can thereby preclude wrongfulness.
Since the Tribunal has found above that the crisis
invoked does not meet the customary law requirements
of Article 25 of the Articles on State Responsibility, it
concludes that necessity or emergency is not conducive
in this case to the preclusion of wrongfulness, and that
there is no need to undertake a further judicial review

  

    

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

under Article XI given that this Article does not set out
conditions different from customary law in such regard.

389. A judicial determination as to compliance with the
requirements of international law in this matter should
not be understood as suggesting that arbitral tribunals
wish to substitute their views for the functions of
sovereign States. Such a ruling instead simply responds.
to the Tribunal’s duty that, in applying international law,
it cannot fail to give effect to legal commitments that are
binding on the parties, and must interpret the rules
accordingly unless a derogation of those commitments.
has been expressly agreed to.

390. The Tribunal explained above that it would
consider the requirement of Article 25 of the Articles on
State Responsibility, to the effect that the act in question
not seriously impair an essential interest of the State
towards which the obligation exists in the context of the
Treaty obligations. In the light of the discussion above
about changing interpretations, it does not appear that
the Government’s invocation of Article XI or of a state
of necessity generally would be taken by the other party
to mean that such impairment arises.

391. Be that as it may, in the context of investment
treaties there is still the need to take into consideration
the interests of the private entities who are the ultimate
beneficiaries of those obligations, as was explained by
the English court in the OEPC case noted above. The
essential interest of the Claimant would certainly be
seriously impaired by the operation of Article XI or a
state of necessity in this case.

 

DISCUSSION

186.

187.

Investment arbitration under the ICSID regime (or any other type of
arbitration whether institutional or ad hoc) is subject to the consent of
the Parties. The State’s consent to arbitration of investment disputes is
given, in a very large number of cases, in a treaty, while the investor’s
consent is normally included in its request for arbitration. The scope,
extent and conditions that apply to the procedural means of recourse
and substantive protections offered to the investor are exclusively
addressed by the treaty.

Where the treaty permits or excuses conduct adverse to the investor in
specific circumstances enunciated in the treaty, it follows that the terms
of the treaty itself exclude the protection to the investor that the treaty
would otherwise have provided.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194,

[CSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
a

According to Article 31(1) of VCLT, the first point of reference for
interpretation of a BIT provision is the “ordinary meaning” of the
words of the treaty themselves.

In the present case, where the BIT provides the relevant treaty
language, it is necessary first and foremost to apply the provisions of
the BIT. Indeed, the Parties are in agreement that the BIT constitutes
the applicable law.

 

Article 38 of the Statute of the ICJ lists “international conventions” as a
primary source of international law. However, it is not primarily for
this reason that the BIT has pre-eminence in the investor-state context
of arbitration, but because the consent to submit to international dispute
resolution is predicated on the very terms of the BIT.

Against that background, it is necessary to consider the relevant terms
of the BIT and the way in which the Tribunal approached its
application.

Article XI of the BIT provides as follows:

This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either
Party of measures necessary for the maintenance of
public order, the fulfilment of its obligations with
respect to the maintenance or restoration of international
peace or security, or the [p]rotection of its own essential
interests.

 

Article XI does not specify who is to be the judge of whether the
measures taken are “necessary” for one or more of the purposes
specified — in other words, whether the State Party taking the measures
is itself to be the judge of their necessity, in which event the provision
is said to be “self-judging”.

 

The Committee finds that the reasoning of the Tribunal does not
distinguish clearly between the question whether Article XI is self-
judging and the prior question as to its scope and application. Thus, at
the outset in paragraph 374 of the Award, the Tribunal states that “there
is nothing that would prevent an interpretation allowing for the
inclusion of economic emergency in the context of Article XI” and that
“essential security interests can eventually encompass situations other
than the traditional military threats for which the institution found its
origins in customary law”. The Tribunal then goes on directly to say,
“However, to conclude that such a determination is self-judging would
definitely be inconsistent with the object and purpose noted. In fact,
the Treaty would be deprived of any substantive meaning”.

40

195.

196.

197.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

As regards the scope and application of Article XI, the Committee finds
the following passages to be central to the reasoning of the Tribunal:-

(1) in paragraph 376: “This Tribunal believes ... that the Treaty
provision [i.e. Article XI of the BIT] is inseparable from the
customary law standard insofar as the definition of necessity and the
conditions for its operation are concerned, given that it is under
customary law that such elements have been defined.”

(2) in paragraph 378: “It is no doubt correct to conclude that a
treaty regime specifically dealing with a given matter will prevail
over more general rules of customary law. The problem here,
however, is that the Treaty itself did not deal with the legal elements
necessary for the legitimate invocation of a state of necessity. The
tule governing such questions will thus be found under customary
law. As concluded above, such requirements and conditions have
not been fully met in this case. ... Nor does the Tribunal believe that
because Article XI did not make an express reference to customary
law, this source of rights and obligations becomes inapplicable.
International law is not a fragmented body of law as far as basic
principles are concerned and necessity is no doubt one such basic
principle.”

 

6

  

 
 

(3) in paragraph 388: “In the light of this discussion, the Tribunal
concludes that Article XI is not self-judging and that judicial review
is not limited in its respect to an examination of whether its
invocation, or the measures adopted, were taken in good faith. The
judicial control must be a substantive one, and concerned with
whether the requirements under customary law or the Treaty have
been met and can thereby preclude wrongfulness. Since the
Tribunal has found above that the crisis invoked does not meet the
customary law requirements of Article 25 of the Articles on State
Responsibility, it concludes that necessity or emergency is not
conducive in this case to the preclusion of wrongfulness, and that
there is no need to undertake a further judicial review under Article
XI given that this Article does not set out conditions different from
customary law in such regard.”

 

  

In the opinion of the Committee, the reasoning of these passages
compels the conclusion that the Tribunal did not deem itself to be
required — or even entitled — to consider the applicability of Article XI,
both because this provision did not deal with the legal elements
necessary for the legitimate invocation of a state of necessity and
because the Tribunal found that the Argentine economic crisis did not
meet the customary international law requirements as set out in Article
25 of the ILC Articles.

First, as regards paragraph 376, the Committee accepts, of course, that
it may be appropriate to look to customary law as a guide to the
interpretation of terms used in the BIT. It does not follow, however,
that customary law (in casu, Article 25 of the ILC Articles) establishes

41

198.

199.

200.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

a peremptory “definition of necessity and the conditions for its
operation”. While some norms of customary law are peremptory (jus
cogens), others are not, and States may contract otherwise, as the
Tribunal itself recognises in paragraph 378.

Second, Article XI differs in material respects from Article 25, as can
be seen from the following comparison of the texts:

 

Article XI of the BIT

Article 25 of the ILC Articles

 

This Treaty shall not preclude the
application by either Party of
measures necessary for the
maintenance of public order, the
fulfilment of its obligations with
respect to the maintenance or
restoration of international peace or
security, or the protection of its own.
essential security interests.

1. Necessity may not be invoked by a
State as a ground for precluding the
wrongfulness of an act not in
conformity with an international
obligation of that State unless the act:

(a) Is the only way for the State to
safeguard an essential interest
against a grave and imminent
peril; and

(b) Does not seriously impair an
essential interest of the State or
States towards which the obligation
exists, or of the international
community as a whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not
be invoked by a State as a ground
for precluding wrongfulness if:

(a) The international obligation in
question excludes the possibility
of invoking necessity; or

 

(b) the State has contributed to the
situation of necessity.

 

 

 

It is apparent from this comparison that Article 25 does not offer a
guide to interpretation of the terms used in Article XI. The most that
can be said is that certain words or expressions are the same or similar.

More importantly, Article 25 is concerned with the invocation by a
State Party of necessity “as a ground for precluding the wrongfulness of
an act not in conformity with an international obligation of that State”.
Article 25 presupposes that an act has been committed that is
incompatible with the State’s international obligations and is therefore
“wrongful”. Article XI, on the other hand, provides that “This Treaty
shall not preclude” certain measures so that, where Article XI applies,
the taking of such measures is not incompatible with the State’s

42

 

201.

202.

203.

204.

ID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(acs)

international obligations and is not therefore “wrongful”. Article 25
and Article XI therefore deal with quite different situations. Article 25
cannot therefore be assumed to “define necessity and the conditions for
its operation” for the purpose of interpreting Article XI, still less to do
so as a mandatory norm of international law.

Third, as regards paragraph 378, it is unclear what the Tribunal means
by the statement that “the Treaty itself [i.e. the BIT] did not deal with
the legal elements necessary for the legitimate invocation of a state of
necessity. The rule governing such questions will thus be found under
customary law” (emphasis added). Invocation of a state of necessity
under the terms of a bilateral treaty need not necessarily be
“legitimated” by a “rule” of international law. There may be no rule
governing such questions. Still less is it obvious that the rule is to be
found in a provision of customary law dealing with invocation of

a justification for breach of an international obligation.

 

 

 

Fourth, again as regards paragraph 378, even if it be the case that
“international law is not a fragmented body of law as far as basic
principles are concerned”, it does not follow either: (i) that “necessity is
no doubt one such basic principle” in the sense that it must be interpreted
and applied in exactly the same way in all circumstances, or (ii) that
international law will become “fragmented” if States contract otherwise.
While there may be certain norms of international law, including
customary law, which would render it unlawful under international law
for States to agree to adopt a provision inconsistent with those norms,
this is not such a case. Jus cogens does not require parties to a bilateral
investment treaty to forego the possibility of invoking a defence of
necessity in whatever terms they may agree. The terms on which they
agree may be thought to be politically or economically unwise, but this
does not render them unlawful.

 

Fifth, as regards paragraph 388, for the same reasons, the statement that
“judicial control must be ... concerned with whether the requirements
under customary law or the Treaty have been met and can thereby
preclude wrongfulness” begs the question. The prior question is
whether there is wrongfuln As noted above, Article 25 deals with a
situation where a State Party is in breach of a Treaty obligation and
seeks to justify its breach by a plea of necessity. Article 25 sets out the
restrictive conditions in which such a plea may be admitted. Article XI
of the BIT, on the other hand, expressly provides that the BIT “shall not
preclude the application by either Party of measures necessary” for
certain reasons or purposes.

  

It is true that the BIT does not prescribe who is to determine whether
the measures in question are or were “necessary” for the purpose so
invoked — whether, in other words, Article XI is or is not self-judging.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

But if the measures in question are properly judged to be “necessary”,
then there is no breach of any Treaty obligation. In that event, it is not
the case that “judicial control must be ... concerned with whether the
requirements under customary law or the Treaty have been met and can
thereby preclude wrongfulness”.

So the question arises whether the error in law so identified constitutes
an excess of powers. Excess of powers is normally invoked where it is
claimed that the Tribunal has failed to apply the applicable law, and a
line of decisions in ICSID practice confirms that failure to apply the
applicable law may amount to an excess of powers, whereas erroneous
application of the law does not constitute a basis for annulment.

It will therefore be necessary to determine whether the error in question
amounts (i) to a failure to apply the law, in which event the award of
the Tribunal may be annulled, or (ii) to a misapplication of the law, in
which event the award, although to that extent defective, will not be
annulled.

In this case, the Committee finds that the following sentence in
paragraph 388 of the Award demonstrates that the Tribunal failed to
apply the applicable law:

Since the Tribunal has found above that the crisis
invoked does not meet the customary law requirements
of Article 25 of the Articles on State Responsibility, it
concludes that necessity or emergency is not conducive
in this case to the preclusion of wrongfulness, and that
there is no need to undertake a further judicial review
under Article XI given that this Article does not set out
conditions different from customary law in such regard.

 

The Tribunal has held, in effect, that the substantive criteria of Article
XI simply cannot find application where rules of customary
international law — as enunciated in the ILC Articles - do not lead to
exoneration in case of wrongfulness, and that Article 25 “trumps”
Article XI in providing the mandatory legal norm to be applied. Thus,
the Tribunal adopted Article 25 of the ILC Articles as the primary law
to be applied, rather than Article XI of the BIT, and in so doing made a
fundamental error in identifying and applying the applicable law.

 

The Committee is therefore driven to the conclusion that the Tribunal
has failed to conduct its review on the basis that the applicable legal
norm is to be found in Article XI of the BIT, and that this failure
constitutes an excess of powers within the meaning of the ICSID

  

Convention.

* See above, paras 173 - 174

44

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

210. It remains to be considered whether the excess of powers so found is
“manifest”.

The excess of powers must be “manifest”

211. In order for excess of powers to require annulment of an Award, the
excess must be “manifest”. In order to ensure that this qualification is
satisfied, it should be noted, as a first step, that it is necessary to
observe the basic requirement of the VCLT to seek the “ordinary
meaning” of the relevant term. In a literal sense “manifest” is
something which is “plain”, “clear”, “obvious”, “evident” i.e. easily
understood or recognized by the mind.°°

212. It would appear that ad hoc committees have applied either a two step
approach determining first whether there is an excess of powers and, if
so, whether that excess was manifest, or an approach starting from a
prima facie assessment of the presence of any manifest excess and, if
the finding is negative, stop the examination there. The Committee
favours the two-step approach, as excess of powers is a sine qua non
for the need to gauge the manifestness of the excess, and allows a more
cogent analysis of what constitutes a breach, on one hand, and, on the
other, what makes it manifest.

 

213. Whether an excess of power satisfies the qualitative criterion of being
manifest has been the object of scrutiny in a large number of deci:
All of these decisions have, in different language, expressed the opinion
that in order for an excess of powers to be manifest, it must be quite
evident without the need to engage in an elaborate analysis of the text
of the Award.”

 

ions.

 

8° Schreuer, ICSID Commentary (2009), page 938 (para 135)

57 The following examples of ad hoc committees which have grappled with the concept of
the qualifying criterion of “manifest” in the context of a manifest excess of powers may
be recalled in this relation.

“The ad hoc Committee considers that the term “manifest” is a strong and emphatic
term referring to obviousness. In its dictionary meaning, “manifest” is substantially
equivalent to “clear”, “plain”, “obvious”, “evident”:

“what is clear can be seen readily;

what is obvious lies directly in our way, and necessarily arrests our attention;

what is evident so clearly as to remove doubt;

what is manifest is very distinctly evident” (Soufraki v. UAE, para 39).

“The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of elaborate
interpretations one way or the other. When the latter happens, the excess of power is no
longer manifest.” (Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002, para 25).

“... even if a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain on its face for

annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if
susceptible of argument ‘one way or the other’, is not manifest” (CDC Group ple v.

45

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

For reasons dealt with above, the Committee has concluded that the
Tribunal engaged in an excess of powers by its total failure to apply
Article XI of the BIT.

Proceeding to the qualitative criterion of “manifest”, the Committee
takes the following considerations into account.

In paragraph 378 of the Award, the Tribunal opines that because the
BIT did not deal with the legal elements necessary for the legitimate
invocation of a state of necessity, the rule governing such questions will
thus be found under customary law. This implies that, according to the

 

Tribunal’s reasoning, where the rules of customary law do not
legitimate treaty application, the treaty provision cannot be applied.
This conclusion is reinforced by the following sentence in the Award,
which explains that “such requirements and conditions have not been
fully met in this case”.

In other words, the fact that customary international law, as enunciated
by the ILC Articles, does not confer exoneration from wrongfulness
was held by the Tribunal to imply that it need not take the inquiry any
further. This is further confirmed in the Tribunal’s conclusion that for
the reasons just mentioned “there is no need to undertake a further
judicial review under Article XI"**

 

On the basis of the above, the Committee considers that it is obvious
from a simple reading of the reasons of the Tribunal that it did not
identify or apply Article XI of the BIT as the applicable law, and that it
failed to do so on the assumption that the language of this provision
was somehow not legitimated by the dictates of customary international
law.

The excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal is therefore manifest.

Articles II(2) (a) and X of the BIT

220.

For the sake of completeness, the Committee wishes to address the
argument of Sempra relating to Articles II(2)(a) and X of the BIT.
Sempra relies on these provisions of the BIT in support of the
proposition that the BIT cannot be seen as other than an integral part of

 

Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, 29 June
2005, para 41).

° Award, para 388

46

221.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

the international law regime, the Committee wishes to make the
following observations.

There is nothing in the materials, and particularly not in the Award, that
indicates that the significance, if any, of Articles II (MFN Treatment
and a national treatment) and Article X (non-derogation) have been
argued by the Parties or discussed by the Tribunal in the context of the
arbitral proceedings. This is, however, not determinative of the issue.
In the present annulment proceeding, the Committee has no reason to
discuss whether these provisions could have had a role to play in the
application of Article XI (since this provision of the BIT, according to
the Committee’s finding, was not applied at all). For that reason,
Articles II and X simply do not enter into the considerations that the ad
hoc Committee needs to take into account in order to reach this
conclusion. The reason for annulment is that Article XI was not
applied, not that it was applied in any particular way, whether affected
or not by the Articles IT and X of the BIT.

 

Exercise of a discretionary right to annul?

222.

The effect of the Tribunal’s treatment of necessity as a matter solely of
customary international law is that Argentina has effectively been
deprived of its procedurally assured entitlement to have its right of
preclusion laid down in Article XI of the BIT — the applicable law in
this respect — subjected to legal scrutiny. For this reason, as annulment
may be a matter of discretion, the Committee has concluded that, in this
case, the Award must be annulled.

CONCLUSION

223.

COSTS

224.

225.

Summarising the Committee’s discussion above, it arrives at the
conclusion that the Award of 28 September 2007 in ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16 shall be annulled on the ground of manifest excess of
powers.

According to Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, a Tribunal shall
(absent party agreement) decide how and by whom fees and expenses
of the members of the Tribunal and the charges and fees of the Centre
shall be paid, such decision forming part of the Award. Article 52(4)
extends the application of this provision to annulment proceedings.

Neither the Convention nor its Rules and Regulations give any
guidelines as to the application of this provision. The principal
alternatives are (1) the application of the rule that the costs follow the
event (“loser pays’) or (2) equal sharing of costs.

47

226.

227.

228.

Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

It is fair to say that a majority of ad hoc committees have opted for the
latter principle, although a recent tendency towards the former principle
may be noted.

This ad hoc Committee considers that it is in line with equitable
principles to let the rule that the costs-follow-the-event apply to those
costs of the annulment proceeding that have been incurred by the
Centre, i.e. in respect of the fees and expenses of the members of the ad
hoc Committee and the charges, fees, and out-of-pocket expenses
incurred by the Centre.

For this reason, Sempra shall be ordered to reimburse Argentina the
total amount of the costs of the Centre — as finally determined — to the
extent that these have been advanced by Argentina, with each Party
bearing the expenses for its own representation and its related party
costs.

DECISION

229.

In consideration of the foregoing, the Committee unanimously decides
to:

Annul the Award of 28 September 2007 on the ground of manifest
excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention) owing to the
failure of the Arbitral Tribunal to apply Article XI of the BIT between
the United States and the Argentine Republic concerning Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment of 14 November 1991:
such annulment applies necessarily to the Award in its entirety,
pursuant to Article 52(3) of the Convention.

Order Sempra to reimburse to the Argentine Republic all of the
expenses incurred by the Centre in connection with the Annulment
proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the arbitrators.

Aolololoiiekaleiciok

48

Sempra Energy Intemational. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/02/16)
Decision on Annulment

 

Mr. Chifister Séderlund
President of the ad hoc Committee
Date: to \yvE 2010

9.4.0, frond AG jecoutle

Sir David A.O. Edway, Ambassador Andreas J. Jacovides
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: 2 juw£ 2olo Date: 24 WAY 29/0

