IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE 1976 RULES OF THE UNITED
NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

SERGEI VIKTOROVICH PUGACHEV

Claimant

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Respondent

 

INTERIM AWARD

 

Tribunal

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo (Presiding Arbitrator)
Prof. Thomas Clay
Prof. Bernardo Cremades

Secretary

Mr. Rafael Rincén

Place of arbitration: Madrid, Kingdom of Spain

7 July 2017

Interim Award

 

 

7 July 2017
Page | of 92
Table of Contents
I. Introd 2
II. Procedural background 4
III. The Parties’ i 9

 

A. Summary of the positions of the Parties concerning Claimant’s Request for Interim

 

 

 

 

 

 

Measures 9
a) Claimants position 9
b) Respondent’s position 21

B. Summary of the positions of the Parties concerning Respondent’s Security for Costs

Applicati 30
a) Respondent’s position 30
b) Claimant’s position 33

C. Summary of the positions of the Parties concerning the alleged breach of confidentiality
provisions in PO1, the Order issued on 9 November 2016 and the 26 May 2017 Order..........

 

 

 

a) Claimant's position. 36
b) Respondent’s position 40
IV. The Tribunal’s Analysis. 43

 

A. Interim measures related to civil proceedings 44
a) Claimant failed to demonstrate that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to decide on the
requested interim measures
b) Claimant did not sufficiently prove necessity ...

B. Interim measures related to criminal proceedings and requests for international

cooperation, including international arrest warrants, extradition requests and mutual legal

i r sts 55
a) Claimant’s request to order Respondent to suspend, and abstain from initiating, criminal
proceedings and international cooperation requests against himself, his family and individuals
related to him 58
b) Claimant’s request to order Russia to suspend the France Extradition Request satisfies all
requirements for granting interim

C. Interim measures related to the protection of witnesses....
a) Claimant’s request is it iated
b) Claimant’s request is unprecise

D. Interim measures related to the protection of Mr. Pugachev and other individuals
a) Claimant’s request is it iated
b) Claimant’s request is unprecise

E. Security for costs applications from the Parties...

This Tribunal’s power to consider and grant security for costs

The legal standard to grant security for cost: .

Respondent’s Security for Costs Application does not meet the applicable legal standard

Claimant’s Security for Costs Application does not meet the applicable legal standard...... 83

F. Respondent’s Application for Disclosure | of Third Party Funders

G. Claimant’s Security for Claims Appli

H. The alleged breach of confidentiality provisions of PO1, the Order issued on 9 November

2016 and the 26 May 2017 Order. 87

V. The Tribunal’s Decision 90

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
  
  

 

 

 

Interim Award

7 July 2017
Page 2 of 92
L INTRODUCTION
1. Mr. Sergei Viktorovich Pugachev (the “Claimant”) is pursuing this arbitration against the

Russian Federation (the “Respondent” or “Russia”) for alleged breaches of the Agreement
Between the Government of the Republic of France and the Government of the United
Socialist Republics on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments (the
“France-Russia BIT” or the “Treaty”).

2. Both Parties have submitted multiple applications and cross-applications before this
Tribunal. In this regard, the Tribunal must decide on:

(i) Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures dated as of 19 December 2016 (the
“Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures” or the “Request for Interim Measures”),
including Claimant’s Security for Costs Application and Claimant’s Security for Claims
Application (as defined below);

(ii) Respondent’s Security for Costs Application dated as of 10 February 2017 (the
“Respondent’s Security for Costs Application”), including a request for disclosure of
third party funders; and

(iii) Applications and cross-applications by both Parties on questions of confidentiality
and alleged breaches of Procedural Order No. | (“PO1”).

3. Claimant requested this Tribunal to grant Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures in the
form of an Interim Award.' Respondent, in turn, requested the Tribunal to grant additional
relief for Claimant’s alleged breaches of PO1 in the form of a Partial Award.” Respondent
considered that such relief may be deemed a request for interim measures in this arbitration.*

4. The Tribunal has carefully reviewed and considered the multiple applications and cross-
applications submitted by the Parties. In this regard, the Tribunal observes that the alleged
breaches of the confidentiality provisions of PO1 and the request for additional relief sought
by Respondent are linked to several issues that must be resolved in the context of Claimant’s
Request for Interim Measures and Respondent’s Security for Costs Application. The
Tribunal notes that all these matters, as pleaded by the Parties, are inextricably linked to the
question of preserving the integrity and efficiency of this arbitration.

5. Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that the Parties have consistently argued during this
arbitration on questions pertaining to alleged breaches of POI and other orders issued by
the Tribunal. Accordingly, and pursuant to the terms of Article 26.2 of the 1976 Arbitration

' Request for Interim Measures, {f 343-346.
2 Respondent’s Letter dated 8 March 2017, {| 53-62.
> Respondent’s Letter dated 8 March 2017, § 60.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 3 of 92

Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (the “UNCITRAL
Rules” or the “1976 UNCITRAL Rules”), the Tribunal deems it necessary to decide in the
form of an Interim Award all the matters addressed in para. 2 above and to issue certain
measures to preserve the integrity and efficiency of this arbitration.

For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal:

a Orders Respondent to take all actions necessary to suspend the France Extradition
Request (as defined below);

(ii) Denies all other claims and requests made by Claimant in the Request for Interim
Measures;

(iii) Denies all claims and requests made in Respondent’s Security for Costs Application;
(iv) Denies Respondent’s additional relief requested in the letter dated 8 March 2017;

(v) Orders each Party and their respective counsel to refrain from commenting or
making any public statement to any third party (including reporters, news organizations or
media networks) on any matter or fact regarding this arbitration, including any matter
addressed in the Available Documents (as defined below), without prior leave from the
Tribunal;

(vi) | Orders each Party and their respective counsel to abstain from publishing or
disclosing any Confidential Information (as defined below) regarding this arbitration
without prior leave from the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Parties are only allowed to publish
or disclose the Available Documents (as defined below) in strict accordance with the terms
set forth in PO2 (as defined below) or any amendment thereto by the Tribunal;

(vii) | Orders Claimant to refrain from posting or publishing, without prior leave from the
Tribunal, any information concerning this arbitration other than the Available Documents
(as defined below), on the website www.pugachevsergei.com, or on any other website or
digital platform;

(viii) Orders Claimant to provide a statement to this Tribunal on or before 17 July 2017
accepting and acknowledging that any post or publication concerning this arbitration, other
than the Available Documents (as defined below), have been removed from the website
www.pugachevsergei.com; and

(ix) Reserves the question of costs associated with the Request for Interim Measures,
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application and all applications and cross-applications
concerning confidentiality to a future stage.

IL.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 4 of 92

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND.

Claimant served a Notice of Arbitration dated 21 September 2015 (the “Notice of
Arbitration”) on Respondent pursuant to Article 7 of the Treaty and the 1976 UNCITRAL
Rules.

Pursuant to Article 3(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules, and as confirmed in para. 2.3 of the
Terms of Appointment dated | March 2017 (the “TOA”), these arbitration proceedings are
deemed to have commenced on 22 September 2015, the date on which the Respondent
received the Notice of Arbitration.

By letter dated 17 June 2016 (received by Respondent on 21 June 2016), Claimant appointed
Professor Thomas Clay, a French national, as the first arbitrator pursuant to Article 7(1) of
the UNCITRAL Rules.

In the letter dated 17 June 2016, Claimant proposed that the Secretary General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (the “PCA”) act as appointing authority in this arbitration.
By letters dated 9 and 10 August 2016, Respondent agreed to the PCA Secretary General
acting as appointing authority in this arbitration.

On 19 August 2016, the Secretary General of the PCA appointed Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades,
a Spanish national, as the second arbitrator pursuant to Article 7(2)(b) of the UNCITRAL
Rules.

On 31 October 2016, the Secretary General of the PCA appointed Dr. Eduardo Zuleta
Jaramillo as the presiding arbitrator pursuant to Article 7(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, as
modified by agreement of the Parties.

On 9 November 2016, the Tribunal ordered the Parties to refrain from making public
statements or disclosing any information related to this arbitration during their discussions
on procedural matters, including the applicable confidentiality rules.

On 19 December 2016, Claimant submitted the Request for Interim Measures. As part of
its Request for Interim Measures, the Claimant sought a Preliminary Order (the “First
Preliminary Application”).

On 27 December 2016, Respondent submitted its Response to Claimant’s First Preliminary
Application (the “Response to the First Preliminary Application”).

On 4 January 2017, the Tribunal issued its Decision on the First Preliminary Application
(the “First Preliminary Application Decision”), rejecting Claimant’s request.

On 8 January 2017, Claimant submitted a Second Application for a Preliminary Order (the
“Second Preliminary Application”).

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 5 of 92

On 10 January 2017, Respondent replied to the Second Preliminary Application (the
“Response_to_the Second Preliminary Application”). Respondent submitted further
information regarding the Second Preliminary Application in a letter dated 12 January 2017,
to which Claimant replied on 14 January 2017.

On 20 January 2017, the Tribunal issued its Decision on the Second Preliminary Application
(the “Second Preliminary Application Decision”) rejecting (i) Claimant’s Second
Preliminary Application, and (ii) Claimant’s request for the Tribunal to revisit its Decision
on the First Preliminary Application issued on 4 January 2017.

On 10 February 2017, Respondent filed its Response to the Request for Interim Measures
opposing it (the “Response to Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures” or “Response
to Request for Interim Measures”).

On the same date, it was submitted to the Tribunal the Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application.

On | March 2017, the Tribunal issued the TOA. Pursuant to para. 6.1 of the TOA, the place
of the arbitration is Madrid, Spain.

On 1 March 2017, the Tribunal issued PO1. As per the Tribunal’s order dated 9 November
2017, Article 10.5 of POI provides that the Parties shall refrain from making any public
statements or disclosures that undermine the integrity and efficiency of this arbitration,
including the disclosure of any confidential material submitted by either Party in the
framework of this arbitral proceeding.

By letter dated 3 March 2017, Claimant raised to the attention of the Tribunal that
Respondent had allegedly breached the confidentiality provisions contained in Article 10 of
the PO1 by publishing a press release on the website of the Russian Federation’s Public
Prosecutor related to the arbitration proceedings.

On the same date, Respondent informed the Tribunal of a series of public statements, press
releases and interviews made by Claimant related to the arbitration, allegedly in breach of
the Tribunal’s order of 9 November 2017 and PO1.

By email dated 3 March 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to comment on each other’s
letter sent on that same date.

On 8 March 2017, Claimant responded to Respondent’s letter dated 3 March 2017 opposing
it and requesting the Tribunal to order Respondent to refrain from making future
communications that undermine the efficiency and integrity of this arbitration.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 6 of 92

On the same date, Respondent commented on Claimant’s letter dated 3 March 2017
opposing it and seeking an additional relief by way of a Partial Award.

On 10 March 2017, Claimant submitted its Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application (the “Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application”).

On 13 March 2017, Claimant brought to the attention of the Tribunal a letter received on 8
March 2017 from Hogan Lovells London on behalf of the Deposit Insurance Agency (the
“DIA”). Claimant alleged that this letter requested Claimant’s counsel to disclose
information covered by the attorney-client privilege.

On 16 March 2017, the Respondent responded to Claimant’s 13 March 2017 letter and
requested the Tribunal to reject all of Claimant’s requests.

On 17 March 2017, the Tribunal recalled that the place of the arbitration is Madrid, Spain,
but that, pursuant to Section 6.2 of the TOA and Section 1.1 of PO1, the hearings may be
held in other locations. The Tribunal considered all arguments put forward by the Parties,
particularly in the submissions of 3 March 2017 and 8 March 2017, and decided to hold a
hearing on 17 April 2017 in Paris, France exclusively devoted to Claimant’s Request for
Interim Measures (the “Hearing”), and to reserve 18 April 2017 if needed. The Tribunal
established that this decision is only applicable for the Hearing and shall not be construed
in any way as a ruling on the location of any future hearing in this arbitration, or as a
judgment on the merits of any of the applications put forward by the Parties in their
submissions.

On 17 April 2017, the Hearing was held in the ICC Hearing Centre 112, avenue Kléber
75016 in Paris, France. The following persons participated in the Hearing:

Tribunal

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo — Presiding - Mr. Rafael Rincén — Secretary to the Tribunal
Arbitrator
Professor Thomas Clay — Arbitrator
Professor Bernardo Cremades — Arbitrator

Claimant Respondent
Julien Fouret, Betto Seraglini law firm - David Goldberg, White & Case
Gaélle Le Quillec, Betto Seraglini law firm - Thomas Vail, White & Case

Elsa Nicolet, Betto Seraglini law firm - Stephanie Stocker, White & Case

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

Interim Award

7 July 2017
Page 7 of 92
Yasmina Najem, Betto Seraglini law firm - Oleg Todua, White & Case
Valeriya Tsekhanska, Betto Seraglini law firm -  Hadia Hakin, White & Case
Natalia Dozortseva, Legal Consultant. - Mikhail Vinogradov, Director, Department of
International Law and Cooperation, Ministry of
Anne-Jessica Fauré, De Baecque Fauré Bellec Justice of the Russian Federation.
Law Firm

Marie Roumiantseva, Roumiantseva Law Firm

During the Hearing, the Tribunal recalled that the Parties were bound by the confidentiality
obligations provided for under POI and, accordingly, they could not hold press conferences,
issue statements to the press or the likes related to this arbitration.’

Furthermore, the Tribunal closed the proceedings pertaining to Claimant’s Request for
Interim Measures, Respondent’s Security for Costs, applications on confidentiality and any
other interim measure. In this regard, the Tribunal noted that it would only receive
additional submissions from the Parties “with prior leave” from the Tribunal in the event
something new and urgent arose.>

On 20 April 2017, Respondent submitted an application alleging further breaches by
Claimant of PO1 and the orders made by the Tribunal during the Hearing. On 24 April 2017,
Claimant submitted its comments to Respondent’s application.

On 29 April 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to provide additional comments and
information concerning the alleged breaches of POI. As requested by the Tribunal,
Respondent submitted its comments on 4 May 2017 and Claimant responded on 9 May
2017.

On 26 May 2017, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties whereby (i) it ordered specific
measures in order to preserve the integrity and efficiency of the arbitration, and (ii) it
submitted a proposal to the Parties to balance confidentiality and transparency concerns in
this arbitration (the “26 May 2017 Order”). The Tribunal invited the Parties to submit joint
or separate comments to the proposal on or before 5 June 2017.

On 6 June 2017, Respondent submitted its comments to the proposal put forward by the
Tribunal and alleged that Claimant breached the specific orders made in the 26 May 2017
Order. Accordingly, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to take such steps as it considers
necessary to ensure the Claimant’s compliance with its orders, including in particular the
26 May 2017 Order. In addition, Respondent expressed the view that, until the Claimant
indicates willingness to comply with the Tribunal’s orders in this arbitration, it should not

+ Hearing, Tr., 3:23-25.
5 Hearing, Tr., 135:17-23.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 8 of 92

be required to incur further time and expense in defending itself, including in relation to
agreeing logistics for the publications of documents relating to the arbitration.

On 9 June 2017, Claimant responded to Respondent’s letter dated 6 June 2017. Claimant
stated that he has complied with the 26 May 2017 Order and removed 103 pages from his
website that contained publications concerning this arbitration. Claimant argued that
Respondent failed to point out to any article, post or any publication, for the simple reason
that Claimant removed from his website all articles and publications as per Tribunal’s
direction. Claimant urged this Tribunal to (i) acknowledge that Claimant has complied with
the 26 May 2017 Order; (ii) order full transparency, in exchange for its extremely strict
confidentiality provision; and (iii) decide on the body that should be designated to
administer the website in order to avoid further obstructive attitude from Respondent in that
respect.

On 12 June 2017, Respondent submitted a letter to the Tribunal alleging Claimant’s further
breaches of the 26 May 2017 Order. Respondent maintained that, in breach of the 26 May
2017 Order: (i) as of 2 June 2017 multiple publications and documents in respect of the
arbitration had not been removed from Claimant’s website; (ii) it was only after the
Respondent’s letter dated 6 June 2017 that Claimant started to remove such materials; and
(iii) that, as of 12 June 2017, a number of further such materials remains on Claimant’s
website. Respondent repeated its request made in its letter dated 6 June 2017, i.e. that the
Tribunal take whatever measures it deems necessary to ensure the Claimant’s compliance
with its orders.

On 12 June 2017, the Tribunal, after carefully reviewing the multiple applications and cross-
applications submitted by the Parties related to breaches of the confidentiality orders and
the additional relief sought, informed the Parties that such matters addressed several issues
that needed to be resolved in the context of the Request for Interim Measures and
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application. However, the Tribunal noted, despite the fact
that the proceedings were closed during the Hearing, the Parties continued submitting
additional applications and cross-applications on these matters, the last one filed on 12 June
2017. Hence, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it would not issue an Interim Award by
17 June 2017 but during the last days of June or first days of July.

On 13 June 2017, the Tribunal requested the Parties to submit any objection on or before
14 June 2017 to the Tribunal’s understanding of the procedural timetable and the resulting
dates of issuance of the Interim Award. Neither Party submitted any objection to this effect.

Accordingly, the Tribunal issues the following Interim Award within the agreed term limits
agreed on by the Parties.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 9 of 92

Ill. | THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

45. The Tribunal summarizes below the arguments and positions of the Parties concerning (i)
Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures; (ii) the Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application and (iii) the alleged breaches of confidentiality provisions in POI, the
Tribunal’s order dated 9 November 2016, and the 26 May 2017 Order. The Tribunal has
taken into consideration all the arguments and evidence submitted by the Parties, including
their presentations during the Hearing. The fact that an argument or a specific piece of
evidence is not mentioned in the summary does not mean that the Tribunal has not
considered it.

A. Summary of the positions of the Parties concerning Claimant’s Request for Interim
Measures

a) Claimant’s position
46. Claimant requests the Tribunal to issue the following interim measures:

[1] Measures related to civil proceedings which aimed at ensuring that
Russia will not aggravate the dispute [...]

i Order Russia to suspend the pending proceedings for the
enforcement of the unlawful Subsidiary Liability Judgment, the UK
Default Judgment and the proceedings for the taking of interim
measures in the same context, as well as to release the interim
measures taken in this respect®.[...]

ii. Order Russia to abstain from initiating any attachment, exequatur
or enforcement proceedings against Mr Pugachev or any of his
assets during the arbitration proceedings.

[2.] Measures related to criminal proceedings which aimed at ensuring that
Russia will not prevent Mr Pugachey from participating and presenting

his case in this arbitration

i Order Russia to suspend the criminal prosecution against Mr
Pugachev, and against members of his family and individuals
related to him, in Russia and Switzerland pending these arbitration
proceedings;

ii. Order Russia to suspend any existing requests for international
cooperation in the context of such criminal proceedings, such as
extradition requests, international arrest warrants, requests for

6 In its Request for Interim Measures, Claimant further details the specific orders that he requests from the Tribunal
related to proceedings, interim judicial orders injunctions and other measures initiated or taken by Respondent in
the UK, France, Luxembourg, and the Cayman Islands. See Request for Interim Measures, | 347(2)(i).

Interim Award

7 July 2017
Page 10 of 92

BJ

[4]

iii.

mutual legal assistance, pending these arbitration proceedings;
and

Order Russia to abstain from initiating any criminal prosecution
against Mr Pugachev, and against members of his family and
individuals related to him, and requesting measures of
international cooperation in that context during these arbitration
proceedings.

Measures related to the protection of witnesses [...]

Order Russia to take all measures required to ensure that
individuals who Mr Pugachev would need to call as witnesses in
the present arbitration proceedings will be able to testify. This
relates notably to Mr Ulyukaev and Mr Amunts, whose testimony
Mr Pugachey will seek in the present arbitration proceedings and
to any other witness already or later identified by Claimant as such;

Order Russia to stay any criminal proceedings against potential
witnesses, notably Mr Ulyukaev and Mr Amunts.

Measures related to the safety of Mr Pugachey and other individuals
which aim at ensuring that Russia will not prevent Mr Pugachey from
Participating and presenting his case in the present arbitration

 

GJ

Order Russia to abstain from taking any action which is aimed at
intimidating Mr Pugachev and the members of his family;

Order Russia to abstain from taking any action that could
intimidate advisors, counsel and experts for Mr Pugachev in the
present proceedings, and more generally any person who assists
Mr Pugachev in the preparation of his claim in arbitration.

Measures aiming at ensuring enforcement of a future award in the
present proceedings

Order Russia alternatively, and at the discretion of the Tribunal,
as a security for claim:

+ To put in an escrow account, held by the Tribunal, the amount
of USD 6 billion [...] as security for his claim in the
arbitration; or

+ To issue a letter of comfort indicating that it would abide by
its international obligations deriving from the provisions of
the BIT notably, but not exclusively, respect any international
award rendered in the present arbitration by the Arbitral
Tribunal including the pecuniary or non-pecuniary
obligations contained therein.

Order Russia to post euro 10 million, as security for the costs in
the present arbitration, to be also held in escrow. Such order

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 11 of 92

should be accompanied by a penalty of USD 100 000 for each day
until Russia has complied with its obligation.’

Claimant substantiates the requested interim measures on the reasoning summarized below.
J. Overview of the facts giving rise to the Request for Interim Measures

Claimant asserts that he was approached by President Putin and forced to sale his interest
in two major shipyards in Russia (i.e., Northern Shipyard and the Baltic Shipyard) under
the threat of expropriation. The Central Bank of Russia (the “Central Bank”) was
designated by President Putin to acquire the interests in the shipyards. The price was
ultimately set in approximately USD 5 billion.®

Claimant argues that the Central Bank proposed a mechanism of pledges to acquire the
interests in the shipyards and included in the transaction the CJSC International Industrial
Bank (the “IIB”). As part of this mechanism, the Central Bank required IIB to assign its
unsecured loans with the Central Bank to Mr. Pugachev and his companies. Moreover, Mr.
Pugachev would be paid the difference between the purchase price agreed by him and the
Russian Government (i.e. USD 5 billion) and IIB’s debt to the Central Bank (i.e.,
approximately USD 4 billion), that is, approximately USD 1 billion. Furthermore, when the
Central Bank signalled that it was ready to pay, the IIB had to notify the Central Bank that
it would default on its loans to monetize the pledges over the interest in the shipyard. The
Central Bank would then enforce the pledges, taking the shares in the shipyards and paying
Mr. Pugachev.”

IIB proceeded to restructure its unsecured loans and concluded a special restructuring
agreement between the IIB and the Central Bank. Mr. Pugachev then pledged the interest
in the shipyards in favour of the Central Bank as security for the payments due under the
restructuring agreement.'°

After IIB defaulted, as planned, the Central Bank revoked IIB banking license. IIB was
declared bankrupt by a Russian court and the DIA was appointed as receiver of IIB.
Claimant alleges that his interest in the shipyards were transferred to United Shipbuilding
Corporation (the “USC”), a company controlled by the Russian government.'!

Claimant states that to justify the revocation of IIB’s license, the DIA initiated “abusive and
irregular” civil proceedings against Mr. Pugachev and other CEOs of IIB. In April 2015,
the Commercial Court of the Moscow District found Mr. Pugachev liable for RUB

7 Request for Interim Measures, {| 347.
* Thid., W 133-137.

° Tbid., Wf 138-141.

 Thid., W 142-143.

4 [bid., 4 149.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

” Tbid.,
!3 Ibid.,
\4 Ibid.,
'5 Tbid.,
16 Tbid.,

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 12 of 92

75,642,466,311.39 (approximately, USD 1.3 billion) (the “Subsidiary Liability
Judgement”).'?

Claimant alleges that the Subsidiary Liability Judgement is tainted by irregularities, among
others: (i) Mr. Pugachev did not own or control IIB, given that he had divested IIB and
resigned his position as Chairman of the board before the bankruptcy proceedings; (ii) the
improper constitution of a one-judge court, given that the Ninth Commercial Court of
Appeal ruled that all decisions taken by one judge are illegal; (iii) the decision is based
almost exclusively on witness statements given in parallel criminal proceedings that Russia
initiated “opportunistically”, including false testimonies provided by Mr. Didenko, who was
imprisoned and under duress at the time of his testimony; and (iv) Claimant’s challenges
against the Subsidiary Liability Judgment were improperly denied.!°

2. This Tribunal has wide powers to order any appropriate interim measures

Claimant affirms that, pursuant to Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules, this Tribunal has
extensive powers to order “any interim measures it deems necessary in respect of the
subject-matter of the dispute.” Claimant further argues, citing as an example Chevron v.
Ecuador, that arbitral tribunals have the power to order any interim measure to preserve the
status quo and to prevent an aggravation of the dispute until the final award is rendered.'*

Against this background, Claimant explains that this Tribunal may suspend civil and
criminal proceedings to preserve a party’s right to have its dispute decided by an
international tribunal. To illustrate this point, Claimant notes that the tribunals in Quiborax
v. Bolivia and Hyrdo v. Albania ordered the suspension of criminal proceedings because
they impaired the Claimant’s rights in the arbitration. '° Claimant also refers to other
international arbitration cases that according to Claimant demonstrate that tribunals have
regularly granted interim measures to prevent enforcement proceedings before domestic
courts.

Claimant further affirms that this Tribunal has the power to prevent the enforcement of a
judgment already issued and to prevent the enforceability of decisions that would be issued
in the future.'®

Additionally, Claimant asserts that this Tribunal has the power to protect witnesses or other
persons engaged in the arbitration to ensure that they would not be subject to coercive
actions against them. Claimant explains, citing Chevron v. Ecuador, that tribunals may

q 158.

4 166.

qu 33-38.
qu 49-51.
462.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 13 of 92

order States to facilitate and not to discourage claimant’s engagement of legal experts,
advisors, and representatives for the arbitration. !”

Claimant also argues that security for costs and security for claims fall within the inherent
powers of the tribunal to adopt measures safeguarding the enforcement of the award. In the
case of security for costs, Claimant notes that UNCITRAL tribunals have recognized the
power of tribunals to grant such measures. Moreover, Claimant states that there is nothing
that prevents a Tribunal from granting security for costs to a claimant. In the case of security
for claims, Claimant argues that, pursuant to Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules, security
for claims is a measure available to the Tribunal for the “conservation of the goods forming
the subject-matter in dispute.”'*

3. The Applicable Requirements for Granting Interim Measures

Claimant, citing Paushok v. Mongolia, identifies five requirements that must be met before
a tribunal grants an order on interim measures, namely: (i) prima facie jurisdiction; (ii)
prima facie establishment of the case; (iii) urgency; (iv) imminent danger of serious
prejudice (i.e., necessity); and (v) proportionality.”

  

Regarding prima facie jurisdiction, Claimant notes that the Tribunal must engage in a
limited review to ensure that the requesting party provides sufficient evidence for the
tribunal to retain provisional jurisdiction. Thus, fulfilling this requirement does not entail
prejudging the question of jurisdiction.”

With respect to prima facie establishment of the merits, the Tribunal must not prejudge the
merits, but simply establish whether a reasonable case has been made which, if the facts
alleged are proven, might possibly lead the tribunal to render an award in favour of Claimant.
Therefore, Claimant argues that this Tribunal should undertake the prima facie analysis
based on the documentary evidence provided with the Notice of Arbitration.”!

Pertaining to urgency, Claimant explains that several investment tribunals have stated that
urgency implies the existence of “serious risks that the rights of the applicants will be
jeopardized if the measures are not taken rapidly.” Claimant quotes Biwater Gauff v.
Tanzania to note that the urgency requirement is satisfied when “there is a need to obtain

923

the requested measure at a certain point in the procedure before the issuance of an award.

" [hid., 1 65-70.
8 [bid 175.
 Thid., 4 86.
2 Tbid., {9 90-92.
2! Tbid., 9 93-94.
% [bid., 4 97.
% [bid., 4 98.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 14 of 92

Claimant indicates, in connection with necessity, that a measure is necessary if it aims at
preventing a substantial or irreparable harm to a party during the proceedings. Claimant
cites Paushok v. Mongolia to illustrate that “irreparable harm” should not be construed as
referring to harm not remediable by an award of damages. Moreover, arbitral tribunals have
generally considered that the risk of aggravating the dispute is a risk of “substantial harm.””*4

Finally, as regards proportionality, Claimant notes that this Tribunal is called upon to
determine that the inconvenience and harm to the requesting party substantially outweighs
the harm that the measures are likely to cause to the other party if implemented.”

At the Hearing, Claimant further developed the interpretation of the elements of urgency,
necessity and proportionality. 7° Since Claimant’s interpretation reaffirmed what he
elaborated in his Request for Interim Measures, as summarized above, Claimant’s
submissions at the Hearing on this matter will not be reproduced herein.

4. The Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to grant the interim measures
requested

Claimant affirms that this Tribunal has jurisdiction because, as required by the relevant
provisions of the Treaty, this dispute concerns the effects of measures taken by Respondent
in violation of the Treaty and relating to the management, maintenance, enjoyment or
disposal of a series of investments made by Mr. Pugachev, a French national since 2009.

In particular, Mr. Pugachev’s shareholding investments in Russian companies and
contractual rights and claims in projects in Russia fall under the broad definition of
investment of Article 1.1 of the Treaty. Moreover, Claimant notes that, as required by the
France-Russia BIT, he tried to settle the dispute amicably before initiating arbitration by
delivering to President Putin a trigger letter dated 10 December 2014. However, no amicable
settlement was reached.

At the Hearing, and in response to Respondent’s objection, Claimant argued that there is no
evidence of abuse of process nor bad faith in invoking the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.
Claimant explained that he became a national of France in November 2009 and, thus, prior
to any breach of the France-Russia BIT.2” Claimant stated that he indeed delivered a trigger
letter to President Putin.”® Third, Claimant asserted that it is hardly debatable that Claimant
made investments and had assets in Russia, namely: (i) a renovation project of
condominiums in the Red Square area (the so-called Red Square Project); (ii) the majority

> Tbid., I 105-108.
°8 Tbid., YH 112-114.

27 Hearing, Tr., 16:11-20.

2 Hearing, Tr., 21:4-25:24.

   

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 15 of 92

interest in two shipyards; (iii) interests in a coal mining project; and (iv) a plot of land in
the Moscow area.”

5. Claimant's request to suspend civil enforcement proceedings satisfies the
requirements for granting interim measures

Claimant first identifies the civil enforcement proceedings that give rise to Claimant’s
Request for Interim Measures, as set out in detail below.

Claimant alleges that Respondent, through DIA and the IIB, initiated ex parte proceedings
in the United Kingdom (the “UK”) to obtain a freezing order against Mr. Pugachev’s assets.
These proceedings were based on the pending Russian proceedings against Mr. Pugachev
for subsidiary liability in the bankruptcy of IIB, which later resulted in the “unlawful”
Subsidiary Liability Judgment. On 11 July 2014, a freezing order was issued on Mr.
Pugachev’s assets for GBP 1,171,490,852 (the “UK Freezing Order” or “UK Worldwide
Freezing Order”). In addition, Claimant explains that Respondent has attempted to enforce
in the UK an additional freezing order against trusts in which Mr. Pugachev was the
protector (the “Trust Freezing Order”).

On 22 February 2016, the UK High Court issued a default judgment enforcing the
Subsidiary Liability Judgment and ordered Mr. Pugachev to pay RUB 75,642,466,311.39
(approximately USD 1.2 billion), plus interest and costs (the “UK Default Judgment”).
Claimant underscores that he did not participate in these proceedings and was not able to
contest Russia’s allegations, because he was no longer in the UK. This forced absence,
according to Claimant, should be considered by the Tribunal.

Claimant alleges that Respondent has used English courts to harass Mr. Pugachev with
“pernicious” judicial orders, such as an order requiring him to surrender his passport to the
DIA and IIB’s solicitors; and orders restraining him from leaving England and Wales. As a
result, Claimant argues that he had no choice but to leave the UK and return to France. Since
then, Russia has requested UK authorities’ consent to extradite Mr. Pugachev and the UK
Home Office decided to start extradition proceedings. In addition, Claimant explains that,
despite being forced by Respondent to leave the UK, an English Court has found Mr.
Pugachev liable for contempt of court for not complying with the Court’s order not to leave
the UK and Mr. Pugachev was thus sentenced to eight months of imprisonment.*”

Claimant also argues that Respondent initiated enforcement proceedings in the Cayman
Islands, France and Luxembourg against Mr. Pugachev. Claimant identifies, among others,
the following proceedings.

» Hearing, Tr., 9:24-25; 10:1-12.
*9 Request for Interim Measures, {ff 190-193.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

3! Tbid.
> Ibid.
3 Ibid.
¥ Ibid.
3 Ibid.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 16 of 92

In the Cayman Islands, on 21 April 2016, Russia obtained an injunction against Mr.
Pugachev preventing the disposal of assets and companies that DIA alleged belong to him.
Moreover, on 9 June 2016, Respondent obtained a default order enforcing the Subsidiary
Liability Judgement in the Cayman Islands (the “Cayman Default Judgment”).*!

In Luxembourg, on 4 May 2016, Respondent requested interim measures ordering, among
others, Mr. Pugachev’s legal counsel not to divest any amount or debt due to Mr. Pugachev.
Claimant asserts that these proceedings clearly indicate Respondent’s aim to deprive Mr.
Pugachev of proper legal representation. Moreover, on 12 May 2016, Respondent initiated
proceedings to enforce the Subsidiary Liability Judgment in Luxembourg.”

In France, on 26 April 2016, Respondent obtained from a French judge the right to register
interim mortgages on a series of properties that Respondent alleges belong to Claimant. On
2 June 2016, Respondent, through the DIA and IIB, requested exequatur of the Subsidiary
Liability Judgement before the Nice Tribunal de Grande Instance. Furthermore, on 2
August 2016, Respondent obtained from a French judge the right to register an additional
judicial mortgage on property owned by Sand Club. Claimant asserts that many of the
properties subject to judicial mortgages in France do not belong to him, including the
property owned by Sand Club.**

Claimant alleges that the above-mentioned proceedings aggravate the status quo of this
dispute and hinder Mr. Pugachev’s rights in this arbitration. Therefore, interim measures
aimed at suspending these pending civil proceedings are urgent and necessary to preserve
the status quo, and thus to prevent the aggravation of the dispute.** Claimant cautions that
absent the requested interim measures, the civil enforcement proceedings initiated by
Respondent will have the following consequences.

First, the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgement aggravates the breaches of the
Treaty by increasing the amount of damages suffered by Claimant. Second, the attachment
of Mr. Pugachev’s assets and enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgment will
dramatically affect his capacity to protect his rights in this arbitration and defend his
physical security. Third, an award on damages will not compensate Mr. Pugachev for his
losses, because the enforcement of the corresponding award will take time, which will be
fatal to Mr. Pugachev’s business. Fourth, the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability
Judgment and the judgments rendered by UK courts may result in the confiscation of the
house where Claimant currently resides, and thus would deprive him of the enhanced
protection offered by his place of residence.**

. {9 204-205.
{9 206-207.
{gl 208-212.
(gl 213-214.
. {Gl 214-228.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 17 of 92

At the Hearing, and in response to Respondent’s objections, Claimant further explained that
DIA’s acts are attributable to Respondent. Claimant argued that the DIA is a state company
of Respondent, is financed by Respondent, and most members of its board are appointed by
Respondent, including its general director.** Moreover, Claimant reaffirmed the reasons for
granting the interim measures related to civil enforcement proceedings, set out in detail
above. Thus, Claimant’s submissions at the Hearing on this matter will not be reproduced
herein.

6. Claimant’s request to suspend criminal proceedings satisfies the
requirements for granting interim measures

In Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures, Claimant first identifies the criminal
enforcement proceedings that give rise to the request for interim measures, as set out in
detail below.

Claimant explains that, since 2013, Respondent has initiated criminal proceedings against
Mr. Pugachev and directors and managers of IIB.*”7 On 28 November 2013, Russian
authorities formally prosecuted Mr. Pugachev for embezzlement and, subsequently, an
arrest warrant and an international arrest warrant were issued against him. After a Russian
court revoked the international arrest warrant, the Ministry of Interior of Russia issued a
new international warrant notice.**

On 10 April 2014, Russian authorities, again, charged Mr. Pugachev with embezzlement
and, on 29 May 2015, another criminal case was opened against him for allegedly
performing managerial functions against the interest of an organization.*”

On 5 and 25 November 2015, Russian authorities initiated two other criminal proceedings
against Mr. Pugachev related to the release of a pledge of an apartment in Moscow, release
of a pledge of shares in a mining company, 120 loans granted by IIB and transfer of funds
from Mr. Pugachev’s companies to Switzerland.”°

Claimant alleges that the above-mentioned proceedings have been conducted with serious
irregularities, in violation of his due process right and his right to be heard.*!

Claimant further explains that, to aid the abovementioned criminal investigations, Russia
has also requested international assistance from Switzerland, the United States, France and

% Hearing, Tr., 18:13-20; 19:1-13.

57 Request for Interim Measures, { 233.
38 Tbid., {| 239-241.

9 Tbid., I 243-244.

*© Tbid., WY 246-247.

+! pbid., 249.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 18 of 92

Cyprus. As a result of such requests, among others, Swiss authorities froze several assets
and bank accounts of Mr. Pugachev in Switzerland.”

Claimant asserts that the request to suspend the above-mentioned criminal proceedings
against him, his family and other individuals** is urgent and necessary to preserve the status
quo, and thus to prevent the aggravation of the dispute.*

Claimant cautions that absent the requested interim measures, the criminal enforcement
proceedings initiated by Respondent may result in the extradition and incarceration of Mr.
Pugachev, preventing him from properly pursuing his claims in the arbitration. Moreover,
the pending criminal proceedings aggravate the dispute because they are aimed at obtaining
witness statements against Mr. Pugachev from individuals under duress; cause Mr.
Pugachev substantial moral harm; and are used to issue extradition orders against Mr.
Pugachev.*°

At the Hearing, Claimant reaffirmed the reasons set out above for granting the suspension
of criminal proceedings.*° Thus, Claimant’s submissions at the Hearing on this matter will
not be reproduced herein.

7. Claimant's request to order Respondent to refrain from threatening Mr.
Pugachev’s potential witnesses satisfies the requirements for granting interim
measures

In its Request for Interim Measures, Claimant first identifies the actions that Respondent
allegedly instigated against Mr. Pugachev’s potential witnesses, as set out below.

Respondent dismissed several individuals that were involved in the transactions that gave
rise to this dispute, including Mr. Alexei Kudrin, Mr. Igor Sechin, Mr. Vladimir Lisin, Mr.
Sergey Ignatyve and Mr. Vladimir Kozhin.*’ Respondent has also initiated criminal
proceedings against several individuals that were also involved in such transactions,
including against Mr. Alexey Ulyakaev, Minister of Economy at the time of the taking of
the interest in the shipyards, and Mr. Didenko, former CEO of IIB. Claimant alleges that
Mr. Didenko was arrested and forced to provide a statement against Mr. Pugachev during
his arrest. He also asserts that Russia has elicited forced testimonies from Ms. Illarianova
and Mr. Zlobin, both former CEOs of IIB, and that these testimonies were submitted as
evidence during the Subsidiary Liability Judgment proceedings.**

2 Tbid., WY 235-237.

+3 For a detailed description of the request to suspend pending criminal proceedings see Ibid., | 347(3).
4 Dbid., 4252.

+ Thid., I 253-255.

* Hearing, Tr. 31:20-35:15.

47 Request for Interim Measures, [ 264.

+8 Thid., WY 264-272.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 19 of 92

Claimant further alleges that Mr. Amunt, a key witness in this arbitration, is prevented from
testifying in his favour, given that he is incarcerated and is being pressured to testify against
Mr. Pugachev in exchange for his release. Moreover, Respondent has allegedly accelerated
criminal proceedings against Mr. Amunt to convict him before this Tribunal issues its
interim measures.”

In light of the myriad of irregular proceedings against potential witnesses, Claimant alleges
that the request to order Respondent to stay criminal proceedings against potential witnesses,
in the terms set for in its Request for Interim Measures, °° is both necessary and urgent by
definition. Claimant alleges, based on the tribunal findings in Quiborax v. Boliva, that this
Tribunal can preserve evidence by protecting both the identified witnesses and potential
ones not yet identified.*!

8. Claimant's request to order Respondent to refrain from threatening or
prosecuting Mr. Pugachey, his family, his counsels and advisors satisfies the
requirements for granting interim measures

Claimant argues that he and his family have been threatened on several occasions by persons
connected to the Respondent. Claimant explains, for example, that, in June 2014, he was
kidnapped by two officials of DIA, who attempted to extort money from Mr. Pugachev by
threatening him and his family. Moreover, Claimant alleges that he, his family and members
of his legal team have been under surveillance of Diligence LLC, a private investigation
company hired by Respondent. He further argues that Diligence LLC even placed tracking
devices on his vehicles that appeared to be explosive devices. Claimant also affirms that,
on 9 October 2015, Ms. Kate Mallisson, an analyst at the security agency GPW Ltd. in
London, informed his former partner that a professional killer had been hired to kill him.*?

Against this background, Claimant alleges that it is urgent and necessary to order
Respondent to take all necessary actions to stop the above-mentioned threats against Mr.
Pugachev and his family, in the terms set forth in Claimant’s Request for Interim
Measures.>? In the case of legal advisors, Claimant argues, based on decisions of arbitral
tribunals, that this Tribunal may order Respondent to facilitate and not to discourage
Claimant’s engagement of legal experts, advisers and representatives.**

At the Hearing, Claimant argued, in response to Respondent’s objections, that he has
presented to this tribunal all the evidence available related to the above-mentioned threats,

*® pbid., 271.

50 For a detailed description of the request to suspend pending criminal proceedings see Ibid., | 347(4).
5! phid., WY 274-276.

22 Pbid., WY 281-285.

53 For a detailed description of the request to suspend pending criminal proceedings see Ibid., | 347(5).
4 Thid., WY 287-289.

96.

97.

98.

99.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 20 of 92

given that all the threats have been done, as would be expected, with the utmost care not to
leave any trace. Moreover, Claimant draws the attention of the Tribunal to the fact that
Respondent has not even agreed to commit not to threaten Claimant, his counsel, his
advisers or witnesses.*°

9. Claimant requests the Tribunal to grant security for claim and security for
costs in this arbitration

Claimant argues that this Tribunal has the inherent powers to grant safeguarding measures
for the enforcement of an award in the form of a security for claims* and security for

 

Regarding the security for claims, Claimant affirms that this Tribunal should grant this
request based on the following grounds:

(i) Russia has resisted the enforcement of all investment awards rendered against it;

(ii) the situation of Russia’s creditors has deteriorated by (a) the enactment of laws
aimed at protecting Russian assets abroad; (b) Russian pressure on foreign governments not
to enforce any measure against its assets; and (c) the fact that Russia is a regular respondent
in investment treaty matters, which results in more creditors trying to enforce their claims
against it; and

(iii) | Respondent has targeted Mr. Pugachev himself and all his business, and this
“destructive” strategy warrants granting security for claims, otherwise Respondent would
be free to ignore the final award.**

Regarding the security for costs, Claimant affirms that this Tribunal should order security
for costs based on the following grounds: (i) Russia’s past record of not reimbursing costs
ordered in arbitral awards; and (ii) the fact that Mr. Pugachev has already incurred
considerable costs to defend the various proceedings initiated by Russia in several
jurisdictions.”

10. Claimant established a prima facie case on the merits for the granting of the
interim measures requested

Claimant argues that the prima facie analysis on the merits required to grant interim
measures is only aimed to dismiss frivolous claims. In this sense, the Tribunal solely needs

55 Hearing, Tr., 36:3-15; 37:1-8.

5 Request for Interim Measures, | 347(6)(i).
57 phid., | 347(6)( ii).

58 Thid., WY 291-327.

%® Thid., W 328-333.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 21 of 92

to evaluate the Notice of Arbitration, and the factual explanations in Claimant’s Request for
Interim Measures, to decide that the claims made are not on their face frivolous or outside
of the competence of the Tribunal.

In this case, Claimant affirms that the breaches of the Treaty have been set out in the Notice
of Arbitration and reaffirmed in Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures. Thus, Claimant
states that he has established a prima facie case on the merits for this Tribunal to grant the
interim measures requested.*!

11. Granting Claimant's Request for Interim Measures will not
disproportionately burden Respondent

Claimant underscores that he would suffer substantial or irreparable harm without interim
measures, whereas Respondent would not incur any meaningful harm if the Tribunal issues
the interim measures.

Regarding the criminal and civil proceedings, suspending these baseless and illegitimate
proceedings is not disproportionate to the harm they are causing Claimant. Claimant affirms
that Respondent has no right to initiate and continue these proceedings for illicit purposes.

At the Hearing, Claimant argued, in response to Respondent’s objection, that the interim
measures requested are also proportionate because they solely seek the suspension of
proceedings, not their definitive termination.

For these reasons, Claimant argues that the interim measures are proportionate because they
are aimed at allowing Claimant to effectively defend and protect his rights for the duration
of this arbitration.

b) Respondent’s position

In its Response to Request for Interim Measures, Respondent requested the Tribunal to (i)
reject the interim relief sought by Claimant and (ii) grant an order requiring Claimant to
provide the submission of the parties in the proceedings listed in Appendix B of the Request
for Interim Measures.

The Respondent argues that Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures should be rejected by
the Tribunal on the grounds summarized below.

© Tbid., WY 334-336.

©! pbid., 4 337.

© pbid., 340-341.

© Hearing, Tr., 25:15-21.

& Response to Request for Interim Measures, {{ 201.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 22 of 92

I. Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures was made in bad faith and
constitutes an abuse of process

Respondent claims that Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures is an attempt to
internationalize a domestic dispute and, thus, the Tribunal is not the appropriate forum to
decide this request. Respondent asserts, citing different arbitration cases, that a tribunal has
the right to dismiss a claim as an abuse of process when procedural rights have been used
“for purposes that are alien to those for which the procedural rights were established.” In
this case, Respondent argues that Claimant is attempting to use this arbitration to challenge
before an international forum the judgments issued by courts in different jurisdictions.

Additionally, this Tribunal should refuse to grant Claimant relief on the basis that his
acquisition of French nationality constitutes an abuse of process aimed at benefiting from
the protection of the BIT. Respondent cites a series of international arbitration cases to
explain that a tribunal must consider whether a dispute was foreseeable at the time of any
change in nationality. If this is the case, such change would be abusive and a tribunal would
be barred from exercising jurisdiction. In this case, Respondent argues that the evidence
suggests that Claimant foresaw this dispute in advance to his acquisition of French
nationality. Respondent points to the fact that Claimant dissipated his assets in late 2008
and early 2009 prior to acquiring his French nationality (i.e., in November 2009).%°

Furthermore, Respondent states that it is not clear whether there has been an attempt to
settle the dispute amicably as required by the Treaty. Respondent notes that, in a letter dated
20 December 2016, it questioned the alleged delivery of a trigger letter to President Putin,
and the Claimant has failed to provide any answer. Thus, Respondent argues that failure to
address this basic preliminary issue raises “serious doubts” as to Claimant’s right to
commence this arbitration.”

Respondent asserts that Claimant’s requests rely on unsubstantiated allegations made in the
Notice of Arbitration, among others, substantive and complex points related to its
investment in the shipyards. Moreover, the issues in respect of which Claimant seeks relief
have already been litigated in the English courts and, thus, Claimant seeks a “second bite at
the cherry.”**

Finally, Respondent argues that Claimant’s account of bankruptcy proceedings in respect
of IIB and the Subsidiary Liability Judgment is inaccurate and misleading. Respondent
highlights a series of inaccuracies in Claimant’s submission, among others: (i) it was the
actions of IIB —or Claimant— that resulted in the bankruptcy of IIB, not the actions of
Respondent; (ii) the appointment of the DIA was triggered by the fact that ITB had a license

© Response to Request for Interim Measures, 17.
© Tbid., W 24-25.

© Thid., 4 26.

® Tbid., W 28-29.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 23 of 92

in the past; (iii) the Ninth Commercial Court of Appeals only reversed a ruling dated 15
July 2016 and, thus, all other decisions concerning IIB’s bankruptcy remain in full force;
(iv) Claimant seeks to downplay his responsibility and control with regard to IIB; (v) the
Subsidiary Liability Judgement was not exclusively based on witness testimonies, but
contains references to other types of evidence; and (vi) Claimant was not denied the
opportunity to appeal the Subsidiary Liability Judgment, indeed he challenged this
judgment in appellate and cassation proceedings.”

112. For these reasons, Respondent requests the tribunal to consider Claimant’s bad faith
behaviour when deciding on the relief requested in Claimant’s Request for Interim
Measures.

2. Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirements for granting any of the interim
measures sought in his Request for Interim Measures

113. Respondent argues, citing the arbitral tribunal in Tallin v. Estonia, that arbitration tribunals
rely on five criteria for granting interim measures, namely: (i) prima facie jurisdiction of
the tribunal, (ii) prima facie existence of a right susceptible of protection —prima facie case
on the merits—; (iii) necessity of the measure requested; (iv) urgency of the measure
requested; and (v) proportionality of the measure requested balance of inconvenience-.”!
At the Hearing, the Respondent further notes that recent arbitration tribunals have
confirmed that all these five elements must be met to grant any interim measure.””

114. Regarding the element of prima facie jurisdiction, Respondent argues that Claimant has the
burden of establishing that this Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction. However, even if
prima facie jurisdiction is established, this Tribunal has the discretion to refrain from
exercising jurisdiction to issue interim measures based on the applicant’s bad faith.”

115. In the present case, Respondent refers as examples to a series of alleged jurisdictional
questions, some of which arise from the request itself, that would evidence that this Tribunal
lacks prima facie jurisdiction. First, Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures seeks to
suspend civil proceedings where the applicant is not a party to this arbitration, and thus it is
not within the power of this Tribunal to order such a suspension.”* Second, several measures
related to Claimant’s investments are alleged to have taken place before the Claimant
became a French national (i.e., 30 November 2009), thus are prima facie not within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Third, many of the proceedings referred to in Claimant’s Request
for Interim Measures took place well before the Notice of Arbitration (i.e., 21 September

© Hearing, Tr., 85:3-16.

7 Hearing, Tr., 85:24-86:11.

7! Response to Request for Interim Measures, {| 60.

” Hearing, Tr., 59:20-61:19.

7 Response to Request for Interim Measures, {{f 64-66.
1 Tbid., | 67.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 24 of 92

2015), thus it is questionable whether the relief sought in this request qualifies for protection
under the BIT.”°

116. At the Hearing, Respondent questioned the evidence presented by Claimant to establish the
prima facie jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In particular, Respondent questioned that Mr.
Pugachev became a French national prior to the alleged breaches of the BIT. Respondent
notes that Claimant’s own Notice of Arbitration refers to events that occurred before he
became a French national (i.e., November 2009). As an example, the decree that gives rise
to Claimant’s complaint related to his investment in the renovation project in the Red Square
area was issued in April 2009, before Mr. Pugachev became a French national (i.e.,
November 2009).”°

117. Additionally, Respondent identifies several problems with the trigger letter that allegedly
was handed to President Putin. Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to provide any
evidence that this letter was delivered, the trigger letter submitted as an exhibit in this
arbitration contains no printed date and seems more like a draft document.”

118. As for the prima facie existence of a right susceptible of protection, Respondent argues that
Claimant has the burden to demonstrate that he has a right susceptible of protection and a
reasonable possibility of success on the merits of the claim. In addition, Respondent points
to legal authorities that illustrate that arbitral tribunals may not grant the requesting party
more rights than it ever possessed. In this case, Claimant’s unsubstantiated case fails to
establish a prima facie existence of a right susceptible of protection under the BIT.”
Claimant seeks to suspend enforcement proceedings that have been initiated by entities
other than Respondent and in jurisdictions outside of Respondent’s control. Thus,
Respondent argues that the appropriate forum for such claims are the relevant domestic
courts.

119. Regarding the necessity of the measures requested, Respondent argues that, as explained by
the tribunal in Tokios Tokelés, interim measures are necessary where the actions of a party
can cause “irreparable prejudice to the right involved.” Respondent cites several arbitration
tribunals that allegedly have adopted the position according to which harm or prejudice is
not irreparable if it can be remedied or compensated by monetary damages. Respondent
cautions that even if this Tribunal considers that a harm that can be remedied by monetary
damages justifies interim measures, Claimant shall establish that specific characteristics in
this case warrant such decision.”? Respondent refers the Tribunal to its previous responses
regarding the preliminary order for its arguments on the point of imminent harm.

 

75 Tbid., | 68-73.

7 Hearing, Tr., 64:15-67:18.

7 Hearing, Tr., 71:5-72:13.

78 Response to Request for Interim Measures, {[ 78.
7 Tbid., 80-87.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 25 of 92

Respondent then argues, citing several arbitration awards, that arbitral tribunals have
interpreted urgency to mean that actions prejudicial to the rights of the requesting party are
likely to occur before an award on the merits has been issued. Respondent refers to
Claimant’s “less restrictive” interpretation of urgency; one that does not require that “harm
must be immediately likely.”*° Respondent does not consider that there is any ground to
adopt such interpretation in this case.

Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to address the issue of how the acts of DIA are
attributable to Respondent. Moreover, Respondent claims that, even if attribution is
established, Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the acts of DIA meet the standard of
urgency. In particular, Respondent argues that time is not of the essence in this case, given
that many of the proceedings mentioned in Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures have
been initiated long before the initiation of this arbitration.*!

As for the element of proportionality, Respondent argues that, following the decision in
Quiborax v. Bolivia, Claimant must establish that the harm caused to him from not granting
the interim measures substantially outweighs the harm that Respondent will suffer from the
interim measures. The reasons for not complying with this element are explained in the next
Section.”

Respondent concludes that Claimant has failed to establish that all the five requirements for
granting interim measures are met in the present case for each of the measures sought.

3. Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirements for requesting the suspension
of civil and criminal proceedings

Respondent argues that the Tribunal should reject Claimant’s request to suspend civil and
criminal proceedings, given that Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirements for granting
interim measures.

First, Respondent asserts that suspending the civil and criminal proceedings by granting the
interim measures is not appropriate nor proportionate. Respondent underscores that
Claimant’s difficulties arising from the local civil and criminal proceedings are of his own
making, namely, from Claimant’s failure to comply with local court orders and procedures.
Thus, any inconvenience caused can be remedied by Claimant’s compliance with his
obligations owed to local courts. Moreover, suspending proceedings would be a
disproportionate burden to Respondent because Respondent is not a party to the civil and
criminal proceedings.**

9 Tbid., {9 89-90.
8! Tbid., Y 88-93.
® [bid., {9 94-97.
8 Tbid., {9 106-108.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 26 of 92

Respondent affirms, moreover, that it is disproportionate to suspend the proceedings
because Claimant has failed to demonstrate sufficient urgency. Respondent notes that many
of the proceedings listed by Claimant were initiated well before —in some cases, years
before— the commencement of this arbitration. Furthermore, and contrary to Claimant’s
statement, there is nothing that suggests in this case that events have only become
“extremely urgent or preoccupying since very recently” or that “time is of the essence.”
Respondent draws the attention of the Tribunal to the fact that Claimant has still failed to
explain why Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures was submitted two months after the
constitution of the Tribunal, and more than a year after the Notice of Arbitration.**

At the Hearing, Respondent asserted that Claimant has failed to substantiate that the civil
proceedings are politically motivated. Respondent notes that the decisions against Mr.
Pugachev have been reviewed by Russian and English courts and so far, no court has been
willing to suspend enforcement proceedings. Likewise, the courts of all jurisdictions were
enforcement proceedings have been initiated against Mr. Pugachev have not been persuaded
by his allegations.**

Second, Respondent points to the fact that she is not the applicant in the civil proceedings
Claimant seeks to suspend. Claimant has failed to substantiate his claim that Respondent is
“synonymous” with the DIA and/or IIB. Claimant’s assertion that DIA is a “hire gun of the
Russian Federation” based on the financial contributions of the latter to the former is
incorrect. Respondent claims that DIA has varied sources of funding, including payment
from banks that are members of DIA. Furthermore, the DIA acts a liquidator or bankruptcy
receiver in the civil proceedings and intervenes on behalf of the relevant bank rather than
on behalf of the government.*®

In particular, Respondent explains that it is neither the applicant in the Russian court
proceedings related to the Subsidiary Liability Judgment, nor the applicant in the English
court proceedings and other enforcement proceedings identified by Claimant in Claimant’s
Request for Interim Measures. Instead, these proceedings have been initiated by the DIA
and/or IIB, and thus is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to suspend such
proceedings.*’

Respondent also alleges that Claimant has made certain misrepresentations with respect to
the civil proceedings, including the following: (i) the UK Freezing Order does not impact
Claimant’s ability to finance this arbitration, given that such order provides for a reasonable
amount to be spent on legal proceedings;** and (ii) the Luxembourg proceedings do not
prevent Claimant from paying legal fees because Claimant’s legal advisor, Mr. Thielen, is

* Tbid., $Y112-117.

8S Hearing, Tr., 51:12-52:14.

% Response to Request for Interim Measures, {ff 118-119; Hearing, Tr., 86:21-87:16.
*7 Response to Request for Interim Measures, ff 118-144.

88 Tbid., 131.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

® Tbid.,
% Ibid.,
°! Ibid.,
* Ibid.,
° Ibid.,

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 27 of 92

solely impacted by the proceedings by virtue of his role as “custodian of the bearer shares,”
rather than in his capacity as Claimant’s legal representative.*?

Third, Claimant has failed to substantiate his request to suspend criminal proceedings.
Respondent points out that ICSID tribunals have generally exercised self-restraint for a stay
of criminal proceedings and require a high threshold to grant provisional measures
regarding criminal investigations. Respondent then argues that such reasoning equally
applies in the UNCITRAL context.”

In this case, Respondent affirms that Claimant’s request is disproportionate because
criminal proceedings should not be suspended without substantiating whether there is a real
issue to be tried in such proceedings. Moreover, Claimant has failed to raise any reasons
that suggest that the criminal proceedings lack a foundation or are contrary to an
international duty of the State. Likewise, Claimant has failed to identify any means whereby
Respondent could suspend the criminal proceedings.”!

Additionally, Respondent alleges that Claimant’s account of the “serious irregularities” in
the Russian criminal proceedings are unsubstantiated. As an example, Respondent notes
that Claimant’s allegation that he could not appeal the Subsidiary Liability Judgement falls
apart by the fact that Claimant did appeal in various occasions such judgment. Likewise,
Claimant fails to explain why the second international warrant notice is “illegal” or how
such alleged illegality is related to the principle of due process and the right to be heard.°”

Respondent further argues that proceedings may not be suspended when the Claimant has
failed to establish how the criminal proceedings could aggravate the dispute. In particular,
Claimant has not explained how the risk of extradition would prevent him from pursuing
his claims in this arbitration or aggravate the dispute. Respondent also underscores that,
even if Claimant were extradited, his ability to defend himself in this arbitration is not
“impossible” since he could still appear in hearings and instruct his counsel via
videoconference.”*

At the Hearing, Respondent also noted that Claimant’s arguments on extradition are
contradictory because he argues that such extradition would dramatically undermine his

ability to defend his rights, however, at the same time, he does not consider that France

would extradite him because he is a French national.”

9M 132-133.
4 145.
qa 147-148.
4 149.
qW 154-155.

4 Hearing, Tr., 81:20-82:11.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 28 of 92

136. Respondent adds that Claimant’s request to suspend criminal proceedings is
“indeterminately far-reaching” and notes that the request requires the suspension of the
criminal proceedings in Russia and all related international assistance measures that may
exist. Respondent claims that this broad request evidences that Claimant does not even
know the exact proceedings he seeks to suspend.°>

4. Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirements for requesting the protection
of witnesses and other individuals

137. Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirements for granting interim
measures related to (i) the “protection of witnesses to protect the integrity of the proceedings”
and (ii) the “safety of Mr. Pugachev and other individuals which aim at ensuring that Russia
will not prevent Mr. Pugachev from participating and presenting his case in the present
arbitration.”°°

138. | Respondent argues that Claimant’s requests should be denied in principle and on substance.
In particular, it claims that the first request must fail in principle since Claimant has not
provided evidence that Respondent has in any way prevented Claimant from obtaining
testimonies from potential witnesses, or has obtained false testimonies. Likewise,
Claimant’s second request must fail in principle because Claimant has not provided any
evidence that suggests that Respondent has indeed taken or intends to take any action that
will prevent Claimant from fully participating and presenting his case.””

139. In addition, Respondent argues that Claimant’s request must fail on substance because it is
“extremely vague and overly broad in scope.” It requires Respondent to adopt measures to
ensure that any witness “already or later identified by Claimant as such” will be able to
testify. Thus, this request refers to a limitless category of individuals. Respondent also
argues that the petition to “stay any criminal proceeding against potential witnesses” is
equally broad. Thus, Respondent concludes that it would be disproportionate to grant the
interim measures requested.”

140. Respondent further asserts that Claimant’s allegations that Respondent has threatened
witnesses are unsubstantiated. Respondent cites Churchil Minig v. Indonesia to claim that
allegations that the dispute has been aggravated needs to be buttressed by “concrete
instances of intimidation and harassment” and there must be an “element on record showing
any pressure or intimidation against Claimant and their witnesses.”°°

°5 Response to Request for Interim Measures, { 157.
% Tbid., 4 159.

°7 Thid., W 164-165.

%8 Tbid., W 164-167.

® Tbid., 171.

141.

142.

143.

144.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 29 of 92

In this case, Claimant has complained about the “dismissal” and the initiation of criminal
proceedings against a number of individuals identified in Claimant’s Request for Interim
Measures. '°” However, Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to (i) provide any
evidence of such dismissals; (ii) provide any evidence of the relationship between the
dismissal and the Respondent; (iii) discuss the content of the criminal proceedings and their
relevance to this arbitration; (iv) explain, and even to provide evidence, that the actions of
Respondent have or will prevent the individuals from testifying in support of Claimant; and
(v) demonstrate the willingness of any of these individuals to testify in support of Claimant
in this arbitration.'°!

In addition, Respondent argues that Claimant failed to substantiate his allegations that Mr.
Didenko, Ms. Illarionova and Mr. Zlobin provided forced testimonies against him in
criminal proceedings and that Respondent is currently trying to force the testimonies of
other witnesses. In particular, Respondent notes that Claimant has failed to attribute these
alleged actions to Respondent.'” At the Hearing, Respondent also noted that, contrary to
Claimant’s allegations, the criminal proceedings against Mr. Amnust have not been
accelerated by Respondent; they have been pending for at least three years. !°

Respondent also argues that Claimant’s allegations of threats by Respondent to Mr.
Pugachev, his family, his counsel and advisors are unsubstantiated. Respondent argues that
Claimant has failed to provide any evidence related to his alleged kidnapping by two
officials of DIA and has not explained why actions of DIA’s officials are attributable to
Respondent. Claimant has also failed to provide any evidence that Diligence LLC, a private
investigations company that allegedly engage in surveillance of Claimant, his family and
legal team, was employed by Respondent. Likewise, Claimant has not provided any
evidence of the alleged surveillance in French territory nor has explained the connection
between the alleged surveillance and Respondent. Respondent also underscores that there
is no proof that Mr. Pugachev was warned by a security analyst of an alleged attempt on his
life and, even if such warning was made, Claimant has not established a link between this
alleged attempt and Respondent.'™*

As Claimant has failed to provide any evidence on the alleged threats, Respondent alleges
that the basis for granting interim measures has not been established, and thus it would be
disproportionate for the Tribunal to grant such measures. At the Hearing, Respondent
further alleged that Claimant has failed to demonstrate that the potential witnesses identified
in his Request for Interim Measures have any connection to his claims.

100 Request for Interim Measures, ff] 264 and 268.

‘1 Response to Request for Interim Measures, {ff 171-173.
2 Thid., 4.174.

3 Hearing, Tr., 92:2-15.

'04 Response to Request for Interim Measures, {| 178-187.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 30 of 92

5. Claimant has failed to establish the necessary conditions for granting security
for costs and security for claims

Respondent notes that while an arbitral tribunal has the power to grant a security for claims,
no tribunal has done so to date. Respondent explains that Claimant incorrectly relies on
Burimi v. Albania as an example of a request for security for claims. In that case, the
claimant requested security for costs, not for claims. In this case, Respondent argues that
Claimant has failed to establish why the extraordinary measure of security for claims should
be granted. Moreover, it argues that Claimant has failed to establish how his request for
security for claims satisfies the five elements for granting provisional measures.'°°

Respondent then argues that security for costs are rarely granted and solely in exceptional
circumstances. Respondent cites, among others, the tribunal in Burimi v. Albania to
illustrate that a request for security for costs should be rejected when it is based on
“hypothetical harm ... from uncertain, future actions, not imminent harm from actions likely
to occur.” Respondent then concludes that Claimant request is based on hypothetical harm
and uncertain future actions and, thus, must be rejected by the Tribunal.!°

Summary of the positions of the Parties concerning Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application

a) Respondent’s position

In Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, Respondent requests the Tribunal to issue
an order “(i) requiring the Claimant to provide security for costs in the amount of USD
800,000; and (ii) requiring the Claimant to disclose the name of any third-party funders as
well as the terms of any funding agreement.”!©” Respondent substantiates its application on
the arguments summarized below.

Respondent notes that it has made several requests regarding information on the Claimant’s
financial situation and has not received any response as of this date. Respondent further
notes that it is likely to spend USD 800,000 in fees up to the first round of substantive
written submissions. '°* Against this background, Respondent argues that Respondent’s
Security for Costs Application is justified because an award on costs in its favour would be
of no use if Claimant lacks the necessary funds to comply with the order.!

In support of Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, Respondent argues that
UNCITRAL arbitration tribunals have considered requests for security for costs under their

105 Thid., J 193.
106 Thid., J 194.
107 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, { 43.

108 Phi,
109 Thi

. 49 1 and 3.
LW 4.

 
 

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

10 Thid.,
1" Tpid.,

  

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 31 of 92

authority to order “any interim measure” pursuant to Article 26(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, and their authority to further order the moving party to provide
“appropriate security for potential costs related to the interim measures.”!!?

Respondent elaborates on the factors that the Tribunal must consider in evaluating its
Security for Costs Application. Respondent quotes an article of A. Redfern and S. O’Leary
that advances the position that tribunals must start by verifying the “dual requirements” of
interim measures, namely, urgency and risk of serious or irreparable harm to the applicant,
and then “go further than this.” However, Respondent also points to commentators that
advocate for not applying the standard criteria for interim measures to security for costs
applications.!!!

Respondent underscores that, in commercial arbitration, Redfern and O’ Leary have argued
that three criteria must be established to grant a security for costs application: (i) a
reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed in its defence; (ii) if the
requesting party succeeds it is likely to be awarded costs; and (iii) a risk that those costs
will not be paid unless some form of security is ordered.!'?

Respondent also suggests the Tribunal to consider the Charted Institute of Arbitrators’ (the
“ClArb”) Practice Guidelines in evaluating its Security for Costs Application, as these
guidelines illustrate the best practices in commercial arbitration. Pursuant to Article 2(1) of
the CIArb Practice Guidelines, Respondent argues that the Tribunal must consider: (i)
claimant’s prospect of success in its claims and defences; (ii) claimant’s ability to satisfy an
adverse costs award and the availability of claimant’s assets to enforce such award; (iii)
whether it is fair in all the circumstances to require one party to provide security for the
other party’s costs. Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to satisfy these criteria, for
the following reasons.!!3

First, Claimant’s failure to substantiate Claimant’s Request on Interim Measures evidences
its low prospect of success in this arbitration. Claimant has failed to prima facie establish
his case and presents no evidence that there is urgency or necessity in the interim measures
requested. Additionally, Claimant’s overall claims have “serious problems” in respect of
both jurisdiction and merits. Accordingly, Respondent argues that is unfair for it to continue
defending such claims with no prospects of recovering its costs.!!*

Second, Claimant is subject to the UK Worldwide Freezing Order issued by Mr. Justice
Henderson on 11 July 2014 and his financial situation is uncertain. Pursuant to the UK
Freezing Order, which can be enforced worldwide, up to GBP 1.2 billion (approximately

q5.
46.

410.
MH 13-14.

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 32 of 92

USD 2 billion at that time) have been frozen. Respondent claims that the UK Freezing Order
allows Claimant to pay security for costs, however, it is not confident that an order for costs
at the conclusion of this arbitration would be easily enforceable.!'>

In addition, Respondent argues that Claimant presents a “shadowy” picture of his financial
situation.''® Respondent notes that it has no confidence in Claimant due to his failure to
respond to Respondent’s queries and his propensity to engage in underhand dealings
involving holding companies.

Respondent points to judgments in English proceedings that allegedly demonstrate that
Claimant uses “elaborate structures” to hold assets and “shield assets from view.”!!7 In
addition, Respondent points out that Claimant asserted in his Request for Interim Measures
that he has “already lost all of what he built over a lifetime.”!'* Finally, Respondent further
argues that the existence of the UK Freezing Order demonstrates that the English court
considered that Claimant is not likely to comply with an adverse cost order and that a risk
of dissipation of Claimant's assets exists.!!°

Third, Respondent asserts that a risk of non-enforcement of any costs award also arises from
Claimant’s failure to comply with at least twelve orders issued by the English High Court
and the Tribunal’s request to refrain from making public statements and disclosing
information. As an example, Claimant violated the Freezing Order by obtaining funds for
legal services without seeking the appropriate authorization from the opposing party in the
proceedings or the English High Court.'?°

Fourth, Respondent claims that in this case it is fair to require Claimant to provide for the
Respondent’s costs in this arbitration, given that Claimant has (i) a low prospect of success
in this arbitration; (ii) a lack of liquidity due to the Freezing Order; and (iii) an uncertain
financial situation that suggests a risk of unenforceability of any future adverse costs
award.|?!

Respondent notes that it has not received from Claimant any assurances that he will be able
to reimburse the Respondent for its legal fees and expenses should it succeed. Moreover,
Claimant has failed to substantiate his requests and his claims have been made in a vague
and haphazard manner. Claimant has also failed to respond to several of Respondent’s
letters and requests, and has distributed false information and statements regarding
Respondent and this arbitration, in breach of the Tribunal’s order prohibiting public
statements and disclosures. Respondent argues that in the aforementioned circumstances it

‘15 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, { 15.
116 Thid., | 16.

117 Thid., J 18.

18 Thid., J 19.

119 Thid., YW 21-22.

 

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 33 of 92

“would be fair to require the Claimant to provide for the Respondent’s costs in this
arbitration.”!??

Respondent suggests that if the Tribunal were to grant its application, the security should
take the form of (i) a payment of USD 800,000 into an account of White & Case LLP within
14 days of the Tribunal’s order; and (ii) an undertaking by White & Case LLP to hold those
monies subject to further directions of the Tribunal and to pay these monies to Respondent
upon the Tribunal’s order. The sum of USD 800,000 is an initial estimate of the
Respondent’s costs prior to the first round of submissions, however, it should be possible
to increase this amount by an application as necessary.!?

In addition, Respondent requests the Tribunal to order Claimant to disclose any third party
funders. Respondents alleges that it has requested Claimant in several occasions to disclose
the names and any agreement with third party funders. Respondent has requested
clarification on the role of Mr. Michael McNutt, an alleged Senior Litigation Advisor for
Claimant that allegedly has no legal background. Respondent states that it is not clear on
whether this individual is financing the arbitration proceedings and on whether he has a
financial interest in the outcome of the case. In this context, Respondent argues that
disclosure of the name of any third party funder and the terms of any third party funding
agreement are warranted in the present dispute.'**

b) Claimant’s position

In its Reply to the Security for Costs Application, Claimant requests the Tribunal to (i) reject
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application; and (ii) order Respondent to immediately
reimburse Claimant for all costs related to defending himself against the “frivolous”
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, together with any interests over such costs.'?°

Claimant argues that Respondent’s Security for Costs Application should be denied as
security for costs can only be granted in extraordinary circumstances, which Respondent
failed to prove. Claimant also requests the Tribunal to reject Respondent’s request for
disclosure of any third party funding agreement.!'”°

Claimant argues that Respondent’s Security for Costs Application is a mere dilatory tactic
to put undue pressure on Claimant and to prevent him from participating and defending
himself in the present arbitration.'?” Moreover, Respondent has obtained a Freezing Order
and, thus, has already a clear vision of Claimant’s assets and his current financial situation.
Respondent is also the beneficiary of conservatory measures in France that constitute a

122 Thid., [ff 27-29.

123 Thid., ff 30-32.

124 Thid., Yf 27-29.

"25 Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, J 95.
26 Thid., | 95.

127 Thid., Y 3-6.

165.

166.

167.

168.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 34 of 92

guarantee, notwithstanding their illegality, against Mr. Pugachev. For these reasons,
Claimant argues that the Tribunal cannot grant Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application.'?

Claimant does not dispute that UNCITRAL tribunals have the power to grant security for
costs, however, it points to the fact that security for costs are rarely granted in investment
arbitration.'? Claimant agrees with Respondent that the requesting party, in a security for
costs application, must establish (i) that there is a reasonable possibility that it will succeed
in its defence to the claim, and it is likely to be awarded costs; (ii) that there exist extreme
and exceptional circumstances warranting a security for costs; and (iii) that granting its
request would not disproportionately burden the party against whom the measure is
sought.'*° Claimant contends that none of these elements are present in Respondent’s
Security for Costs Application.

Regarding the first requirement, Claimant argues that the requesting party must establish a
plausible defence on the merits and a likelihood that it will be awarded costs. In this case,
Claimant argues that Respondent’s Security for Costs Application does not provide any
substantiated defence besides mere assertions. Respondent claims that Claimant has a “low
prospect of success in the arbitration” but provides neither factual nor legal basis to support
his claim. Claimant states that Respondent’s success is “impossible” considering the
numerous breaches of the Treaty it committed.'*!

In addition, Claimant states that Respondent mistakenly assumes that if it wins on the merits,
the Tribunal will automatically award Respondent costs based on the “costs follow the event
principle” or “Loser Pay Principle”, which Respondent alleges is “unanimously” followed
by investment tribunals. However, Claimant states that the trend in investment arbitration
is the contrary, investment tribunals have not followed this rule and costs awards against
unsuccessful Claimants “are exceedingly rare and the standard to be met is extremely high.”
In fact, Article 40(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules expressly provides that tribunals retain the
discretion no to apply the “Loser Pay” principle. '**

Claimant further explains that, as noted by an author, the shift of costs onto the unsuccessful
claimant may exceptionally apply in cases of abuse of process, fraud or other misconduct
by claimants. In this case, Claimant argues that there is no reason that the Tribunal will
deem his case to be of such nature as to require him to pay Respondent costs and, in any
event, Respondent has not asserted that Claimant has incurred in any of the aforementioned

misconducts.'>

28 Thid., 1-11.
29 Tbid., | 13.

80 Thid., i 14-15.
31 [bid., {| 48-49.

132 Thi
133 [bi

 

 

(9 18-20.
LW 21, 52-54.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 35 of 92

169. Regarding the second requirement, Claimant explains, citing several investment arbitration
awards, that investment tribunals have held that (i) financial distress of a party or the risk
that an adverse costs award will go unpaid do not justify ordering security for costs; (ii) the
mere existence of a third party funding agreement does not warrant security for costs; (iii)
the history of unpaid adverse costs awards in similar circumstances is relevant; and (iv)
claimant’s timely payment of the advance on the tribunal’s costs militates against an order
for security for costs.!**

170. In this case, Claimant notes that Respondent relies on Claimant’s alleged lack of available
assets, however, Claimant’s financial situation deteriorated after he was illegally deprived
of his most valuable and promising investment in Russia. Since then, Respondent has
attempted to seize all the assets of Claimant by initiating illegal enforcement and interim
proceedings worldwide. Accordingly, Claimant argues that “[g]ranting Respondent the
requested security for costs would allow Russia to benefit from its improper and illicit
conduct, which is the subject matter of the present arbitration proceedings.”

171. Moreover, in this case, Claimant further argues that allegations of third party funding are
not “exceptional circumstances” in investment arbitration and, in any event, “no such third-
party funding agreement exists in the present case and this argument is therefore moot.”!*°

172. In addition, Claimant has no history of unpaid awards. Respondent may not rely on
Claimant’s alleged failure to comply with orders issued by the English High Court and the
other proceedings initiated by Respondent, since these proceedings form “the core of the
present arbitration” and Respondent cannot rely on them to justify its illegitimate request
for security for costs. Claimant argues that he was merely trying to protect his rights and his
access to international justice. Furthermore, Respondent failed to point to any arbitral award
that Claimant has not respected as a basis for its request.'*°

173. Claimant also highlights that he has timely performed all his financial obligations since the
outset of this arbitration, whereas Respondent has failed to timely pay its share of the deposit
of costs nor indicated the date of such future payment. Respondent’s conduct shows that
Respondent “lacks good faith” and thus cannot request a security for costs in this arbitration.
Respondent has failed to demonstrate that Claimant is unwilling or unable to pay the

 

174. Finally, Claimant states that the form of the security for costs envisaged by Respondent is
contrary to all principles regulating security for costs aimed at obtaining cash deposits. In
the present case, Claimant argues that the security for costs cannot be at the full discretion

14 Thid., YW] 25-41.

85 Tbid., 77.

86 Thid., | 57-62.

37 [bid., Y 63-65, 68.

 

 

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 36 of 92

of the requesting party, as intended by Respondent. Therefore, Claimant notes that this is a
further reason to deny Respondent’s request.'3*

Regarding the third requirement, Claimant alleges that Respondent failed to demonstrate
that the risk of an unpaid adverse costs award substantially outweighs the harm that an order
for security for costs would impose on Claimant. The harm imposed on Claimant would be
immediate and significant, and would create an unfair imbalance between the Parties,
imposing further financial pressure and harm on an investor already “suffering” from
Respondent's illegal financial measures.'*?

For the above-mentioned reasons, Claimant argues that Respondent failed to demonstrate
the three elements required to grant a security for costs request, and thus requests the
Tribunal to reject its Security for Cost Application.

As for the third party funder request, Claimant explains that there is no general duty to
disclose information relating to the financial situation of the parties nor the financing of an
international arbitration. Indeed, Claimant asserts, citing an investment arbitral award, that
disclosure of such information may only be required in exceptional circumstances, where
there exists a significant risk of disruption to the proceedings.“

In the present case, Claimant alleges that “there is no reason to warrant the disclosure by
Claimant of any third-party funding arrangement, since there is none.” Claimant further
asserts that, in any event, Respondent failed to demonstrate that such disclosure would be
necessary to preserve the integrity of this arbitration and the parties’ rights. In this sense,
Claimant states that Respondent’s request is another attempt to put undue pressure on
Claimant and to obtain information to further the damage done to Claimant in domestic
enforcement proceedings.'*!

C. Summary _of_the_ positions of the Parties concerning the alleged breach _of

confidentiality provisions in PO1, the Order issued on 9 November 2016 and the 26
May 2017 Order

a) Claimant’s position

By letter dated 3 March 2017 to the Tribunal, Claimant alleged that Respondent violated
the confidentiality provision contained in POI.

Claimant draws the attention of the Tribunal to an official press release published on the
website of the Russian Federation’s Public Prosecutor, quoting the Deputy Prosecutor of

38 Tbid., | 66-67.
89 Tbid., | 69-71.

140 Thi
MU Ibi

 

 

. 19 84-90.
., WL 91-94.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 37 of 92

the Russian Federation. This press release explains that Respondent has requested from the
French authorities the “politically motivated” extradition of Mr. Pugachev. Claimant further
argues that this press release has been dispatched to the French Press Agency and has been
further reproduced by Russian, French and international newspapers and has been widely
reported in TV channels. '*

Claimant notes that the information disclosed by Respondent in the press release is both
erroneous and partially privileged. Indeed, it is information relating to enforcement
measures undertaken in France that is not public and solely known by Claimant and
Respondent.'*3

Claimant alleges that by this press release Respondent breached Article 10.5 of POI and
such action seriously undermines the integrity and efficiency of the arbitration proceedings.
Additionally, the public disclosure of extradition proceedings was exclusively aimed at
pressuring and threatening Claimant.'“

For these reasons, Claimant requested the Tribunal to order Respondent to (i) comply with
the TOA and PO]; (ii) refrain from taking any actions undermining the integrity and
efficiency of this arbitration; and (iii) refrain from taking any actions that would deprive
Claimant of his due process rights in this arbitration.!45

In his letter dated 8 March 2017, Claimant responds to Respondent’s allegations that he has
breached the confidentiality provision in PO1 and the Tribunal’s order dated 9 November
2016. Claimant notes that all the publications that form the basis of Respondent’s complaint,
except for an article published in Challenges Magazine on 24 November 2016, were
reactions to Respondent’s violations of Article 10.5 of the PO1, and thus were solely
intended to be protective measures.'4°

Claimant affirms that the press releases appearing on Claimant’s website in March 2017
were published in reaction to public statements by the Presidential Press Officer of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Dimitri Peskov. Likewise, Claimant’s interview with RBC
Television Channel dated 3 March 2017 and Claimant’s interview with Radio Liberty dated
3 March 2017 were solely commenting on Respondent’s request for extradition.

As for the article published in Challenges Magazine, Claimant argues that this article has
been in the public domain for more than three months and has not had any adverse impact
on the arbitration. Thus, Claimant states that this publication complies with Article 10.5 of
POI.

‘42 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, {ff 2-4.

143 Tbid., | 7. See also Claimant's letter to the Tribunal dated 8 March 2017, ff 9-11.
44 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, {9 6-10.

145 Thid., Y17.

46 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 8 March 2017, {{ 12.

187.

188.

189.

190.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 38 of 92

For these reasons, Claimant requests the Tribunal to (i) reject Respondent’s request dated 3
March 2017, which is further explained below; (ii) order Respondent to refrain from future
communication undermining the efficiency and integrity of this arbitration; and (iii) order
Respondent to reimburse Claimant all costs related to the defence against Respondent’s
frivolous request, together with interest on such costs.'47

In his letter dated 13 March 2017, Claimant informed the Tribunal that, on 8 March 2017,
he received a letter from Hogan Lovells London, pursuant to the instruction of DIA. In this
letter, Claimant’s counsel is requested to disclose information covered by the attorney-client
privilege (i.e., information on whether counsel has received payments from, or on behalf,
of Mr. Pugachev related to their engagement). Claimant cautions that deferring to such
request would amount to a violation of the ethical rules applicable to Claimant’s counsel.
Additional, Claimant further argues that this letter was sent “with a perfect timing” to
disrupt Claimant’s preparation of his filing on the security for costs.

For these reasons, Claimant requests this Tribunal to, among others, (i) order Respondent
to refrain from interfering with Claimant’s right to prepare his defence in this arbitration;
and (ii) take any measures it deems appropriate to preserve the integrity and efficiency of
this arbitration.'**

In his letter dated 24 April 2017, Claimant presented five comments on Respondent's letter
dated 20 April 2017:

a Claimant argued that Respondent’s letter breached Tribunal’s order to ask
permission before submitting the actual memorandum;

(ii) Claimant asserted that Respondent’s insinuation in paragraph 4 of the said letter
questioning Claimant’s health is unacceptable;

(iii) in Claimant’s view, Respondent’s letter did not contain anything new and urgent,
but just a further disruption. Claimant added that Mr. Pugachev is a politician and therefore
a public figure and cannot refuse to talk to any media;

(iv) Claimant insisted that Respondent still has to take a decision on the transparency
issue raised during the Hearing since Claimant agreed to have full transparency; and

47 Thid., | 28.
48 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 13 March 2017, 12.

191.

192.

193.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 39 of 92

(v) Claimant held that Respondent, or at least its counsel, has elected to answer
journalists’ questions on the very day of the Hearing on 17 April 2017, in breach of
confidentiality measures.'?

By letter dated 9 May 2017, Claimant submitted five comments on Respondent’s letter
dated 4 May 2017:

a in the first place, Claimant argued that Respondent breached the Tribunal’s order
that Parties’ should not send further submissions without permission. In its view,
Respondent’s letter breached that order;

(ii) likewise, Claimant stressed that Respondent breached PO1 and the Tribunal’s order
during the Hearing by answering journalists’ questions referring to this arbitration on 17
April 2017;

(iii) on Respondent’s assertion that some translations of Claimant’s interviews were
incorrect, Claimant indicated that it has hired a professional external translator and provided
the Tribunal with the accurate translations of the interviews;

(iv) Claimant maintained that the quotes provided by Respondent on its letter do not
constitute a disclosure of specific information about the present case or of the content of the
Hearing; and

(v) Claimant drew the attention of the Tribunal to the fact that Respondent’s letter
contains various inaccurate allegations pertaining to the merits of the Request for Interim
Measures. Against this background, Claimant requested this Tribunal to order an exchange
of written submission between the Parties limited to the new allegations presented for the
first time by Respondent that pertain to the merits of the Request for Interim Measures, and
not to confidentiality issues.!°°

In his letter dated 9 June 2017, Claimant asserted that he has complied with the Tribunal’s
order and removed 103 pages and publications concerning the ongoing arbitration
proceedings from his website. Thus, Claimant affirmed that Respondent’s allegations that
he has not removed all information related with the ongoing arbitration only aim at
defaming him in the present procedure.'*!

Claimant maintained that Respondent wants to prevent him from being able to express
freely. Claimant further argued that Respondent is only using excuses to renege on its own
transparency commitments now that it has achieved its aim of silencing him through

49 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 24 April 2017, PP. 1-3.

'50 Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 9 May 2017, PP. 1

 

'5! Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 9 June 2017, ff 10-13.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 40 of 92

shutting down most of his website. In Claimant’s view, Respondent simply wishes to erase
the present case from any source of information in order to act as if it did not exist since
nothing will be reported on it anymore, and since no official information could ever be made
available to the public.!°

In consequence, Claimant requested this Tribunal to (i) acknowledge that Claimant has
complied with the 26 May 2017 Order regarding the publications on his website; (ii) order
full transparency, in exchange for its extremely strict confidentiality provision, as per its
proposal indicated in paragraph 7 of the 26 May 2017 Order; and (iii) decide on the body
that should be designated to administer the website in order to avoid further obstructive
attitude from Respondent in that respect'®* (requests from letters dated 3 March 2017, 8
March 2017, 13 March 2017, 9 May 2017 and 9 June 2017, together the “Claimant’s
Confidentiality Request’).

b) Respondent’s position

In its letter dated 3 March 2017, Respondent draws the attention of the Tribunal to a series
of public statements of Claimant related to this arbitration, allegedly in violation of Article
10.5 of PO] and the Tribunal’s order dated 9 November 2016.

Respondent argued that Claimant breached confidentiality measures by making public
statements regarding this arbitration in “Challenges” Magazine, by issuing a press release
on his website, and by giving interviews in Radio Liberty and RBC Television Channel.

Respondent requested the Tribunal to order Claimant: (i) to cease making public statements
and disclosing information, pursuant to PO1; (ii) to remove the relevant material from the
Claimant’s website www.pugachevsergei.com; (iii) to identify any publicly available
sources to which Claimant or his representatives have provided information since he filed
its Notice of Arbitration on 21 September 2015; (iv) to take steps (and provide an account
of the steps taken) to retract any information about these proceedings which the Claimant
or his representatives have made publicly available, including in the Russian media; and (v)
to the extent that such retraction is not possible, to take steps (and provide an account of the
steps taken) to correct the false and misleading information about these proceedings which
the Claimant or his representatives have made publicly available, including in the Russian
media, to preserve the integrity of the arbitration.'**

In its letter dated 8 March 2017, Respondent alleged additional breaches to PO1 by Claimant
since their submission dated 3 March 2017. In this new letter, Respondent argued that
Claimant disclosed the Request for Interim Measures in an application made before the

132 Dhid., Yf 17-24.
133 Thid., 26.
'54 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, P. 4.

199.

200.

201.

202.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 41 of 92

French courts to stay proceedings brought in connection with the enforcement of certain
judgments arising out of the DIA Proceedings.

Respondent requested the following additional relief by way of a Partial Award: (i) the
granting of permission for Respondent to share the Response with the DIA, and for the DIA
to exhibit the Response in the French Proceedings; (ii) a declaration that the Claimant’s
Public Statements consist of incorrect and misleading information and have been made in
breach of the Tribunal’s order of 9 November 2016 and POI (the “Tribunal’s
Declaration”); and (iii) any such other relief as the Tribunal sees fit.'°°

Respondent argues that public dissemination of information about the arbitration risks
undermining its integrity and efficiency. According to Respondent, Article 15(1) of the
1976 UNCITRAL Rules provides a basis for the Tribunal to protect the integrity of the
proceedings, by issuing a Partial Award. In this regard, Article 15(1) provides that “the
arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate,
provided that the parties are treated with equality and that at any stage of the proceedings
each party is given a full opportunity of presenting his case.”

Furthermore, and to the extent that such additional relief may be deemed an interim measure,
Respondent alleges that such relief is justified as: (i) the Tribunal has prima facie
jurisdiction to grant relief in respect of the Claimant’s breach of PO1, and to grant relief to
remedy the alleged harm caused by the Claimant’s failure to comply with PO1; (ii) there is
a prima facie existence of a right susceptible to protection where the right is clearly
enshrined in PO]; (iii) the relief sought is necessary and essential as the Claimant’s ongoing
breaches of PO1 are capable of causing irreparable harm given the Claimant’s continuing
and systematic press campaign, and the dissemination of confidential information about the
arbitration; (iv) the relief sought is urgent as the Claimant continues to disseminate false
and misleading information about the arbitration in breach of POI on a regular basis,
requiring immediate action by the Tribunal prior to the issuance of a final award; and (v)
the relief requested is proportionate as the Claimant will suffer no harm if ordered (again)
to comply with the order of the Tribunal and if ordered to perform the relief requested by
the Respondent to remedy the harm caused by the Claimant’s failure to comply with the
Tribunal’s order dated 9 November 2016 and PO1.'*°

In its letter dated 4 May 2017, Respondent alleged that Claimant posted on his website
inaccurate translations of the TV Rain and Radio Liberty interviews. Respondent considered
that, by making all of this material available on his own website, Claimant has remained
consistent in his approach to comment publicly on the proceedings in breach of the
confidentiality order. In addition, Respondent sustained that statements made by Claimant
on the bankruptcy of IIB and the English proceedings infringed the Tribunal’s orders.

'55 Respondent's letter to the Tribunal dated 8 March 2017, 53.
156 Thid., | 60.

203.

204.

205.

206.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 42 of 92

Accordingly, Respondent requested this Tribunal to (i) take new evidence into account
provided in Exhibit R-52 and Exhibit R-53; and (ii) dismiss Mr. Pugachev’s Request.!*7

In its letter dated 6 June 2017, Respondent affirmed that Claimant, in breach of the 26 May
2017 Order, did not remove all posts and publications from his website concerning this
arbitration. Thus, given Claimant’s repeated failure to comply with the Tribunal’s orders,
Respondent maintained that she could not agree to the proposals made by the Tribunal in
relation to confidentiality and transparency. In particular, Respondent did not agree to the
Tribunal’s proposal that a third party administer a website on which documents relating to
this arbitration can be published.

Regarding the 26 May 2017 Order, Respondent asserted that, according to the
circumstances of that moment, she does not agree with the disclosure of documents related
to the arbitration. However, Respondent affirmed that if Claimant’s conduct changes, she
would be willing to consider the publication of certain documents, namely orders and
decision of this Tribunal. Respondent maintained that in its view, agreeing to publication of
documents relating to the arbitration at the current time would be counterproductive.
Respondent argued that publishing submissions and evidence will create unnecessary
distractions, detract from the substance of the arbitration, and jeopardise its integrity.

Respondent reiterated that it would be willing to agree to the disclosure of the Tribunal’s
awards and decisions, since they are different from the parties’ submissions and evidence.
Lastly, Respondent requested this Tribunal to take the measures it deems necessary to
ensure Claimant’s compliance with its orders, including in particular the 26 May 2017
Order.'**

By letter dated 12 June 2017, Respondent called the attention of this Tribunal that, allegedly
in breach of the 26 May 2017 Order, as of 2 June 2017 multiple publications and documents
in respect of the arbitration had not been removed from the Claimant’s website. Respondent
alleged that it was only after the letter dated 6 June 2017 that the Claimant started to remove
such materials. Moreover, Respondent maintained that as of 12 June 2017, a number of such
materials remain on Claimant’s website. Respondent repeated its request that the Tribunal
take whatever steps that it considers necessary to ensure Claimant’s compliance with its
orders!? (requests from letters dated 3 March 2017, 8 March 2017, 4 May 2017, 6 June
2017 and 12 June 2017, together the “Respondent’s Confidentiality Request”).

157 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 4 May 2017, {[ 17.
158 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 6 June 2017, PP. 2-3.
'59 Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 12 June 2017, P. 1.

Iv.

207.

208.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 43 of 92

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

Having carefully considered the various submissions of the Parties, the Tribunal has decided
to:

a Order Respondent to take all actions necessary to suspend the France Extradition
Request (as defined below);

(ii) Deny all other claims and requests made by Claimant in the Request for Interim
Measures;

(iii) Deny all claims and requests made in Respondent’s Security for Costs Application;
(iv) | Deny Respondent’s additional relief requested in the letter dated 8 March 2017;

(v) Order each Party and their respective counsel to refrain from commenting or making
any public statement to any third party (including reporters, news organizations or media
networks) on any matter or fact regarding this arbitration, including any matter addressed
in the Available Documents (as defined below), without prior leave from the Tribunal;

(vi) Order each Party and their respective counsel to abstain from publishing or
disclosing any Confidential Information (as defined below) regarding this arbitration
without prior leave from the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Parties are only allowed to publish
or disclose the Available Documents (as defined below) in strict accordance with the terms
set forth in PO2 (as defined below) or any amendment thereto by the Tribunal;

(vii) Order Claimant to refrain from posting or publishing, without prior leave from the
Tribunal, any information concerning this arbitration other than the Available Documents
(as defined below), on the website www.pugachevsergei.com, or on any other website or
digital platform;

(viii) Order Claimant to provide a statement to this Tribunal on or before 17 July 2017
certifying that any posts or publications concerning this arbitration, other than the Available
Documents (as defined below), have been removed from the website
www.pugachevsergei.com; and

(ix) Reserve the question of costs associated with the Request for Interim Measures,
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application and all applications and cross-applications
concerning confidentiality to a future stage.

All arguments and allegations by the Parties have been considered and the fact that any of
the arguments of the Parties summarised above are not referred to below, should not be
taken to mean that the argument has not been considered.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 44 of 92

209. — This Tribunal will perform the analysis in the following order: (A) Interim measures related
to civil proceedings; (B) Interim measures related to criminal proceedings and requests for
international cooperation, including international arrest warrants, extradition requests and
mutual legal assistance requests; (C) Interim measures related to the protection of witnesses;
(D) Interim measures related to the protection of Mr. Pugachev and other individuals; (E)
Security for costs applications from both Parties; (F) Respondent’s application for
disclosure of third party funders; (G) Claimant’s Security for Claims Application; and (H)
the alleged breach of confidentiality provisions in PO1, the Order issued on 9 November
2016 and the 26 May 2017 Order.

A. Interim measures related to civil proceedings

210. Claimant has requested this Tribunal to suspend all civil enforcement proceedings initiated
by Respondent in order to protect the integrity of this arbitration.!° In particular, Claimant
requested the Arbitral Tribunal to order Respondent to suspend the pending proceedings for
the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgment, the UK Default Judgment and the
proceedings for the taking of interim measures in the same context, as well as to order
Russia to abstain from initiating any attachment, exequatur, or enforcement proceedings
against Mr. Pugachev or any of his assets during the arbitration proceedings.'*' Claimant
alleges that “it is therefore necessary and urgent to stop the imminent danger of serious
prejudice if enforcement occurs.”!

211. On the other hand, Respondent argued that Claimant failed to satisfy the requirements for
requesting a suspension of all civil proceedings.'® Specifically, Respondent states that
suspending proceedings by granting an interim measure would not be appropriate or
proportionate, and that the Claimant is not the applicant in the civil proceedings.'™

212. The 1976 UNCITRAL Rules do not specifically provide for the requirements that must be
satisfied for an arbitral tribunal to issue an interim measure.'® Nevertheless, both Claimant
and Respondent accept that arbitral tribunals generally rely on five requirements for
granting interim measures.' These requirements are: (i) prima facie jurisdiction of the
tribunal; (ii) prima facie existence of a right susceptible of protection; (iii) necessity of the

160 Request for Interim Measures, ] 41.

161 Thid., J 347.

162 Thid., | 174.

163 Response to Request for Interim Measures, { 100.

164 Thid., J 100.

165 Exhibit RL-35, 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Article 26(3) (“The party requesting an interim measure
under paragraphs 2(a) to (c) shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that: (a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award
of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is
likely to result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the measure is grated; and (b) There is a
reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the merits of the claim. The determination on this
possibility shall not affect the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in making any subsequent determination”).

166 Request for Interim Measures, {] 86; Response to Request for Interim Measures, {| 60.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 45 of 92

measure requested; (iv) urgency of the measure requested; and (v) proportionality of the
measure requested.!©7

213. Claimant, relying on EnCana v. Ecuador, argues that some tribunals have not retained all
five requirements.'®* However, more recent investment arbitration tribunals such as Tallin
v. Stonia, Paushok v. Mongolia and Lao Holding v. Lao confirm that all five elements must
be met for granting interim measures.!©

214. This Tribunal considers that the Claimant has the burden of demonstrating that his request
meets all of the five requirements previously mentioned for issuing an interim measure.!”°
This Tribunal reaffirms, as it did in its Decision on Claimant’s Second Request for an
Immediate Interim Order, that the standard to issue an interim order is high.'"! As the Hydro
v. Albania tribunal acknowledged, “it is also right to acknowledge that there is a high
threshold for the Tribunal to recommend the making of provisional measures.”!””

215. For the reasons explained in the following paragraphs, this Tribunal finds that Claimant has
failed to satisfy the requirements for purposes of issuing an interim order to suspend all civil
proceedings initiated by the Respondent. In particular, this Tribunal considers that Claimant
failed to demonstrate that: (a) the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to decide on the
requested interim measures; and (b) the requested measures are necessary.

a) Claimant failed to demonstrate that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to
decide on the requested interim measures

216. Claimant has the burden of establishing that this Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction over
the dispute. As the International Court of Justice asserted in Nicaragua v. United States “[a
Court] ought not to indicate such measures unless the provisions invoked by the applicant
appear, prima facie, to afford a basis on which the jurisdiction of the court might be

'61 These criteria are both found in the decisions presented by Claimant and Respondent. Exhibit RL-36, United
States (Tallim) B.V. and Aktsiselts Tallinna Vesi v. Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/24, Decision on
Respondents Application for Provisional Measures, 12 May 2016, 78; and Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC
Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v. Government of Mongolia. Order on interim measures,
September 2, 2008, 140.

'68 Request for Interim Measures, { 87. See also Exhibit CL-27, EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, LCIA Case No UN3481, Interim Award, Request for Interim Measures of Protection, 31 January
2004, 4 13.

69 Exhibit RL-36, United States (Talim) B.V. and Aktsiselts Tallinna Vesi v. Republic of Estonia, (CSD Case
No. ARB/14/24, Decision on Respondents Application for Provisional Measures, 12 May 2016, Request for
Interim Measures, 78; Exhibit CL-4. Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostoknefiegaz
Company v. Government of Mongolia. Order on interim measures, 2 September 2008, 40; Exhibit RL-37, Lao
Holding N.V. v Lao People’s Democratic Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6, Decision on the merits, 10
June 2015, 109.

10 Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v.
Government of Mongolia. Order on interim measures, 2 September 2008, 4 40.

"! Decision on Second Request for an Immediate Interim Order, { 37.

'2 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro S.r.l and others v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/15/28. Order on
provisional measures, 3 March 2016, { 3.12.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 46 of 92

founded.” Thus, Claimant must prove, not only that this Tribunal has prima facie
jurisdiction over the general dispute, but also that it has prima facie jurisdiction for the
requested interim measures.!4

217. Claimant asserts that it is well established that fulfilling this requirement is not prejudging
the question of jurisdiction, but it is rather simply ensuring that: (i) there is an offer to
arbitrate in the applicable BIT; (ii) the investor has a documentary proof of its nationality;
(iii) the investors economic activities appear to meet the definition of an investment under
the BIT; and (iv) the dispute is related to an investment in the host State.!*

218. In the case at hand, Claimant considers that this Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction,
“because this dispute concerns the effects of the measures taken by Russia in violation of
the BIT and relating to the management, maintenance, enjoyment or disposal of numerous
investments made by Mr. Pugachev, a French national as of 2009.”!7

219. Article 7 of the France-Russia BIT provides:

Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party concerning the effects of a measure taken by the first
Contracting Party and relating to the management, maintenance, enjoyment or
disposal of an investment made by such investor, including but not limited to
the effects of a measure relating to the transportation and sales of goods, an
expropriation or the transfers set forth in Article V of this Agreement, shall be
settled if at all possible amicably by the two parties concerned.

This dispute shall then be settled definitively in accordance with the arbitration
rules of the United Nations Commission for International Commercial Law as
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in its resolution 31/98
of December 15, 1976.'7

220. Claimant alleges that Mr. Pugachev is an investor and his assets in Russia are investments
within the meaning of the France-Russia BIT. Article 1.2 of the Treaty defines an investor
as:

a) [A]ny natural person who is a national of one of the Contracting Parties and

173 Exhibit CL-28, Military and Paramilitary Action in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States),
Provisional Measures Order, 10 May 1984, ICJ Reports, 1984, {| 169.

1 As the Paushok v Mongolia tribunal explained, the Tribunal must address whether the claims made are “on
their face, frivolous or obviously outside the competence of the Tribunal”. Exhibit CL-4. Sergei Paushok, CJSC
Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v. Government of Mongolia. Order on interim measures,
2 September 2008, { 55.

"5 Exhibit CL-10, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, CSID Case No ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 1, 1 July 2003,
16.
176 Request for Interim Measures, {[ 120.

7” Exhibit CL-1, Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of France and the Government of the
United Soviet Socialist ics on the i | Promotion and Protection of , Signed on 4 July
1989, entered into force on 18 July 1991, Article 7.

 

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 47 of 92

who is allowed, in accordance with the laws of that Contracting Party, to make
investments on the territory or in the maritime zone of the other Contracting
Party.'

On that basis, Claimant argues that this Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction, and requests
to suspend the enforcement of all civil proceedings worldwide, as noted above.

On the other hand, Respondent affirms that this Tribunal has no prima facie jurisdiction to
decide on the requested interim measures.'” Respondent asserts that this Tribunal should
not grant relief where the Claimant is attempting to create artificial jurisdiction over a pre-
existing domestic dispute.'®?

Respondent, relying on Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador states that even though a tribunal
need not definitely satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction in respect of the merits of the case, it
will not order such measures unless there is, prima facie, a basis upon which the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction might be established.'*!

Respondent further argues that several measures relating to the Red Square Project and the
Shipyards are alleged to have taken place prior to 30 November 2009, when according to
Claimant Mr. Pugachev became a French national, so are prima facie not within this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.'*?

Accordingly, in order to grant the requested interim measures, the Tribunal must find that
such measures appear to be, prima facie, under its jurisdiction.

As an initial matter, this Tribunal finds that some of the civil proceedings that Claimant
requests the Tribunal to suspend are being carried out in States other than France and Russia
(the State parties to the France-Russia BIT), particularly the UK, Luxemburg and the
Cayman Islands.'** Although Claimant structures its Request for Interim Measures under
the premise that Russia is the State involved in the aforesaid proceedings, it is not clear
prima facie that, pursuant to Article 7 of the France-Russia BIT transcribed above, this
Tribunal has jurisdiction to suspend proceedings in third States.

In addition, based on the very limited evidence submitted in this arbitration and the
arguments put forward by both Parties, this Tribunal is not convinced that prima facie it can

"8 Exhibit CL-1, Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of France and the Government of the
United Soviet Socialist ics on the i | Promotion and Protection of , Signed on 4 July
1989, entered into force on 18 July 1991, Article 1.2.

179 Response to Request for Interim Measures, { 73.

180 Thid., | 73.

181 Thid., | 65.

182 Thid., | 68.

183

 

Request for Interim Measures, { 231.

228.

229.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 48 of 92

be held that the DIA and IIB -the parties involved in the civil proceedings— are the same as
or are synonymous with the Respondent.

As evidenced in the Request for Interim Measures, the applicants in the civil proceedings
that Claimant requested this Tribunal to suspend are the DIA and IIB.'* In particular, the
DIA and IIB are individually or jointly referred to as applicants in the context of the
enforcement proceedings of the (i) Subsidiary Liability Judgment, (ii) the UK proceedings,
(iii) the Luxemburg proceedings, and (iv) the Cayman Islands proceedings.'**

a The Subsidiary Liability Judgment does not appear prima facie to be a judgment
relating to proceedings between the Claimant and the Respondent. The evidence submitted
by Claimant in this regard is Exhibit C-12, namely the Decision of the Moscow City
Commercial Court rendered upon an application of the bankruptcy receiver of IIB to declare
ME. Illarionova, S.V. Pugachev, A.A. Didenko and A.S. Zlobin liable in respect of IIB’s
obligations. '*° Neither the evidence in the record, nor the arguments put forward by
Claimant, allow this Tribunal to be satisfied, prima facie, that Respondent is the applicant
in the case resulting in the Subsidiary Liability Judgment.

(ii) In the UK proceedings, the applicants are I[B and DIA. On the one hand, the UK
Worldwide Freezing Order, presented by the Claimant as Exhibit C-20, states that “this is
a freezing injunction against Sergei Viktorovich Pugachev on 11 July 2014 by Mr. Justice
Henderson on the application of IIB and DIA.”!*’ On the other hand, the UK Default
Judgment, as can be seen in Exhibit C-35, has as Claimants IIB and DIA; and as defendant
Mr. Pugachev.'**

(iii) | The applicants in the Luxemburg proceedings, as evidenced in Exhibit C-40, and
Exhibit C-41, are IIB and DIA. Those proceedings are related to the exequatur of the
Moscow Commercial Court judgment dated 30 April 2015. '*?

(iv) The Cayman Island Freezing Order, as evidenced in Exhibit C-37, has as plaintiffs
IIB and DIA, and as defendants Mr. Pugachev, Arcadia Nominees Limited and DB
Marine.'”°

In accordance with the foregoing, this Tribunal reiterates that it is clear from the record in
this arbitration that the applicants in all the civil proceedings that Claimant requested to
suspend are the DIA and IIB.

84 Thid., 4 347.

'85 Thid., | 181-212, and Appendix B.

'86 Exhibit C-12, Subsidiary Liability Judgment, 30 April 2015.

'87 Exhibit C-20, UK Worldwide freezing order, 11 July 2014.

'88 Exhibit C-35, UK Default Judgment, 22 February 2016.

'89 Exhibit C-40, Summon to appear before the Luxemburg Tribunal, 12 May 2016; Exhibit C-41, Summon to
appear before the Luxemburg Tribunal and make disclosure.

9 Exhibit C-37, Cayman Islands Freezing Order, 21 April 2016.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

235.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 49 of 92

Based on the evidence submitted in this arbitration and the arguments put forward by both
Parties, this Tribunal is not convinced, prima facie, that the DIA and IIB are the same as or
as synonymous to the Respondent. In other words, at this point and with the limited evidence
available, the Tribunal is not in a position to state, not even prima facie, that the acts of the
DIA and/or IIB may be attributed to Respondent.

On this point, Claimant argued at the Hearing that “the Respondent is the DIA.”!?! In
Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures, Claimant asserts that the DIA is a Russian agency,
associated with the Central Bank and an agent of the State. At the Hearing, Claimant further
argued that a majority of the members of the DIA board are appointed by Respondent
directly, not the least of which its general director.'°? Claimant also alleges that the Russian
Federation is contributing financially to the DIA’s assets.'°°

At the Hearing, Respondent asserted that “the DIA is not synonymous with Russia.”!™
Respondent argues that it is wholly misleading to assert that the DIA is synonymous with
the Respondent through monetary contributions, when it is clear that the DIA is a separate

and distinct legal entity which receives contributions from a variety of sources. !°°

Respondent adds that the DIA does not act as an organ of the State but as a liquidator
pursuant to the statutory duties of a liquidator in bankruptcy, in the best interests of the
debtor and all creditors.'°° Consequently, according to Respondent, the DIA acts in the
interests of the creditors and in the interest of the IIB.'°”

In light of the arguments put forward by the Parties and the very limited evidence submitted
in this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal cannot assert, not even prima facie, that DIA
and IIB are synonymous to the Respondent or that the acts of the DIA and the IIB should
be attributed to the Respondent. Therefore, the Tribunal cannot assert, prima facie, that it
has jurisdiction to order the suspension of proceedings where the DIA and the IIB are
applicants.

The Tribunal stresses that this conclusion does not entail any prejudging on the merits of
the case or any final finding as to whether the DIA and IIB are synonymous with the
Respondent or if the acts of the DIA and the IIB may be attributed to Respondent. The
Tribunal will duly consider this issue at the appropriate time in this arbitration once the
Parties have submitted further evidence and allegations.

9! Hearing, Tr., 18:13.
2 Hearing, Tr., 19:4-6

193

Hearing, Tr., 18:24-19:1.

4 Hearing, Tr., 97:20.
5 Hearing, Tr., 8712-16.

196

Hearing, Tr., 98:7-11.

"7 Hearing, Tr., 98:11-13.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 50 of 92

236. For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal concludes that Claimant failed to
demonstrate that this Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to decide on the requested interim
measures to suspend all civil enforcement proceedings.

b) Claimant did not sufficiently prove necessity

237. Claimant and Respondent acknowledge that, in order for a tribunal to issue an interim
measure, the necessity of the measure must be sufficiently proved.'**

238. Pursuant to Article 26.1 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, this Tribunal may take “any interim
measures it deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute.”!°? Several
tribunals have interpreted and defined the requirement of necessity. For example, in Tokios
Tokelés v Ukraine, the tribunal found that “international jurisprudence on provisional
measures indicates that a provisional measure is necessary where the actions of a party are
capable of causing or threatening irreparable prejudice to the rights invoked.”” According
to this decision, Claimant must sufficiently prove that in the absence of interim measures,
the civil procedures will cause an irreparable harm to his rights.

239. After studying the arguments put forward by the Parties, this Tribunal finds that necessity
is not satisfied in the present case since: (1) the harm claimed is not irreparable given that
it can be compensated by monetary damages; and (2) there is no sufficient evidence to
conclude that the civil enforcement proceedings would aggravate the present dispute.

J. The harm claimed is not irreparable since it can be compensated by monetary
damages

240. International tribunals have interpreted that, for a measure to be necessary, the harm sought
to be avoided cannot be compensated by monetary damages.?”!

241. As explained above, Claimant seeks to suspend the enforcement of all civil proceedings. As
evidenced in Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures, these civil proceedings are related

198 Request for Interim Measures, {| 104; Response to Request for Interim Measures, { 80.

199 Exhibit CL-22, 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Article 26(1) (“At the request of either party, the arbitral
tribunal may take any interim measures it deems necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute, including
measures for the conservation of the goods forming the subject-matter in dispute, such as ordering their deposit
with a third person or the sale of perishable goods.”) (emphasis added).

200 Exhibit CL-11, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3, 18 January, {[ 8. (emphasis
added).

201 Exhibit RL-14, Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Republic of Ecuador, 1\CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, {| 99;
Exhibit RL-3, Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order on
Provisional Measures, 06 September 2005, {| 46; Exhibit CL-7, Quiborax v. Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2,
Decision on Provisional Measures, {| 156 (“The Tribunal considers that an irreparable harm is a harm that cannot
be repaired by an award of damages.”).

  

242.

243.

244.

245.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 51 of 92

to the freezing of assets and the release of mortgages on Mr. Pugachev’s properties.”°? The
Parties do not dispute that the civil measures in the proceedings that Claimant seeks to
suspend affect assets, properties and goods of Mr. Pugachev.

In particular, Claimant requests this Tribunal to suspend the pending proceedings for the
enforcement of civil measures related to discharge the UK Worldwide Freezing Order,?°?
to release interim judicial mortgages taken on eleven properties —mostly chateaux and
villas— located in France,” to suspend the exequatur of the judgment of the Commercial
Court of Moscow dated 30 April 2015 in Luxemburg,” and to release the injunction
ordered by the Grand Court of the Cayman Islands on 20 April 2016 prohibiting the disposal
of Mr. Pugachev’s assets,”°° among others.

 

After due consideration, this Tribunal finds that Claimant failed to substantiate that the
possible harm caused by the enforcement of the civil proceedings could not be compensated
by monetary damages.

Claimant relies on Paushok v. Mongolia to argue that the possibility of monetary
compensation does not necessarily eliminate the possible need for interim measures.”””
Claimant further argues that there is no requirement for the harm to be absolutely irreparable
by an award of damages.?°° However, this Tribunal notes that the facts that gave rise to
Paushok v. Mongolia do not resemble that of the case at hand. In Paushok v. Mongolia,
Claimant requested a declaratory relief in addition to compensatory relief, whereas in the
present case Claimant simply requested compensation in the Notice of Arbitration.”

After careful consideration of Claimant’s argument, this Tribunal finds that a harm that may
be compensated by a damages award is not irreparable. The tribunal in Dawood Rawat v.
The Republic of Mauritius endorsed this finding by stating that “as for irreparable harm, it
is well-established that harm claimed is not irreparable if it can be compensated by monetary
damages.”?!° Likewise, the Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador and Plama v. Bulgaria
tribunals found that harm is not irreparable if it can be compensated by damages.”!!

22 Request for Interim Measures, 231, Appendix B.

203 Thid., 347 (2).

204 Thid., | 347 (2).

205 Thid., 347 (2).

206 Thid., {347 (2).

207 Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v.
Government of Mongolia, UNCITRAL Case, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, {| 68-69.

28 Request for Interim Measures, { 106.

209 Notice of Arbitration, 147.

20 Exhibit RL-39, Dawood Rawat v. The Republic of Mauritius, Order Regarding Claimant's and Respondent’s
Requests for Interim Measures, 11 January 2017, | 45.

21 Exhibit RL-14, Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Republic of Ecuador, 1\CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, {| 99;
Exhibit RL-3, Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order on
Provisional Measures, 06 September 2005, J 46.

246.

247.

248.

249.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 52 of 92

Also, in EnCana v. Ecuador the tribunal interpreted that harm is not irreparable if it can be
compensated economically, and if the measures could be challenged in domestic courts. In
that case, the Claimant requested the tribunal, constituted under the UNCITRAL Rules, to
suspend the enforcement of freezing orders issued by Ecuador.?'? However, the tribunal
rejected the request on the basis that the enforcement measure could be challenged in
Ecuadorean domestic courts.”!>

This Tribunal considers that Claimant has not produced sufficient evidence that the
enforcement of the civil measures would place him in an economic situation of such nature
that he could not defend his rights in this arbitration. Moreover, with the evidence presented
in this case, it is not possible to conclude that rights other than economic rights represented
by goods and assets will be affected by the civil measures. Such economic rights would be
susceptible of monetary compensation.

Furthermore, the tribunal in Dawood Rawat v. The Republic of Mauritius considered, and
this Tribunal agrees, that in addition to demonstrating that the measure is essential to prevent
an irreparable harm, the applicant needs to demonstrate the urgency of the measure: “for an
interim measure to be necessary, the requesting party must demonstrate that the measure is
both (a) urgent, and (b) essential to prevent irreparable harm to its rights.”?!* Usually,
arbitral tribunals have understood urgency to mean that “a question cannot await the
outcome of the award on the merits.”?!° In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, for example, the
tribunal noted that “a measure is urgent where action prejudicial to the rights of either party
is likely to be taken before such decision is taken.”?!®

In the case at hand, Claimant requested, among others, to suspend proceedings originating
in the following actions: (i) on 2 September 2013, the Swiss Public Prosecutor froze several
assets and bank accounts associated with the Claimant; (ii) on 2 December 2013, the
Subsidiary Liability claim was filed by the DIA with the Moscow Commercial Court; (iii)
on 11 July 2014, the UK Worldwide Freezing Order was issued; (iv) on 30 April 2015, the
Claimant was found liable under the Subsidiary Liability Judgment; (v) on 27 August 2015,
the Trust Freezing Order was issued in the English High Court against nine of the
Claimant’s trusts.?!”

22 Exhibit CL-27, EnCana Corporation v, Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3481, Interim Award -
Request for Interim Measures of Protection, 31 January 2004, { 16.

213 Exhibit CL-27, EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3481, Interim Award -
Request for Interim Measures of Protection, 31 January 2004, { 16.

214 Exhibit RL-39, Dawood Rawat v. The Republic of Mauritius, Order Regarding Claimant’s and Respondent’s
Requests for Interim Measures, 11 January 2017, 45 (emphasis added).

218 Exhibit CL-7, Quiborax v. Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, { 66.

216 Exhibit CL-11, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, CSID Case No ARB/02/18, Procedural Order n°3, 18 January 2005,

18.

?!7 Request for Interim Measures, Appendix B.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 53 of 92

This Tribunal notes that all of the aforementioned proceedings began before the Notice of
Arbitration on 21 September 2015. Consequently, it seems that if these measures had been
urgent, the Claimant should have requested them much earlier, upon the constitution of this
Tribunal on October 2016 or shortly thereafter.

However, this Tribunal emphasizes that the granting of interim measures is not prevented,
per se, by the fact that the arbitration initiates after the judicial decisions that are intended
to be suspended through interim measures. However, in these cases, (regardless of whether
the measures are civil, criminal or administrative) a higher evidentiary burden may be
required to prove the connection between the arbitration and measures already existing at
the time of commencement of the arbitration. Accordingly, the Tribunal must perform a
more cautious analysis of the case to avoid the use of the interim measures in the context of
investment arbitration as a mechanism to interfere with judicial decisions adopted by the
States.

Furthermore, the evidence in the record suggests that Claimant could have submitted the
Notice of Arbitration at least three months earlier. Claimant asserts that the trigger letter
required by the Treaty was delivered to President Putin on 14 December 2014,”'* whereas
the Notice of Arbitration was presented on 21 September 2015.7! Pursuant to Article 7 of
the France-Russia BIT, only a six-month period is required, after a dispute cannot be settled
amicably, to present the Notice of Arbitration. This delay in presenting the Notice of
Arbitration suggests Claimant’s lack of urgency, particularly when most of these civil
measures took place before the submission of the Notice of Arbitration.

For these reasons, this Tribunal considers that the Claimant has failed to prove that the
enforcement of the civil procedures will cause an irreparable harm to his rights. This
Tribunal finds that the evidence and arguments presented are not conclusive to determine
that the damage is irreparable.

2. There is no conclusive evidence that the civil enforcement proceedings would
aggravate the present dispute

Claimant asserts that the civil enforcement proceedings worldwide would aggravate the
dispute between the Parties. Claimant argues that a potential enforcement would have four
different effects.

218 Thid., J 123.

219 Notice of Arbitration, { 148.

»0 Exhibit CL-1, Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of France and the Government of the
United Soviet Socialist ics on the ip Promotion and Protection of signed on 4 July
1989, entered into force on 18 July 1991; Exhibit C-2, Letter from Mr. Pugachev to the Russian Federation
proposing to have an amicable settlement dated 10 December 2014.

 

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 54 of 92

First, Claimant maintains that the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgment will
aggravate the present dispute because it will exacerbate the breaches of the BIT by
increasing the amount of damages suffered.?”!

However, the Tribunal finds that the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgment
would not constitute an aggravation of the dispute, since it is a substantial part of the dispute
itself. In consequence, a decision of this Tribunal on the dispute through a provisional
measure would constitute a prejudgement of an issue that must be resolved in the merits of
the case. In addition, this Tribunal observes that the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability
Judgment would not aggravate the dispute because it was a predictable situation at least
since 30 April 2015, prior to the Notice of Arbitration, when Mr. Pugachev was found liable
by the Russian courts.”” It was rationally foreseeable that the enforcement of the measures
would occur in a certain period thereafter. Claimant failed to prove how a measure, taken
in legal proceedings initiated before the dispute, would aggravate the dispute.

Second, Claimant states that if the Subsidiary Liability Judgment and the parallel judicial
proceedings were enforced, Mr. Pugachev will be almost entirely deprived of any income,
and this will have an impact on his capacity to protect his rights in this arbitration.”
Nevertheless, this Tribunal finds that Claimant failed to substantiate his claim regarding this
matter. Claimant did not provide any evidence to support the assertion that he would be
deprived of any income or that he would lose his capacity to protect his rights in this
arbitration.

 

 

Moreover, this Tribunal recalls that the Freezing Order granted by the English court
provides for a reasonable amount to be spent on legal proceedings. The UK Freezing Order
presented as Exhibit C-20, states that: “This order does not prohibit Respondent from
spending GBP 10.000 a week towards his ordinary living expenses and also a reasonable
sum on legal advice and representation.”?~4

Third, Claimant argues that if Russia proceeds with the enforcement of civil measures, and
if Mr. Pugachev is ultimately awarded monetary compensation in this arbitration, “he may
never fully recover the loss.”??* Again, this Tribunal considers that this allegation is not
supported by the evidence at hand. In effect, Claimant did not provide any evidence that a
delay in enforcement would imply a loss in Mr. Pugachev’s capital, nor in his business
activities.

221 Request for Interim Measures, f 215.

22 Exhibit C-12, Decision of the Commercial Court of the City of Moscow, Central Bank, Receiver of IIB v. M
E Illarionova, $ V Pugachev, A A Didenko, A $ Zlobin, Case No A40- 119763/10, 30 April 2015.

23 Request for Interim Measures, { 217.

24 Exhibit C-20, High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, JSC Mezhdunarodney Promyshlenniy Bank, State
Corporation “Deposit Insurance Agency” v. S V Pugachev, Claim No HC14D02752, Ex Parte Worldwide Freezing
Injunction, 11 July 2014.

25 Request for Interim Measures, | 224.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 55 of 92

260. Fourth, Claimant asserts that the enforcement of the Subsidiary Liability Judgment and the
UK Judgment “may result in the confiscation of the house where Mr. Pugachev currently
resides. Such enforcement will compromise Mr. Pugachev’s safety and security [because
the house has] a sophisticated surveillance system.”?”° This Tribunal is well aware that as
regards alleged threats it may be difficult to obtain conclusive evidence and therefore
Claimant should not be placed with an impossibly high burden to prove the existence of a
threat against him or his family. However, in the present case, Claimant must submit
sufficient evidence to assert at least the nature of the threats made and the impact on his
safety and security.

261. The Tribunal remains open to take, when and if sufficient evidence is presented, any
measure it deems necessary within its power to protect the life and safety of Mr. Pugachev
and his family, to the extent necessary to preserve and protect the integrity of this arbitration.

262. Additionally, Claimant requests this Tribunal to order Russia to abstain from initiating any
attachment, exequatur or enforcement proceedings against Mr. Pugachev or any of his assets
during the arbitration proceedings.””” This Tribunal observes that Claimant did not provide
any evidence to substantiate this request. Moreover, this Tribunal notes that Claimant’s
request is extremely general and unprecise. It does not specify the time, subject, place or
circumstance by which Russia should cease to exercise its sovereign power. For these
reasons, this Tribunal will deny Claimant’s request to order Russia to abstain from initiating
any attachment, exequatur or enforcement proceedings against Mr. Pugachev.

263. In sum, this Tribunal finds that Claimant failed to satisfactorily demonstrate prima facie
jurisdiction of this Tribunal, and the necessity of the measure. Thus, this Tribunal will deny
Claimant’s request to issue an interim order to suspend all civil proceedings.

B. Interim measures related_to criminal proceedings and_requests for international
cooperation, including international arrest warrants, extradition requests and mutual
legal assistance requests

264. Claimant requests the Tribunal to adopt three types of interim measures related to criminal
proceedings:

a order Russia to suspend pending criminal proceedings against Mr. Pugachev,
members of his family and individuals related to him in Russia and Switzerland;

(ii) order Russia to suspend any existing request for international cooperation, such as
extradition requests, international arrest warrants and requests for mutual assistance; and

226 Thi

 

4225.
id., | 347.

 

265.

266.

267.

268.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 56 of 92

(iii) order Russia to abstain from initiating criminal proceedings against Mr. Pugachev,
members of his family and individuals related to him, including requesting measures of
international cooperation based in these proceedings.

During the Hearing, Claimant further specified in his oral submissions that the above-
mentioned requests only sought to suspend the proceedings during the arbitration, and not
to request a withdrawal or waiver of any rights from Respondent.”

Claimant identified the following pending criminal proceedings that Russia had initiated
against him and that he seeks to suspend:

a an indictment dated 28 November 2013 for allegedly committing embezzlement, in
violation of Articles 33 and 160 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation;?”?

(ii) a second indictment dated 10 April 2014 for allegedly committing embezzlement,
again, in violation of Articles 33 and 160 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation;?°

(iii) a third indictment dated 1 June 2015 for allegedly discharging his managerial
functions in a commercial organization contrary to the lawful interests of that organization,
in violation of Articles 33 and 160 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation;?*! and

(iv) a fourth indictment dated 25 November 2015 concerning the release of a pledge over
an apartment in Moscow, release of a pledge over shares in a mining company, one-hundred
and twenty loans granted by IIB and transfer of funds from Claimant’s companies to
Switzerland.”

Claimant further explained that, between 29 May and 1 June 2015, the indictments
identified in (i) to (iii) were joined in the criminal proceeding No. 201/712005-11. Thus,
pursuant to these criminal proceedings, Russian authorities are investigating Mr. Pugachev
for alleged violations of Articles 33, 160 and 201 of the Criminal Code of the Russian
Federation.

Claimant identified an additional pending criminal proceeding against him in Switzerland.
In 2013, the Swiss Public Prosecutor opened a criminal investigation for money laundering

28 Hearing, Tr., 7:25-8:2.

»° Exhibit C-52, Decision of the Main Investigative Directorate of the Investigative Committee of the Russian
Federation to Prosecute Mr. Pugachev, 28 November 2013. See also Request for Interim Measures, {] 238.

20 Exhibit C-53, Decision of the Main Investigative Directorate of the Investigative Committee of the Russian
Federation to prosecute Mr Pugachev, 10 April 2014. See also Request for Interim Measures, 242.

3! Exhibit C-54, Decision of the Main Investigative Directorate of the Investigative Committee of the Russian
Federation to prosecute Mr Pugachev, | June 2015.

232 Request for Interim Measures, 247.

?33 Request for Interim Measures, {[ 245. The Tribunal notes that no exhibit was provided for this alleged indictment.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 57 of 92

against him. ?*4 Claimant affirms that this investigation was the result of a mutual legal
assistance request made by Russia to Switzerland on 12 March 2013.

269. This Tribunal further notes that Claimant failed to identify any criminal proceeding against
members of his family.

270. Claimant also identified the existing international cooperation requests made by Russia
related to the above-mentioned pending criminal proceedings, which he seeks to suspend,
namely:

(i) four mutual assistance requests made by Russia, between March and July 2013, and
addressed to Switzerland,”* the United States, Cyprus and France (the “Mutual Legal
Assistance Requests”); 236

(ii) an international arrest warrant issued on 29 January 2014 by the Russian Ministry
of Interior (the “International Arrest Warrant”);”*’

 

(iii) an extradition request made by Russia to UK authorities (the “UK Extradition
Request”);”** and

(iv) an extradition request made by Russia to France on 2 March 2017 (the “France
Extradition Request”).?”

271. Against the above background, this Tribunal must consider whether each of the interim
measures requested with respect to existing and future criminal proceedings, international
cooperation requests, including mutual legal assistance request, arrest warrants and
extradition requests, satisfy all requirements for granting interim measures. As explained
above, this Tribunal must be satisfied that the following criteria are present in the case for
granting interim measures: (i) prima facie jurisdiction of the tribunal; (ii) prima

 

244 Exhibit C-56, Order to freeze Mr Pugachev’s assets issued by the Swiss Public Ministry, 2 September 2013.
235 Exhibit C-55, Request for mutual legal assistance from the Russian Federation to Switzerland, 12 March 2013.
236 Request for Interim Measures, ff] 235-237. See also, Claimant’s Hearing Powerpoint Presentation, at 5.

?37 Request for Interim Measures, J 241. This Tribunal notes that another international arrest warrant against Mr.
Pugachev was issued on 3 December 2013. However, Claimant itself explained that this warrant was revoked and
this decision was confirmed, on 19 February 2014, by the Basmanny District Court of the City of Moscow. See
Request for Interim Measures, { 240.

238 This Tribunal notes that Claimant has not submitted sufficient evidence to determine when was the UK
Extradition Request issued. At the Hearing, Claimant asserted that this request was made on 5 November 2015,
however he submitted a press article that explains that it was initiated sometime at the end of May or beginning of
June of 2015. This information is not sufficient for this Tribunal to corroborate when was this extradition request
issued. See Claimant’s Hearing Power Presentation, at 5 and Exhibit C-62, W. Stewart, “Assassination fear as
Russia demands extradition of ‘Putin’s banker’ from Britain”, Daily Mail Online, 8 June 2015.

29 Exhibit C-87, Public Prosecutor Website Press Release (http://genproc.gov.ru/smi/news/archive/news-
1168054/). See also Claimant’s Letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017. The Tribunal further notes that
Respondent has not contested the fact that the Russian Federation’s Public Prosecutor officially requested the
extradition of Mr. Pugachev to Russian authorities.

 

  

 

272.

273.

274.

275.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 58 of 92

facie existence of a right susceptible of protection; (iii) necessity of the measure requested;
(iv) urgency of the measure requested; and (v) proportionality of the measure requested.”

At the outset, this Tribunal notes that the standard to grant the suspension or obstruction of
any criminal investigation or proceedings is very high and, in any case, higher than the
threshold that Claimant must satisfy to suspend civil proceedings. This is so because the
relief sought by the interim measures related to criminal proceedings and investigations
would interfere with Respondent’s sovereign right and duty to investigate and prosecute
crime.

The findings of the tribunal in Hydro v. Albania, cited by Claimant, supports requiring a
very high threshold for this type of interim measures. As the Hydro v. Albania tribunal
acknowledged, “any obstruction of the investigation or prosecution of conduct that is
reasonably suspected to be criminal in nature should only be ordered where that is
absolutely necessary.”74!

In the case at hand, this Tribunal considers that: (a) Claimant has not established that it is
necessary and proportional to order Russia to suspend, and abstain from initiating, criminal
proceedings and international cooperation requests —other than the France Extradition
Request— against Mr. Pugachev, his family and individuals related to him; nonetheless, (b)
Claimant’s request to order Russia to suspend the France Extradition Request, and to abstain
from initiating any other such request during this arbitration, satisfies all requirements for
granting interim measures.

a) Claimant’s request to order Respondent to suspend, and abstain from initiating,
criminal proceedings and international cooperation requests against himself, his
family and individuals related to him

This Tribunal considers that Claimant has failed to establish that an order to Russia to
suspend, and abstain from initiating, criminal proceedings or international cooperation
request —other than the France Extradition Request— is an interim measure that is (1)
necessary to prevent any “irreparable harm” or “serious prejudice” to Claimant’s rights, and
(2) proportional in light of the circumstances of the present case.

0 These criteria are both found in the rulings presented by Claimant and Respondent. Exhibit RL-36, United
States (Tallim) B.V. and Aktsiselts Tallinna Vesi v. Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/24, Decision on
Respondents Application for Provisional Measures, 12 May 2016, 78; and Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC
Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v. Government of Mongolia. Order on interim measures,
September 2, 2008, 140.

24 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on
Provisional Measures, 3 March 2016, { 3.16.

276.

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 59 of 92

J. Claimant has failed to establish that it is necessary to order Russia to suspend,
and abstain from initiating, criminal proceedings or international
cooperation request —other than the France Extradition Request— against him,
his family and individuals related to him

The Parties do not dispute that, pursuant to Article 26.1 of UNCITRAL Rules, for a Tribunal
to grant an interim measure it must be deemed necessary. The Parties further agree that a
measure is necessary if it is aimed at preventing a “substantial” or “irreparable” harm to the
rights one of the parties."

Nonetheless, as previously mentioned in Section (IV)(A)(b)(1), the Parties disagree on
whether harm that may be compensated by an award on damages is “irreparable.” On the
one hand, Claimant argues that substantial harm must be assessed on a case-by-case basis
and that the risk of aggravating the dispute has been considered by tribunals as a risk of
substantial or irreparable harm.”“* On the other hand, Respondent argues that most tribunals
have argued that a harm is not irreparable if it can be compensated by damages.”

In this case, the Tribunal considers that the request to order Russia to suspend pending
criminal proceedings and existing mutual legal assistance requests —other than the France
Extradition Request— is not necessary, even if the irreparable harm were not remediable by
monetary damages.

Claimant argues that the suspension of the criminal proceedings is necessary to prevent an
irreparable harm to his right to the status quo, the non-aggravation of the dispute and the
integrity of the arbitration process.

Claimant argues that the criminal proceedings “put at risk the integrity of the procedure and
of Claimant’s right to defend himself properly.” This Tribunal considers that Claimant
has not sufficiently demonstrated that the pending criminal proceedings in Russia and
Switzerland, the Mutual Legal Assistance Requests, the International Arrest Warrant and
the UK Extradition Request affect the integrity of this arbitration. Moreover, Claimant has
not provided conclusive evidence that shows that Claimant’s ability to defend himself in
the arbitration has been hindered by these proceedings.

The record shows that since the commencement of the pending criminal proceedings against
Mr. Pugachev and the Mutual Legal Assistance Requests, Claimant has been able to pursue
his claims in this arbitration. Since then, Claimant has presented the Notice of Arbitration,
filed a Request for Interim Measures, filed two requests for immediate interim orders, has
responded to Respondent’s Security for Cost Application and Claimant’s counsel presented

22 Request for Interim Measures, | 104; Response to Request for Interim Measures, { 80.

243

Request for Interim Measures, {| 108.

>4 Response to Request for Interim Measures, 81.
245 Request for Interim Measures, § 251.

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

246

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 60 of 92

oral submissions to this Tribunal at the Hearing.™“° These circumstances suggest that the
existence of the pending criminal proceedings per se would not prevent Claimant from
pursuing this arbitration.

Claimant also argues that the criminal proceedings aggravate the dispute because these (i)
are aimed at obtaining witness statements against Mr. Pugachev from individuals under
duress; (ii) cause Mr. Pugachev substantial moral harm; and (iii) are used as a basis to issue
extradition orders against Mr. Pugachev.7*”

In this case, the Tribunal considers that Claimant has not presented convincing evidence to
demonstrate that pending criminal proceedings and existing mutual assistance requests
affect his right to the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute, for the following
reasons.

Claimant has not presented any evidence to substantiate his claim that the criminal
proceedings “are a tactical move” to obtain witness statements against him.”4* Claimant
solely identifies a series of criminal proceedings that have been initiated against several
individuals, such as Mr. Didenko (former CEO of IIB) and Mr. Dimitry Amunts (former
member of IIB’s board of directors). Nonetheless, Claimant has failed to submit evidence
that may even suggest that criminal proceedings are being used to fabricate evidence against
him, nor that Respondent is forcing any prosecuted individual to testify against him.

The fact that criminal proceedings that commenced before the Notice of Arbitration, have
been initiated against individuals allegedly related to Claimant, or allegedly related to this
arbitration, is not alone sufficient evidence to demonstrate that their sole purposes is to
pressure individuals to testify against Claimant.?°

Claimant has also argued that a major risk of aggravation arises because criminal
proceedings are causing him moral harm. Claimant states that this moral harm is the result
of “[hJaving to live with his name mentioned in an Interpol Red Notice.”**! However,
Claimant failed to explain how this moral harm would aggravate the dispute. Moreover, in
his Request for Interim Measures, Claimant explained to this Tribunal that “[o]n 11 January
2016, following an application by Mr. Pugachev, Interpol’s Commission recommended that

This Tribunal further notes that Claimant had planned to appear at the Hearing. He finally could not attend the

Hearing because he was urgently hospitalized for a heart condition. See Hearing, Tr., 1:18-2:7.
247 Request for Interim Measures, {| 253-255.

248 Thid., | 255.

49 Thid., {I 264-268.

250 Exhibit CL-14, Lao Holdings NV v. Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling
on Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order, 30 May 2014, § 30 (“a criminal proceeding does not per se
(...) aggravate the dispute”).

25! Request for Interim Measures, § 255.

287.

288.

289.

290.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 61 of 92

the Red Notice be withdrawn from Interpol’s website.”?*? Since the Interpol Red Notice has
been withdrawn, this argument is rendered moot.

Additionally, this Tribunal considers that there is no element of necessity in the requested
suspension of the pending criminal proceedings in Russia and Switzerland, the Mutual
Legal Assistance Requests and the International Arrest Warrant, given that these
proceedings were part of the status quo and the dispute submitted to this Tribunal at the
time of the Notice of Arbitration.

All criminal proceedings in Russia and Switzerland, but one, started before Claimant filed
the Notice of Arbitration, on 21 September 2015. Indeed, the first indictment is dated 28
November 2013, the second one is dated 10 April 2014, the third one is dated 1 June 2015,7°3
and the criminal investigation in Switzerland commenced in 2013. Likewise, the Mutual
Legal Assistance Requests and the International Arrest Warrant were issued in 2013 and
early 2014, before the Notice of Arbitration was filed.

All the aforementioned proceedings were ongoing when Claimant submitted his Notice of
Arbitration (i.e., 21 September 2015). In fact, in his Notice of Arbitration, Claimant already
mentioned the majority of these criminal proceedings as the underlying facts that gave rise
to the dispute.?** Nonetheless, as previously mentioned, Claimant failed to request a
declaratory relief in his Notice of Arbitration that sought to compel Respondent to cease the
continuation of the ongoing criminal proceedings, including the Mutual Legal Assistance
Requests and the International Arrest Warrant. °° This Tribunal is of the view that if such
proceedings were truly causing an irreparable harm to Claimant’s rights, he would have
requested such relief in his Notice of Arbitration or immediately upon constitution of the
Tribunal.

This Tribunal notes that Claimant has cited the tribunals in Hydro v. Albania and Quiborax
v. Bolivia to support his request to suspend pending criminal proceedings and international
cooperation requests. Nonetheless, unlike this case, the criminal proceedings in Quiborax
v. Bolivia were filed a considerable time after the respective notice of arbitration.?° In
Hydro v. Albania, claimants were not formally notified of any criminal proceedings against
them, and their arrest warrants were issued less than one week before the initiation of the
arbitration.*”

282 Jhid., | 243.

253 These three indictments were later joined in criminal proceeding No. 2017/712005-11, which Claimant has
specifically requested this Tribunal to suspend. See Request for Interim Measures, { 260.

24 Notice of Arbitration, Mf 76, 107-108.

285 Jbid., 147.

286 Exhibit CL-7, Quiborax SA, Non Metallic Minerals SA and Allan Fosk Kapliin v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, 26 February 2010, {| 4-11, 27-45.

281 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro Srl and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional
Measures, 3 March 2016, { 2.30.

291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 62 of 92

Against this background, the criminal proceedings in Russia and Switzerland, including the
Mutual Legal Assistance Request and the International Arrest Warrant, were well known to
Claimant at the time he submitted the dispute to this Tribunal, thus they are an integral part
of the status quo and the dispute. For this reason, Claimant may not claim that these
proceedings cause an irreparable harm to his right to the status quo and non-aggravation of
the dispute.

As for the only criminal proceedings that started following the Notice of Arbitration,
Claimant has not satisfied his burden to demonstrate that it is necessary to suspend it to
prevent any “irreparable harm.” Claimant has argued that, on 25 November 2015, a fourth
indictment was issued against Mr. Pugachev. However, Claimant did not submit any
document or other evidence that supports his allegation that an indictment was issued on 25
November 2015. Moreover, Claimant has failed to provide sufficient evidence as to why
these criminal proceedings are causing an “irreparable harm” to him by aggravating the
dispute, affecting the status quo or affecting the integrity of this arbitration. This Tribunal
already referred to the arguments advanced by Claimant in the preceding paragraphs.

As indicated in Section (IV)(A)(b)(1), the mere fact that the judicial decision that a party
seeks to be suspended through an interim measure precedes the initiation of the arbitration,
does not imply per se that the said interim measure cannot be granted. However, in these
cases, the evidence required to demonstrate the relationship of the measure sought to be
suspended with the arbitration is higher, and the Tribunal’s analysis must be cautious in
order to prevent unjustified interferences in the sovereign judicial decisions of States.

For these reasons, Claimant did not sufficiently establish that the interim measures related
to the suspension of the criminal proceedings in Russia and Switzerland, the Mutual
Extradition Requests and the International Arrest Warrant are necessary.

2. Claimant has failed to establish that it is proportionate to order Russia to
suspend, and abstain from initiating, criminal proceedings or international
cooperation requests —other than the France Extradition Request

The Parties do not dispute that proportionality is a requirement that must be established
before a tribunal grants an interim measure.** The Parties also agree that Article 26(3) of
the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules?» illustrates the importance and reaffirms the
principle of proportionality in international arbitration.

258 Request for Interim Measures, | 112-115; Response to Request for Interim Measures, {| 94-97.

259 Exhibit RL-35, 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Article 26(3). (“Harm not adequately reparable by an
award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweigh the harm
that the measures are likely to cause to the other party if implemented”).

260 Request for Interim Measures, J 114; Response to Request for Interim Measures, {J 95-96.

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 63 of 92

The tribunal in Paushok v. Mongolia is quoted as having established the applicable standard
to evaluate the proportionality of interim measures under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. In
its ruling “the tribunal is called upon to weigh the balance of inconvenience in the
imposition of interim measures upon the parties.”*°' This Tribunal agrees that it must
balance the alleged harm caused to Claimant by not granting the interim measures against
the potential harm caused to Respondent if these measures were granted.

Accordingly, the Tribunal must assess the harm caused to Claimant by the criminal
proceedings, the Mutual Legal Assistance Requests, the International Arrest Warrant and
the UK Extradition Request against the harm infringed on Respondent if it were ordered to
stay, and abstain from initiating, any criminal proceeding and international cooperation
request against Mr. Pugachev, his family and individuals related to him.

In this case, the Tribunal is of the view that ordering a State to suspend, or abstain from
initiating, criminal proceedings and international cooperation requests encroaches the
sovereign State’s rights and duty to investigate and prosecute crime. As acknowledged by
the tribunal in Hydro v. Albania, “(i]t is trite to say that criminal law and procedure are a
most obvious and undisputed part of a State’s sovereignty.” In this sense, a particularly
high threshold must be met for this Tribunal to grant a provisional measure related to
criminal proceedings.

In particular, the breadth of the interim measure requested by Claimant would considerably
limit Russia’s ability to investigate and prosecute crime in relation to events that took place
within its jurisdiction. Claimant’s request, among others, seeks to order Russia to suspend,
and abstain from, initiating criminal prosecution against an undefined category of persons,
namely, “individuals related to [Mr. Pugachev].” Thus, granting such vague and broad
interim measure would place an undue burden on Respondent.

Moreover, this Tribunal considers that the requested interim measure is disproportionate
because it unduly and unjustifiably encroaches Russia’s future ability to initiate criminal
proceedings against any of the named individuals, and request international cooperation in
this context, including extradition requests. In fact, this interim measure even forbids Russia
from initiating criminal proceedings that would have a reasonable foundation under its
applicable laws.

In this context, Claimant must overcome a particularly high threshold before this Tribunal
may order the interim measure requested related to criminal measures. However, Claimant
has failed to do so.

2%! Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostoknefiegaz Company
v. Government of Mongolia, UNCITRAL Case, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, 1 79.

28 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on
Provisional Measures, 3 March 2016, {{ 3.16.

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 64 of 92

Claimant has failed to provide sufficient evidence that demonstrates that pending criminal
proceedings in Russia and Switzerland and the international cooperation requests (i.e.,
Mutual Legal Assistance Requests, the International Arrest Warrant and the UK Extradition
Request) are affecting his capacity to pursue his rights in this arbitration. Moreover, any
harm that may derive from these proceedings would be mitigated by the fact that Claimant
currently resides in France, and that this Tribunal has decided to suspend the France
Extradition Request pursuant to the terms set forth below.

For these reasons, this Tribunal has decided that the circumstances of this case do not
warrant this Tribunal to encroach on Russia’s sovereign right to investigate and prosecute
crime by ordering Russia to suspend, and abstain from initiating, criminal proceedings and
international cooperation requests —other than the extradition request to France— against
Claimant, his family and individuals related to him.

b) Claimant’s request to order Russia to suspend the France Extradition Request
satisfies all requirements for granting interim measures

After carefully considering the submissions of the Parties, this Tribunal has decided to order
Respondent to suspend the France Extradition Request, and to abstain from initiating any
future extradition request to France. This Tribunal further clarifies that such interim
measure solely seeks the suspension of the France Extradition Request under the strict terms
set forth below.

In this regard, the suspension of the France Extradition Request meets all the requirements
to issue an interim measure.

I. Prima facie jurisdiction

This Tribunal is of the view that such assessment does not require it to definitely satisfy
itself that it has jurisdiction over the merits of the case.” All that is required is that the
provisions invoked by Claimant appear, prima facie, to afford a basis to establish
jurisdiction.

While this Tribunal has not yet finally determined that is has jurisdiction on the merits, it is
satisfied that Claimant, in his Notice of Arbitration and Request for Interim Measures,”°
has established a basis upon which the prima facie jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be
founded:

283 See Section (IV)(B)(b)

264 Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CISC Company v. Government of Mongolia,
UNCITRAL Case, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, {| 47-54; Exhibit RL-14, Occidental
Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/06/I1, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, 155.

285 Request for Interim Measures, ff 116-124.

308.

309.

310.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 65 of 92

(i) Article 7 of the France-Russia BIT provides for arbitration under the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules;

(ii) until proven otherwise, and without pre-judging Respondent’s jurisdictional
objections, Mr. Pugachev is a French national, and thus appears to be an investor pursuant
to Article 1.2(a) of the France-Russia BIT;

(iii) | Claimant appears to have made investments, pursuant to Article 1.1. of the France-
Russia BIT, in a renovation project of condominiums in the Red Square area, in two
shipyards and an associated construction bureau, in a company that hold a license to develop
and mine coal, and in 167 plots of land in the Moscow area; and

(iv) the dispute is related to investments in Russia.

This Tribunal acknowledges that Respondent has raised a series of jurisdictional objections.
However, this Tribunal is not required to review at this stage the substance of Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections to consider a request for provisional measures. °° Indeed,
Respondent accepts that this Tribunal may order interim measures, even while jurisdiction
is being challenged.”*” Moreover, Respondent has indicated that it will raise a number of
jurisdictional objections in respect to Claimant’s claims.?°* Thus, the Tribunal considers it
appropriate to address these objections in due course and after the Parties have fully
presented their submissions on this issue.

Unlike Claimant’s request to suspend civil enforcement proceedings, there is no question
that the France Extradition Request is a sovereign act of the State of Russia, a Party to the
France-Russia BIT. The Tribunal therefore concludes, that for the purposes of a request for
interim measures, the prima facie jurisdiction of the Tribunal has been established.

2. Prima facie establishment of the case
The Parties seem to agree, citing Paushok v. Mongolia, that this Tribunal needs not go

beyond assessing whether the claims are “on their face, frivolous or obviously outside the
competence of the Tribunal.”?

266 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on
Provisional Measures, 3 March 2016, {{ 3.7.

267 Response to Request for Interim Measures, J 64.

268 Thid., 89.

269 Exhibit CL-4, Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CJSC Vostokneftegaz Company v.
Government of Mongolia, Order on Interim Measures, 2 September 2008, {[ 50. See also Request for Interim
Measures, {| 93-94; Response to Request for Interim Measures, {| 77.

311.

312.

313.

314.

315.

316.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 66 of 92

In the present circumstances, this Tribunal is satisfied that Claimant has established a prima
facie basis of the merits of his case. In particular, Claimant has established (i) the facts that
allegedly give rise to the dispute; (ii) the provisions of the France-Russia BIT that
Respondent allegedly breached; (iii) the relief sought; and (iv) provided sufficient
documentary evidence to support, on a prima facie basis, his claims in this arbitration.

More importantly, Claimant has further identified, among others, that the procedural
integrity of the arbitration and the non-aggravation of the dispute are rights protected form
the basis of Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures. In this particular case, the Tribunal
is satisfied that a real issue arises in relation to Claimant’s right to the procedural integrity
of this arbitration. As will be explained below, Mr. Pugachev faces extradition from France
as a result of the France Extradition Request and his possible extradition and further
incarceration in Russia would prevent him from effectively participating in this arbitration.

For these reasons, the Tribunal considers, that for the purposes of a request for interim
measures, Claimant has prima facie established his case on the merits. This ruling, again,
does not imply that the Tribunal would reach a similar conclusion on the merits of the case
or that is pre-judging in any way the merits of this case.

3. Necessity

This Tribunal notes that an interim measure is necessary where it prevents “irreparable harm”
to the requesting party’s rights. As acknowledged by the tribunal in Tokios Tokelés, a case
cited by Respondent, “a provisional measure is necessary where the actions of a party ‘are
capable of causing or threatening irreparable prejudice of the rights invoked.’”?”°

Claimant submits that extradition requests put at “risk the integrity of the procedure and of
Claimant’s right to defend himself properly.”?7! Claimant further alleges that extradition
would prevent Claimant from fully participating in this arbitration and would have a
dramatic consequence in his ability to defend himself.””? Claimant also notes that, even if
France has a tradition not to extradite its own nationals, the concerned person can be held
in custody during the duration of the extradition proceedings, which last between three to
six years.?73

Respondent notes that Mr. Pugachev himself considers that France would normally refuse
to extradite him, since he is a French citizen. Thus, there is no need to award Claimant the
relief he seeks.” Respondent, moreover, affirms that even if Claimant were extradited he

210 Exhibit CL-11, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3, 18 January 2005, { 8.
27! Request for Interim Measures, J 251, 257.
2 Hearing, Tr., 81:24-82:2.
273 Claimant's letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, § 11.
1.

274 Hearing, Tr., 82:3:

 

317.

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 67 of 92

could still appear in hearings and instruct counsel via videoconference, wherever their
location.?”°

In this case, the Tribunal considers that the France Extradition Request threatens to cause
Claimant an irreparable harm to his right to (i) the procedural integrity of the arbitration and
(ii) his right to defend himself.

The possible detention of Mr. Pugachev in France for extradition purposes and the eventual
incarceration of Mr. Pugachev in Russia, as a result of the France Extradition Request,
would cause irreparable harm to Claimant and to the integrity of this arbitration. Claimant’s
detention or imprisonment would substantially hinder Claimant’s ability to present his case
before this Tribunal and would prevent him from fully participating in this arbitration.

Claimant’s ability to defend himself would be dramatically undermined. If Claimant were
extradited, his incarceration would limit his access to legal counsel, who is based in France.
Even if Claimant would be allowed to contact his counsel by videoconference or other
similar means, Claimant’s imprisonment would undoubtedly limit his capacity to react
promptly to developments in this arbitration and to be informed on recent developments in
this arbitration. Even if he is allowed to participate in hearings and communicate with his
legal counsel through videoconference, such participation in the proceedings would be
conditioned to the terms of his imprisonment. Thus, Claimant’s imprisonment in Russia
implies that his availability, and contact with legal counsel and the Tribunal, would be under
the control of Respondent.

This Tribunal considers that the harm set out above would not be adequately reparable by
an award of damages, and thus even satisfy the stricter interpretation of “irreparable harm”
endorsed by Respondent.

4. Urgency

As acknowledged by the tribunal in Chevron v. Ecuador, urgency is established where there
is a “risk that a substantial harm may befall the Claimants before this Tribunal can decide
the Parties’ dispute by any final award.”?’° Similarly, the tribunal in Tokios Tokelés, a case
cited by Respondent, affirmed that “a measure is urgent where ‘action prejudicial to the
rights of either party is likely to be taken before such final decision is taken.’”?””

Claimant submits that, in the case of extradition, the urgency is characterized by the very
nature of the risk of extradition. Claimant, citing Hydro v. Albania, explains that extradition

275 Response to Request for Interim Measures, | 155.

26 Exhibit CL-32, Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No 2009-23, Second Interim Award on Interim Measures, 16 February 2012, 2.

2” Exhibit CL-11, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order n°3, 18 January
2005, 18.

323.

324.

325.

326.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 68 of 92

causes an imminent risk to a claimant’s ability to effectively participate in an arbitration
proceeding, given that extradition may be an accomplished fact by the time an order is
made.?”*

As set out above, Claimant further argues that, even if it is true, in principle, that France
does not extradite its own nationals, French courts’ usual practice is to place under custody
the subject of the request (i.e., Mr. Pugachev) pending the examination of the extradition
request.’”? These proceedings may last between three to five years, and Claimant may
remain in custody during this period. Moreover, extradition requests are not public in France.
Therefore, Claimant affirms that he is no condition to satisfy any burden, given that he does
not have access to the relevant information.**°

Respondent submits that Claimant himself considers that he would not be extradited from
France, given that he is a French citizen. Thus, there is no need to award Claimant the relief
he seeks. 7°! Respondent argues that Claimant’s assertion that he may be held in custody by
the French authorities between three to five years pending the examination of the extradition
is false. Respondent explains that this assertion is not supported in French law, which
establishes a swift process for addressing extradition requests. Pursuant to this process,
Respondent concludes that, if conditions for extradition are not met, Mr. Pugachev would
be in custody for a “very short period of time, at most a few weeks.”

This Tribunal concludes that the very nature of extradition proceedings in France shows
that it is highly probable that a substantial harm may befall Claimant before this Tribunal
issues a final award on the merits. It is not disputed by the Parties that the French courts
have the authority to hold in custody Mr. Pugachev pending the examination of the France
Extradition Request, even if they disagree on the duration of such detention in custody.
Moreover, Respondent itself has recognized that French legislation provides “for a swift
process for addressing extradition requests.”?** Thus, there is an imminent risk that Mr.
Pugachev could be placed in legal custody pending the extradition request and that he would
be extradited before this Tribunal issues a final award.

This Tribunal further notes that the confidentiality of the France Extradition Request
warrants its suspension. Indeed, Claimant may be served —or even placed in custody— at an
advance stage of the examination of these requests, without prior notice. At this point, it
would take some time for Claimant to seek further orders from this Tribunal, thus an
extradition may be a consummated fact before an order is issued by this Tribunal.

278 Request for Interim Measures, 257; Hearing, Tr., 34:24-35:6.

279 Hearing, Tr., 34:5-12; Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, ff 11-12.
280 Hearing, Tr., 34:10-17; Claimant’s letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, { 11.

28! Hearing Tr., 82:3-11.

°82 Respondent's letter to the Tribunal dated 8 March 2017, ff 15-19.

283 Thid., 17.

327.

328.

329.

330.

331.

332.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 69 of 92

This Tribunal thus considers that the suspension of the France Extradition Request is urgent,
because there is an “imminent” risk that Mr. Pugachev would be placed in custody in France
and extradited and incarcerated in Russia.

5. Proportionality

As explained above, this Tribunal must weigh the balance of inconvenience in the
imposition of interim measures upon the Parties. Accordingly, the Tribunal must balance
the harm caused to Claimant by not suspending the France Extradition Request and the harm
caused to Respondent if the France Extradition Request was stayed for purposes of this
arbitration.

As set out above, Claimant argues that the outcome of the extradition is critical for Mr.
Pugachev’s ability to defend himself and right to access to justice and due process more
generally. Claimant also notes that even if France has a tradition not to extradite its own
nationals, Mr. Pugachev could be held in custody pending the arbitration proceedings. Thus,
Mr. Pugachev’s incarceration in Russia, and even if he is held in custody in France pending
extradition, would jeopardize the arbitration proceedings.”

Respondent submits that States have the right to conduct criminal proceedings alongside
arbitration proceedings. The France Extradition Request has been made in connection with
criminal charges brought against Claimant in the Russian Federation. The Russian
authorities are entitled to make the France Extradition Request in support of criminal
proceedings against Claimant. Respondent further argues that the criminal proceedings
were commenced long before this arbitration, and thus this arbitration provides no reason
for Russian authorities to cease from pursuing valid criminal proceedings.

In this case, this Tribunal considers that to suspend the France Extradition Request is
proportionate. The France Extradition Request is not divorced from the dispute at issue in
this arbitration. As explained above, the possible incarceration of Mr. Pugachev, as a result
of the France Extradition Request, would substantially undermine his rights to (i) the
integrity of the arbitration and (ii) his ability to defend himself. In particular, Mr. Pugachev
would be prevented from adequately and effectively pursuing his case and participating in
this arbitration.

This Tribunal acknowledges that the interim measure would affect Respondent’s ability to
proceed with the extradition of Mr. Pugachev from France in the immediate future. However,
the stay of the France Extradition Request would not definitely terminate it. Indeed, this
interim measure solely requires Respondent to suspend the France Extradition Request in
the present circumstances and for purposes of preserving the integrity and efficiency of this

28 Claimant's letter to the Tribunal dated 3 March 2017, 4f{ 10-13.
285 Respondent's letter to the Tribunal dated 8 March 2017, 4 9-12.

333.

334.

335.

336.

337.

338.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 70 of 92

arbitration. Moreover, this interim measure does not affect the criminal proceedings in
Russia against Mr. Pugachev. Hence, this interim measure does not disproportionately
encroach on Russia’s sovereign right to prosecute crime.

For the above-mentioned reasons, the balance of inconveniences upon the parties derived
from the suspension of the France Extradition Request demonstrates that such interim
measures are proportional.

In ruling to suspend the France Extradition Request, this Tribunal clarifies that it is not pre-
judging the merits of this case. Moreover, this Tribunal reserves its right to withdraw or
modify this interim measure if Respondent demonstrates in a later stage of this arbitration
that the France Extradition Request does not undermine the integrity of this arbitration or
Claimant’s ability to defend himself in this arbitration.

For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal will order Respondent to take all actions
necessary to suspend the France Extradition Request.

Interim measures related to the protection of witnesses
Claimant requests this Tribunal to:

(i) Order Russia to take all measures required to ensure that individuals who
Mr Pugachev would need to call as witnesses in the present arbitration
proceedings will be able to testify. This relates notably to Mr Ulyukaev and Mr
Amunts, whose testimony Mr Pugachev will seek in the present arbitration
proceedings and to any other witness already or later identified by Claimant as
such;

(ii) Order Russia to stay any criminal proceedings against potential witnesses,
notably Mr Ulyukaev and Mr Amunts.?8°

This Tribunal finds, as it will explain below, that Claimant’s request for protection of
witnesses is (a) unsubstantiated and (b) unprecise. Accordingly, this Tribunal notes that
Claimant failed to demonstrate that his request satisfies the requirements for interim
measures.

a) Claimant’s request is unsubstantiated

Claimant states that since Russia became aware of the potential BIT claim that could be
filed by Mr. Pugachev, Russia instigated various actions against potential witnesses who
could corroborate Mr. Pugachev’s claims.”*” Claimant further maintains that Russia is

286 Request for Interim Measures, | 347(4).
281 Jhid., | 262.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 71 of 92

currently trying to force the testimonies of other potential key witnesses that could be central

in the present arbitration to establish Claimant’s case.?5*

339. To corroborate the aforesaid allegation, Claimant mentions the dismissal from office of six
individuals, and the initiation of criminal proceedings or arrest of another five.” Because
of the importance of evidencing the manner in which Claimant sustains this claim, this

Tribunal transcribes it below:

340. Claimant also mentions that Mr. Dmitry Amunts, who was for a short-term member of the
IIB’s Board of Directors, is being investigated in criminal proceedings in Russia, and is

288 Jhid., | 267.
28° Tbid., | 264.
2% Tbid., 264.

- Mr Alexei Kudrin, former Minister of Finance and First Deputy Prime
Minister, who had been responsible for the purchase by Russia of the Shipyard
Interests, was dismissed from office.

- Mr Igor Sechin, who was organizing the Shipyard Interests’ sale, was
dismissed as Chairman of the Board of United Shipbuilding Corporation
(USC).

- Mr Vladimir Lisin, Chairman of the Board of USC after Mr Sechin, with whom
Mr Pugachev conducted the negotiations in London in relation to the
compensation for the Shipyard Interests was dismissed in June 2012.

- Mr Roman Trotsenko, President of USC who actively participated in the
expropriation of the Shipyard Interests and was the advisor of Mr Sechin, was
also dismissed and a criminal investigation has been initiated against him. He
was also put on a wanted person list.

- Mr Sergey Ignatyev, Head of the Central Bank, who was also organizing the
Shipyard Interests’ deal, was also dismissed.

- Mr Vladimir Kozhin, Head of Presidential Property Management Department
and in charge of Red Square and Moscow region land projects was also
dismissed.

- Mr Alexander Dunayev, the “right hand” of Mr Valery Miroshnikov at the
DIA, was indicted and fled to Israel. He is currently on the Interpol Red Notice
list and an extradition procedure has been launched against him.

- Mr Mikhail Bashmakov, associate of Mr. Miroshnikov, is being prosecuted in
Russia and is prevented from leaving Russia.

- Mr Andrey Fomichev, Director of Baltic and Northern Shipyards at the time
of their expropriation, is currently under criminal investigation and prevented
from leaving Russia.

- Mr Vladimir Yevtushenkov, majority shareholder and Chairman of the Board
of Sistema PJSFC, which was the majority owner of Bashneft [...] Mr
Yevtushenkov was arrested in Russia. In December 2014, Bashneft was
expropriated by Russia.

- Mr Alexey Ulyukaev, the Minister of Economy, First Deputy Head of the
Central Bank at the time of the expropriation of the Shipyard Interests, was
arrested based on allegedly fabricated evidence and is being now held under
house arrest.

341.

342.

343.

344.

345.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 72 of 92

being held in prison during the investigation. ?°?! Claimant states that the criminal
proceedings in Russia against Mr. Amunts have recently accelerated because “Respondent
seeks to convict Claimant’s potential witness as quickly as possible before this Tribunal can

grant any interim measures.”??

On the contrary, Respondent asserts that Claimant has not provided any evidence to
substantiate his allegations that Russia has, or intends to take, any action which will prevent
Claimant from fully participating and presenting his case.?°

At the Hearing, Respondent argued that “the criminal proceedings against Mr. Amunts have
been pending for at least three years now. It is not that quick. Mr. Pugachev has not put
forward any evidence to suggest that they are connected to this arbitration, those criminal
proceedings, or that they are taking place unnecessarily quickly or not in accordance with
Russian law.”?°*

First of all, this Tribunal reiterates that, as the tribunal in Hydro v. Albania remarked, “any
obstruction of the investigation or prosecution of conduct that is reasonably suspected to be
criminal in nature should only be ordered where that is absolutely necessary.” As
explained in Section (IV)(B)(a)(2), there is a high threshold for ordering the suspension of
criminal proceedings.

Having carefully considered the arguments put forward by the Parties, this Tribunal notes
that Claimant’s request is unsubstantiated. Of all cases of dismissal or initiation of criminal
proceedings alleged by Claimant and transcribed above, none of them is supported by
evidence. The mere existence of the alleged facts is not clear to this Tribunal.

Moreover, this Tribunal finds that Claimant failed to prove the link between the dismissals
and the initiation of criminal proceedings and the present dispute. It is not sufficiently clear
that those facts are related to, or are the consequence of, the dispute brought before this
Tribunal. As the Churchill Mining v. Indonesia tribunal stated, the mere fact of the existence
of criminal proceedings cannot be argued in isolation from the purposes of obtaining interim
measures: “while fears and concerns deriving from an ongoing criminal investigation may
be understandable, it is not sufficient to allege, without more, that the possibility of being
the target of a criminal investigation is intimidatory to obtain protection through provisional

measures.”?"°

2! Thid., | 268.
22 Pbid., | 271.

293

Response to Request for Interim Measures, 165.

24 Hearing, Tr., 92:5-11.
25 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro S.r.l. and others v. Republic of Albania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on

Provis

  

al Measures, 3 March 2016, {{ 3.16.

2% Exhibit RL-48, Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Lid v. Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, 72.

346.

347.

348.

349.

350.

351.

352.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 73 of 92

This Tribunal further finds that Claimant has not provided any evidence to show that
Respondent has prevented Mr. Pugachev from obtaining testimonies from potential
witnesses. In this regard, Claimant did not sufficiently prove that Respondent’s actions will
prevent the individuals from appearing as witnesses in this arbitration. Likewise, Claimant
failed to provide evidence of how Respondent is currently trying to force testimonies of
other potential witnesses.

For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal finds that Claimant’s request regarding the
protection of witnesses is unsubstantiated.

b) Claimant’s request is unprecise

As noted above, Claimant requests this Tribunal to order Respondent to “take all measures
required to ensure that individuals who Mr. Pugachev would need to call as witnesses in the
present arbitration proceeding will be able to testify [...] [and to] suspend any criminal
proceedings against potential witnesses.”?°”

Furthermore, Claimant requests the Tribunal to:

(i) Order Russia to stay the criminal proceedings against Mr. Amunts and Mr.
Ulyukaev;

(ii) Order Russia not to threaten or sue any potential witness linked to this
arbitration or which will be designated as such by Mr. Pugachev.

(iii) Order Russia consequently to take all appropriate measure to suspend the
criminal proceedings and to refrain from initiation any other criminal
proceedings directly related to the arbitration or engaging in any other course
of action which might jeopardise the procedural integrity of the arbitration.”

On this matter, Respondent argued at the Hearing that “the effect of Mr. Pugachev’s
requested relief would be to require the stay of any criminal proceedings against potential
witnesses. That is to say that it gives anyone who Mr Pugachev identifies as a potential
witness free rein to commit criminal offences without fear of sanctions.”””

Respondent further alleges that Claimant’s request to take all measures required to ensure
that individuals who Mr. Pugachev would need to call as witnesses is an extremely broad
category.*

This Tribunal notes that Claimant’s request to “order Russia to take all measures required
to ensure individuals who Mr. Pugachev would need to call as witnesses in the present

2°? Request for Interim Measures, {[ 347.

28 Thid., (277.

29 Hearing, Tr., 92:18-23.

5 Response to Request for Interim Measures, J 166.

353.

354.

355.

356.

357.

358.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 74 of 92

arbitration proceedings will be able to testify’*"' is a request for Respondent to merely

comply with one of its obligations in this arbitration.

On the other hand, this Tribunal considers that Claimant’s request to “order Russia to stay
any criminal proceedings against potential witnesses” *°? is too broad in scope to be
actionable. The “potential witnesses” category is so broad that would prevent Russia from
prosecuting a potentially indefinite number of individuals. Moreover, in the manner in
which the relief is requested, any person who is a potential witness would have a de facto
immunity to be investigated for criminal acts. This Tribunal observes that the granting of
such an order would be an extreme burden on Respondent.

In this manner, this Tribunal finds that Claimant’s request related to the protection of
witnesses is unprecise and would be a disproportionate burden on Respondent.

This Tribunal concludes that Claimant’s request for the protection of witnesses is
unsubstantiated and unprecise. Accordingly, Claimant failed to demonstrate that his request
for protection of witnesses satisfies the requirements for interim measures. For the above-
mentioned reasons, this Tribunal will deny Claimant’s request related to the protection of
witnesses.

For an application to protect witnesses of the nature requested by Claimant, the applicant
should at least provide: (i) a witness identification; (ii) a description of the conduct of the
State leading to the prevention of access to such a witness; (iii) a generic description of how
the testimony will be relevant and necessary to the case; (iv) and an allegation of how the
particular request meets the five requirements for granting an interim measure. None of the
above have been provided in this case.

Interim measures related to the protection of Mr. Pugachev and other individuals

Claimant requests this Tribunal to order Russia to abstain from taking any action that could
intimidate Mr. Pugachev, his family, advisors, counsels, experts and any person who assists
him in the preparations of the claim in the present arbitration.*

After careful consideration of the arguments brought up by the Parties, this Tribunal
considers that Claimants request is (a) unsubstantiated and (b) unprecise.

5°! Request for Interim Measures, {[ 347.
302 Thid., 347.
303 Thid., | 347(5).

359.

360.

361.

34 Thid.,
35 Tbid.,
3° Thid.,
3°” Tbid.,

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 75 of 92

a) Claimant’s request is unsubstantiated

Claimant asserts that Mr. Pugachev and his family have been threatened and frightened
several times by persons connected to the Respondent.* In this regard, Claimant affirms
that:

a “in June 2011, Mr. Pugachev was kidnapped by two officials of the DIA [...] who
attempted to extort money from Mr. Pugachev by threatening his and his family’s life and

safety;"2°5

(ii) “since 2012, Mr. Pugachev has been under surveillance of Diligence LLC, a private
investigation company hired by the Russian authorities to identify Mr. Pugachev’s assets,
but which also conducted extensive surveillance on Mr. Pugachev’s family and members of
his team assisting in this arbitration, in the UK and France; and

(iii) “on 9 October 2015, Ms. Kate Mallisson, analyst of the security agency GPW Ltd
in London, informed Mr. Pugachev’s former partner that a professional killer had been hired
to kill Mr. Pugachev.”*°”

Respondent, in turn, argues that “Claimant’s allegations with respect to these issues are so
lacking in evidence that they border on the fanciful. In addition, the Claimant has failed to
provide any explanation linking the Respondent to these allegations. The conclusions that

the Claimant draws are therefore wholly unconvincing.”>"*

This Tribunal affords the utmost importance to the security and safety of Mr. Pugachev, his
family, advisors, counsels, experts and any person who assists him in the present arbitration.
Nevertheless, having carefully reviewed the evidence submitted by Mr. Pugachev, this
Tribunal finds that:

a Claimant failed to provide sufficient evidence related to the alleged kidnapping.
There is no evidence on the record, besides Claimant’s assertions, that indicates the
existence of this event;

(ii) Claimant has not demonstrated that Diligence LLC was employed by Respondent.
There is no evidence on the record suggesting that Respondent hired Diligence LLC to put
Mr. Pugachev and his family under surveillance. In this regard, after reviewing specific
evidence on this question, the Tribunal found two relevant exhibits. First, Exhibit C-32,

4 280.
q281.
4282.
285.

308 Response to Request for Interim Measures, | 178.

362.

363.

364.

365.

366.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 76 of 92

which consists of an email sent by Mr. Pugachev himself to French police officers.*”

Second, Exhibit C-33, which is a letter sent by a British law firm to a New Scotland Yard’s
detective with the opinion that Diligence LLC was working under the instruction of
international law firm Hogan Lovells.*!° However, none of these exhibits reasonably
indicate that Diligence LLC was employed by Respondent; and

(iii) Claimant failed to provide sufficient evidence regarding the alleged threat to his life.
In this vein, Exhibit C-33 mentions that “Kate Mallison [...] informed [his] wife, Alexandra
Tolstoy-Miloslavsky, that she had information that someone had contracted a contract killer
in France to kill me.”*!! Furthermore, from the evidence provided by Claimant, it is unclear
how there is a link between the alleged threat and Respondent.

As noted above, this Tribunal does not expect Claimant to prove conclusively the existence
of threats against himself and other individuals. This would constitute and extremely high
burden of proof that Claimant could hardly satisfy. However, Claimant must submit
sufficient evidence to assert at least the nature of the threats made, and the impact on him
and other individuals safety and security.

For these reasons, this Tribunal finds that Claimant’s request regarding the protection of
Mr. Pugachev and other individuals is not sufficiently substantiated.

b) Claimant’s request is unprecise

Claimant makes his request as follows:

i. Order Russia to abstain from taking any action which is aimed at intimidating
Mr Pugachev and the members of his family;

ti. Order Russia to abstain from taking any action that could intimidate
advisors, counsel and experts for Mr Pugachey in the present proceedings, and
more generally any person who assists Mr Pugachev in the preparation of his
claim in arbitration?”

It is unclear for this Tribunal what is the scope of the expressions “any action” or “that could
intimidate”. These expressions are very broad in definition and are subject to a high degree
of subjectivity.

The tribunal in Hydro v. Albania faced a similar request and stated that “the proposed
measure is to refrain from initiating other proceedings ‘directly or indirectly related to the
present arbitration’ and also to ‘engaging in any other course of action that may aggravate

+” Exhibit C-32, Letter from Peters & Peters to Detective Constable Rhodri Gardner, 9 September 2015.
310 Exhibit C-33, Email from Mr. Pugachev to Officer Gardner, 16 October 2015.

3! Exhibit C-33, Email from Mr. Pugachev to Officer Gardner, 16 October 2015.

5!2 Request for Interim Measures, {[ 347.

367.

368.

369.

370.

371.

372.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 77 of 92

the dispute’. The terminology is too broad, vague and uncertain in scope and is in any event

premature.”3!5

This Tribunal notes that the language in which Claimant’s request is formulated is unprecise,
so that its application would be impossible and would place a disproportionate burden on
Respondent.

In conclusion, this Tribunal finds that Claimant’s request regarding the protection of Mr.
Pugachev and other individuals is unsubstantiated and unprecise. In consequence, Claimant
did not satisfy the necessary requirements for granting an interim measure. For these reasons,
this Tribunal will deny Claimant’s request related to the protection of Mr. Pugachev and
other individuals.

Nonetheless, as mentioned in Section ([V)(A)(b)(2), this Tribunal remains open to take any
measure it deems necessary to protect the life and safety of Mr. Pugachev and to protect the
life and safety of other individuals to the extent required to protect the integrity of this
arbitration. However, in order to take any measure, this Tribunal needs to find sufficient
evidence that reasonably indicates the existence of a threat that is attributed to Respondent
together with an allegation of how the particular request meets the five requirements for
granting interim measures.

Security for costs applications from the Parties

Having carefully considered the Parties’ submissions, this section refers to: (a) the
Tribunal’s power to consider and grant security for costs; (b) the legal standard to grant
security for costs; (c) how Respondent’s Security for Costs Application does not meet the
applicable legal standard; and (d) how Claimant’s security for costs application included in

the Request for Interim Measures (the “Claimant’s Security for Costs Application”) does
not meet the applicable legal standard.

a) This Tribunal’s power to consider and grant security for costs

The Parties agree that this Tribunal has the power to grant requests for security for costs.*!
Although this issue is not contested, the Tribunal will examine whether it has the power to
consider and, if the applicable legal standard is satisfied, grant the security for costs
applications.

This Tribunal is of the view that its power to grant security for costs applications falls under
Article 26 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules. Pursuant to this provision, UNCITRAL Tribunals

313 Exhibit CL-15, Hydro Srl and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional
Measures, 3 March 2016, {[ 4.5.

5!4 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, | 5; Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, {[ 13;
Response to Request for Interim Measures, J 193.

373.

374.

375.

376.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 78 of 92

have the power to, upon request of either party, “take any interim measures it deems
necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute.”*!° Moreover, Article 26(a) of the
UNCITRAL Rules expressly entitles UNCITRAL Tribunals to require “security for the
costs” of such interim measures. Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules does not set forth a
limit on the types of provisional measures that this Tribunal may take. In this sense, this
Tribunal has the powers to request a party to provide security for costs.

Additionally, in the context of investment arbitration, several arbitral tribunals have
expressly confirmed that arbitral tribunals have the power to grant requests for security for
costs. Both Parties have put forward several of these decisions,*!© and such decisions
confirm the Tribunal’s conclusion that it has the power to grant security for costs
applications.

b) The legal standard to grant security for costs

The Tribunal notes that the Parties disagree on the criteria that the requesting party must
establish to grant security for costs.

Respondent argues that this Tribunal should consider the factors listed in Article 1(2) of the
CIArb Practice Guidelines to evaluate whether to grant Respondent’s Security for Cost
Application. Respondent submits that the Tribunal should consider: (i) Claimant’s prospect
of success in its claims and defences; (ii) Claimant’s ability to satisfy an adverse costs award
and the availability of Claimant’s assets to enforce such award; and (iii) whether it is fair in
all the circumstances to require one party to provide security for the other party’s costs.*!”
In its Response to Claimant’s Request for Interim Measures, Respondent, citing South
American Silver v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, further submits that investment arbitration
tribunals are reluctant in awarding security for costs except in “exceptional

circumstances.”*!*

On the other hand, Claimant submits that the requesting party must establish the following
criteria before a security for costs is granted: (i) a reasonable possibility to succeed on the
merits (i.e., a plausible defence on the merits) and a likelihood to be awarded costs; (ii) the
existence of extreme and exceptional circumstances warranting a security for costs; and (iii)

415 Exhibit CL-22, 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Article 26(1).

46 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, {i 48-52; Exhibit CL-60, RSM Production Corporation v. Government of Grenada,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent's Application for Security for Costs, 14 October
2010, | 5.5; Exhibit CL-25, Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8,

Decision on Preliminary Issu

s, 23 June 2008, | 57; and Exhibit CL-24, Burimi S.RL. & Eagle Games SH.A v.

 

Republic of Albania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Procedural Order No. 2 (Provisional Measures Concerning
Security for Costs), 3 May 2012, {[ 28-33.

317 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, {{[ 9-10.

518 Response to Request for Interim Measures, {{ 193.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 79 of 92

that to grant the security for costs would not disproportionately burden the party against
whom the measure is sought.*!

377. Having carefully considered the application submitted by both Parties, this Tribunal is of
the opinion that a security for costs application is an extraordinary measure that should only
be granted in “extreme and exceptional circumstances.”*”° This approach is supported by
the cases put forward by the Parties in their respective submissions and by the Parties’
admission that the requesting party has to establish that exceptional circumstances exist that

warrant security for costs.*?!

378. Pursuant to decisions of arbitral tribunals, exceptional circumstances are construed to
require that a security for costs request is both (i) necessary and (ii) urgent.*” The tribunal
in South American Silver v. Plurinational State of Bolivia established that a security for
costs application meets these requirements in the following terms:

In relation to the necessity and the urgency of the measure, investment
arbitration tribunals considering requests for security for costs have
emphasized that they may only exercise this power where there are extreme and
exceptional circumstances that prove a high real economic risk for the
respondent and/or that there is bad faith on the part from whom the security for
costs is requested.”

379. Therefore, the controlling criteria in the review of requests for security for costs is to
establish whether there are exceptional circumstances that demonstrate a high real economic
risk or that there is bad faith on the party subject to security for costs.

380. R.S.M. v. Saint Lucia, a case invoked by Respondent, is the landmark example of an
arbitration where the tribunal was satisfied that such exceptional circumstances existed. The
tribunal considered that claimant’s history of unpaid advances, opposing party’s costs and
final awards in two different international arbitrations was sufficient to determine that
exceptional circumstances existed, and thus it was urgent and necessary to grant the security

+!° Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, Jf 13-15.

320 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, 59; Exhibit CL-60, RSM Production Corporation v. Government of Grenada, ICSID
Case No. ARB/10/6, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs, 14 October 2010,
5.17; Exhibit CL-24, Burimi S.RL. & Eagle Games SH.A v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/18,
Procedural Order No. 2 (Provisional Measures Concerning Security for Costs), 3 May 2012, 4 34.

*! Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, {{{[ 23-24; Response to Request for Interim Measures, {{]
193-194.

32 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, {[ 59; Exhibit CL-63, RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/10, Decision on Saint Lucia’s request for security for costs, Assenting reasons of Gavan Griffith, 12
August 2014, { 75; and Exhibit CL-24, Burimi S.RL. & Eagle Games SH.A v. Republic of Albania, I1CSID Case
No. ARB/11/18, Procedural Order No. 2 (Provisional Measures Concerning Security for Costs), 3 May 2012, {[
34.

3 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, 59.

 

381.

382.

383.

384.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 80 of 92

for costs, based on the following: (i) claimant failed to pay the requested advances in an
ICSID annulment proceeding, and the proceeding was eventually discontinued; and (ii)
claimant, in an investor-State arbitration, failed to pay the costs advanced by the opposing
party (i.e., the State of Grenada) and the final award, which had to be paid by one of
claimant’s shareholders. The tribunal reached the conclusion that claimant’s conduct in
these two international proceedings was sufficient to establish that it did not have sufficient
financial resources, and that it was inappropriate to wait for the final award before dealing
with respondent’s legal costs. 74

Moreover, this Tribunal notes that the standard to establish that the opposing party lacks
sufficient financial resources to warrant granting security for costs is “very high.”3?° As
acknowledged by the tribunal in South American Silver v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
“the lack of assets, the impossibility to show available economic resources or the existence
of economic risk or difficulties that affect the finances of a [party] are not per se reasons or
justifications sufficient to warrant security for cost.”>2°

c) Respondent’s Security for Costs Application does not meet the applicable legal
standard

Respondent seeks an order from this Tribunal requiring the Claimant to provide security for
costs in the amount of eight hundred thousand dollars (USD 800,000).*?”

Respondent argues that this Tribunal should grant its security for costs application due to:
(i) Claimant’s low prospect of success in this arbitration;>”* (ii) Claimant’s lack of liquidity
due to the UK Freezing Order and an uncertain financial situation;*” and (iii) a real risk of
non-enforcement of any costs award.**° In this regard, it is worth considering each of these
arguments.

Claimant submits that Respondent has failed to satisfy the standard to obtain a security for
costs because (i) Respondent has failed to establish a plausible defence on the merits and a
likelihood that it will be awarded costs; (ii) Respondent has failed to demonstrate the
existence of exceptional circumstances that warrant its request for security for costs to be

34 Exhibit CL-63, RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/10, Decision on Saint
Lucia’s request for security for costs, Assenting reasons of Gavan Griffith, 12 August 2014, {| 77-82, 85.

25 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, { 61.

6 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, {| 63; Exhibit CL-60, RSM Production Corporation v. Government of Grenada, ICSID
Case No. ARB/10/6, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs, 14 October 2010, §
5.19 (“In an ICSID arbitration, it is also doubtful that a showing of an absence of assets alone would provide a
sufficient basis for such an order”).

*7 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, { 1.

38 Thid., [9] 12-14.

 
 

id., I 15-22.
id., I 23-25.

385.

386.

387.

388.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 81 of 92

granted; and (iii) Respondent’s request is based on a speculative risk that would not
substantially outweigh the harm that Claimant will suffer from a security for cost.>*!

Claimant further notes that there are no exceptional circumstances that could justify
granting security for costs, given that he has no history of unpaid awards and he has timely
paid all the advance costs in this arbitration. In addition, Claimant alleges that his financial
situation is the result of Russia’s illegal expropriation and, thus, to grant Respondent’s
Security for Costs Application would allow Russia to benefit from its improper and illicit
conduct.*?

  

This Tribunal considers that Respondent’s allegation that Claimant has a low prospect of
success in this arbitration would require it to examine the merits of Claimant’s claims. At
this stage of the proceedings, this Tribunal is precluded from prejudging any matters
submitted to its decision, and it is not necessary to make any determination on this issue for
this Tribunal to reach a decision on Respondent’s Security for Costs Application.** Thus,
the Tribunal does not consider it necessary, nor appropriate, to examine Claimant’s alleged
low prospect of success.

Moreover, this Tribunal considers that Respondent has not provided enough evidence to
establish that Claimant has insufficient assets or that he would have difficulties in satisfying
an adverse costs award. The fact that Claimant is subject to the UK Freezing Order alone is
not sufficient to overcome the “very high” threshold to grant security for costs. This
Tribunal further considers that Claimant’s failure to respond to Respondent’s queries on his
current financial situation is not sufficient to imply that Claimant does not have the financial
resources to comply with an adverse costs award.

Furthermore, Claimant’s conduct in this arbitration suggests that he has sufficient financial
resources to pay an eventual adverse costs award. First, Claimant has fully paid the initial
deposit ordered by the Tribunal. Second, Claimant has been able to present his case before
this Tribunal and respond to the opposing party’s submissions. Indeed, Claimant has
submitted before this Tribunal the Notice of Arbitration, the Request for Interim Measures,
two requests for immediate interim orders, his Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application and a considerable number of applications and cross-applications. Moreover,
Claimant’s counsel presented oral submissions to this Tribunal at the Hearing. Third, the
Tribunal also notes that Claimant has been able to defend himself in multiple proceedings
before different jurisdictions. The previous facts suggest that Claimant’s has a financial

+! Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, {J 46-82.

332 [bid., [. 57-73.

33Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, | 56 (“On this respect, the Tribunal shares the view of Rurelec v. Bolivia, in which it

was stated that ‘[i]t is also unwise to risk even the most minor prejudgment of the case
are therefore best avoided unless absolutely necessary to come to a decision on the reque:

  
 

Such determinations
for interim measures,

which is not the case here”).

389.

390.

391.

392.

393.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 82 of 92

capacity, or at least has entered into an agreement with his lawyers, to defend himself in
this arbitration and pay an eventual cost awards. Therefore, there is no sufficient evidence
that leads this Tribunal to the conclusion that exceptional circumstances exist to grant
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application.

Respondent further alleges that a real risk of non-enforcement of any costs award arises
from the Claimant’s failure to comply with twelve orders of the English High Court.
Respondent also points to Claimant’s failure to comply with this Tribunal’s request to
refrain from making public statements and disclose information. Additionally, Respondent
submits that these circumstances show a tendency of Claimant to act in bad faith

Contrary to Respondent’s allegation, Claimant’s alleged failure to comply with orders of
the English High Court does not constitute an exceptional circumstance that warrants a
security for cost. This Tribunal notes that the orders that Claimant allegedly breached are
related to proceedings initiated by DIA and/or the IIB, thus form part of the issues to be
discussed in this arbitration. In this sense, it is not clear that Claimant’s alleged failure to
comply with these orders speaks to Claimant’s ability to satisfy an adverse costs award, nor
provide sufficient evidence of bad faith. Thus, this Tribunal is of the opinion that such
conduct is not sufficient to overcome the high threshold to grant security for costs.

Respondent also alleges that Claimant’s failure to comply with the Tribunal’s requests to
refrain from making public statements and disclosing information demonstrates a real risk
of non-enforcement of an adverse cost award.** This Tribunal notes that this matter is
related to Respondent’s applications concerning Claimant’s alleged breaches of
confidentiality provisions in PO1 and the Tribunal’s order dated 9 November 2016. In this
regard, having carefully considered Respondent’s applications on this matter, this Tribunal
will not derive any further consequences from Claimant’s alleged failure to comply with
such Tribunal’s orders other than those set out in Section (IV)(H).

In any case, Claimant’s alleged failure to comply with the Tribunal’s orders to refrain from
making public statements and disclosing information, even if sufficiently established, is not
alone sufficient to overcome the standard to grant security for costs. As explained above,
Claimant has failed to establish that exceptional circumstances exist that demonstrate that
the requested security for costs is necessary and urgent.

For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal denies Respondent’s Security for Costs
Application, given that there are no exceptional circumstances that demonstrate that the
measures sought are necessary or urgent.

34 Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, {{ 23.
335 Thid., | 29.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 83 of 92

d) Claimant’s Security for Costs Application does not meet the applicable legal
standard

394. In its Request for Interim Measures, Claimant requested this Tribunal to grant a security for
costs in his favour either in the form of a transfer of funds in an escrow —or in any other
way- for EUR 10 million.

395. Claimant alleges that, in this case, Respondent’s past record regarding non-reimbursement
of costs from international arbitration awards is an exceptional circumstance that must be
considered to grant the requested security for costs. Claimant cites two cases that allegedly
illustrate Russia’s record of not paying final awards, the Noga case and the Sedelmayer
case.>*° In addition, Claimant submits that Russia has “bluntly declared that it intends not
to abide by international awards rendered against it [...].”**’ In this regard, Claimant
submits that this declaration further demonstrates that exceptional circumstances exist that
warrant a security for costs.

396. Respondent alleges, based on the ruling of the tribunal in Burimi v. Albania, that Claimant’s
request must be rejected because it is grounded on hypothetical harm and uncertain future
actions. Moreover, Respondent alleges that it is incorrect for Claimant to “accuse”
Respondent that it does not intend to “abide by international awards.” Respondent clarifies
that of the ten awards that have been issued against Russia: (i) five have been set aside; (ii)
payment has been settled in three awards; (iii) payment is pending in respect of one award;
and (iv) annulment proceedings are pending in respect of one award.*** Thus, it is incorrect
to claim that Russia does not intend to abide by international awards.

397. In this case, this Tribunal finds that Claimant has failed to sufficiently establish that
exceptional circumstances exist that justify his request for security for costs. Claimant bases
his request mainly on the premise that Russia allegedly has a record of not paying adverse
costs awards. This Tribunal considers that Claimant has failed to provide sufficient evidence
to substantiate this allegation.

398. Moreover, the fact that Mr. Pugachev has incurred “very heavy costs” to defend his case
does not overcome the “very high” threshold to grant security for costs. As explained above,
the economic risks or financial difficulties that affect a party are not per se sufficient reasons
or justifications to warrant security for costs.*° Thus, the fact that Mr. Pugachev has

+6 In the Noga case, Claimant argues that Russia refused to pay two awards that amounted to USD 27 millions of
damages, and the claimant went bankrupt for attempting to enforce such awards. In the Sedelmayer case, Claimant
argued that the claimant collected the USD 2 million awarded by the tribunal after a costly litigation and two
decades after the award was issued.

337 Request for Interim Measures, § 329.

338 Response to Request for Interim Measures, | 191.

389 Exhibit RL-49, South American Silver Limited y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2013-15,
Procedural Order No. 10, {| 63; Exhibit CL-60, RSM Production Corporation v. Government of Grenada, ICSID

  
 

 

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 84 of 92

incurred considerable costs in defending his cases does not constitute an exceptional
circumstance that justifies this Tribunal to grant his request for security for costs.

399. For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal is of the opinion that Claimant has failed to
overcome the high threshold to grant security for costs.

F. Respondent’s Application for Disclosure of Third Party Funders

400. In its Security for Cost Application, Respondent requested this Tribunal to order Claimant
“to disclose the name of any third-party funders as well as the terms of any funding
agreement.”*“° This Tribunal notes that Claimant has affirmed that “there is no reason that
would warrant the disclosure by Claimant of any third-party funding arrangement, since

« 3.
there is none.”**!

401. Since Claimant has already disclosed that there is no third-party funder, and Respondent
has not submitted evidence suggesting that there is one, this Tribunal does not need to
decide on such a request.

G. Claimant’s Security for Claims Application

¢

402. In its Request for Interim Measures, Claimant requested this Tribunal to order Respondent
to provide a security for claim in the form of either (i) the transfer of six billion dollars
(USD 6 billion) —or any other amount the Tribunal deems appropriate— to an escrow account
administered by this Tribunal; or (ii) to issue a letter of comfort**? where Respondent
indicates that it will abide to its international obligations, including, but not exclusively,
under the France-Russia BIT and that it will respect any award issued in this arbitration,
including any pecuniary or non-pecuniary obligations therein (the “Security for Claims
Application”) *°

403. Claimant argues that this Tribunal has the inherent power to order a security for claim
pursuant to Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules, which authorizes the Tribunal to take
“measures for the conservation of the goods forming the subject-matter in dispute.”*“
Claimant also identifies Burimi v. Albania as case where the tribunal considered that it had
the power to grant a security for claim in favour of claimant.*4°

Case No. ARB/10/6, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs, 14 October 2010, §
5.19.

*° Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, { 43(ii).

1 Reply to Respondent’s Security for Costs Application, 91 (emphasis added).

*? The Claimant provided a draft letter of comfort in Appendix C of the Request for Interim Measures.

45 Request for Interim Measures, § 321 and 347(6)(i).

M4 Tbid., (75.

45 Thid., 80.

404.

405.

406.

407.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 85 of 92

Claimant further submits that this Tribunal should grant Claimant’s Security for Claims
Application given that his situation is “exceptional and the risk not speculative” on the
following grounds. First, Respondent has continuously refused to comply with past arbitral
awards and other pecuniary commitments. Second, Respondent’s credit situation has
deteriorated because (i) Russia has recently enacted laws that protect its assets from
enforcement proceedings; (ii) Russia pressures other governments not to enforce
international decisions against its property; and (iii) Russia is increasingly a respondent in
investment treaty cases and in cases before the European Court of Human Rights (the
“ECHR”), and thus there are more creditors trying to enforce their claims. Third, the
security for claim is necessary due to the “exorbitant damages” suffered by Mr. Pugachev
that result from Respondent’s destructive strategy that targets Mr. Pugachev’s “entire
business empire.”*4°

Respondent does not contest that this Tribunal has the power to grant security for claims,
but points out that no investment arbitration tribunal has done so to date. Respondent also
draws the attention of this Tribunal to the fact that Respondent incorrectly relies on Burimi
v. Albania as an example of a case where a party requested security for claims. Respondent
points out that such a case refers to a request for security for costs, and not security for
claims. Respondent further submits that Claimant has failed to establish that the Security
for Claims Application satisfies the requirements for granting provisional measures.*“7

In this case, this Tribunal has carefully considered the submissions filed by the Parties
related to the Security for Claims Application. This Tribunal has reached the conclusion
that Claimant has failed to substantiate its Security for Claims Application.

First, Claimant’s allegation that Respondent has been reluctant to comply with past
arbitration awards is solely substantiated with references to two cases, namely, the Noga
case and the Sedelmayer case.*“* In response, and as previously mentioned in Section
(IV)(E)(d), Respondent questions the accuracy of Claimant’s submissions and provides a
detailed explanation of the status of the ten awards rendered against it: (i) five have been
set aside; (ii) payment is pending in one case; (iii) three have been settled; and (iv)
annulment proceedings are pending in one case. Against this background, Claimant has not
provided sufficient evidence that support his argument that Respondent continuously
refuses to comply with international awards. In this context, it would be disproportionate to
order Respondent to grant a security for claim in favour of Claimant.

6 Request for Interim Measures, ff 292-327.

*7 Response to Request for Interim Measurt

qi 190-191.

  

¥8 In the Noga case, Claimant argues that Russia refused to pay two awards that amounted to USD 27 million of
damages, and the claimant went bankrupt for attempting to enforce such awards. In the Sedelmayer case, Claimant
argued that the claimant collected the USD 2 million awarded by the tribunal after a costly litigation and two

decades after the award wa:

ued.

 

408.

409.

410.

411.

412.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 86 of 92

Second, Claimant also argues that its Security for Claims Application should be granted
because Russia has not complied with commitments made to Mr. Pugachev in the past. For
example, Claimant submits that Respondent affirmed that it would compensate Mr.
Pugachev for the termination of an investment agreement with one of its companies, but
failed to do so.*° At this stage of the proceedings, this Tribunal will abstain from
entertaining any of these alleged breaches of Respondent’s commitments, given that it must
not prejudge the merits of this case.

Third, this Tribunal considers that Claimant’s arguments alleging that Russia has enacted
laws that protect its assets from enforcement proceedings and it is increasingly a respondent
in investment treaty cases and ECHR proceedings, even if true, do not necessarily imply
that Russia will not pay any adverse award rendered by this Tribunal. Moreover, Claimant
has not pointed to any fact that suggests that Russia intends or has initiated any act to avoid
compliance with a future award on the merits.

Fourth, Claimant’s allegation that Respondent pressures other governments not to enforce
international decisions against its property is unsubstantiated. Claimant mostly supports this
assertion with articles published in newspapers, journals and other websites. **° This
Tribunal cannot rely on such exhibits in order to support Claimant’s assertion.

Finally, Claimant argues that Mr. Pugachev’s financial situation warrants granting a
security for claim. However, this Tribunal does not consider that Mr. Pugachev’s financial
difficulties per se are sufficient to grant a security for claim. This Tribunal further notes that
Claimant argues that the security for claim is necessary due to the exorbitant damages
suffered by Mr. Pugachev, which at this stage amount to twelve billion dollars (USD 12
billion). However, Claimant has not substantiated why the underlying amount in dispute in
this arbitration speaks against Respondent’s ability or disposition to comply with an adverse
award.

For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal is of the opinion that Claimant has failed to
substantiate its Security for Claims Application. Consequently, it would be disproportionate
to order Respondent to grant a security for claim based on Claimant’s request.

4° Request for Interim Measures, ff 298-299.
380 Exhibit CL-46, A. Panov, “Law on Jurisdictional Immunities of Foreign States Passed”, International Law

Office, 1 December 2015; Exhibit CL-47, A. Ross, “Rus

ia’s Lawmakers Respond to Yukos Enforcement

  

Attempts”, Global Arbitration Review, 19 August 2015; Exhibit C-74, H. Amos, “Russia Pushes Ahead with Law
to Confiscate Foreign Assets”, The Moscow Times, 6 August 2015; Exhibit CL-42, T. Osborne, “Rule of Law
Forgotten. The Justice of the Yukos case — an Investor View”, Global Arbitration Review, 30 August 2016.

413.

414.

415.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 87 of 92

. The alleged breach of confidentiality provisions of PO1, the Order issued_on 9

November 2016 and the 26 May 2017 Order

By letter dated 8 March 2017, Respondent requested from this Tribunal the following
additional relief: (i) grant permission for the Respondent to share the Response with the
DIA, and for the DIA to exhibit the Response to Request for Interim Measures in the French
Proceedings; (ii) a declaration that Claimant’s public statements consist of incorrect and
misleading information and have been made in breach of Tribunal’s 9 November Order and
PO1; and (iii) any such relief as the Tribunal sees fit.

Respondent justifies the additional relief by asserting that an order permitting him to share
the Response to Request for Interim Measures with the DIA would provide the DIA a better
understanding of Claimant’s allegations in this arbitration. Additionally, Respondent
affirms that permitting the DIA to exhibit the Response to Request for Interim Measures in
the French proceedings would enable the DIA to correct Claimant’s misleading statements
made to the French court.

Respondent alleges that such relief is justified since it complies with the five requirements
for issuing an interim measure. Respondent sustains that:

a the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to grant relief in respect of the Claimant’s
breach of POI, and to grant relief to remedy the harm caused by the Claimant’s failure to
comply with POI;

(ii) there is a prima facie existence of a right being susceptible to protection where the
right is clearly enshrined in PO1;

(iii) the relief sought is necessary and essential as the Claimant’s ongoing breaches of
PO1 are capable of causing irreparable harm given the Claimant’s press campaign —
disseminating not only confidential information about the arbitration, but also false and
misleading information—, as well as his use of materials from the arbitration to mislead
national courts in clear breach of PO1; thereby causing harm that may not be remedied by
monetary compensation;

(iv) the relief sought is urgent as the Claimant continues to disseminate false and
misleading information about this arbitration in breach of POI on a regular basis, most
recently on 3 March 2017, requiring immediate action by the Tribunal prior to the issuance
of a final award; and

(v) the relief requested is proportionate as the Claimant will suffer no harm if ordered
to comply with the Tribunal’s order, whereas Respondent will continue to suffer the harm
arising out of the Claimant’s breaches of the 9 November Order and PO1, particularly where
the relief requested is that the Claimant refrain from activities on which the Tribunal has

416.

417.

418.

419.

420.

421.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 88 of 92

already ruled and complying with the Tribunal’s ruling requires no effort or expense. Any
effort or expense the Claimant may incur in repairing the harm caused by his breaches, as
requested by the Respondent, flows directly from his own repeated breaches.

Pursuant to Article 15(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, “the arbitral tribunal may conduct
the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties are
treated with equality and that at any stage of the proceedings each party is given a full
opportunity of presenting his case.” According to this Article, the Tribunal’s authority to
conduct the arbitration finds its limit on the Parties’ rights of equality and due process. Thus,
this Tribunal has wide powers to guarantee the Parties’ rights and preserve the integrity and
efficiency of this arbitration.

On this point, the Methanex Corporation v. United States of America decision stressed that
“Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules grants to the Tribunal a broad discretion
as to conduct of this arbitration, subject always to the requirements of procedural equality
and fairness towards the Disputing Parties. This provision constitutes one of the essential
‘hallmarks’ of an international arbitration under the UNICITRAL Arbitration Rules,

according to the travaux préparatoires.”**!

Against this background, this Tribunal must consider whether it would (i) grant permission
for Respondent to share the Response with the DIA; and (ii) make a declaration regarding
Claimant’s public statements.

First, regarding Respondent’s request for permission to share the Response with the DIA,
and for the DIA to exhibit the Response in the French Proceedings, this Tribunal stresses
that Article 10.4 of POI provides that the Parties must keep confidential all materials
submitted in the framework of the arbitral proceedings, except that a disclosure may be
required to comply with a legal duty, to protect or pursue a legal right, or to enforce or
challenge an award in legal proceedings before a judicial authority.

In the case at hand, this Tribunal notes that Respondent has failed to substantiate how the
disclosure of the Response is required to comply with a legal duty of Respondent, to protect
or pursue a right of Respondent, or to enforce or challenge an award. Particularly, it is not
sufficiently clear how the disclosure of the Response would protect Respondent’s rights in
the French Proceedings, if any such right exists given that Respondent is not a party to those
proceedings.

Furthermore, this Tribunal notes that the applicant in the French Proceedings is the DIA
and, as mentioned in Section (IV)(A)(a), there is not sufficient evidence to assert that, prima

38! Exhibit RL-59, Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, Decision of the Tribunal on Petitions from
Third Persons, intervene as “amici curiae”, 15 January 2001, ICSID administered, 1976 UNCITRAL Rules,
NAFTA Chapter Eleven, {[ 26, Appendix 11.

422.

423.

424,

425.

426.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 89 of 92

facie, the DIA is the same as or is synonymous to the Respondent, or that the acts of the
DIA should be attributed to the Respondent. Accordingly, the measure requested by
Respondent pursues the protection of a right that allegedly is not its and, therefore, is not
susceptible of protection under the present circumstances.

Second, the Tribunal denies Respondent’s request for this Tribunal to make a declaration in
the sense that Claimant’s public statements consist of incorrect and misleading information.
This Tribunal will not comment on statements that correspond to one of the Parties’
perspective on the procedure or merits of the case, given that any statement in this regard
could risk a prejudging on the merits of the dispute.

Nonetheless, this Tribunal is aware that after PO1 and the Order issued on 9 November 2016
and the 26 May 2017 Order, Claimant maintained on the web _ page
www.pugachevsergei.com some information about this arbitration available to the public.
The Tribunal is also aware that the constant disputes between the Parties concerning the
alleged breaches of the multiple confidentiality orders could jeopardize in the future the
integrity and efficiency of these proceedings. Finally, the Tribunal must balance the need
for reserve and confidentiality that preserves the integrity of the arbitration with the need
for transparency in a case involving a State and matters of public interest. Accordingly, the
Tribunal considers necessary to adopt certain measures in this Interim Award to preserve
and protect the integrity and efficiency of this arbitration and guarantee the transparency
with which both parties seem to agree.

The Tribunal has issued, as of the date of this Interim Award, a Procedural Order No. 2
(“PO2”) which specifically sets forth that certain documents of this arbitration will not be
deemed confidential and may be published by the Parties (the “Available Documents”) and
that documents other that the Available Documents shall be deemed confidential (the
“Confidential Information”). Hence, Available Documents may only be disclosed or
published in accordance with the terms set forth in PO2 or any amendment thereto by the
Tribunal, and no Party may publish or disclose to any third party any Confidential
Information without prior leave from the Tribunal.

The Tribunal has the power to, and in its discretion, may allow the disclosure of Confidential
Information to the extent that such disclosure: (i) is necessary to pursue and protect a Party’s
legal right, or is necessary in order for a Party to comply with a legal duty; (ii) does not
hinder a Party’s right to be treated equally and does not undermine its opportunity to fully
present its case; and (iii) does not jeopardize the integrity and efficiency of this arbitration.

Second, for purposes of preventing any further disputes between the Parties concerning the
specific scope of the confidentiality orders issued in this arbitration and with the intent of
strengthening the foundations of PO2, the Tribunal considers necessary to incorporate the
26 May 2017 Order to the present Interim Award and amend it for purposes of allowing
exclusively the publication of the Available Documents and protecting all Confidential
Information. In particular, and in light of the substantive differences expressed in the

427.

428.

429.

430.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 90 of 92

applications submitted by Respondent on 6 June 2017 and Claimant on 9 June 2017, this
Tribunal considers necessary that, without prejudice of the publication of the Available
Documents: (i) each Party and their respective counsel shall refrain from commenting or
making any public statement to any third party (including reporters, news organizations or
media networks) on any matter or fact regarding this arbitration, including any matter
addressed in the Available Documents, without prior leave from the Tribunal; and (ii) each
Party and their respective counsel must, except with prior leave from the Tribunal, abstain
from publishing or disclosing any Confidential Information regarding this arbitration.
Accordingly, the Parties are only allowed to publish or disclose the Available Documents.

In addition, Claimant is ordered to: (i) refrain from posting or publishing, without prior
leave from the Tribunal, any information concerning this arbitration other than the
Available Documents, on the website www.pugachevsergei.com, or on any other website
or digital platform; and (ii) provide a statement to this Tribunal on or before 17 July 2017
declaring and certifying that any posts or publications concerning this arbitration, other than
the Available Documents, have been removed from the website www.pugachevsergei.com.

Pursuant to the terms set forth in para. 425 above, the Tribunal may grant leave from these
orders in the form it deems appropriate, either through a procedural order or through any

letter or correspondence.

For the above-mentioned reasons, this Tribunal will deny Respondent’s additional relief
sought in letter dated 8 March 2017.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

Based on the above-mentioned, the Tribunal hereby:

a Orders Respondent to take all actions necessary to suspend the France Extradition
Request;

(ii) Denies all other claims and requests made by Claimant in the Request for Interim
Measures;

(iii) Denies all claims and requests made in Respondent’s Security for Costs Application;
(iv) Denies Respondent’s additional relief requested in the letter dated 8 March 2017;

(v) Orders each Party and their respective counsel to refrain from commenting or
making any public statement to any third party (including reporters, news organizations or

media networks) on any matter or fact regarding this arbitration, including any matter
addressed in the Available Documents, without prior leave from the Tribunal;

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 91 of 92

(vi) | Orders each Party and their respective counsel to abstain from publishing or
disclosing any Confidential Information regarding this arbitration without prior leave from
the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Parties are only allowed to publish or disclose the Available
Documents in strict accordance with the terms set forth in PO2 or any amendment thereto
by the Tribunal;

(vii) | Orders Claimant to refrain from posting or publishing, without prior leave from the
Tribunal, any information or comment on this arbitration other than the Available
Documents, on the website www.pugachevsergei.com, or on any other website or digital
platform;

(viii) Orders Claimant to provide a statement to this Tribunal on or before 17 July 2017
accepting and acknowledging that any posts or publications concerning this arbitration,
other than the Available Documents, have been removed from the website
www.pugachevsergei.com; and

(ix) Reserves the question of costs associated with the Request for Interim Measures,
Respondent’s Security for Costs Application and all applications and cross-applications
concerning confidentiality to a future stage.

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 92 of 92

THE TRIBUNAL:

 

Professor Thomas Clay Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades

Date: Date:

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo
Presiding Arbitrator

Date: 7 July 2017

Interim Award

 

7 July 2017
Page 92 of 92
THE TRIBUNAL:
Professor Thomas Clay | Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades
Date: ate: ¢ Py 0 \ 7

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo
Presiding Arbitrator

Date:

Interim Award
7 July 2017
Page 92 of 92

 

ane Thomas Clay Dr. Bernardo M. Cremades

Date: Date:

Dr. Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo
Presiding Arbitrator

Date:

